
Thomas Ligotti was born in 1953 in Detroit, Michigan. One critic 
has written of his power as a storyteller: ‘It’s a skilled writer indeed 
who can suggest a horror so shocking that one is grateful it was 
kept offstage.’ His work has appeared regularly in a host of horror 
and fantasy magazines, earning him high esteem from followers of 
weird and macabre fiction everywhere. His previous books include 
Noctuary, Grimscribe: His Lives and Works and Songs of a Dead Dreamer

THE
NIGHTMARE
FACTORY
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Carroll & Graf Publishers, Inc. 
NEW YORK

Carroll & Graf Publishers, Inc.
260 Fifth Avenue 
New York 
NY 10001
First published in the UK by Robinson Publishing 1996
First Carroll & Graf edition 1996
Some of the stories in this collection first appeared in the following 
publications: Fantasy Tales, Dark Horizons, Eldritch Tales, Nyctalops, 
Grimwire, Weird Tales, Heroic Visions II, Grue, Crypt of Cthulhu, Fantasy 
Macabre, Dagon, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, Tiamat, Tekeli- 
li!, Fear All the Devils Are Here, Horror Mag, Deathrealm, The Urbanite, and 
A Whisper of Blood.
Stories from Songs of a Dead Dreamer copyright © Thomas Ligotti 1989 
Stories from Grimscribe copyright © Thomas Ligotti 1991 
Stories from Noctuary copyright © Thomas Ligotti 1994 
Introduction and all stories in Part 4: Teatro Grottesco copyright © 
Thomas Ligotti 1996 
Preface copyright © Poppy Z. Brite 1996
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in 
any form or by any means without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
ISBN 0-7867-0302-4
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
Foreword by Poppy Z . Brite 
ix
Introduction: The Consolations of Horror 
xi
Part 1: from Songs of a Dead Dreamer 
1
The Frolic 
3
Les Fleurs 
16
Alice’s Last Adventure 
23
Dream of a Mannikin 
39
The Chymist 
52
Drink to Me Only with Labyrinthine Eyes 
62
Eye of the Lynx 
71
The Christmas Eves of Aunt Elise 
79
The Lost Art of Twilight 
87
The Troubles of Dr. Thoss 
103
Masquerade of a Dead Sword 
114
Dr. Voke and Mr. Veech 
132
Dr. Locrian’s Asylum 
141
The Sect of the Idiot 
150
The Greater Festival of Masks 
159
The Music of the Moon 
166
The Journal of J.P. Drapeau 
173
Vastarien 
179
Part 2: Grimscribe 
193
The Last Feast of Harlequin 
195
The Spectacles in the Drawer 
229
Flowers of the Abyss 
240
Nethescurial 
247
The Dreaming in Nortown 
260

VIII
CONTENTS
The Mystics of Muelenburg 
280
In the Shadow of Another World 
287
The Cocoons 
299
The Night School 
308
The Glamour 
318
The Library of Byzantium 
327
Miss Plarr 
339
The Shadow at the Bottom of the World 
348
Part 3: from Noctuary 
357
The Medusa 
359
Conversations in a Dead Language 
377
The Prodigy of Dreams 
389
Mrs Rinaldi’s Angel 
399
The Tsalal 
409
Mad Night of Atonement 
436
The Strange Design of Master Rignolo 
449
The Voice in the Bones 
459
Part 4: Teatro Grottesco and Other Tales 
467
Teatro Grottesco 
469
Severini 
486
Gas Station Carnivals 
498
The Bungalow House 
514
The Clown Puppet 
533
The Red Tower 
542

FOREWORD
Poppy Z. Brite
Are you out there, Thomas Ligotti?
 You have a lot to answer for, but I’ve never been able to 
discover anything of substance about you. That’s the way you 
seem to want it. Even in the single interview I managed to glean 
from the wasteland of the small press, you spoke exclusively about 
the craft of writing. Don’t mistake my meaning; there is no one I’d 
rather read upon the craft. But not a scrap of personal information 
escaped those lines of print. As someone who gives numerous, 
messy, highly personal interviews that I suspect I may yet live to 
regret, I wonder how you are able to do it.
I was twenty, on my first trip to San Francisco, when a friend 
first handed me your work Songs of a Dead Dreamer, the Silver 
Scarab limited edition with Harry O. Morris illustrations that 
approached the fabulousness of the stories. My interest was 
aroused at least partly by the fact that Ramsey Campbell, then 
and now one of my favourite writers, had seen fit to pen an 
introduction; so being asked to write this introduction has a 
certain poignancy.
Riding stoned in the back seat of a car across the Bay Bridge, I 
opened the book at random and read a sentence that will haunt me 
all my days, a sentence I’d give a thumb to have written:
We leave this behind in your capable hands, for in the black- 
foaming gutters and back alleys of paradise, in the dank 
windowless gloom of some galactic cellar, in the hollow 
pearly whorls found in sewerlike seas, in starless cities of 
insanity, and in their slums . . . my awe-struck little deer 
and I have gone frolicking.
from ‘The Frolic'
The glittering panorama of San Francisco, a city I already 
suspected of harbouring deep mystery from Fritz Leiber’s Our 
Lady of Darkness, became inextricably linked in my mind with this

X
FOREW ORD
prose jewel. For me, those black-foaming gutters and back alleys 
(not to mention the Street of Wavering Peaks) will always be just 
across the bay from Berkeley.
Will you hate me if I confess that I photocopied the entire book? 
I’d promised to send it back to my friend, and I am no book thief. 
But I could not bear to part with your words, and I could not find 
another copy anywhere; those few precious copies had been 
snapped up and hoarded.
Songs of a Dead Dreamer has since been released by major 
publishers on at least two continents. I have three editions 
myself. But, until it was destroyed in a flood last year, I still 
had the looseleaf binder with that pathetic photocopy in it too.
I have followed your career since then - nearly a decade - and I 
still know nothing more of you than your fiction reveals. Though I 
know that fictional self-revelation can be considerable, I also know 
that it is frequently misinterpreted by the reader. If you were to 
call up and invite me over for coffee, I would expect to meet a 
slightly dissipated aesthete, sarcastic and decadent and wry, given 
to odd word-associations, with a taste not just for the macabre but 
for the truly, nakedly gruesome. (Let the critics blather on about 
subtle half-hidden horrors; you make me see it all.) But perhaps I 
would encounter someone else entirely. I suspect I’ll never know.
You have a lot to answer for, Thomas Ligotti. For every score of 
horrorheads who don’t ‘get’ your work, there will always be the 
one who is profoundly impressed and appalled by it, for it seems as 
though you have reached into his dreaming brain and pulled out 
the stuff of intensely private nightmares. I am one of those readers. 
Upon reading your stories, I often experience two distinct sensa­
tions: a faint déjà vu, not as if I’ve read the words before, but as if the 
images have already appeared somewhere in the murk of my 
subconscious; and a sense of Lovecraftian awe shading into 
existential nausea. More than any other author I can think of, 
you write decidedly weird fiction. And I can only marvel. Are you 
out there, Thomas Ligotti?
I believe I’ve just answered my own question.

INTRODUCTION: 
THE CONSOLATIONS OF 
HORROR
Darkness, we welcome and embrace you
Horror, at least in its artistic presentations, can be a comfort. And, 
like any agent of enlightenment, it may even confer - if briefly -  a 
sense of power, wisdom, and transcendence, especially if the 
conferee is a willing one with a true feeling for ancient mysteries 
and a true fear of the skulduggery which a willing heart usually 
senses in the unknown.
Clearly we (just the willing conferees, remember) want to know 
the worst, both about ourselves and the world. The oldest, possibly 
the only theme is that of forbidden knowledge. And no forbidden 
knowledge ever consoled its possessor. (Which is probably why it’s 
forbidden.) At best it is one of the more sardonic gifts bestowed 
upon the individual (for knowledge of the forbidden is first and 
foremost an individual ordeal). It is particularly forbidden because 
the mere possibility of such knowledge introduces a monstrous and 
perverse temptation to trade the quiet pleasures of mundane 
existence for the bright lights of alienage, doom, and, in some 
rare cases, eternal damnation.
So we not only wish to know the worst, but to experience it as 
well.Hence that arena of artificial experience, supposedly of the worst 
kind -  the horror story -  where gruesome conspiracies may be 
trumped up to our soul’s satisfaction, where the deck is stacked 
with shivers, shocks, and dismembered hands for every player; 
and, most importantly, where one, at a safe distance, can come to 
grips (after a fashion) with death, pain, and loss in the, quote, real 
world, unquote.
But does it ever work the way we would like it to?

XII
INTRODU CTION
A test case
I am watching Night of the Living Dead. I see the ranks of the 
deceased reanimated by a double-edged marvel of the modern 
age (atomic radiation, I think. Or is it some wonder chemical 
which found its way into the water supply? And does this detail 
even matter?). I see a group of average, almost documentary 
types holed up in a house, fighting off wave after wave of hungry 
ghouls. I see the group hopelessly losing their ground and 
succumb each one of them to the same disease as their sleepwalk­
ing attackers: A husband tries to eat his wife (or is it mother tries 
to eat child?), a daughter stabs her father with a gardener’s 
trowel (or perhaps brother stabs sister with a bricklayer’s trowel). 
In any case, they all die, and horribly. This is the important 
thing.
When the movie is over, I am invigorated by the sense of having 
rung the ear-shattering changes of harrowing horror; I’ve got 
another bad one under my belt that will serve to bolster my nerves 
for whatever shocking days and nights are to come; I have, in a 
phrase, an expanded capacity for fear. I can really take it!
At the movies, that is.
The fearful truth is that all of the above brutalities can be 
“taken” only too well. And then, at some point, one starts to adopt 
unnatural strategies to ward off not the bogey but the sand man. 
Talking to the characters in a horror film, for instance: Hi, 
Mr. Decomposing Corpse lapping up a lump of sticky entrails, 
Hi! But even this tactic loses its charm after a while, especially if 
you’re watching some “shocker” by yourself and lack an accom­
plice to share your latest stage of jadedness and immunity to 
primitive fright. (At the movies, I mean. Otherwise you’re the 
same old vulnerable self.)
So after a devoted horror fan is stuffed to the gills, thoroughly 
sated and consequently bored - what does he (the he’s tradi­
tionally out-number the she’s here) do next? Haunt the emer­
gency rooms of hospitals or the local morgues? Keep an eye out 
for bloody mishaps on the freeway? Become a war correspondent? 
But now the issue has been blatantly shifted to a completely 
different plane - from movies to life - and clearly it doesn’t 
belong there.
The one remedy for the horror addict’s problem seems this: 
that if the old measure of medicine is just not strong enough - 
increase the dosage! (This pharmaceutical parallel is ancient

INTRODU CTION
XIII
but apt.) And thus we have the well-known and very crude 
basis for the horror film’s history of ever-escalating scare tactics. 
Have you already seen such old classics as Werewolf of London too 
many times? Sample one of its gore-enriched, yet infinitely 
inferior versions of the early 1980s. Of course the relief is only 
temporary; one’s tolerance to the drug tends to increase. And 
looking down that long open road there appears to be no 
ultimate drugstore in sight, no final pharmacy where the 
horror hunger can be glutted on a sufficiently enormous dose, 
where the once insatiable addict may, at last, be laden with all 
the demonic dope there is, collapse with sated obesity into the 
shadows, and quietly gasp: “enough.”
The empty pit of boredom is ever renewing itself, while horror 
films become less tantalizing to the marginally sadistic movie- 
goer.And what is the common rationale for justifying what would 
otherwise be considered a just barely frustrated case of sadomaso­
chism? Now we remember: to present us with horrors inside the 
theater (or the books, let’s not forget those) and thereby help us to 
assimilate the horrors on the outside, and also to ready us for the 
Big One. This does sound reasonable, it sounds right and rational. 
But none of this has anything to do with these three R’s. We are in 
the great forest of fear, where you can’t fight real experiences of the 
worst with fake ones (no matter how well synchronized a symbolic 
correspondence they may have). When is the last time you heard of 
someone screaming himself awake from a nightmare, only to shrug 
it off with: “Yeah, but I’ve seen worse at the movies” (or read 
worse in the books; we’ll get to them)? Nothing is worse than that 
which happens personally to a person. And though a bad dream 
may momentarily register quite high on the fright meter, it is, 
realistically speaking, one of the less enduring, smaller time terrors 
a person is up against. Try drawing solace from your half-dozen 
viewings of the Texas Chain-Saw Massacre when they’re prepping 
you for brain surgery.
In all truth, frequenters of horror films are a jumpier, more 
casually hysterical class of person than most. We need the most 
reassurance that we can take it as well as anyone, and we tend to be 
the most complacent in thinking that seventeen straight nights of 
supernatural-psycho films is good for the nerves and will give us a 
special power which non-horror-fanatics don’t have. After all, this 
is supposed to be a major psychological selling point of the horror 
racket, the first among its consolations.
It is undoubtedly the first consolation, but it’s also a false one.

XIV
IN TRODU CTION
Interlude: so long, consolations of mayhem
Perhaps it was a mistake selecting Night of the Living Dead to 
illustrate the consolations of horror. As a delegate from Horror- 
land this film is admirably incorruptible, oozing integrity. It hasn’t 
sold out to the kindergarten moral codes of most “modem horror” 
movies and it has no particular message to deliver: its only news is 
nightmare. For pure brain-chomping, nerve-chewing, sight-cur- 
sing insanity, this is a very effective work, at least the first couple of 
times or so. It neither tries nor pretends to be anything beyond 
that. (And as we have already found, nothing exists beyond that 
anyway, except more and more of that.) But the big trouble is that 
sometimes we forget how much more can be done in horror movies 
(books too!) than that. We sometimes forget that supernatural 
stories -  and this is a very good time to boot nonsupernatural ones 
right ofT the train: psycho, suspense, and the like -  are capable of 
all the functions and feelings of real stories. For the supernatural 
can serve as a trusty vehicle for careening into realms where the 
Strange and the Familiar charge each other with the opposing 
poles of their passion.
The Haunting, for example. Besides being the greatest haunted 
house film ever made, it is also a great haunted human one. In it 
the ancient spirit of mortal tragedy passes easily through walls 
dividing the mysteries of the mundane world from those of the 
extra-mundane. And this supertragic specter never comes to rest in 
either one of these worlds; it never lingers long enough to give us 
forbidden knowledge of either the stars or ourselves, or anything 
else for that matter. To what extent may the “derangement of Hill 
House” (Dr. Markway’s diagnosis) be blamed on the derangement 
of the people who were, are, and probably will be in it? And vice 
versa of course. Is there something wrong with that spiral staircase 
in the library or just with the clumsy persons who try to climb it? 
The only safe bet is that something is wrong, wherever the 
wrongness lies . . . and lies and lies. Our poor quartet of spook- 
chasers -  Dr. Markway, Theo, Luke, and Eleanor -  are not only 
helpless to untie themselves from entangling puppet strings; they 
can’t even find the knots!
The ghosts at Hill House always remain unseen, except in their 
effects: savagely pummeling enormous oak doors, bending them 
like cardboard; writing assonant messages on walls (“Help Eleanor 
come home”) with an unspecified substance (“Chalk,” says Luke. 
“Or something like chalk,” corrects Markway); and in general

INTRODU CTION
XV
giving the place a very bad feeling. We’re not even sure who the 
ghosts are, or rather were. The pious and demented Hugh Crane, 
who built Hill House? His spinster daughter Abigail, who wasted 
away in Hill House? Her neglectful companion, who hung herself 
in Hill House? None of them emerges as a discrete, clearly 
definable haunter of the old mansion. Instead we have an 
undefined presence which seems a sort of melting pot of deranged 
forces from the past, an anti-America where the very poorest in 
spirit settle and stagnate and lose themselves in a massive and 
insane spectral body.
Easier to identify are the personal specters of the living, at least 
for the viewer. But the characters in the film are too busy with 
outside things to look inside one another’s houses, or even their 
own. Dr. Markway doesn’t acknowledge Eleanor’s spooks. (She 
loves him, hopelessly.) Eleanor can’t see Theo’s spooks (she’s 
lesbian) and Theo avoids dwelling on her own. (“And what are 
you afraid of, Theo?” asks Eleanor. “Of knowing what I really 
want,” she replies, somewhat uncandidly.) Best of all, though, is 
Luke, who doesn’t think there even are any spooks, until near the 
end of the film when this affable fun-seeker gains an excruciating 
sense of the alienation, perversity, and strangeness of the world 
around him. “It should be burned to the ground,” he says of the 
high-priced house he is to inherit, “and the earth sown with salt.” 
This quasi-biblical quote indicates that more than a few doors 
have been kicked down in Luke’s private passageways. He knows 
now! Poor Eleanor, of course, has been claimed by the house as one 
of its lonely, faceless citizens of eternity. It is her voice that gets to 
deliver the reverberant last lines of the film: “Hill House has stood 
for eighty years and will probably stand for eighty more . . . and 
we who walk there, walk alone.” With these words the viewer 
glimpses a realm of unimaginable pain and horror, an unfathom­
able region of aching Gothic turmoil, a weird nevermoresville.
The experience is extremely disconsoling but nonetheless ex­
hilarating.
But for a movie to convey such intense feeling for the super­
natural is rare. (This one of course is a scrupulously faithful 
adaptation of Shirley Jackson’s unarguably excellent novel.) 
The thing that is quite common, especially with fiction, is the 
phenomenon that produced the single-sentence paragraph above; 
in other words - the horror story’s paradox of entertainment. The 
thumping heart of the question, though, is what really entertains 
us? In opposition, that is, to what we only imagine entertains us. 
Entertainment, whatever we imagine its real source, is rightly

XVI
INTRODU CTION
regarded as its own justification, and this seems to be one of the 
unassailable consolations of horror.
But is it? (This won’t take long.)
Another test case
We are reading - in a quiet, cozy room, it goes without saying - 
one of M.R. James’ powerful ghost stories. It is “Count Mag­
nus,” in which a curious scholar gains knowledge he didn’t even 
know was forbidden and suffers the resultant doom at the hands 
of the count and his betentacled companion. The story actually 
ends before we have a chance to witness its fabulous coup de 
grace, but we know that a sucked-off face is in store for our 
scholar. Meanwhile we sit on the sidelines (sipping a warm drink, 
probably) as the doomed academic meets a fate worse than any 
we’ll ever know. At least we think it’s worse, we hope it is . . . 
deep, deep in the subcellars of our minds we pray: “Please don’t 
let anything even like that happen to me! Not to me. Let it always 
be the other guy and I’ll read about him, even tremble for him a 
little. Besides, I’m having so much fun, it can’t be all that 
terrible. For him, that is. For me it would be unbearable. See 
how shaky and excitable I get just reading about it. So please let it 
always be the other guy.”
But it can’t always be the other guy, for in the long run we’re all, 
each of us, the other guy.
Of course in the short run it’s one of life’s minor ecstasies - an 
undoubted entertainment - to read about a world in which the 
very worst doom takes place in a restricted area we would never 
ever wander into and befalls somebody else. And this is the run in 
which all stories are read, as well as written. (If something with 
eyes like two runny eggs were after your carcass, would you sit 
down and write a story about it?) It’s another world, the short run; 
it’s a world where horror really is a true consolation. But it’s no 
compliment to Dr. James or to ourselves as readers to put too much 
stock in ghost stories as a consolation for our mortality, our 
vulnerability to real-life terrors. As consolations go, this happens 
to be a pretty low-grade one -  demented complacency posing as 
beatitude.
So our second consolation lives on borrowed time at best. And in 
the long-run - where no mere tale can do you much good - is 
delusory.
(Perhaps the stories of H.P. Lovecraft offer a more threatening

INTRODU CTION
XVII
and admirable role to those of us devoted to doom. In Lovecraft’s 
work doom is not restricted to eccentric characters in eccentric 
situations. It begins there but ultimately expands to violate the 
safety zone of the reader (and the non-reader for that matter, 
though the latter remains innocent of Lovecraft’s forbidden 
knowledge). M.R. James’ are cautionary tales, lessons in how 
to stay out of spectral trouble and how nice and safe it feels to do 
so. But within the cosmic boundaries of Lovecraft’s universe, 
which many would call the universe itself, we are already in 
trouble, and feeling safe is out of the question for anyone with 
some brains and chance access to the manuscripts of Albert 
Wilmarth, Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee, or Prof. Angell’s ne­
phew. These isolated narrators take us with them into their 
doom, which is the world’s. (No one ever gives a hoot what 
happens to Lovecraft’s characters as individuals.) If we knew what 
they know about the world and about our alarmingly tentative 
place in it, our brains would indeed reel with revelation. And if we 
found out what Arthur Jermyn found out about ourselves and our 
humble origins in a mere madness of biology, we would do as he 
did with a few gallons of gasoline and a merciful match. Of course 
Lovecraft insists on telling us things it does no good to know: 
things that can’t help us or protect us or even prepare us for the 
awful and inevitable apocalypse to come. The only comfort is to 
accept it, live in it, and sigh yourself into the balm of living 
oblivion. If you can only maintain this constant sense of doom, 
you may be spared the pain of foolish hopes and their impending 
demolishment.
But we can’t maintain it; only a saint of doom could. Hope leaks 
into our lives by way of spreading cracks we always meant to repair 
but never did. (Oddly enough, when the cracks yawn their widest, 
and the promised deluge comes at last, it is not hope at all that 
finally breaks through and drowns us.)
Interlude: see you later, consolations of doom
So when a fictional state of absolute doom no longer ofFers us 
possibilities of comfort - what’s left? Well, another stock role casts 
one not as the victim of a horror story but as its villain. That is, we 
get to be the monster for a change. To a certain extent this is 
supposed to happen when we walk onto those resounding floor­
boards behind the Gothic footlights. It’s traditional to identify 
with and feel sorry for the vampire or the werewolf in their

xv m
INTRODU CTION
ultimate moment of weakness, a time when they’re most human. 
Sometimes, though, it seems as if there’s more fun to be had 
playing a vampire or werewolf at the height of their monstrous, 
people-maiming power. To play them in our hearts, I mean. After 
all, it would be kind of great to wake up at dusk every day and 
cruise around in the shadows and fly on batwings through the 
night, stare strangers in the eye and have them under your power. 
Not bad for someone who’s supposed to be dead. Or rather, for 
someone who can’t die and whose soul is not his own; for someone 
who - no matter how seemingly suave - is doomed to ride eternity 
with a single and highly embarrassing obsession, the most debased 
junkie immortalized.
But maybe you could make it as a werewolf. For most of a 
given month you’re just like anybody else. Then for a few days 
you can take a vacation from your puny human self and spill the 
blood of puny human others. And once you return to your 
original clothes size, no one is any the wiser . . . until next 
month rolls around and you’ve got to do the whole thing again, 
month after month, over and over. Still, the werewolfs lifestyle 
might not be so bad, as long as you don’t get caught ripping out 
someone’s throat. Of course, there might be some guilt involved 
and, yes, bad dreams.
Vampirism and lycanthropy do have their drawbacks, anyone 
would admit that. But there would also be some memorable 
moments too, moments humans rarely, if ever, have: feeling your 
primal self at one with the inhuman forces around you, fearless in 
the face of night and nature and solitude and all those things from 
which mere people have much to fear. There you are under the 
moon - a raging storm in human form. And you’ll always be like 
that, forever if you’re careful. Being a human being is a dead end 
anyway. It would seem that supernatural sociopaths have more 
possibilities open to them. So wouldn’t it be great to be one? What 
I mean, of course, is: is it a consolation of horror fiction to let us be 
one for a little while? Yes, it really is; the attractions of this life are 
sometimes irresistible. But are we missing some point if we only see 
the glamour and ignore the drudgery in the existence of these free- 
spirited nyctophiles? Well, are we?
The last test
Test cancelled. The consolation is patently a trick one, done with 
invisible writing, mirrors, and camera magic.

INTRODU CTION
XIX
Substitute consolation: “The Fall of the House of 
Usher, or Doom Revisited”
Did you ever wonder how a Gothic story like Poe’s masterpiece 
can be so great without enlisting the reader’s care for its 
characters’ doom? Plenty of horrible events and concepts are 
woven together; the narrator and his friend Roderick experience 
a fair amount of f e a r. But unlike a horror story whose effect 
depends on reader sympathy with its fictional victims, this one 
doesn’t want us to get involved with the characters in that way. 
Our fear does not derive from theirs. Though Roderick, his sister, 
and the visiting narrator are fascinating companions, they do not 
burden us with their individual catastrophes. Are we sad for 
Roderick and his sister’s terrible fate? No. Are we happy the 
narrator makes a safe flight from the sinking house? Not 
particularly. Then why get upset about this calamity which 
takes place in the backwoods, miles from the nearest town and 
everyday human concerns?
In this story individuals are not the issue. Everywhere in Poe’s 
literary universe (Lovecraft’s too) the individual is horribly and 
comfortably irrelevant. During the reading of “The Fall of the 
House of Usher” we don’t look over any character’s shoulder but 
have our attention distributed god-wise into every corner of a foul 
factory which manufactures only one product: total and inescap­
able doom. Whether a given proper noun escapes this doom or is 
caught by it is beside the point. Poe’s is a world created with built- 
in obsolescence, and to appreciate fully this downrunning cosmos 
one must take the perspective of its creator, which is all perspec­
tives without getting sidetracked into a single one. Therefore we as 
readers are the House of Usher (both family and structure), we are 
the fungi clustering across its walls and the violent storm over its 
ancient head; we sink with the Ushers and get away with the 
narrator. In brief, we play all the roles. And the consolation in this 
is that we are supremely removed from the maddeningly tragic 
viewpoint of the human.
Of course, when the story is over we must fall from our god’s 
perch and sink back into humanness, which is perhaps what the 
Ushers and their house are doing. This is always a problem for 
would-be gods! We can’t maintain for very long a godlike point 
of view. Wouldn’t it be great if we could; if life could be lived 
outside the agony of the individual? But we are always doomed 
and redoomed to become involved with our own lives, which is

XX
IN TRODU CTION
the only life there is, and godlikeness has nothing at all to do 
with it.
But still, wouldn’t it be great . . .
Darkness, you’ve done a lot for us
At this point it may seem that the consolations of horror are not 
what we thought they were, that all this time we’ve been keeping 
company with illusions. Well, we have. And we’ll continue to do 
so, continue to seek the appalling scene which short-circuits our 
brain, continue to sit in our numb coziness with a book of terror on 
our laps like a cataleptic predator, and continue to draw smug 
solace, if only for the space of a story, from a world made snug and 
simple by absolute hopelessness and doom. These consolations are 
still effective, even if they don’t work as well as we would prefer 
them to. But they are only effective, like most things of value in art 
or life, as illusions. And there’s no point attributing to them powers 
of therapy or salvation they don’t and can’t have. There are 
enough disappointments in the world without adding that one.
Perhaps, though, our illusion of consolation could be enhanced 
by acquiring a better sense of what we are being consoled by. 
What, in fact, is a horror story? And what does it do? First the 
latter.
The horror story does the work of a certain kind of dream we all 
know. Sometimes it does this so well that even the most irrational 
and unlikely subject matter can infect the reader with a sense of 
realism beyond the realistic, a trick usually not seen outside the 
vaudeville of sleep. When is the last time you failed to be fooled by 
a nightmare, didn’t suspend disbelief because its incidents weren’t 
sufficiently true-to-life? The horror story is only true to dreams, 
especially those which involve us in mysterious ordeals, the passing 
of secrets, the passages of forbidden knowledge, and, in more ways 
than one, the spilling of guts.
What distinguishes horror from other kinds of stories is the 
exclusive devotion of their practitioners, their true practitioners, to 
self-consciously imagining and isolating the most demonic aspects 
and episodes of human existence, undiminished by any consolation 
whatever. For here no consolation on earth is sufficient to the 
horrors it will struggle in vain to make bearable.
Are horror stories truer than other stories? They may be, but not 
necessarily. They are limited to depicting conditions of extraor­
dinary suffering, and while this is not the only game in town, such

INTRODU CTION
XXI
depletions can be as close to truth as any others. Nevertheless, what 
simple fictional horror - no matter how grossly magnified - can 
ever hold a candle to the complex mesh of misery and disenchant­
ment which is merely the human routine? Of course, the funda­
mental horror of existence is not always apparent to us, its 
constantly menaced but unwary existers. But in true horror stories 
we can see it even in the dark. All eternal hopes, optimistic outs, 
and ultimate redemptions are cleared away, and for a little while 
we can pretend to stare the very worst right in its rotting face.
Why, though? Why?
Just to do it, that’s all. Just to see how much unmitigated 
weirdness, sorrow, desolation, and cosmic anxiety the human 
heart can take and still have enough heart left over to translate 
these agonies into artistic forms: James’ stained glass monstrosities, 
Lovecrafts narrow-passaged blasphemies, Poe’s symphonic para­
noia. As in any satisfying relationship, the creator of horror and its 
consumer approach oneness with each other. In other words, you 
get the horrors you deserve, those you can understand. For 
contrary to conventional wisdom, you cannot be frightened by 
what you don’t understand.
This, then, is the ultimate, that is only, consolation: simply that 
someone shares some of your own feelings and has made of these a 
work of art which you have the insight, sensitivity, and - like it or 
not - peculiar set of experiences to appreciate. Amazing thing to 
say, the consolation of horror in art is that it actually intensifies our 
panic, loudens it on the sounding-board of our horror-hollowed 
hearts, turns terror up full blast, all the while reaching for that 
perfect and deafening amplitude at which we may dance to the 
bizarre music of our own misery.

To the memory of my aunt 
and godmother, Virginia Cianciolo

PART 1
from Songs of a Dead Dreamer


THE FROLIC
In a beautiful home in a beautiful part of town -  the town of 
Nolgate, site of the state prison - Dr. Munck examined the 
evening newspaper while his young wife lounged on a sofa nearby, 
lazily flipping through the colorful parade of a fashion magazine. 
Their daughter Norleen was upstairs asleep, or perhaps she was 
illicitly enjoying an after-hours session with the new color televi­
sion she’d received on her birthday the week before. If so, her 
violation of the bedtime rule went undetected due to the affluent 
expanse between bedroom and living room, where her parents 
heard no sounds of disobedience. The house was quiet. The 
neighborhood and the rest of the town were also quiet in various 
ways, all of them slightly distracting to the doctor’s wife. But so far 
Leslie had only dared complain of the town’s social lethargy in the 
most joking fashion (“Another exciting evening at the Munck’s 
monastic hideaway”). She knew her husband was quite dedicated 
to this new position of his in this new place. Perhaps tonight, 
though, he would exhibit some encouraging symptoms of disen­
chantment with his work.
“How did it go today, David?” she asked, her radiant eyes 
peeking over the magazine cover, where another pair of eyes 
radiated a glossy gaze. “You were pretty quiet at dinner.”
“It went about the same,” said David, without lowering the 
small-town newspaper to look at his wife.
“Does that mean you don’t want to talk about it?”
He folded the newspaper backwards and his upper body 
appeared. “That’s how it sounded, didn’t it?”
“Yes, it certainly did. Are you okay today?” she asked, laying 
aside the magazine on the coffee table and offering her complete 
attention.
“Severely doubting, that’s how I am.” He said this with a kind 
of far-off reflectiveness.
“Anything particularly doubtful, Dr. Munck?”
“Only everything,” he answered.
“Shall I make us drinks?”

4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“That would be much appreciated.”
Leslie walked to another part of the living room and from a large 
cabinet pulled out some bottles and some glasses. From the kitchen 
she brought out a supply of ice cubes in a brown plastic bucket. 
The sounds of drink-making were unusually audible in the living 
room’s plush quiet. The drapes were drawn on all windows except 
the one in the corner where an Aphrodite sculpture posed. Beyond 
that window was a deserted streetlighted street and a piece of 
moon above the opulent leafage of spring trees.
“There you go, doctor,” she said, handing him a glass that was 
very thick at its base and tapered almost undetectably toward its 
rim.“Thanks, I really need one of these.”
“Why? Aren’t things going well with your work?”
“You mean my work at the prison?”
“Yes, of course.”
“You could say at the prison once in a while. Not always talk in 
the abstract. Overtly recognize my chosen professional environ­
ment, my—”
“All right, all right. How’s things at the wonderful prison, dear? 
Is that better?” She paused and took a deep gulp from her glass, 
then calmed a little. “I’m sorry about the snideness, David.” 
“No, I deserved it. I’m blaming you for long realizing something 
I can’t bring myself to admit.”
“Which is?” she prompted.
“Which is that maybe it was not the wisest decision to move here 
and take this saintly mission upon my psychologist’s shoulders.” 
This remark was an indication of even deeper disenchantment 
than Leslie had hoped for. But somehow these words did not cheer 
her the way she thought they would. She could distantly hear the 
moving vans pulling up to the house, but the sound was no longer 
as pleasing as it once was.
“You said you wanted to do something more than treat urban 
neuroses. Something more meaningful, more challenging.” 
“What I wanted, masochistically, was a thankless job, an 
impossible one. And I got it.”
“Is it really that bad?” Leslie inquired, not quite believing she 
asked the question with such encouraging skepticism about the 
actual severity of the situation. She congratulated herself for 
placing David’s self-esteem above her own desire for a change of 
venue, important as she felt this was.
“I’m afraid it is that bad. When I first visited the prison’s 
psychiatric section and met the other doctors, I swore I wouldn’t

T H E  FROLIC
5
become as hopeless and cruelly cynical as they were. Things would 
be different with me. I overestimated myself by a wide margin, 
though. Today one of the orderlies was beaten up again by two of 
the prisoners, excuse me, ‘patients’. Last week it was Dr. Valdman, 
that’s why I was so moody on Norleen’s birthday. So far I’ve been 
lucky. All they do is spit at me. Well, they can all rot in that 
hellhole as far as I’m concerned.”
David felt his own words lingering atmospherically in the room, 
tainting the serenity of the house. Until then their home had been 
an insular haven beyond the contamination of the prison, an 
imposing structure outside the town limits. Now its psychic 
imposition transcended the limits of physical distance. Inner 
distance constricted, and David sensed the massive prison walls 
shadowing the cozy neighborhood outside.
“Do you know why I was late tonight?” he asked his wife. 
“No, why?”
“Because I had an overlong chat with a fellow who hasn’t got a 
name yet.”
“The one you told me about who won’t tell anyone where he’s 
from or what his real name is?”
“That’s him. He’s just an example of the pernicious monstrosity 
of the place. Worse than a beast, a rabid animal. Demented blind 
aggression . . . and clever. Because of this cute name game of his, 
he was classified as unsuitable for the regular prison population 
and thus we in the psychiatric section ended up with him. 
According to him, though, he has plenty of names, no less than 
a thousand, none of which he’s condescended to speak in anyone’s 
presence. From my point of view, he doesn’t really have use for any 
human name. But we’re stuck with him, no name and all.”
“Do you call him that, ‘no name’?”
“Maybe we should, but no, we don’t.”
“So what do you call him, then?”
“Well, he was convicted as John Doe, and since then everyone 
refers to him by that name. They’ve yet to uncover any official 
documentation on him. Neither his fingerprints nor photograph 
corresponds to any record of previous convictions. I understand he 
was picked up in a stolen car parked in front of an elementary 
school. An observant neighbor reported him as a suspicious 
character frequently seen in the area. Everyone was on the 
alert, I guess, after the first few disappearances from the school, 
and the police were watching him just as he was walking a new 
victim to his car. That’s when they made the arrest. But his version 
of the story is a little different. He says he was fully aware of his

6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
pursuers and expected, even wanted, to be caught, convicted, and 
exiled to the penitentiary.”
“Why?”
“Why? Why ask why? Why ask a psychotic to explain his own 
motivation, it only becomes more confusing. And John Doe is even 
less scrutable than most.”
“What do you mean?” asked Leslie.
“I can tell you by narrating a little scene from the interview I 
had with him today. I asked him if he knew why he was in prison.
“ ‘For frolicking,’ he said.
“ ‘What does that mean?’ I asked.
“His reply was: ‘Mean, mean, mean. You’re a meany.’
“That childish ranting somehow sounded to me as if he were 
mimicking his victims. I’d really had enough right then but 
foolishly continued the interview.
“ ‘Do you know why you can’t leave here’? I calmly asked with 
a poor variant of my original inquiry.
“ ‘Who says I can’t? I’ll just go when I want to. But I don’t want 
to yet.’
“ ‘Why not?’ I naturally questioned.
“ ‘I just got here,’ he said. ‘Thought I’d take a rest after 
frolicking so hard. But I want to be in with all the others. 
Unquestionably stimulating atmosphere. When can I go with 
them, when can I?’
“Can you believe that? It would be cruel, though, to put him in 
with the regular prison population, not to say he doesn’t deserve 
this cruelty. The average inmate despises Doe’s kind of crime, and 
there’s really no predicting what would happen if we put him in 
there and the others found out what he was convicted for.”
“So he has to stay in the psychiatric section for the rest of his 
term?” asked Leslie.
“He doesn’t think so. He thinks he can leave whenever he 
wants.”
“And can he?” questioned Leslie with a firm absence of 
facetiousness in her voice. This had always been one of her 
weightiest fears about living in this prison town, that every 
moment of the day and night there were horrible fiends plotting 
to escape through what she envisioned as rather papery walls. To 
raise a child in such surroundings was another of her objections to 
her husband’s work.
“I told you before, Leslie, there have been a very few successful 
escapes from that prison. If an inmate does get beyond the walls, 
his first impulse is usually one of practical self-preservation, and

THE FROLIC
7
he tries to get as far away as possible from this town, which is 
probably the safest place to be in the event of an escape. 
Anyway, most escapees are apprehended within hours after 
they’ve gotten out.”
“What about a prisoner like John Doe? Does he have this sense 
of ‘practical self-preservation,’ or would he rather just hang 
around and do damage to someone?”
“Prisoners like that don’t escape in the normal course of things. 
They just bounce off the walls but not over them. You know what I 
mean?”
Leslie said she understood, but this did not in the least lessen the 
potency of her fears, which found their source in an imaginary 
prison in an imaginary town, one where anything could happen as 
long as it approached the hideous. Morbidity had never been 
among her strong points, and she loathed its intrusion on her 
character. And for all his ready reassurance about the able security 
of the prison, David also seemed to be profoundly uneasy. He was 
sitting very still now, holding his drink between his knees and 
appearing to listen for something.
“What’s wrong, David?” asked Leslie.
“I thought I heard ... a sound.”
“A sound like what?”
“Can’t describe it exactly. A faraway noise.”
He stood up and looked around, as if to see whether the sound 
had left some tell-tale clue in the surrounding stillness of the house, 
perhaps a smeary sonic print somewhere.
“I’m going to check on Norleen,” he said, setting his glass down 
rather abruptly on the table beside his chair and splashing the 
drink around. He walked across the living room, down the front 
hallway, up the three segments of the stairway, and then down the 
upstairs hall. Peeking into his daughter’s room he saw her tiny 
figure resting comfortably, a sleepy embrace wrapped about the 
form of a stufFed Bambi. She still occasionally slept with an 
inanimate companion, even though she was getting a little old 
for this. But her psychologist father was careful not to question her 
right to this childish comfort. Before leaving the room Dr. Munck 
lowered the window which was partially open on that warm spring 
evening.
When he returned to the living room he delivered the wonder­
fully routine message that Norleen was peacefully asleep. In a 
gesture containing faint overnotes of celebratory relief, Leslie made 
them two fresh drinks, after which she said:
“David, you said you had an ‘overlong chat’ with that John

8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Doe. Not that I’m morbidly curious or anything, but did you ever 
get him to reveal very much about himself?”
“Sure,” Dr. Munck replied, rolling an ice cube around in his 
mouth. His voice was now more relaxed.
“He told me everything about himself, and on the surface all of 
it was nonsense. I asked him in a casually interested sort of way 
where he was from.
“ ‘No place,’ he replied like a psychotic simpleton.
“ ‘No place?’ I probed.
“ ‘Yes, precisely there, Herr Doktor.’
“ ‘Where were you born?’ I asked in another brilliant alternate 
form of the question.
“ ‘Which time do you mean, you meany?’ he said back to me, 
and so forth. I could go on with this dialogue—”
“You do a pretty good John Doe imitation, I must say.” 
“Thank you, but I couldn’t keep it up for very long. It wouldn’t 
be easy to imitate all his different voices and levels of articulateness. 
He may be something akin to a multiple personality, I’m not sure. 
I’d have to go over the tape of the interview to see if any patterns of 
coherency turn up, possibly something the detectives could use to 
establish the man’s identity, if he has one left. The tragic part is 
that this is all, of course, totally useless information as far as the 
victims of Doe’s crimes are concerned . . . and as far as I’m 
concerned it really is too. I’m no aesthete of pathology. It’s never 
been my ambition to study disease merely for its own sake, without 
effecting some kind of improvement, trying to help someone who 
would just as soon see me dead, or worse. I used to believe in 
rehabilitation, maybe with too much naivete and idealism. But 
those people, those things at the prison are only an ugly stain on 
existence. The hell with them,” he concluded, draining his glass 
until the ice cubes rattled.
“Want another?” Leslie asked with a smooth therapeutic tone to 
her voice.
David smiled now, the previous outburst having purged him 
somewhat. “Let’s get drunk, shall we?”
Leslie collected his glass for a refill. Now there was reason to 
celebrate, she thought. Her husband was not giving up his work 
from a sense of ineffectual failure but from anger. The anger would 
turn to resignation, the resignation to indifference, and then 
everything would be as it had been before; they could leave the 
prison town and move back home. In fact, they could move 
anywhere they liked, maybe take a long vacation first, treat 
Norleen to some sunny place. Leslie thought of all this as she

TH E FROLIC
9
made the drinks in the quiet of that beautiful room. This quiet was 
no longer an indication of soundless stagnancy but a delicious 
lulling prelude to the promising days to come. The indistinct 
happiness of the future glowed inside her along with the alco­
hol; she was gravid with pleasant prophecies. Perhaps the time was 
now right to have another child, a little brother for Norleen. But 
that could wait just a while longer . .. a lifetime of possibilities lay 
ahead, awaiting their wishes like a distinguished and fatherly 
genie.
Before returning with the drinks, Leslie went into the kitchen. 
She had something she wanted to give her husband, and this was 
the perfect time to do it. A little token to show David that although 
his job had proved a sad waste of his worthy efforts, she had 
nevertheless supported his work in her own way. With a drink in 
each hand, she held under her left elbow the small box she had got 
from the kitchen.
“What’s that?” asked David, taking his drink.
“Something for you, art lover. I bought it at that little shop 
where they sell things the inmates at the penitentiary make -  belts, 
jewelry, ashtrays, you know.”
“I know,” David said with an unusual lack of enthusiasm. “I 
didn’t think anyone actually bought that stuff.”
“I, for one, did. I thought it would help to support those 
prisoners who are doing something creative, instead of . . . well, 
instead of destructive things.”
“Creativity isn’t always an index of niceness, Leslie,” David 
admonished.
“Wait’ll you see it before passing judgement,” she said, opening 
the flap of the box. “There -  isn’t that nice work?” She set the piece 
on the coffee table.
Dr. Munck now plunged into that depth of sobriety which can 
only be reached by falling from a prior alcoholic height. He looked 
at the object. Of course he had seen it before, watched it being 
tenderly molded and caressed by creative hands, until he sickened 
and could watch no more. It was the head of a young boy, 
discovered in gray formless clay and glossily glazed in blue. The 
work radiated an extraordinary and intense beauty, the subject’s 
face expressing a kind of ecstatic serenity, the labyrinthine sim­
plicity of a visionary’s gaze.
“Well, what do you think of it?” asked Leslie.
David looked at his wife and said solemnly: “Please put it back 
in the box. And then get rid of it.”
“Get rid of it? Why?”

IO
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Why? Because I know which of the inmates did this work. He 
was very proud of it, and I even forced a grudging compliment for 
the craftsmanship of the thing. It’s obviously remarkable. But then 
he told me who the boy was. That expression of sky-blue peace­
fulness wasn’t on the boy’s face when they found him lying in a 
field about six months ago.”
“No, David,” said Leslie as a premature denial of what she was 
expecting her husband to reveal.
“This was his last - and according to him most memorable - 
‘frolic’.”
“Oh my God,” Leslie murmured softly, placing her right hand 
to her cheek. Then with both hands she gently placed the boy of 
blue back in his box. “I’ll return it to the shop,” she said quietly.
“Do it soon, Leslie. I don’t know how much longer we’ll be 
residing at this address.”
In the moody silence that followed, Leslie briefly contemplated 
the now openly expressed, and definite reality of their departure 
from the town of Nolgate, their escape. Then she said: “David, did 
he actually talk about the things he did. I mean about—”
“I know what you mean. Yes, he did,” answered Dr. Munck 
with a professional seriousness.
“Poor David,” Leslie sympathized.
“Actually it wasn’t that much of an ordeal. The conversation we 
had could even be called stimulating in a clinical sort of way. He 
described his ‘frolicking’ in a kind of unreal and highly imaginative 
manner that wasn’t always hideous to listen to. The strange beauty 
of this thing in the box here - disturbing as it is -  somewhat 
parallels the language he used when talking about those poor kids. 
At times I couldn’t help being fascinated, though maybe I was 
shielding my feelings with a psychologist’s detachment. Sometimes 
you just have to distance yourself, even if it means becoming a little 
less human.
“Anyway, nothing that he said was sickeningly graphic in the 
way you might imagine. When he told me about his last and ‘most 
memorable frolic,’ it was with a powerful sense of wonder and 
nostalgia, shocking as that sounds to me now. It seemed to be a 
kind of homesickness, though his ‘home’ is a ramshackle ruin of his 
decaying mind. His psychosis had bred this blasphemous fairyland 
which exists in a powerful way for him, and despite the demented 
grandeur of his thousand names, he actually sees himself as only a 
minor figure in this world -  a mediocre courtier in a broken-down 
kingdom of horror. This is really interesting when you consider the 
egoistical magnificence that a lot of psychopaths would attribute to

TH E  FROLIC
II
themselves given a limitless imaginary realm in which they could 
play any imaginary role. But not John Doe. He’s a comparatively 
lazy demi-demon from a place, a No Place, where dizzy chaos is 
the norm, a state of affairs on which he gluttonously thrives. Which 
is as good a description as any of the metaphysical economy of a 
psychotic’s universe.
“There’s actually quite a poetic geography to his interior 
dreamland as he describes it. He talked about a place that 
sounded like the back alleys of some cosmic slum, an innerdimen­
sional dead end. Which might be an indication of a ghetto 
upbringing in Doe’s past. And if so, his insanity has transformed 
these ghetto memories into a realm that cross-breeds a banal 
streetcorner reality with a psychopath’s paradise. This is where 
he does his ‘frolicking’ with what he calls his ‘awe-struck com­
pany,’ the place possibly being an abandoned building, or even an 
accomodating sewer. I say this based on his repeated mentioning of 
‘the jolly river of refuse’ and ‘the jagged heaps in shadows,’ which 
are certainly mad transmutations of a literal wasteland. Less 
fathomable are his memories of a moonlit corridor where mirrors 
scream and laugh, dark peaks of some kind that won’t remain still, 
a stairway that’s ‘broken’ in a very strange way, though this last 
one fits in with the background of a dilapidated slum.
“But despite all these dreamy back-drops in Doe’s imagination, 
the mundane evidence of his frolics still points to a crime of very 
familiar, down-to-earth horrors. A run-of-the-mill atrocity. Con­
sistently enough, Doe says he made the evidence look that way as a 
deliberate afterthought, that what he really means by ‘frolicking’ is 
a type of activity quite different from, even opposed to, the crime 
for which he was convicted. This term probably has some private 
associations rooted in his past.”
Dr. Munck paused and rattled around the ice cubes in his empty 
glass. Leslie seemed to have drifted into herself while he was 
speaking. She had lit a cigarette and was now leaning on the 
arm of the sofa with her legs up on its cushions, so that her knees 
pointed at her husband.
“You should really quit smoking someday,” he said.
Leslie lowered her eyes like a child mildly chastised. “I promise 
that as soon as we move - I’ll quit. Is that a deal?”
“Deal,” said David. “And I have another proposal for you. First 
let me tell you that I’ve definitely decided to hand in my 
resignation no later than tomorrow morning.”
“Isn’t that a little soon?” asked Leslie, hoping it wasn’t. 
“Believe me, no one will be surprised. I don’t think anyone will

12
THOMAS LIGOTTI
even care. Anyway, my proposal is that tomorrow we take Norleen 
and rent a place up north for a few days or so. We could go 
horseback riding. Remember how she loved it last summer? What 
do you say?”
“That sounds nice,” Leslie agreed with a deep glow of enthu­
siasm. “Very nice, in fact.”
“And on the way back we can drop off Norleen at your parents’. 
She can stay there while we take care of the business of moving out 
of this house, maybe find an apartment temporarily. I don’t think 
they’ll mind having her for a week or so, do you?”
“No, of course not, they’ll love it. But what’s the great rush? 
Norleen’s still in school, you know. Maybe we should wait till she 
gets out. It’s just a month away.”
David sat in silence for a moment, apparently ordering his 
thoughts.
“What’s wrong?” asked Leslie with just a slight quiver of anxiety 
in her voice.
“Nothing is actually wrong, nothing at all. But—”
“But what?”
“Well, it has to do with the prison. I know I sounded very smug 
in telling you how safe we are from prison escapes, and I still 
maintain that we are. But the one prisoner I’ve told you about is 
very strange, as I’m sure you’ve gathered. He is positively 
criminally psychotic . . . and then again he’s something else.” 
Leslie quizzed her husband with her eyes. “I thought you said he 
just bounces off the walls, not—”
“Yes, much of the time he’s like that. But sometimes, well . . .” 
“What are you trying to say, David?” asked an uneasy Leslie. 
“It’s something that Doe said when I was talking with him 
today. Nothing really definite. But I’d feel infinitely more com­
fortable about the whole thing if Norleen stayed with your parents 
until we can organize ourselves.”
Leslie lit another cigarette. “Tell me what he said that bothers 
you so much,” she said firmly. “I should know too.”
“When I tell you, you’ll probably just think I’m a little crazy 
myself. You didn’t talk to him, though, and I did. The tone, or 
rather the many different tones of his voice; the shifting expres­
sions on that lean face. Much of the time I talked to him I had 
the feeling he was beyond me in some way, I don’t know exactly 
how. I’m sure it was just the customary behavior of the 
psychopath - trying to shock the doctor. It gives them a sense 
of power.”
“Tell me what he said,” Leslie insisted.

T H E  FROLIC
13
“All right, I’ll tell you. As I said, it’s probably nothing. But 
toward the end of the interview today, when we were talking about 
those kids, and actually kids in general, he said something I didn’t 
like at all. He said it with an afTected accent, Scottish this time with 
a little German flavor thrown in. He said: ‘You wouldn’t be havin’ 
a misbehavin’ laddie nor a little colleen of your own, now would 
you, Professor von Munck?’ Then he grinned at me silently.
“Now I’m sure he was deliberately trying to upset me without, 
however, having any purpose in mind other than that.”
“But what he said, David: ‘nor a little colleen.’ ” 
“Grammatically, of course, it should have been ‘or’ not ‘nor’, 
but I’m sure it wasn’t anything except a case of bad grammar.” 
“You didn’t mention anything about Norleen, did you?”
“Of course I didn’t. That’s not exactly the kind of thing I would 
talk about with these . . . people.”
“Then why did he say it like that?”
“I have no idea. He possesses a very weird sort of cleverness, 
speaking much of the time with vague suggestions, even subtle 
jokes. He could have heard things about me from someone on the 
staff, I suppose. Then again, it might be just an innocent 
coincidence.” He looked to his wife for comment.
“You’re probably right,” Leslie agreed with an ambivalent 
eagerness to believe in this conclusion. “All the same, I think I 
understand why you want Norleen to stay with my parents. Not 
that anything might happen—”
“Not at all. There’s no reason to think anything would happen. 
Maybe this is a case of the doctor being out-psyched by his patient, 
but I don’t really care anymore. Any reasonable person would be a 
little spooked after spending day after day in the chaos and 
physical danger of that place . . . the murderers, the rapists, the 
dregs of the dregs. It’s impossible to lead a normal family life while 
working under those conditions. You saw how I was on Norleen’s 
birthday.”
“I know. Not the best surroundings in which to bring up a 
child.”
David nodded slowly. “When I think of how she looked when I 
went to check on her a little while ago, hugging one of those stuffed 
security blankets of hers.” He took a sip of his drink. “It was a new 
one, I noticed. Did you buy it when you were out shopping 
today?”
Leslie gazed blankly. “The only thing I bought was that,” she 
said, pointing at the box on the coffee table. “What ‘new one’ do 
you mean?”

14
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“The stuffed Bambi. Maybe she had it before and I just never 
noticed it,” he said, partially dismissing the issue.
“Well, if she had it before, it didn’t come from me,” Leslie said 
quite resolutely.
“Nor me.”
“I don’t remember her having it when I put her to bed,” said 
Leslie.
“Well, she had it when I looked in on her after hearing . . .”
David paused with a look on his face of intense thought, an 
indication of some frantic, rummaging search within.
“What’s the matter, David?” Leslie asked, her voice weakening.
“I’m not sure exactly. It’s as if I know something and don’t 
know it at the same time.”
But Dr. Munck was beginning to know. With his left hand he 
covered the back of his neck, warming it. Was there a draft coming 
from somewhere, another part of the house? This was not the kind 
of house to be drafty, not a broken-down place where the wind gets 
in through ancient attic boards and warped window-frames. There 
actually was quite a wind blowing now; he could hear it hunting 
around outside and could see the restless trees through the window 
behind the Aphrodite sculpture. The goddess posed languidly with 
her flawless head leaning back, her blind eyes contemplating the 
ceiling and beyond. But beyond the ceiling? Beyond the hollow 
snoozing of the wind, cold and dead? And the draft?
What?
“David, do you feel a draft?” asked his wife.
“Yes,” he replied very loudly and with unusual force.
“Yes,” he repeated, rising out of the chair, walking across the 
room, his steps quickening toward the stairs, up the three seg­
ments, then running down the second-floor hallway. “Norleen, 
Norleen,” he chanted before reaching the half-closed door of her 
room. He could feel the breeze coming from there.
He knew and did not know.
He groped for the light switch. It was low, the height of a child. 
He turned on the light. The child was gone. Across the room the 
window was wide open, the white translucent curtains flapping 
upwards on the invading wind. Alone on the bed was the stuffed 
animal, torn, its soft entrails littering the mattress. Now stuffed 
inside, blooming out like a flower, was a piece of paper, and Dr. 
Munck could discern within its folds a fragment of the prison’s 
letterhead. But the note was not a typed message of official 
business: the handwriting varied from a neat italic script to a 
child’s scrawl. He desperately stared at the words for what seemed

TH E FROLIC
!5
an infinite interval without comprehending their message. Then, 
finally, the meaning sank heavily in.
Dr, Monk, read the note from inside the animal, We leave this 
behind in your capable hands, for in the black-foaming gutters and back alleys 
of paradise, in the dank windowless gloom of some galactic cellar, in the 
hollow pearly whorlsfound in sewerlike seas, in starless cities of insanity, and 
in their slums ... my awe-struck little deer and I have gone frolicking. See 
you anon. Jonathan Doe.
“David?” he heard his wife’s voice inquire from the bottom of 
the stairs. “Is everything all right?”
Then the beautiful house was no longer quiet, for there rang a 
bright freezing scream of laughter, the perfect sound to accompany 
a passing anecdote of some obscure hell.

LES FLEURS
April 17th. Flowers sent out today in the early a.m.
May 1st. Today -  and I thought it would never happen again -  I 
have met someone about whom, I think, I can be hopeful. Her 
name is Daisy. She works in a florist shop! The florist shop, I might 
add, where I quietly paid a visit to gather some sorrowful flowers 
for Clare, who to the rest of the world is still a missing person. At 
first, of course, Daisy was politely reserved when I asked about 
some lilting blossoms for a loved one’s memorial. I soon cured her, 
however, of this unnecessarily detached manner. In my deeply shy 
and friendly tone of voice I asked about some of the other flowers in 
the shop, ones having nothing to do with loss, if not everything to 
do with gain. She was quite glad to take me on a trumped-up tour 
of hyacinths and hibiscuses. I confessed to knowing next to nothing 
about commercial plants and things, and remarked on her 
enthusiasm for this field of study, hoping all the while that at 
least part of her animation was inspired by me. “Oh, I love 
working with flowers,” she said. “I think they’re real interest­
ing.” Then she asked if I was aware that there were plants having 
flowers which opened only at night, and that certain types of 
violets bloomed only in darkness underground. My inner flow of 
thoughts and sensations suddenly quickened. Though I had 
already sensed she was a girl of special imagination, this was the 
first hint I received of just how special it was. I judged my efforts to 
know her better would not be wasted, as they have been with 
others. “That is real interesting about those flowers,” I said, 
smiling a hothouse warm smile. There was a pause which I filled 
in with my name. She then told me hers. “Now what kind of 
flowers would you like?” she asked. I sedately requested an 
arrangement suitable for the grave of a departed grandmother. 
Before leaving the shop I told Daisy I might need to stop by again 
to satisfy some future floral needs. She seemed to have no objection 
to this. With the vegetation nestled in my arm I songfully walked 
out of the store. I then proceeded directly to Chapel Gardens

LES FLEURS
17
cemetery. For a while I sincerely made the effort to find a 
headstone that might by coincidence display my lost one’s 
name. And any dates would just have to do. I thought she 
deserved this much at least. As events transpired, however, the 
recipient of my floral memorial had to be someone named 
Clarence.
May 16th. Daisy visited my apartment for the first time and fell in 
love with its quaint refurbishments. “I adore well-preserved old 
places,” she said. It seemed to me she really did. I thought she 
would. She remarked what decorative wonders a few plants - of 
varying species - would do for the ancient rooms. She was 
obviously sensitive to the absence of natural adornments in my 
bachelor quarters. “Night-blooming cereuses?” I asked, trying not 
to mean too much by this and give myself away. A mild grin 
appeared on her face, but it was not an issue I thought I could 
press at the time, and even now I only delicately press it within 
these scrapbook pages. She wandered about the apartment at 
great length. I watched her, seeing the place with new eyes. Then 
suddenly I realized I had regrettably overlooked something. She 
looked it over. The object was positioned on a low table before a 
high window and between its voluminous curtains. It seemed so 
vulgarly prominent to me then, especially since I hadn’t intended 
to let her see anything of this sort so early in our friendship. “What 
is this?” she asked, her voice expressing a kind of outraged curiosity 
bordering on plain outrage. “It’s just a sculpture. I told you I do 
things like that. It’s not very good. Kind of dumb.” She examined 
the piece more closely. “Watch that,” I warned. She let out a tiny, 
unserious “Ow.” “Is it supposed to be some type of cactus?” she 
inquired. For a moment she seemed to take a genuine interest in 
that obscure objet d’art. “It has little teeth,” she observed, “on 
these big tongue things.” They do look like tongues; I’d never 
thought of that. Rather ingenious comparison, considering. I 
hoped her imagination had found fertile ground in which to 
grow, but instead she revealed a moribund disgust. “You might 
have better luck passing it off as an animal than a plant, or a 
sculpture of a plant, or whatever. It’s got a velvety kind of fur and 
looks like it might crawl away.” I felt like crawling away myself at 
that point. I asked her, as a quasi-botanist, if there were not plants 
resembling birds and other animal life. This was my feeble attempt 
to exculpate my creation from any charges of unnaturalness. It’s 
strange how you’re sometimes forced to assume an unsympathetic 
view of yourself through borrowed eyes. Finally I mixed some

i8
THOMAS LIO O TTI
drinks and we went on to other things. I put on some music.
Soon afterward, however, the bland harmony of the music was 
undermined by an unfortunate dissonance. That detective (Bri- 
ceberg, I think) arrived for an unexpected encore of his interroga­
tion re: the Clare afTair. Fortunately I was able to keep him and his 
questions out in the hallway the entire time. We reviewed the 
previous dialogue we’d had. I reiterated to him that Clare was just 
someone I worked with and with whom I was professionally 
friendly. It appears that some of my co-workers, unidentified, 
suspect that Clare and I were romantically involved. “Office 
gossip,” I countered, knowing she was one girl who knew how 
to keep certain secrets, even if she could not be trusted with others. 
No, I said, I definitely had no idea where she could have 
disappeared to. I did manage to subversively hint, however, that 
I would not be surprised if in a sudden flight of neurotic despair she 
had impulsively relocated in some land of her heart’s desire. I 
myself had despaired to find that within Clare’s dark and promis­
ingly moody borders lay a disappointing dreamland of white 
picket fences and flower-printed curtains. No, I didn’t tell that 
to the detective. Besides, I further argued, it was well known in the 
office that Clare had begun dating someone approximately seven 
to ten days (my personal estimation of the term of her disloyalty) 
before her disappearance. So why bother me? This, I found out, 
was the reason: he had also been informed, he informed me, of my 
belonging to a certain offbeat organization. I replied there was 
nothing offbeat in serious philosophical study; furthermore, I was 
an artist, as he well knew, and, as anybody knows, artistic 
personalities have a perfectly natural tendency toward such 
things. I thought he would understand if I put it that way. He 
did. The man appeared satisfied with my every statement. Indeed, 
he seemed overly eager to dismiss me as a suspect in the case, no 
doubt trying to create a false sense of security on my part and lead 
me to make an unwitting admission to the foulest kind of play. 
“Was that about the girl in your office?” Daisy asked me after­
ward. “Mm-hm,” I noised. I was brooding and silent for a while, 
hoping she would attribute this to my inward lament for that 
strange girl at the office and not to the lamentably imperfect 
evening we’d had. “Maybe I’d better go,” she said, and very soon 
did. There was not much of our date left to salvage anyway. After 
she abandoned me I got very drunk on a liqueur tasting of flowers 
from open fields, or so it seemed. I also took this opportunity to 
reread a story about some men who visit the white waste regions of 
a polar wonderland. I don’t expect to dream tonight, having

LES FLEURS
already sated myself with this frigid fantasy. Brotherhood of 
Paradise offbeat indeed!
September 21st. Day came up to the cool, clean offices of G.R. Glacy, 
the advertising house of whores and horrors, to meet me for lunch. 
I introduced her around the department to the few people I get 
along with, and definitely not to those vicious copy-slingers who 
spread rumors about me. I also showed her my little corner of 
commercial artistry, including my latest project. “Oh, that’s 
lovely,” she said when I pointed out the drawing of a nymph 
with flowers in her freshly shampooed hair. “That’s really nice.” 
That “nice” remark almost spoiled my day. I asked her to look 
closely at the flowers mingling freshly in the fresh locks of this 
mythical being. It was barely noticeable that one of the flower 
stems was growing out of, or perhaps into, the creature’s head. Day 
didn’t seem to appreciate the craftiness of my craft very much. And 
I thought we were making such progress along “ofíbeat” paths. 
(Damn that Briceberg!) Perhaps I should wait until we return 
from our trip before showing her any of my paintings. I want her to 
be prepared. Everything is all prepared for our vacation, at least; 
Day finally found someone to take care of the cat who shares her 
flat.
October 10th. Good-bye diary. See you when I get back.
November 1st. With ecstasy and exasperation, I here record a 
particular episode from Day’s and my tropical sojourn. I’m not 
sure whether the following adventure represents an impasse or a 
turning point in the course of our relationship. Perhaps there is 
some point that I have failed to entirely get. As yet I am, not 
surprisingly, in the dark. Here, nevertheless, is a fragment from our 
escapist interlude.
An Hawaiian paradise at midnight. Actually we were just 
gazing upon the beachside luxuriance from our hotel veranda. 
Day was bemused by several exotic drinks that wore flowers on 
their foamy heads. I was in a condition similar to hers. A few 
moments of heady silence passed, punctuated by an occasional sigh 
from Day. We heard the flapping of invisible wings whipping the 
warm air in darkness. We listened closely to the sounds of black 
orchids growing, even if there were none. “Mmmm,” hummed 
Day. We were ripe for a whim. I had one, not knowing yet if I 
could pull it thoroughly ofT. “Can you smell the mysterious 
cereus?” I asked, placing one hand on her far shoulder and

2 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
dramatically passing the other in a horizontal arc before the jungle 
beyond. “Can you?” I hypnotically repeated. “I can,” said a game 
Day. “But can we find them, Day, and watch them open in the 
moonlight?” “We can, we can,” she chanted giddily. We could. 
Suddenly the smooth-skinned leaves of the night garden were 
brushing against our smooth-skinned selves. Day paused to touch 
a flower that was orange or red but smelled of a deep violet. I 
encouraged us to press on across the flower-bedded earth. We 
plunged deeper into the dream garden. Faster, faster, faster the 
sounds and smells rushed by us. It was easier than I thought. At 
some point, with almost no effort at all, I successfully managed our 
full departure from known geography. “Day, Day,” I shouted in 
the initial confusion and excitement. “We’re here. I’ve never 
shown this to anyone. It’s been such a torturous secret, Day. I’ve 
wanted to tell you for so long, and show you. No, don’t speak. 
Look, look.” Oh, the thrill of seeing this dark paradise with new 
eyes. With doubled intensity would I now see my world. My world. 
She was somewhere near me in the darkness. I waited, seeing her a 
thousand ways in my mind before actually gazing at the real Day. 
I looked. “What’s wrong with the stars, the sky?” was all she said. 
She was trembling.
At breakfast the next morning I subtly probed her for impres­
sions and judgements of the night before. But she was badly hung 
over and had only a chaotic recall of the previous night. Oh, well.
Since our return I have been working on a painting entitled 
“Sanctum Obscurum.” Though I have done this kind of work 
many times before, I am including in this one elements that I hope 
will stir Day’s memory and precipitate a conscious recollection of 
not only a certain night in the islands but of all the subtle and not 
so subtle messages I have tried to communicate to her. I only pray 
she will understand.
November 14th. Stars of disaster! Earthly, and not unearthly asters 
are all that fill Day’s heart with gladness. She is too much a lover of 
natural flora to be anything else. I know this now. I showed her the 
painting, and even imagined she anticipated seeing it with some 
excitement. But I think she was just anxiously waiting to see what 
kind of fool I would make of myself. She sat on the sofa, scraping 
her lower lip with a nervous forefinger. Opposite her I let a little 
cloth drop. She looked up as if there had been a startling noise. I 
was not wholly satisfied with the painting myself, but this exhibi­
tion was designed to serve an extra-aesthetic purpose. I searched 
her eyes for a reflection of understanding, a ripple of empathetic

LES FLEURS
21
insight. “Well?” I asked, the necessity of the word tolling doom. 
Her gaze told me all I needed to know, and the fatal clarity of the 
message was reminiscent of another girl I once knew. She gave me 
a second chance, looking at the picture with a theatrical scrutiny. 
The picture itself? An inner refuge, cozily crowding about the 
periphery of a central window of leaded glass. The interior beams 
with a honeyed haze, as of light glowing evenly through a 
patterned tapestry. Beyond the window, too, is a sanctuary of 
sorts, but not of man or terrestrial nature. Outside is an opulent 
kingdom of glittering colors and velvety jungle-shapes, a realm of 
contorted rainbows and twisted auroras. Hyperradiant hues are 
calmed by the glass, so that their strange intensity does not 
threaten the chromatic integrity of the world within. Some 
stars, coloured from the most spectral part of the spectrum, 
blossom in the high darkness. The outer world glistens in stellar 
light and also gleams with a labyrinthine glare inside each twisted 
form. And upon the window’s surface is the watery reflection of a 
lone figure gazing out at this unearthly paradise.
“Of course, it’s very good,” she observed. “Very realistic.”
Not at all, Daisy Day. Not realistic in the least.
Some uncomfortable moments later I found out she had to be 
leaving. It seemed she had made girl plans with a girlfriend of hers 
to do some things girls do when they get together with others of 
their kind. I said I understood, and I did. There was no doubt in 
my mind of the gender of Day’s companion this evening. But it was 
for a different reason that I was distressed to see her go. Tonight 
marks the first time, and this I could read in her every move and 
expression, that she has truly possessed a sure knowledge of my 
secrets. Of course, she already knew about the meetings I attend 
and all such things. I’ve even paraphrased and abridged for her 
the discussion which goes on at these gatherings, always obscuring 
their real nature in progressively more transparent guises, hoping 
one day to show her the naked truth. And now, I think, the secret 
has been stripped bare. Whether she believes them or not, which 
doesn’t make any difference, she has as clear a notion as Clare ever 
did of the fabulous truth about me and the others. She has 
positively gotten the picture now.
November 16th. Tonight we held an emergency meeting, our 
assembly in crisis. The others feel there’s a problem, and of course 
I know they’re right. Ever since I met that girl I could sense their 
growing uneasiness, which was their prerogative. Now, however, 
all has changed; my romantic misjudgement has seen to that. They

22
THOMAS LIOOTTI
expressed absolute horror that an outsider should know so much. I 
feel it myself. Day is a stranger now, and I wonder what her 
loquacious self might disclose about her former friend, not to 
mention his present ones. A marvelous arcana is threatened with 
exposure. The secretness we need for our lives could be lost, and 
with it would go the keys to a strange kingdom.
We’ve confronted these situations before, and I’m not the only 
one to have jeopardized our secrecy. We, of course, have no secrets 
from each other. They know everything about me, and I about 
them. They knew every step of the way my relationship with 
Daisy. Some of them even predicted the outcome. And though I 
thought I was right in taking the extravagant chance that they 
were wrong, I must now defer to their prophecy. Those lonely 
souls, mes frères! “Do you want us to see it through?” they asked in 
so many words. I consented, finally, in a score of ambiguous, half- 
hesitant ways. Then they sent me back to my unflowered sanctum. 
I’ll never do this again, I thought, even though I’ve made this 
resolution before. I stared at the razory denies of my furry 
sculpture for a perilously long while. What that poor girl saw as 
tongue-like floral appendages were silent: the preservation of such 
silence, of course, is their whole purpose. I remember that Daisy 
once jokingly asked me on what I modeled my art ...
November 17th.
To Eden with me you will not leave
To live in a cottage of crazy crooked
eaves.
In your own happy home you take care 
these nights;
When you let your little cat in, turn 
on the lights!
Something scurries behind and finds 
a cozy place to stare,
Something sent to you from paradise, 
paradisically so rare:
Tongues flowering; they leap out 
laughing, lapping. Disappear!
I do this to pass the hours. Only to pass the hours.
November 17th. 12.00 a.m. Flowers.

ALICE’S LAST 
ADVENTURE
Preston, stop laughing. They ate the whole backyard. They ate your 
mother’s favorite flowers! It’s not funny, Preston.”
“Aaaaa ha-ha-ha-ha-ha. Aaaaa ha-ha-ha-ha-ha.”
- Preston and the Starving Shadows
long time ago, Preston Penn made up his mind to ignore the
passing years and join the ranks of those who remain forever 
in a kind of half-world between childhood and adolescence. He 
would not give up the bold satisfaction of eating insects (cripsy flies 
and crunchy beetles are his favorites), nor that peculiar drunken­
ness of a child’s brain, induplicable once grown-up sobriety has set 
perniciously in. The result was that Preston successfully negotiated 
several decades without ever coming within hailing distance of 
puberty; he lived unchanged throughout many a perverse adven­
ture in the forties and fifties and even into the sixties. He lived long 
after I ceased writing about him.
Did he have a prototype? I should say so. One doesn’t just invent 
a character like Preston using only the pitiful powers of imagina­
tion. He was very much a concoction of reality, later adapted for 
my popular series of children’s books. Preston’s status in both 
reality and imagination has always had a great fascination for me. 
In the past year, however, this issue has especially demanded my 
attention, not without some personal annoyance and even anxiety. 
Then again, perhaps I’m just getting senile.
My age is no secret, since it can be looked up in a number of 
literary reference sources (see Children's Authors of Today) whose 
information is only a few years ofT - I won’t tell you in which 
direction. Over two decades ago, when the last Preston book 
appeared (Preston and the Upside-Down Face), one reviewer rather

24
THOMAS LIG O TTI
snootily referred to me as the “ ‘Grande Damned’ of a particular 
sort of children’s literature.” What sort you can imagine if you 
don’t otherwise know, if you didn’t grow up -  or not grow up, as it 
were - reading Preston’s adventures with the Dead Mask, the 
Starving Shadows, or the Lonely Mirror.
Even as a little girl, I knew I wanted to be an author; and I also 
knew just the kinds of things I would write. Let someone else give 
the preadolescents their literary introductions to life and love, 
guiding them through those volatile years when anything might go 
wrong, and landing them safely on the shores of incipient maturity. 
That was never my destiny. I would write about my adventures 
with Preston - my real-life childhood playmate, as everybody 
knew. Preston would then initiate others into the mysteries of an 
upside-down, inside-out, sinistral, always faintly askew (if not 
entirely reversed) universe. A true avatar of topsy-turveydom, 
Preston gave himself body and soul to the search -  in common 
places such as pools of rainwater, tarnished ornaments, November 
afternoons -  for zones of fractured numinosity, usually with the 
purpose of fracturing in turn the bizarre icons of his foul and 
bloated twin, the adult world. He became a conjurer of stylish 
nightmares, and what he could do with mirrors gave the grown­
ups fits and sleepless nights. No dilettante of the extraordinary, but 
its embodiment. Such is the spiritual biography of Preston Penn.
But I suppose it was my father, as much as Preston’s original, 
who inspired the stories I’ve written. To put it briefly, Father had 
the blood of a child coursing through his big adult body, nourish­
ing the over-sophisticated brain of Foxborough College’s associate 
professor of philosophy. Typical of his character was a love for the 
books of Lewis Carroll, and thus the genesis of my name, if not my 
subsequent career. (My mother told me that while she was 
pregnant, Father willed me into a little Alice.) Father thought of 
Carroll not merely as a clever storyteller but more as an inhumanly 
jaded aesthete of the imagination, no doubt projecting some of his 
own private values onto poor Mr. Dodgson. To him the author of 
the Alice books was, I think, a personal symbol of power, the 
strange ideal of an unstructured mind manipulating reality to its 
whim and gaining a kind of objective force through the minds of 
others.
It was very important that I share these books, and many other 
things, in the same spirit. “See, honey,” he would say while 
rereading Through the Looking Glass to me, “see how smart little 
Alice right away notices that the room on the other side of the 
mirror is not as ‘tidy’ as the one she just came from. Not as tidy” he

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
25
repeated with professorial emphasis but chuckling like a child, a 
strange little laugh that I inherited from him. “Not tidy. We know 
what that means, don’t we?” I would look up at him and nod with 
all the solemnity that my six, seven, eight years could muster.
And I did know what that meant. I felt intimations of a thousand 
discrete and misshapen marvels: of things going wrong in curious 
ways, of the edge of the world where an endless ribbon of road 
continued into space by itself, of a universe handed over to new 
gods. Father would gaze at my round little face, squinting his eyes 
as if I were giving ofTlight. “Moon face,” he called me. When I got 
older, my features became more angular, an involuntary betrayal 
of my father’s conception of his little Alice, among all the other 
betrayals once I’d broken the barrier of maturity. I suppose it was 
a blessing that he did not live to see me grow up and change, saved 
from disappointment by a sudden explosion in his brain while he 
was giving a lecture at the college.
But perhaps he would have perceived, as I did not for many 
years, that my “change” was illusory, that I merely picked up the 
conventional gestures of an aging soul (nervous breakdown, 
divorce, remarriage, alcoholism, widowhood, stoic tolerance of a 
second-rate reality) without destroying the Alice he loved. She was 
always kept very much alive, though relegated to the role of an 
author for children. Obviously she endured, because it was she who 
wrote all those books about her soul mate Preston, even if she has 
not written one for many years now. Not too many, I hope. Oh, 
those years, those years.
So much for the past.
At present I would like to deal with just a single year, the one 
ending today - about an hour from now, judging by the clock that 
five minutes ago chimed eleven p.m. from the shadows on the other 
side of this study. During the past three hundred and sixty-five 
days I have noticed, sometimes just barely, an accumulation of 
peculiar episodes in my life. A lack of tidiness, you might say. (As a 
result, I’ve been drinking heavily again; and loneliness is getting to 
me in ways it never did in the past. Ah, the past.)
Some of these episodes are so elusive and insubstantial that it 
would be impossible to talk about them sensibly, except perhaps in 
the moods they leave behind like fingerprints, and which I’ve 
learned to read like divinatory signs. My task will be much easier if 
I confine myself to recounting but a few of the incidents, thereby 
giving them a certain form and structure I so badly need just now. 
A tidying up, so to speak.
I should start by identifying tonight as that sacred eve which

26
THOMAS LIOOTTI
Preston always devotedly observed, celebrating it most intensely in 
Preston and the Ghost of the Gourd. (At least there should be a few 
minutes remaining of this immovable feast, according to the clock 
ticking at my back; though from the look of things, the hands seem 
stuck on the time I reported a couple of paragraphs ago. Perhaps I 
misjudged it before.)
For the past several years I’ve made an appearance at the local 
suburban library on this night to give a reading from one of my 
books as the main event of an annual Hallowe’en fest. Tonight I 
managed to show up once again for the reading, even if I hesitate 
to say everything went as usual. Last year, however, I did not make 
it at all to the costume party. This brings me to what I think is the 
first in a year-long series of disruptions unknown to a biography 
previously marked by nothing more than episodes of conventional 
chaos. My apologies for taking two steps backward before one step 
forward. As an old hand at storytelling, I realize this is always a 
risky approach when bidding for a reader’s attention. But here 
goes.Around this time last year I attended the funeral of someone 
from my past, long past. This was none other than that sprite of 
special genius whose exploits served as the prima materia for my 
Preston Penn books. The gesture was one of pure nostalgia, for I 
hadn’t actually seen this person since my twelfth birthday party. It 
was soon afterward that my father died, and my mother and I 
moved out of our house in North Sable, Mass. (see Childhood Homes 
of Children’s Authors for a photo of the old two-story frame job), 
heading for the big city and away from sad reminders. A local 
teacher who knew of my work, and its beginnings in North S, sent 
me a newspaper clipping from the Sable Sentinel, that reported the 
demise of my former playmate and even mentioned his second­
hand literary fame.
I arrived in town very quietly and was immediately over­
whelmed by the lack of change in the place, as if it had existed 
all those years in a state of suspended animation and had been only 
recently reanimated for my benefit. It almost seemed that I might 
run into my old neighbors, schoolmates, and even Mr. So and So 
who ran the ice-cream shop, which I was surprised to see still in 
operation. On the other side of the window, a big man with a 
walrus mustache was digging ice cream from large cardboard 
cylinders, while two chubby kids pressed their bellies against the 
counter. The man hadn’t changed in the least over the years. He 
looked up and saw me staring into the shop, and there really 
seemed to be a twinkle of recognition in his puffy eyes. But that was

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
27
impossible. He could have never perceived behind my ancient 
mask the child’s face he once knew, even if he had been Mr. So and 
So and not his look-alike (son? grandson?). Two complete stran­
gers gawking at each other through a window smeared with the 
sticky handprints of sloppy patrons. The scene depressed me more 
than I can say.
Unfortunately, an even more depressing reunion waited a few 
steps down the street. G. V. Ness and Sons, Funeral Directors. For 
all the years I’d lived in North Sable, this was only my second visit 
(“Good-bye, Daddy”) to that cold colonial building. But such 
places always seem familiar, having that perfectly vacant, neutral 
atmosphere common to all funeral homes, the same in my home­
town as in the suburb outside New York (“Good riddance, 
Hubby”) where I’m now secluded.
I strolled into the proper room unnoticed, another anonymous 
mourner who was a bit shy about approaching the casket. 
Although I drew a couple of small-town stares, the elderly, 
elegant author from New York did not stand out as much as 
she thought she would. But with or without distinction, it 
remained my intention to introduce myself to the widow as a 
childhood friend of her deceased husband. This intention, how­
ever, was shot all to hell by two oxlike men who rose from their 
seats on either side of the grieving lady and lumbered my way. For 
some reason I panicked.
“You must be Dad’s Cousin Winnie from Boston. The family’s 
heard so much about you over the years,” they said.
I smiled widely and gulped deeply, which must have looked like 
a nod of affirmation to them. In any case, they led me over to 
“Mom” and introduced me under my inadvertent pseudonym to 
the red-eyed, half-delirious old woman. (Why, I wonder, did I 
allow this goof to go on?)
“Nice to finally meet you, and thank you for the lovely card you 
sent,” she said, sniffing loudly and working on her eyes with a 
grotesquely soiled handkerchief. “I’m Elsie.”
Elsie Chester, I thought immediately, though I wasn’t entirely 
sure that this was the same person who was rumored to have sold 
kisses and other things to the boys at North Sable Elementary. So 
he had married her, whaddaya know? Possibly they had to get 
married, I speculated cattily. At least one of her sons looked old 
enough to have been the consequence of teenage impatience. Oh, 
well. So much for Preston’s vow to wed no one less than the Queen 
of Nightmares.
But even greater disappointments awaited my notice. After

28
THOMAS LIGOTTI
chatting emptily with the widow for a few more moments, I 
excused myself to pay my respects at the cofiinside of the 
deceased. Until then I’d deliberately averted my gaze from that 
flower-crazed area at the front of the room, where a shiny, pearl- 
grey casket held its occupant in much the same position as the 
“Traveling Tomb” racer he’d once constructed. This part of the 
mortuary ritual never fails to put me in mind of those corpse- 
viewing sessions to which children in the nineteenth century were 
subjected in order to acquaint them with their own mortality. At 
my age this was unnecessary, so allow me to skip quickly over this 
scene with a few tragic and inevitable words . . .
Bald and blemished, that was unconsciously expected. Totally 
unfamiliar, that wasn’t. The mosquito-faced child I once knew had 
had his features smushed and spread by the years -  bloated, not 
with death but with having overfed himself at the turgid banquet 
of life, lethargically pushing away from the table just prior to 
explosion. A portrait of lazy indulgence. Defunct. Used up. The 
eternal adult. (But perhaps in death, I consoled myself, a truer self 
was even now ripping off the false face of the thing before me. This 
must be so, for the idea of an afterworld populated with a 
preponderance of old, withered souls is too hideous to contem­
plate.)
After paying homage to the remains of a memory, I slipped out 
of that room with a stealth my Preston would have been proud of. 
I’d left behind an envelope with a modest contribution to the 
widow’s fund. I had half a mind to send a batch of gaping black 
orchids to the funeral home with a note signed by Laetitia 
Simpson, Preston’s dwarfish girlfriend. But this was something 
that the other Alice would have done - the one who wrote those 
strange books.
As for me, I got into my car and drove out of town to a nice big 
Holiday Inn near the interstate, where I found a nice suite - spoils 
of a successful literary career - and a bar. And as it turned out, this 
overnight layover must take us down another side road (or back 
road, if you like) of my narrative. Please stand by.
A late-afternoon crowd had settled into the hotel’s bar-room, 
relieving me of the necessity of drinking in total solitude, which at 
the time I was quite prepared to do. After a couple of Scotches on 
the rocks, I noticed a young man looking my way from the other 
side of that greenish room. At least he appeared young, extremely 
so, from a distance. But as I walked over to sit at his table, with a 
boldness I’ve never attributed to alcohol, he seemed to gain a few 
years with every step I took. He was now only relatively young -

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
29
from an old dowager’s point of view, that is. His name was Hank 
De Vere, and he worked for a distributor of gardening tools and 
other such products, in Maine. But let’s not pretend to care about 
the details. Later we had dinner together, after which I invited him 
to my suite.
It was the next morning, by the way, that inaugurated that 
year-long succession of experiences which I’m methodically trying 
to sort out with a few select examples. Half step forward coming 
up: pawn to king three.
I awoke in the darkness peculiar to hotel bedrooms, abnormally 
heavy curtains masking the morning light. Immediately it became 
apparent that I was alone. My new acquaintance seemed to have a 
more developed sense of tact and timing than I had given him 
credit for. At least I thought so at first. But then I looked through 
the open doorway into the other room, where I could see a convex 
mirror in an artificial wood frame on the wall.
The bulging eye of the mirror reflected almost the entire next 
room in convexed perspective, and I noticed someone moving 
around in there. In the mirror, that is. A tiny, misshapen figure 
seemed to be gyring about, leaping almost, in a way that should 
have been audible to me. But it wasn’t.
I called out a name I barely remembered from the night before. 
There came no answer from the next room, but the movement in 
the mirror stopped, and the tiny figure (whatever it was) disap­
peared. Very cautiously I got up from the bed, robed myself, and 
peeked around the corner of the doorway like a curious child on 
Christmas morning. A strange combination of relief and confusion 
arose in me when I saw that there was no one else in the suite.
I approached the mirror, perhaps to search its surface for the 
little something that might have caused the illusion. My memory is 
vague on this point, since at the time I was a bit hung over. But I 
can recall with spectacular vividness what I finally saw after 
gazing into the mirror for a few moments. Suddenly the sphered 
glass before me became clouded with a mysterious fog, from the 
depths of which appeared the waxy face of a corpse. It was the 
visage of that old cadaver I’d seen at the funeral home, now with 
eyes open and staring reproachfully into mine . . .
Of course I really saw nothing of the kind. I did not even 
imagine it, except just now. But somehow this imaginary mani­
festation seems more fitting and conclusive than what I actually 
found in the mirror, which was only my old and haggard face . . .  a 
corpselike countenance if ever there was one.
But there was another conclusion, let’s say encore, to this episode

30
THOMAS LIGOTTI
with the mirror. A short while later I was checking out, and as the 
desk clerk was fiddling with my bill, I happened to look out of a 
nearby window, beyond which two children were romping on the 
lawn in front of the hotel: an arm-swinging, leaping mime show. 
After a few seconds the kids caught me watching them. They 
stopped and stared back at me, standing perfectly still, side by 
side . . . then suddenly they were running away. The room took a 
little spin that only I seemed to notice, while others went calmly 
about their business. Possibly this experience can be attributed to 
my failure to employ the usual post-debauch remedies that 
morning. The old nerves were somewhat shot, and my stomach 
was giving me no peace. Still, I’ve remained in pretty fair health 
over the years, all things considered, and I drove back home 
without further incident.
That was a year ago. (Get ready for one giant step forward: the 
old queen is now in play.)
In the succeeding months I noted a number of similar happen­
ings, though they occurred with varying degrees of clarity. Most of 
them approached the fleeting nature of déjà vu phenomena. A few 
could be pegged as self-manufactured, while others lacked a 
definite source. I might see a phrase or the fragment of an image 
that would make my heart flip over (not a healthy thing at my 
age), while my mind searched for some correspondence that 
triggered this powerful sense of repetition and familiarity: the 
sound of a delayed echo with oblique origins. I delved into 
dreams, half-conscious perceptions, and the distortions of mem­
ory, but all that remained was a chain of occurrences with links as 
weak as smoke rings.
And today, one year later, this tenuous haunting has regained 
the clarity of the first incident at the hotel. Specifically I refer to a 
pair of episodes that have caused me to become a little insecure 
about my psychic balance and to attempt to confirm my lucidity 
by writing it all out. Organization is what’s needed. Thus:
Episode One. Place: The Bathroom. Time: A Little After Eight 
a.m., the Last Day of October.
The water was running for my morning bath, cascading into the 
tub a bit noisily for my sensitive ears. The night before, I suffered 
from an advanced case of insomnia, which even extra doses of my 
beloved Guardsman’s Reserve Stock did not help. I was very glad 
to see a sunny autumn morning come and rescue me. My bath­
room mirror, however, would not let me forget the sleepless night 
I’d spent, and I combed and creamed myself without noticeable 
improvement. Sandal was with me, lying atop the toilet tank and

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
3i
scrutinizing the waters of the bowl below. She was actually staring 
very hard and deliberately at something. I’d never seen a cat stare 
at its own reflection and have always been under the impression 
that they cannot see reflected images of themselves. (Lucky them!) 
But this one saw something. “What is it, Sandal?” I asked with the 
patronizing voice of a pet owner. Her tail had a life of its own; she 
stood up and hissed, then yowled in that horribly demonic falsetto 
of threatened felines. Finally she dashed out of the bathroom, 
relinquishing her ground for the first time in all my memory of her.
I had been loitering at the other side of the room, a groggy 
bystander to an unexpected scene. With a large plastic hairbrush 
gripped in my left hand, I investigated. I gazed down into the same 
waters, and though at first they seemed clear enough, something 
soon appeared from within that porcelain burrow ... It had 
dozens of legs and looked all backward and inside out, but what 
was most disgusting about the thing was that it had a tiny human 
head, one like a baby’s except all blue and shriveled.
This latter part, of course, is an exaggeration; or rather, it’s an 
alarm without a fire. It helps if I can tack a neat storybook finish 
onto these episodes, because what seem to be their real conclusions 
just leave me hanging. You can’t have stories end that way and still 
expect to hold your reader’s esteem. Some genius once said that 
literature was invented the first time a certain boy cried “Wolf!” 
and there was none. I suppose this is what I’m doing now. Crying 
wolf. Not that it’s my intention to make a fiction out of what is real. 
(Much too real, judging by my recent overdrinking and resultant 
late-night vomiting sessions.) But stories, even very nasty ones, are 
traditionally considered more satisfying than reality -  which, as we 
all know, is a grossly overrated affair. So don’t worry about my 
cries of wolf. Even if it turns out that I’m making everything up, at 
least what you have left can be enjoyed as a story -  no small value 
to my mind. It’s just a different story, that’s all: one about another 
old-lady author of children’s yarns, which, incidentally, has 
nothing to do with the “truth” one way or the other.
So: Yes, I was in the bathroom, staring into the toilet bowl. The 
truth is that there was nothing in there, except nice, disinfected 
water of a bluish tint. The water was still, like a miniature lake, 
and cruelly reflected a miniature face. That’s all I really saw, my 
hysterical kitty notwithstanding. I gazed at my wrinkled self in the 
magic pool for a few moments longer and then cocked the handle 
to flush it away. (You were right, Father, it doesn’t pay to get old 
and ugly.)
I spent the rest of the morning lying around the baggy old

32
THOMAS LIGOTTI
suburban home my second husband left me when he died some 
years ago. An old war movie on television helped me pass the time. 
(And vain lady that I am, what I remember most about the war is 
the shortage of silk and other luxury items, like the quicksilver 
needed to make a mirror of superior reflective powers.)
In the afternoon I began preparing myself for the reading I was 
to give at the library, the preparation being mostly alcoholic. I’ve 
never looked forward to this annual ordeal and only put up with it 
out of a sense of duty, vanity, and other less comprehensible 
motives. Maybe this is why I welcomed the excuse to skip it last 
year. And I wanted to skip it this year, too, if only I could have 
come up with a reason satisfactory to the others involved - and, 
more importantly, to myself. Wouldn’t want to disappoint the 
children, would I? Of course not, though heaven only knows why. 
Children have made me nervous ever since I stopped being one of 
them. Perhaps this is why I never had any of my own - adopted 
any, that is - for the doctors told me long ago that I’m about as 
fertile as the seas of the moon.
The other Alice is the one who’s really comfortable with kids 
and kiddish things. How else could she have written Preston and the 
Laughing This or Preston and the Twitching Thai? So when it comes 
time to do this reading every year, I try to put her onstage as much 
as possible, something that’s becoming more difficult with the 
passing years. Oddly enough, it’s my grown-up’s weakness for 
booze that allows me to do this most effectively. Each drink I had 
this afternoon peeled away a few more winters, and soon I was 
ready to confront the most brattish child without fear. Which leads 
me to introduce:
Episode Two. Place: The Car in the Driveway. Time: A Radiant 
Twilight.
With a selection of Preston stories on the seat beside me (I was 
still undecided on which to read, hoping for inspiration), I was off 
to do my duty at the library. A routine adjustment of the rearview 
mirror straightened the slack-mouthed angle it had somehow 
assumed since I’d last driven the car. The image I saw in the 
mirror was also routine. Across the street and staring into my car 
by way of the rear window was the odious and infinitely old Mr. 
Thompson. (Worse than E. Nesbit’s U. W. Ugli, let me assure 
you.)He seemed to appear out of nowhere, for I hadn’t seen him when 
I was getting into the car. But there he was now, ogling the back of 
my head. This was quite normal for the lecherous old boy, and I 
didn’t think anything of it. While I was adjusting the mirror,

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
33
however, a strange little trick took place. I must have hit the switch 
that changes the position of the mirror for night driving, flipping it 
back and forth very quickly like the snap of a camera. So what I 
saw for an instant was ,a nighttime, negative version of Mr. 
Thompson as he stood there with his hands deep in his trouser 
pockets. What a horrendous idea. The unappealingly lubricious 
Thompson on this side of reality is bad enough without anti- 
Thompsons running around and harassing me for dates. (Thank 
goodness there’s only one of everybody, I thought.) I didn’t pull 
out of the driveway until I saw Thompson move on down the 
sidewalk, which he did after a few moments, leaving me to stare at 
my own shriveled eye sockets in the rearview mirror.
The sun was going down in a pumpkin-colored blaze when I 
arrived at the little one-story library. Some costumed kids were 
hanging around outside: a werewolf, a black cat with a long 
curling tail, and what looked like an Elvis Presley, or at least 
some teen idol of a bygone age. And coming up the walk were two 
identical Tinkerbells, who I later found out were Tracy and Trina 
Martin. I had forgotten about twins. So much for the comforting 
notion that there’s only one of everybody.
I was actually feeling quite confident, even as I entered the 
library and suddenly found myself confronted with a huddling 
mass of youngsters. But then the spell was broken maliciously when 
some anonymous smart aleck called out from the crowd, saying: 
“Hey, lookit the mask she’s wearing.” After that I propelled myself 
down several glossy linoleum hallways in search of a friendly adult 
face. (Someone should give that wisecracker a copy of Struwwelp- 
eter; let him see what happens to his kind of kid.)
Finally I passed the open door of a tidy little room where a 
group of ladies and the head librarian, Mr. Grosz, were sipping 
coffee. Mr. Grosz said how nice it was to see me again and 
introduced me to the moms who were helping out with the party.
“My William’s read all your books,” said a Mrs. Harley, as if she 
were relating a fact to which she was completely indifferent. “I 
can’t keep him away from them.”
I didn’t know whether or not to thank her for this comment, and 
ended up replying with a dignified and slightly liquorish smile. Mr. 
Grosz offered me some coffee and I declined: bad for the stomach. 
Then he wickedly suggested that, as it was starting to get dark 
outside, the time seemed right for the festivities to begin. My 
reading was to inaugurate the evening’s fun, a good spooky story 
“to get everyone in the mood.” First, though, I needed to get 
myself in the mood, and discreetly retired to a nearby ladies’ room

34
THOMAS LIGOTTI
where I could refortify my fluttering nerves. Mr. Grosz, in one of 
the strangest and most embarrassing social gestures I’ve ever 
witnessed, offered to wait right outside the lavatory until I finished.
“I’m quite ready now, Mr. Grosz,” I said, glaring down at the 
little man from atop an unelderly pair of high heels. He cleared his 
throat, and I almost thought he was going to extend a crooked arm 
for me to take. But instead, he merely stretched it out, indicating 
the way to an old woman who might not see as well as she once did.
He led me back down the hallway toward the children’s section 
of the library, where I assumed my reading would take place as it 
always had in the past. However, we walked right by this area, 
which was dark and ominously empty, and proceeded down a 
flight of stairs leading to the library’s basement. “Our new facility,” 
bragged Mr. Grosz. “Converted one of the storage rooms into a 
small auditorium of sorts.” Down at the end of the hallway, two 
large green doors faced each other on opposite walls. “Which one 
will it be tonight?” asked Mr. Grosz while staring at my left hand. 
“Preston and the Starving Shadows,” I answered, showing him the 
book I was holding. He smiled and confided that it was one of his 
favorites. Then he opened the door to the library’s new facility.
Over fifty kids were sitting (quietly!) in their seats. At the front 
of the long, narrow room, a big witch was outlining the party 
activities for the night; and when she saw Mr. Grosz and me enter, 
she began telling the children about a “special treat for us all,” 
meaning that the half-crocked lady author was about to give her 
half-cocked oration. Walking a very straight line to the front, I 
took the platform and thanked everyone for that nice applause - 
most of it, in fact, coming from the sweaty hands of Mr. Grosz. On 
the platform was a lamp-bearing podium decorated with wizened 
cornstalks. I fixed my book in place before me, disguising my 
apprehension with a little stage patter about the story everyone 
was going to hear. When I invoked the name of Preston Penn, a 
few kids actually cheered, or at least one did. Just as I was ready to 
begin reading, however, the lights went out, which was rather 
unexpected. And for the first time I noticed that facing each other 
on opposite sides of the room were two rows of jack-o’-lanterns 
shining bright orange and yellow in the darkness. They all had 
identical faces - triangular eyes and noses, wailing 0’s for mouths - 
and could have been mirror reflections of themselves. (As a child, I 
was convinced that pumpkins naturally grew this way, complete 
with facial features and phosphorescent insides.) Furthermore, 
they seemed to be suspended in space, darkness concealing their 
means of support. Since that darkness also prevented my seeing the

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
35
faces of the children, these jack-o’-lanterns became my audience.
But as I read, the real audience asserted itself with giggles, 
whispers, and some rather ingenious noises made with the folding 
wooden chairs they were sitting in. At one point, toward the end of 
the reading, there came a low moan from somewhere in the back, 
and it sounded as if someone had fallen out of his seat. “It’s all 
right,” I heard an adult voice call out. The door at the back 
opened, allowing a moment of brightness to break the spooky spell, 
and some shadows exited. When the lights came on at the end of 
the story, one of the seats toward the back was missing its 
occupant.
“Okay, kids,” said the big witch after some minor applause for 
Preston, “everyone move their chairs back to the walls and make 
room for the games and stuff.”
The games and stufT had the room in a low-grade uproar. 
Masked and costumed children ruled the night, indulging their 
appetite for movement, sweet things to eat and drink, and noise. I 
stood at the periphery of the commotion and chatted with Mr. 
Grosz.
“What exactly was the disturbance all about?” I asked him. 
He took a sip from a plastic cup of cider and smacked his lips 
offensively. “Oh, nothing, really. You see that child there with the 
black-cat outfit? She seemed to have fainted. Not entirely, of 
course. Once we got her outside, she was all right. She was 
wearing her kitty mask all through your reading, and I think 
the poor thing hyperventilated or something like that. Complained 
that she saw something horrible in her mask and was very 
frightened for a while. At any rate, you can see she’s fine now, 
and she’s even wearing her mask again. Amazing how children can 
put things right out of their minds and recover so quickly.”
I agreed that it was amazing, and then asked precisely what it 
was the child thought she saw in her mask. I couldn’t help being 
reminded of another cat earlier in the day who also saw something 
that gave her a fright.
“She couldn’t really explain it,” replied Mr. Grosz. “You know 
how it is with children. Yes, I daresay you do know how it is with 
them, considering you’ve spent your life exploring the subject.”
I took credit for knowing how it is with children, knowing 
instead that Mr. Grosz was really talking about someone else, 
about her. Not to overdo this quaint notion of a split between my 
professional and my private personas, but at the time I was already 
quite self-conscious about the matter. While I was reading the 
Preston book to the kids, I had suffered the uncanny experience of

3 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
having almost no recognition of my own words. Of course, this is 
rather a cliché with writers, and it has happened to me many times 
throughout my long career. But never so completely. They were 
the words of a mind (I stop just short of writing soul) entirely alien 
to me. This much I would like to note in passing, never to be 
mentioned again.
“I do hope,” I said to Mr. Grosz, “that it wasn’t the story that 
scared the child. I have enough angry parents on my hands as it 
is.”“Oh, I’m sure it wasn’t. Not that it wasn’t a good scary 
children’s story. I didn’t mean to imply that, of course. But you 
know, it’s that time of year. Imaginary things are supposed to seem 
more real. Like your Preston. He was always a big one for 
Hallowe’en, am I right?”
I said he was quite right and hoped he would not pursue the 
subject. The reality of fictional characters was not at all what I 
wanted to talk about just then. I tried to laugh it away. And you 
know, Father, for a moment it was exactly like your own laugh, 
and not my usual hereditary impersonation of it.
Much to everyone’s regret, I did not stay very long at the party. 
The reading had largely sobered me up, and my tolerance level 
was running quite low. Yes, Mr. Grosz, I promise to do it again 
next year, anything you say; just let me get back to my car and my 
bar.The drive home through the suburban streets was something of 
an ordeal, made hazardous by pedestrian trick-or-treaters. The 
costumes did me no good. (The same ghost was everywhere.) The 
masks did me no good. And those Prestonian shadows fluttering 
against two-story facades (why did I have to choose that book?) 
certainly did me no good at all. This was not my place anymore. 
Not my style. Dr. Guardsman, administer your medicine in tall 
glasses . . . but please not looking-ones.
And now I’m safe at home with one of the tallest of those glasses 
resting full and faithful on my desk as I write. A lamp with a shade 
of TifTany glass (circa 1922) casts its amiable glow on the many 
pages I’ve filled over the past few hours. (Although the hands of 
the clock seem locked in the same V position as when I started 
writing.) The lamplight shines upon the window directly in front 
of my desk, allowing me to see a relatively flattering reflection of 
myself in the black mirror of the glass. The house is soundless, and 
I’m a rich, retired authoress-widow.
Is there still a problem? I’m really not sure.
I remind you that I’ve been drinking steadily since early this

A l i c e ’s l a s t  a d v e n t u r e
37
afternoon. I remind you that I’m old and no stranger to the 
mysteries of geriatric neuroticism. I remind you that some part of 
me has written a series of children’s books whose hero is a disciple 
of the bizarre. I remind you of what night this is and to what zone 
the imagination can fly on this particular eve. (But we can 
discount this last one, owing to my status as an elderly cynic 
and-disbeliever.) I need not, however, remind you that this world 
is stranger than we know, or at least mine seems to be, especially 
this past year. And I now notice that it’s very strange - and, once 
again, untidy.
Exhibit One. Outside my window is an autumn moon hanging in 
the blackness. Now, I have to confess that I’m not up on lunar 
phases (“loony faces,” as Preston might say), but there seems to 
have been a switch since I last peeked out the window -  the thing 
looks reversed. Where it used to be concaving to the right, it’s now 
conwxing in that direction, last quarter changed to first quarter, or 
something of that nature. But I doubt Nature has anything to do 
with it; more likely the explanation lies with Memory. And there’s 
really not much troubling me about the moon, which, even if 
reversed, would still look as neat as a storybook illustration. The 
trouble is with everything else below, or at least what I can see of 
the suburbanscape in the darkness. Like writing that can only be 
read in a mirror, the shapes outside my window - trees, houses, but 
thank goodness no people -  now look awkward and wrong.
Exhibit Two. To the earlier list of reasons for my diminished 
competence, I would like to add an upcoming alcohol withdrawal. 
The last sip I took out of that glass on my desk tasted indescribably 
strange, to the point where I doubt I’ll be having any more. I 
almost wrote, and now will, that the booze tasted inside out. Of 
course, there are certain diseases with the power to turn the flavor 
of one’s favorite drink into that of a hellbroth. So perhaps I’ve 
fallen victim to such a malady. But I remind you that although my 
mind may be terminally soused, it has always resided in corpore sano.
Exhibit Three (the last). My reflection in the window before me. 
Perhaps something unusual in the melt of the glass. My face. The 
surrounding shadows seem to be overlapping it a little at a time, 
like bugs attracted to something sweet. But the only thing sweet 
about Alice is her blood, highly sugared over the years from her 
drinking habit. So what is it, then? Shadows of senility? Or those 
starving things I read about earlier this evening come back for a 
repeat performance, another in a year-long series of echoes? But 
whenever that happens, it’s always the reflection, the warped or 
imaginary image first. . . and then the real-life echo. Since when

3 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
does reading a story constitute an incantation calling up its 
imagery before the body’s eyes and not the mind’s?
Something’s backward here. Backward into a corner: checkmate.
Now, perhaps this seems like merely another cry of wolf, the 
most elaborate one so far. I can’t actually say that it isn’t. I can’t 
say that what I’m hearing right now isn’t some Hallowe’en trick of 
my besotted brain.
The laughing out in the hallway, I mean. That childish 
chuckling. Even when I concentrate, I’m still not able to tell if 
the sound is inside or outside my head. It’s like looking at one of 
those toy pictures that yield two distinct scenes when tilted this 
way or that, but, at a certain angle, form only a merging blur of 
them both. Nonetheless, the laughing is there, somewhere. And the 
voice is extremely familiar. Of course, it is. No, it isn’t. Yes, it is, it 
is!Aaaaa ha-ha-ha-ha-ha.
Ex. 4 (the shadows again). They’re all over my face in the 
window. Stripping away, as in the story. But there’s nothing under 
that old mask; no child’s face there, Preston. It is you, isn’t it? I’ve 
never heard your laughter, except in my imagination, but that’s 
exactly how I imagined it sounds. Or has my imagination given 
you, too, a hand-me-down, inherited laugh?
My only fear is that it isn’t you but some impostor. The moon, 
the clock, the drink, the window. This is all very much your style, 
only it’s not being done in fun, is it? It’s not funny. Too horrible for 
me, Preston, or whoever you are. And who is it? Who could be 
doing this to a harmless old lady? Too horrible. The shadows in the 
window. No, not my face.
I can’t see anymore I can’t see 
Help me 
Father

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
O
nce upon a Wednesday afternoon, promptly at two o’clock, a 
girl stepped into my office. It was her first session, and she 
introduced herself as Amy Locher. (And didn’t you once tell m
that long ago you had a doll with this same first name?) Under t
present circumstances I don’t think it too gross a violation of 
professional ethics to use the subject’s real name in describing her 
case to you. Certainly there’s something more than simple ethics 
between us, ma chère amie. Besides, I understood from Miss Locher 
that you recommended me to her. This didn’t seem necessarily 
ominous at first; perhaps, I speculated, your relationship with the 
girl was such that made it awkward for you to take her on as one of 
your own patients. Actually it’s still not clear to me, my love, just 
how deeply you can be implicated in the overall experience I had 
with the petite Miss L. So you’ll have to forgive any stupidities of 
mine which may crudely crop up in the body of this correspon­
dence.
My first impression of Miss Locher, as she positioned herself 
almost sidesaddle in a leather chair before me, was that of a tense 
and disturbed but basically efficient and self-seeking young 
woman. She was dressed and accessoried, I noticed, in much 
the classic style which you normally favor. I won’t go into our 
first visit preliminaries here (though we can discuss these and other 
matters at dinner this Saturday if only you are willing). After a 
brief chat we zeroed in on the girl’s immediate impetus for 
consulting me. This involved, as you may or may not know, a 
distressing dream she had recently suffered. What will follow, as I 
have composed them from my tape of the September 10th session, 
are the events of that dream.
In the dream our subject has entered into a new life, at least to 
the extent that she holds down a different job from her waking one. 
She had already informed me that for some five years she has 
worked as a secretary for a tool and die firm. (And could this 
possibly be your delicate touch? Tooling into oblivion.) However, 
her working day in the dream finds her as a long-time employee of

4 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
a fashionable clothes shop. Like those state witnesses the govern­
ment wishes to protect with new identities, she has been out-fitted 
by the dream with what seems to be a mostly tacit but somehow 
complete biography; a marvelous trick of the mind, this. It appears 
that the duties of her new job require her to change the clothes of 
the mannikins in the front window, this according to some 
mysterious schedule. She in fact feels as if her entire existence is 
slavishly given over to dressing and undressing these dummies. She 
is profoundly dissatisfied with her lot, and the mannikins become 
the focal point of her animus.
Such is the general background pre-supposed by the dream, 
which now begins in proper. On a particularly gloomy day in her 
era of thralldom, our dummy dresser approaches her work. She is 
resentful and frightened, the latter emotion an irrational “given” 
at this point in the dream. An awesome load of new clothes is 
waiting to attire a windowful of naked mannikins. Their unwarm, 
uncold bodies repel her touch. (Note this rare awareness of 
temperature in a dream, albeit neutral.) She bitterly surveys the 
ranks of these putty-faced creatures and then says: “Time to stop 
dancing and get dressed, sleeping beauties.” These words are 
spoken without spontaneity, as if ritually uttered to inaugurate 
each dressing session. But the dream changes before the dresser is 
able to put one stitch on the dummies, who stare at nothing with 
“anticipating” eyes.
The working day is now finished. She has returned to her small 
apartment, where she retires to bed . . . and has a dream. (This 
dream is that of the mannikin dresser and not hers, she empha­
tically pointed out!)
The mannikin dresser dreams she is in her bedroom. But what 
she now thinks of as her “bedroom” is to all appearances actually 
an archaically furnished hall with the dimensions of a small 
theater. The room is dimly lit by some jeweled lamps along the 
walls, the lights shining “with a strange glaziness” upon an 
intricately patterned carpet and upon the massive pieces of 
antique furniture around the room. She perceives the objects of 
the scene more as pure ideas than material phenomena, for details 
are blurry and there are many shadows. There is something, 
however, which she visualizes quite clearly: one of the walls of 
this lofty room is missing, and beyond this great gap is a view of 
star-clustered blackness which, irrationally, may in truth represent 
the depths of a colossal mirror. In any case, this maze of stars and 
blackness appears as an enormous mural and suggests an uncertain 
location for a room formerly thought to be nestled at the cozy

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
41
crossroads of well-known coordinates. Now it is truly just a lost 
point within the unfathomable universe of sleep.
The dreamer is positioned on the other side of the room from the 
brink of the starry abyss. Sitting on the edge of an armless, backless 
couch of complex brocade, she stares and waits “without breath or 
heartbeat,” these functions being quite unnecessary to her dream 
self. Everything is in silence. This silence, however, is somehow 
charged with strange currents of force which she can’t really 
explain, an insane physics electrifying the atmosphere with demo­
nic powers lurking just beyond the threshold of sensory perception. 
All is perceived with elusive dream senses.
Then a new feeling enters the dream, one slightly more tangible. 
There seems to be an iciness drifting in from that dazzling 
starscape across the room. Suddenly our dreamer experiences a 
premonitory dread of something unknown. Without moving from 
her place on that uncomfortable couch, she visually searches the 
room for clues to the source of her terror. Many areas are 
inaccessible to her sight - like a picture that has been scribbled 
out in places -  but she sees nothing particularly frightening and is 
relieved for a moment. Then her anxiety begins anew when she 
realizes for the first time that she hasn’t looked behind her, and 
indeed she seems physically unable to do so.
Something is back there. She feels this to be a horrible truth. She 
almost knows what the thing is, but, afflicted with some kind of 
oneiric aphasia, she cannot find the word for the thing she fears. 
She can only wait, hoping that sudden shock will soon bring her 
out of the dream, for she is now aware that “she is dreaming,” 
thinking of herself in the third person.
The words “she is dreaming” somehow form a ubiquitous motif 
for the present situation: as a legend written somewhere at the 
bottom of the dream, as echoing voices bouncing here and there 
around the room, as a motto printed upon fortune cookie-like 
strips of paper and hidden in bureau drawers, and as a broken 
record repeating itself on an ancient victrola inside the dreamer’s 
head. Then all the words of this monotonous slogan gather from 
their divers places and like an alighting flock of birds settle in the 
area behind the dreamer’s back. There they twitter for a moment, 
as upon the frozen shoulders of a statue in a park. This is actually 
the way it seems to the dreamer, including the statue comparison. 
Something of a statuesque nature is back there, approaching her. 
Something that is radiating a searing field of tension, coming 
closer, its great shadow falling across and enlarging her own upon 
the floor. Still she cannot turn around, cannot move her body,

42
THOMAS LIGOTTI
which is stiff-jointed and rigid. Perhaps she can scream, she thinks, 
and makes an attempt to do so. But this fails, because by then there 
is already a firm and tepid hand that has covered her mouth from 
behind. The fingers on her lips feel like thick, naked crayons. Then 
she sees a long slim arm extending itself over her left shoulder, and 
a hand that is holding some filthy rags before her eyes and shaking 
them, “making them dance.” And at that moment a dry sibilant 
voice whispers into her ear: “It’s time to get dressed, little dolling.”
She tries to look away, her eyes being the only things she can 
move. Now, for the first time, she notices that all around the room
- in the shadowed places - are people dressed as dolls. Their forms 
are collapsed, their mouths opened wide. They do not look as if 
they are still alive. Some of them have actually become dolls, their 
flesh no longer supple and their eyes having lost the appearance of 
teary moistness. Others are at various intermediate stages between 
humanness and dollhood. With horror, the dreamer now becomes 
aware that her own mouth is opened wide and will not close.
But at last, through the power of her fear, she is able to turn 
around and face the menacing agent. The dream now reaches a 
shattering crescendo and she awakes. She does not, however, 
awake in the bed of the mannikin dresser in her dream within a 
dream, but instead finds herself directly transported into the 
tangled, though real, bedcovers of her secretary self. Not exactly 
sure where or who she is for a moment, her first impulse on 
awaking is to complete the movement she began in the dream; 
that is, turning around to look behind her. (The hypnopompic 
hallucination that followed served as a “strong motivating factor” 
in her decision to seek the powers of a psychiatrist.) What she saw, 
upon pivoting about, was more than just a simple headboard with 
a blank wall above. For projecting out of that moon-whitened wall 
was the face of a female mannikin. And what particularly 
disturbed her about this illusion (and here we go deeper into 
already dubious realms) was that the face didn’t melt away into 
the background of the wall the way post-dream projections usually 
do. It seems, rather, that this protruding visage, in one smooth 
movement, withdrew back into the wall. Her screams summoned 
more than a few concerned persons from neighboring apartments.
End of dream and related experiences.
Now, my darling, you can probably imagine my reaction to the 
above psychic yarn. Every loose skein I followed led me back to 
you. The character of Miss Locher’s dream is strongly reminiscent, 
in both mood and scenario, of matters you have been exploring for

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
43
some years now. I’m referring, of course, to the all-around astral 
ambiance of Miss Locher’s dream and how eerily it relates to 
certain notions (very well, theories) that in my opinion have become 
altogether too central to your oeuvre as well as to your vie. Above all, 
I refer to those “otherworlds” you say you’ve detected through a 
combination of occult studies and depth analysis.
Let me digress for a brief lecture apropos of the preceding.
It’s not that I object to your delving into speculative models of 
reality, sweetheart, but why this particular one? Why posit these 
“little zones,” as I’ve heard you call.them, having such hideous 
attributes, or should I say û/i/i-attributes (to keep up with your 
theoretical lingo)? To whimsically joke about such bizarrerie with 
phrases like “pockets of interference” and “cosmic static,” belies 
your talents as a thoughtful member of our profession. And the rest 
of it: the hyper-uncanniness, the warped relationships that are 
supposed to obtain in these places, the “games with reality,” and 
all the other transcendent nonsense. I realize that psychology has 
charted some awfully weird areas in its maps of the mind, but 
you’ve gone so far into the ultra-mental hinterlands of metaphysics 
that I fear you will not return (at least not with your reputation 
intact).
To speak of your ideas with regard to Miss Locher’s dream, you 
can see the connections, especially in the tortuous plot of her 
narrative. But I’ll tell you when these connections really struck me 
with a hammerblow. It was just after she had related her dream to 
me. She was now riding the saddle of her chair in the normal 
position, and she made a few remarks obviously intended to convey 
the full extent of her distress. I’m sure she thought it de rigueur to 
tell me that after her dream episode she began entertaining doubts 
concerning who she really was. Secretary? Attirer of mannikins? 
Other? Other other? She knew, of course, the identity of her 
genuine, factual self; it was just some “new sense of unreality” 
that undermined complete assurance in this matter.
Surely you can see how the above identity tricks fit in with those 
“harassments of the self’ that you say are one of the characteristic 
happenings in these zones of yours. And just what are the 
boundaries of the self? Is there a secret communion of seemingly 
separate things? How do animate and inanimate relate? Very 
boring, m’dear . . . zzzzz.
It all reminds me of that trite little fable of the Chinese (Chuang 
Tzu?) who dreamed he was a butterfly but upon waking affected 
not to know whether he was a man who’d dreamed he was a 
butterfly or a butterfly now dreaming . . . you get the idea. The

44
THOMAS LIGOTTI
question is: “Do things like butterflies dream?” (Ans.:no. Recall 
the lab studies in this field, if you will for once.) The issue is ended 
right there. However - as I’m sure you would contest - suppose the 
dreamer is not a man or butterfly, but both ... or neither, 
something else altogether. Or suppose . . . really we could go on 
and on like this, and we have. Possibly the most repellent concept 
you’ve developed is that which you call “divine masochism,” or 
the doctrine of a Bigger Self terrorizing its little splinter selves, 
precisely that Something Else Altogether scarifying the man- 
butterfly with uncanny suspicions that there’s a game going on 
over its collective head.
The trouble with all this, my beloved, is the way you’re so 
adamant about its objective reality, and how you sometimes 
manage to infect others with your peculiar convictions. Me, for 
instance. After hearing Miss Locher tell her dream story, I found 
myself unconsciously analyzing it much as you might have. Her 
multiplication of roles (including the role reversal with the 
mannikin) really did put me in mind of some divine being that 
was splintering and scarring itself to relieve its cosmic ennui, as 
indeed a few of the well-reputed gods of world religion supposedly 
do. I also thought of your “divinity of the dream,” that thing 
which is all-powerful in its own realm. Contemplating the realm of 
Miss Locher’s dream, I came to deeply feel that old truism of a 
solipsistic dream deity commanding all it sees, all of which is only 
itself. And a corollary to solipsism even occurred to me: if, in any 
dream of a universe, one has to always allow that there is another, 
waking universe, then the problem becomes, as with our Chinese 
sleepyhead, knowing when one is actually dreaming and what 
form the waking self may have; and this one can never know. The 
fact that the overwhelming majority of thinkers rejects any 
doctrine of solipsism suggests the basic horror and disgusting 
unreality of its implications. And after all, the horrific feeling of 
unreality is much more prevalent (to certain people) in what we 
call human “reality” than in human dreams, where everything is 
absolutely real.
See what you’ve done to me! For reasons that you well know, I 
always try to argue your case, my love. I can’t help myself. But I 
don’t think it’s right to be exerting your influence upon innocents 
like Miss Locher. I should tell you that I hypnotized the girl. Her 
unconscious testimony seems very much to incriminate you. She 
almost demanded the hypnosis, feeling this to be an easy way of 
unveiling the source of her problems. And because of her frantic 
demands, I obliged her. A serendipitous discovery ensued.

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
45
She was an excellent subject. In hypnosis we restricted ourselves 
to penetrating the mysteries of her dream. I had her recount the 
events of this nightmare with the more accurate memory of her 
hypnotized state. Her earlier version was amazingly factual, with 
the exception of one important datum which I’ll get to in a 
moment. I asked her to elaborate on her feelings in the dream 
and any sense of meaning she experienced. Her responses to these 
questions were sometimes given in the incoherent language of 
delirium and dream. She said some quite horrible things about life 
and lies and “this dream of flesh.” I don’t think I need expand on 
the chilling nonsense she uttered, for I’ve heard you say much the 
same in one of your “states.” (Really, it’s appalling the way you 
dwell both on and in your zones of the metaphysically flayed self.)
That little thing which Miss Locher mentioned only under 
hypnosis, and which I temporarily omitted above, was a very 
telling piece of info. It told on you. For when my patient first 
described the scenes of her dream drama to me, she had forgotten - 
or just neglected to mention - the presence of another character 
hidden in the background. This character was the proprietor of the 
nameless clothing store, a domineering boss who was played by a 
certain lady psychoanalyst. Not that you were ever on stage, even 
in a cameo appearance. But the hypnotized Miss Locher did 
remark in passing on the identity of the employer of that oneiric 
working girl, this being one of the many underlying suppositions of 
the dream. So you, my dear, were present in Miss Locher’s 
hypnotic statement in more than just spirit.
I found this revelation immensely helpful in coordinating the 
separate items of evidence against you. The nature of the evidence, 
however, was such that I could not rule out the possibility of a 
conspiracy between you and Miss Locher. So I refrained from 
asking my new patient anything about her relationship with you, 
and I didn’t inform her of what she disclosed under hypnosis. My 
assumption was that she was guilty until proven otherwise.
Alternatives did occur to me, though, especially when I realized 
Miss Locher’s extraordinary susceptibility to hypnosis. Isn’t it just 
possible, sweet love, that Miss Locher’s incredible dream was 
induced by one of those post-hypnotic suggestions at which you’re 
so well practised? I know that lab experiments in this area are 
sometimes eerily successful; and eeriness is, without argument, 
your specialty. Still another possibility involves the study of dream 
telepathy, in which you have no small interest. So what were you 
doing the night Miss Locher underwent her dream ordeal? (You 
weren’t with me, I know that!) And how many of those eidola on

4 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
my poor patient’s mental screen were images projected from an 
outside source? These are just some of the bizarre questions which 
lately seem so necessary to ask.
But the answers to such questions would still only establish your 
means in this crime. What about your motive? On this point I need 
not exert my psychic resources. It seems there is nothing you won’t 
do to impose your ideas upon common humanity - deplorably on 
your patients, obnoxiously on your colleagues, and affectionately 
(I hope) on me. I know it must be hard for a lonely visionary like 
yourself to remain mute and ignored, but you’ve chosen such an 
eccentric path to follow that I fear there are few spirits brave 
enough to accompany you into those zones of deception and pain, 
at least not voluntarily.
Which brings us back to Miss Locher. By the end of our first, and 
only, session I still wasn’t sure whether she was a willing or 
unwilling agent of yours; hence, I kept mum, very mum, about 
anything concerning you. Nor did she happen to speak of you in 
any significant way, except of course unconsciously in hypnosis. At 
any rate, she certainly appeared to be a genuinely disturbed young 
lady, and she asked me to prescribe for her. As Dr. Bovary tried to 
assuage the oppressive dreams of his wife with a prescription of 
valerian and camphor baths, I supplied Miss Locher with a 
program for serenity that included valium and companionship 
(the latter of which I also recommend for us, dolling). Then we 
made a date for the following Wednesday at the same time. Miss 
Locher seemed most grateful, though not enough, according to my 
secretary, to pay up what she owed. And wait till you find out 
where she wanted us to send the bill.
The following week Miss Locher did not appear for her 
appointment. This did not really alarm me, for as you know 
many patients - armed with a script for tranquilizers and a single 
experience of therapy -  decide they don’t need any more help. But 
by then I had developed such a personal interest in Miss Locher’s 
case that I was seriously disappointed at the prospect of not being 
able to pursue it further.
After fifteen patientless minutes had elapsed, I had my secretary 
call Miss Locher at the number she gave us. (With my former 
secretary - poor thing! -  this would have been done automatically; 
so the new girl is not as good as you said she was, doctor. I 
shouldn’t have let you insinuate her into my employ . . . but that’s 
my fault, isn’t it?) Maggie came into my office a few minutes later, 
presumably after she’d tried to reach Miss Locher. With rather 
cryptic impudence she suggested I dial the number myself, giving

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
47
me the form containing all the information on our new patient. 
Then she left the room without saying another word. The nerve of 
that soon-to-be-unemployed girl.
I called the number - which incidentally plays the song about 
Mary’s lamb on the push-button phone in my office - and it rang 
twice before someone answered. This someone had the voice of a 
young woman but was not our Miss Locher. In any case, the way 
this person answered the phone told me I had a wrong number 
(the right wrong number). Nevertheless, I asked if a Miss Locher 
could be reached at that number or any of its possible extensions; 
but the answering voice expressed total ignorance regarding the 
existence of any person by that name. I thanked her and hung up.
You will have to forgive me, my lovely, if by this time I began to 
feel like the victim of a hoax, your hoax to be exact. “Maggie,” I 
intercommed, “how many more appointments for this afternoon?” 
“Just one,” she immediately answered, and then without being 
asked, said: “But I can cancel it if you’d like.” I said I would like, 
that I would be gone for the rest of the afternoon.
My intention was to call on Miss Locher at the, probably also 
phony, address on her new patient form. I had the suspicion that 
the address would lead to the same geographical spot as had the 
electronic nexus of the false phone number. Of course I could have 
easily verified this without leaving my office; but knowing you, 
sweet one, I thought that a personal visit was warranted. And I 
was right.
The address was an hour’s drive away. It was in a fashionable 
suburb on the other side of town from that fashionable suburb in 
which I have my office. (And I wish you would remove your own 
place of business from its present location, unless for some reason 
you need to be near a skid-row source that broadcasts on 
frequencies of chaos and squalor, which you’d probably claim.) 
I parked my big black car down the block from the street number I 
was seeking, which turned out to be located in the middle of the 
suburb’s shopping district.
This was last Wednesday, and if you’ll recall it was quite an 
unusual day (an accomplishment I do not list among all your 
orchestrated connivings of my adventure). It was dim and moody 
most of the morning, and so prematurely dark by late afternoon 
that there were stars seemingly visible in the sky. A storm was 
imminent and the air was appropriately galvanized with a pre­
deluge feeling of suspense. Display windows were softly glowing, 
and one jewelry store I passed twinkled with electric glory in the 
corner of my eye. In the stillness I strolled beside a row of trees,

4 8
THOMAS LIG O TTI
each of their slender trunks planted in a complex mosaic along the 
sidewalk, all of their tiny leaves fluttering.
Of course, there’s no further need to describe the atmosphere of 
a place you’ve visited many times, dear love. But I just wanted to 
show how sensitive I was to a certain kind of portentous mood, and 
how ripe I’d become for the staged antics to follow. Very good, 
doctor!
Distancewise, I only had to walk a few gloomy steps before 
arriving at the place purported to be the home of our Miss L. By 
then it was quite clear what I would find. There were no surprises 
so far. When I looked up at the neon-inscribed name of the shop, I 
heard a young woman’s telephone voice whispering the words into 
my ear: Mademoiselle Fashions. A fake French accent here, S.V.P. 
And this is the store -  no? - where it seems you acquire so many of 
your own lovely ensembles. But I’m jumping ahead with my 
expectations.
What I did not expect were the sheer lengths to which you would 
go in order to arouse my sense of strange revelation. Was this, I 
pray, done to bring us closer in the divine bonds of unreality? 
Anyway, I saw what you wanted me to see, or what I thought you 
wanted me to see, in the window of Mile Fashions. The thing was 
even dressed in the same plaid-skirted outfit that I recall Miss 
Locher was wearing on her only visit to my office. And I have to 
admit that I was a bit shocked - perhaps attributable in part to the 
unstable climatic conditions of the day - when I focused on the 
frozen face of the mannikin. Then again, perhaps I was sublimin- 
ally looking for a resemblance between Miss Locher (your fellow 
conspirator, whether she knows it or not) and the figure in the 
window. You can probably guess what I noticed, or thought I 
noticed, about its eyes - what you would have me perceive as a 
certain moistness in their fixed gaze. Oh, woe is this Wednesday’s 
child!
Unfortunately, I was unable to linger long enough to positively 
confirm the above perception, for a medium-intensity shower 
began to descend at that point. The rain sent me running to a 
nearby phone booth, where I had some business to conduct 
anyway. Retrieving the number of the clothes store from my 
memory, I phoned them for the second time that afternoon. That 
was easy. What was not quite as easy was imitating your voice, my 
high-pitched love, and asking if the store’s accounting department 
had mailed out a bill that month for my, I mean your, charge 
account. My impersonation of you must have been adequate, for 
the voice on the phone reminded me that I’d already taken care of

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
49
all my recent expenditures. You thanked the salesgirl for this 
information, apologizing for your forgetfulness, and then said 
goodbye. Perhaps I should have asked the girl if she was the 
one who helped rig up that mannikin to look like Miss Locher, if 
indeed the situation was not the other way around, with Miss 
Locher following the fashion of display-window dummies. In any 
case, I did establish a definite link between you and the clothes 
store. It seemed you might have accomplices anywhere, and to tell 
you the truth I was beginning to feel a bit paranoid standing in 
that little phone booth.
The rain was coming down even harder as I made a mad dash 
back to my black sedan. A bit soaked, I sat in the car for a few 
moments wiping ofT my rain-spotted glasses with a handkerchief. I 
said that I felt a slight case of paranoia coming on, and what 
follows proves it. While sitting there with my glasses ofT, I thought I 
saw something move in the rearview mirror. My visual vulner­
ability, combined with the claustrophobic sensation of being in a 
car with rain-blinded windows, together added up to a momentary 
but very definite panic on my part. Of course I quickly put on my 
glasses and found that there was nothing whatever in the back seat. 
But the point is that I was forced to physically verify this fact in 
order to relieve my spasm of anxiety. You succeeded, my love, in 
getting me to experience a moment of self-terror, and in that 
moment I, too, became your accomplice against myself. Brava!
You have indeed succeeded - assuming all my inferences thus far 
are for the most part true - perhaps more than you know or ever 
intended. Having confessed this much, I can now get to the real 
focus and “motivating factor” of my appeal to you. This has far less 
to do with A. Locher than it does with us, dearest. Please try to be 
sympathetic and, above all, patient.
I have not been well lately, and you know the reason why. This 
business with Miss Locher, far from bringing us to a more intimate 
understanding of each other, has only made the situation worse. 
Horrible nightmares have been plaguing me every night. Me, of all 
people! And they are directly due to the well-intentioned (I think) 
influence of you and Miss L. Let me describe one of these night­
mares for you, and thereby describe them all. This will be the last 
dream story, I promise.
In the dream I am in my bedroom, sitting upon my unmade bed 
and wearing my pajamas (Oh, will you never see them?). The 
room is partially illuminated by beams from a streetlight shining 
through the window. And it also seems to me that a whole galaxy 
of constellations, although not actually witnessed firsthand, are

50
THOMAS LIGOTTI
contributing their light to the scene, a ghastly glowing which 
unnaturally blanches the entire upstairs of the house. I have to use 
the bathroom and walk sleepily out to the hallway . . . where I get 
the shock of my life.
In the whitened hallway - I cannot say brightened, because it is 
almost as if a very fine and luminous powder coats everything - are 
these things lying up and down the floor, at the top of the stairway, 
and even upon the stairs themselves as they disappear into the 
darker regions below. These things are people dressed as dolls, or 
else dolls made up to look like people. I remember being confused 
about which it was.
Their heads are turned in all directions as I emerge from the 
bedroom, and their eyes shine in the white darkness. Paralyzed - 
yes! - with terror, I merely return a fixed gaze, wondering if my 
eyes are shining the same as theirs. Then one of the doll people, 
slouching against the wall on my left, turns its head haltingly upon 
a stifF little neck and looks into my eyes. Worse, it talks. And its 
voice is an horrific cackling parody of speech. Even more horrible 
are its words, as it says: “Become as we are, sweetie. Die into us.” 
Suddenly I begin to feel very weak, as if my life were being drained 
out of me. Summoning all my powers of movement, I manage to 
rush back to my bed to end the dream.
After I awake, screaming, my heart pounds like a mad prisoner 
inside me and doesn’t let up until morning. This is very disturbing, 
for there’s truth in those studies relating nightmares to cardiac 
arrest. For some poor souls, that imaginary incubus squatting 
upon their sleeping forms can do real medical harm. And I do not 
want to become one of these cases.
You can help me, sweetheart. I know you didn’t intend things to 
turn out this way, but that elaborate joke you perpetrated with the 
help of Miss Locher has really gotten to me. Consciously, of course, 
I still uphold the criticism I’ve already expressed about the basic 
absurdity of your work. Unconsciously, however, you seem to have 
awakened me to a stratum (zone, I know you would say) of 
uncanny terror in my mind-soul. I will at least admit that your 
ideas form a powerful psychic metaphor, though no more than 
that. Which is quite enough, isn’t it? It’s certainly quite enough to 
inspire the writing of this letter, in which I plead for your 
attention, since I’ve failed to attract it in any other way. I can’t 
go on like this! You have strange powers over me, as if you didn’t 
already know it. Please release me from your spell, and let’s begin a 
normal romance. Who really gives a damn about the metaphysics 
of invisible realms anyway? It’s only emotions, not abstractions,

DREAM OF A MANNIKIN
51
that count. Love and terror are the true realities, whatever the 
unknowable mechanics are that turn their wheels, and our own.
In Miss Locher I believe you sent me the embodiment of your 
deepest convictions. But suppose I start admitting weird things 
about Miss L? Suppose I admit that she was somehow just a 
dream. (Then she must have been my secretary’s dream too, for 
she saw her.) Suppose I even admit that Miss Locher was not a girl 
but actually a multi-selved thing - part Man, part mannikin - and 
with your assistance dreamed itself for a time into existence, 
reproduced itself in human form just as we reproduce ourselves 
as an infinite variety of images and shapes, all those impersonations 
of our flesh? You would like to have me think of things like this. 
You would like to have me think of all the mysterious connections 
among the things of this world, and of other worlds. So what if 
there are? I don’t care anymore.
Forget other selves. Forget the third (fourth, nth) person view of 
life; only first and second persons are important (I and thou). And 
by all means forget dreams. I, for one, know I’m not a dream. I am 
real, Dr.— (There, how do you like being anonymized?) So please 
be so kind as to acknowledge my existence.
It is now after midnight, and I dread going to sleep and having 
another of those nightmares. You can save me from this fate, if only 
you can find it in your heart to do so. But you must hurry. Time is 
running out for us, my love, just as these last few waking moments 
are now running out for me. Tell me it is still not too late for our 
love. Please don’t destroy everything for us. You will only hurt 
yourself. And despite your high-flown theory of masochism, there 
is really nothing divine about it. So no more of your strange 
psychic deceptions. Be simple, be nice. Oh, I am so tired. I must 
say good night, then, but not good
Bye, my foolish love. Hear me now. Sleep your singular sleep and dream of 
the many, the others. They are also part of you, part of us. Die into them and 
leave me in peace. I will come for you later, and then you can always be with 
me in a special corner all your own, just as my tittle Amy once was. This is 
what you’ve wanted, and this you shall have. Die into them. Yes, die into 
them, you simple soul,you silly dolling. Die with a nice bright gleam in your 
eyes.

THE GHYMIST
H
ello, miss. Why, yes, as a matter of fact I am looking for some 
company this evening. My name is Simon, and you are . . . 
Rosemary. Funny, I was just daydreaming in the key of Rosicr
cianism. Never mind. Please sit, and watch out for splinters on 
your chair, so you don’t catch your dress. It appears that every­
thing around here has come to the point of frays and splinters. But 
what this old place lacks in freshness of decor it amply makes up in 
atmosphere, don’t you think? Yes, as you say, I suppose it does 
serve its purpose. It’s a little lax as far as table service, though. I’m 
afraid that in the way of drinks one must procure for one’s self. 
Thank you, I’m glad you think I have a nice way of talkin’. Now, 
can I get you something from the bar? All right, a beer you shall 
have. And do me a favor please: before I come back, you will 
already have taken that wad of gum out of your mouth. Thank 
you, and I’ll return shortly with our drinks.
Here you are, Rosie, one beer from the bar. Just don’t belch and 
we’ll get along fine. I’m pleased to see you’ve gotten rid of your 
gum, though I hope you didn’t swallow it. The human stomach 
should probably remain ignorant of what it’s like to accomodate 
beer and bubble gum in the same digestive episode. I know it’sjoi/r 
stomach, but I’m concerned about what gets mixed up inside any 
human vessel. No, I said vessel, not that anatomical cavity to which 
you smuttily refer: Man’s hole is not his vessel. We’re talking about 
things in which other things may be contained.
That’s right, like that dirty little glass in your immaculate hand, 
now you’re getting it. My glass? Yes, you do see a lot of red in 
there. I like red drinks. Created this one myself. A Red Rum 
Ginny, I call it. White rum, gin, pale ginger ale, and, ideally, 
cranberry juice, though the bartender here had to substitute some 
undistilled maraschino solution, which has neither the rich red 
color nor a fraction of the tartness of your smile. Would you like a 
sip? Go ahead, take a good belt. If you don’t like it, say so. Yes, 
different is the word for it, the wellspring of its interest, as you’ve 
observed. I wonder, though, in whose mouth it tastes more

TH E  CHYMIST
53
different - mine or yours? We’ll never know. Even adhering to 
the same mixological formula there’s always some difference in 
taste, if only you have the sensitivity to notice it. In general, I think, 
there are always those varying factors that make every moment of 
our lives unique and strange to every other moment.
I have a high tolerance for diversity myself. You’re smiling at my 
emphasis. You think you know something about me, and perhaps 
you do. Sharp girl! Of course, the imp of perversity in your thoughts 
is only one of the many offspring of the imp of the diverse. And 
diversity is the soul of life, or at least of life’s amusement.
Pardon me? Yes, I have created other drinks. There’s another 
red one I’ve pioneered that’s actually just a variation on a 
standard number, but I like it. The Sweet and Sour Bloody 
Mary, made with high-test vodka, sugar, a lemon slice, and 
ketchup. It does sound like a meal in itself at that. Very fortify­
ing. No, sorry to spoil your joke, my fondness for red drinks does 
not extend to the vampire’s neck-drawn nectar. Besides, I’m quite 
able to work during daylight hours.
Where? Well, I suppose I can tell you, sub rosa, that I’m 
employed by a pharmaceutical company not far from here, near 
that run-down warehouse district. I’m a chemist there. Yes, really. 
Well, it’s nice the way you could see right off that I wasn’t no 
average guy just cornin’ round after work lookin’ for some fun. 
Perceptive girl! However, I did in fact come directly here after 
working a little overtime. I noticed while I was at the bar that you 
were eyeing and toeing the briefcase I brought in with me and set 
so discreetly under the table. Yes, there are papers in there relating 
to my work, among other things, never mind just now about that. 
But you’re right that it would be foolish to leave anything 
important outside in one’s car in this neighborhood.
Well, I wouldn’t say that this part of town is simply a pit. It is, of 
course, that; but the word doesn’t begin to describe the various 
dimensions of decrepitude in the local geography. Decrepitude, Ro. 
It has your pit in it and a lot more besides. I speak from experience, 
more than you would believe. This whole city is a pitiful corpse, 
and the neighborhood outside the walls of this bar has the 
distinction of being the withering heart of the deceased. Yes, I’ve 
gotten to know it over the years. I’ve gone out of my way to note its 
outlandish points of interest.
For instance, have you ever been to that place not far from here 
called Speakeasy? Well, then you have some acquaintance with the 
beautiful corruption of nostalgia, the putrescence of things past. 
Yes, up a flight of stairs from a crooked little street facade is a high

54
THOMAS U G O T T I
echoey hall with a leftover Deco decor of silvery mirrors and 
sequined globes. And there the giant painted silhouettes of bony 
flappers and gaunt Gatsbys sport about the curving ballroom 
walls, towering over the dance floor, their funereal elegance 
mocking the awkward gyrations of the living. An old dream with 
a shiny new veneer. It’s fascinating, you know, how an obsolete 
madness is sometimes adopted and stylized in an attempt to 
ghoulishly preserve it. These are the days of second-hand fantasies 
and antiquated hysteria.
But there are other sights in this city that I think are much more 
interesting. Not the least of which are those storefront temples of 
dubious denomination. There’s one on Third and Snoville called 
the Church of the True Dividing Light, not to be mistaken, I 
presume, with that false light which dazzles so many searching eyes. 
Oddly enough, I’ve yet to see any light at all shining through the 
windows of this gray dwarfish building, and I always look for some 
sort of illumination as I ride by. I tell you, no one worships this city 
as I do. Especially its witticisms of proximity, one strange thing next 
to another, adding up to a greater strangeness. One of the more 
grotesque examples of this phenomenon occurs when you observe 
that a little shop whose display window features a fabulous array of 
prosthetic devices is right next-door to Marv’s Second Hand City. 
Then there are those places -  you’ve noticed them, I’m sure -  that 
are freakishly suggestive in a variety of ways. One of them is that 
pink and black checkerboard box on Bender Boulevard that calls 
itself Bill’s Bender Lounge, where a garish marquee advertises 
Nightly Entertainment. And if you stare at that legend long 
enough, the word “Nightly” will begin to connote more than the 
interval between dusk and dawn. Soon this simple word becomes 
truly evocative, as if it were code for the most exotic and unspeak­
able entertainments of the infinite night. And speaking of enter­
tainment, I should cite that establishment whose owner, no doubt 
an epicure of musical comedy, gave it the title of Guys and Dolls, 
Inc. What a genius of vulgarity, considering that this business is 
devoted solely to the sale and repair of mannikins. Or is it really a 
front for a bordello of dummies? No offense intended, Rosalie.
I could go on - 1 still haven’t mentioned Miss Wanda’s Wigs or a 
certain hotel that boasts a “Bath in Every Room” -  but maybe 
you’re becoming a bit bored. Yes, I can understand what you 
mean when you say you don’t notice that stuff after a while. The 
mind becomes dull and complacent. I know. Sometimes I get that 
way myself. But it seems that just when I’m comfortably mired in 
complacency, some good jolt comes along.

THE CHYMIST
55
Maybe I’m sitting in my car, waiting for a red light to change. A 
derelict, drunk or brain-diseased or both, comes up to my 
defenseless vehicle and pounds on my windows -  with both fists, 
like so - and demands a cigarette. He touches his ragged lips with 
scissored fingers to convey his meaning, having left speech behind 
him long ago. A cigarette? Indeed! The traffic signal changes and I 
drive on, watching the bum’s half-collapsed form shrinking in my 
rearview mirror. But somehow I’ve taken him on as a passenger, a 
ghostly shape sitting cozily beside me and raving about all kinds of 
senseless and fascinating things, the autobiography of confusion. 
And in a little while I’m back on the lookout once more.
Touching story, don’t you— Yes, I suppose it is getting a bit late 
and we haven’t made much progress. Your apartment? I think 
that would be fine. No, nothing else in mind as far as places go. 
Yours is okay. Where is it, though? No kidding? That’s the old 
Temple Towers with a new cognito. Excellent, our ride will take us 
through the neighborhood in the shadow of the brewery. What 
floor of the building do you live on? Well, a veritable penthouse, an 
urban aerie. The loftier the better, I say.
Shall we go, then? My car is parked right out front.
I hope it hasn’t decided to rain. Nope, it’s a beautiful night. But 
look, that’s my car where that cop is standing. Just stay calm. I 
certainly won’t say anything if you don’t. You’re not, by chance, a 
vice officer in disguise, are you, Rosiecrantz? You wouldn’t betray 
this unsuspecting Hamlet. A simple “no” would have been 
sufficient. If you use that kind of language again I’ll turn you in 
to the cops right now, and then we can see what sort of arrest 
record you’ve accumulated in your brilliant career. Silence, that’s 
good. Just let me do the talking. Here goes.
Hi, officer. Yeah, that’s my car. It’s parked okay, isn’t it? Geez, 
that’s a relief. For a second I thought -  My driver’s license? Sure 
thing. Here you go. Beg pardon? Yeah, I guess I am a little far from 
home. But I work real close to here. I’m a stockbroker, here’s my 
card. You know, I’ve been in the business for some time now, and I 
can almost tell just by the look of a guy if he’s got something 
invested in the market. I’d bet that you have. See there, I knew I 
was right. Doesn’t matter if you’re just small-time. Listen, have 
you been in touch with an investment counsellor lately? Well, you 
should. There’s a lot going on. People talk about inflation, 
recession, depression. Forget it. If you know where to put your 
finances, I mean really know, it doesn’t matter if it’s Friday the 
thirteenth and the streets are bloody with corporate corpses.
Smart advice is what you need. It’s all anyone needs. For

56
THOMAS LIGOTTI
example - and I tell you this just to make a point -  there’s an outfit 
right in this city, not a half-mile from here in fact, by the name of 
Lochmyer Laboratories. They’ve been working on a new product 
and are just about ready to market it. ’Course I don’t understand 
the whole technical end of it, but I know for sure that it’s going to 
revolutionize the field of - what d’you call it - psychopharma­
ceutics. Revolutionize it the way tranquilizers did in the Fifties. 
It’ll be bigger than tranquilizers. Bigger than LSD. You know 
what I mean? That’s the kind of thing you got to know.
That’s right, officer, Lochmyer Laboratories. And they’re on the 
New York Exchange. Good outfit all around. I own stock in it 
myself. What tip, hell? Hey, you don’t have to thank me. Beg 
pardon? A tip for me? Well, now that you mention it, probably 
there are better neighborhoods for a man like me to be frequenting. 
I guess you probably won’t be seeing me around here anymore. I 
appreciate that, officer. I’ll remember. And you remember Loch 
Lab. Right, then. ’Night to you.
Wait for his car to turn the corner, Rosie, before getting in mine. 
We’ll let the lawman maintain the illusion that his warning has set 
me straight with regard to the dangers of this seamy area and your 
seamy self. He looked at you like an old friend. Could have been 
trouble for both of us. You’re a smart girl to have sat at my table 
tonight. I think my briefcase impressed him, don’t you? Okay, we 
can get in the car now.
Yes, I did get us out of a touchy situation with that cop. But I 
hope when you just mentioned my B.S. apropos of that scene with 
the policeman, you were referring to the Bachelor of Science 
degree I received when I was sixteen years old. This is your last 
warning about unclean idioms. Now roll down your window and 
let’s air your words out of this car as we drive. And as far as my 
deceiving that fine officer goes - I actually didn’t. No, I’m not 
really a stockbroker. I told you the truth about being in chemicals. 
And I told that mole-eyed patrolman the truth when I advised him 
to put his money in Lochmyer Lab, for we are about to market a 
new mind medicine that should make our investors as pleased as 
amphetamine addicts at an all-night cofTee shop. How did I know 
he owned stock in the first place? That is strange, isn’t it? I guess I 
was just lucky. This is just my lucky night -  and yours too.
You don’t much like the policía, do you, Rrrosa? Yes, of course I 
can blame you. Without them, where would all of us outlaws be? 
What would we have? Only a lawless paradise . . . and paradise is 
a bore. Violence without violation is only a noise heard by no one, 
the most horrendous sound in the universe. No, I realize you don’t

TH E  CHYMIST
57
have anything to do with violence. I didn’t mean to imply you did. 
Yes, I can drop you off back at the bar when we’ve finished at your 
apartment. Of course.
Right now let’s just enjoy the ride. What do you mean “so 
what’s to enjoy”? Can’t you see we’re nearing the brewery? Look, 
there’s its beer-golden sign, advertising the alchemical quest to 
transmute base ingredients into liquid gold. Alchemical, Rosetta. 
And I’m not referring to that shoddy firm of Allied Chem. Just 
look around at these hollowed-out houses, these seedy stores, each 
one of them a sacred site of the city, a shrine, if you will. You 
won’t? You’ve seen it all a million times? A slum is a slum is a slum, 
eh? Always the same. Always?
Never.
What about when it’s raining and the brown bricks of these old 
places start to drip and darken? And the smoke-gray sky is the 
smoky mirror of your soul. You give a lightning blink at a row of 
condemned buildings, starkly outlining them. And do they blink 
back at you? Or does that happen only in another type of storm, 
when windows are slyly browed with city-soiled clumps of snow. 
Was it under such conditions that you first thought of all the cold 
and dark places in the universe, all the clammy basements and 
gloomy attics of creation? Maybe you didn’t want to think about 
those places, but you couldn’t help yourself at the time. Another 
time you could have. No two times are the same. No two lives are 
alike: you have yours and others have theirs. And when you’re 
traveling through these streets with some stranger, you have to 
contend with the way someone else sees things, the way you now 
must deal with my 20-20 visions and I with your blasé nearsight­
edness. Are these the same gutted houses you saw last night, or 
even a second ago? Or are they like the fluxing clouds that swirl 
above the chimneys and trees, and then pass on?
The alchemical transmutations are infinite and continuous, 
working all the time like slaves in the Great Laboratory. Tell 
me you can’t perceive their work, especially in this part of the city. 
Especially where the glamor and sanity of former days wears a new 
mask of rats and rot, where an old style is transformed by time into 
a parody of itself which no man could foresee, where greater and 
greater schisms are forever developing between past shapes and 
future shapelessness, and finally where the evolution toward 
ultimate diversity can be glimpsed as if in a magic mirror.
This is, of course, the real alchemy, as you’ve probably gathered, 
and not that other kind which theorized that everything was 
struggling toward an auric perfection. Lead into gold, lower

THOMAS LIGOTTI
matter into higher spirit. No, it’s not like that. Just the opposite, in 
point of fact. Please don’t put that hunk of gum in your mouth; 
throw it out the window, now! As I was saying, everything is just 
variation without a theme. Oh, perhaps there is some solid and 
unchanging ideal, shining very dimly and very far ofT. Scientifi­
cally, I suppose, we should allow for that improbability. But to 
reach that ideal would mean a hopeless stroll along the path to 
hypothetically higher worlds. And on the way our ideas become 
feverish and confused. What begins as a solitary truth soon 
proliferates like malignant cells in the body of a dream, a body 
whose true outline remains unknown. Perhaps, then, we should be 
grateful to the whims of chemistry, the caprices of circumstance, 
and the enigmas of personal taste for giving us such an array of 
strictly local realities and desires.
No, I didn’t always think this freaky, as you put it. But I can tell 
you almost precisely when I began to see the truth of things. I was 
a callow freshman in college, even callower than most, given my 
precocious progress. One day something seemed to change in my 
chemistry, as I like to think of it. It was quite horrible for a while. 
Eventually, though, I realized that the alteration was from a false 
chemistry to a true one. Yes, that’s when I decided to pursue the 
subject as my career, my calling. But that’s a story in itself, and 
here we are now at your apartment tower.
Please don’t slam the car door the way you were about to. No 
need to draw attention to our presence. You’re right, there’s really 
no one around to be attentive anyway. The local street vermin 
seem to have withdrawn into their holes. Very good: “But their 
holes are not their vessels,” indeed. Not the hole of man but the 
whole man is the true vessel, as some pompous sage might have 
said. And the right vessel is the whole point of the thing, for the best 
vessel will ultimately take the shape of its contents.
Never mind what I’m talking about. I just like to talk, as you 
may have noticed. Oops, almost forgot my briefcase. Wouldn’t 
want to leave it unattended in this neighborhood, isn’t that right? 
You’re smiling about my briefcase, aren’t you, Maryrose? You 
think you know something again. Well, go ahead and think that if 
you like. Everybody likes to think he has inside information. That 
policeman, for example. You could see how pleased he was to 
instantly become a man of knowledge, even if it’s only by way of a 
knowledgeable tip on the stock market. Everybody wants to know 
the secret truth, scientia arcana, the real dope.
Maybe I do have some dope in my case. Then again, maybe it’s 
just an empty prop, a leather vessel with a void inside. But you

TH E  CHYMIST
59
already know that I work for a dope company. You were thinking 
that, weren’t you? Well, let’s go up to your place and find out.
Cozy little lobby you have here; but I’m afraid the atmosphere is 
doing strange things to that pot of ferns over there. Of course I 
know they’re artificial. Which only means that Nature, one of the 
Great Chemists, made them at one remove, that’s all. Here, this 
elevator seems to be working, though a little noisily. After you, 
Lady R. The twenty-second floor if I remember right, and I always 
do. Uh, I believe there’s to be no smoking in this elevator, if you 
don’t mind. Thank you. And here we are. I’ll bet your place is 
down this way. See, I am always right. Isn’t that funny? Yes, I’m 
coming, I’m coming.
Well, your apartment has a very nice door. No, you’re wrong. 
There’s no such thing as “just like all the others.” Yours is quite 
different, can’t you see that? And tonight your dòor is visibly 
different from any other time you’ve ever seen it. I’m not just being 
egoistical about my unique presence at your threshold this 
evening. Do you see what I mean? Well, I’m sorry if you feel 
I’ve been lecturing you all night. I was a pedagogue once, which I 
suppose is obvious. It’s just that there are some important things I 
must impart to you, my little rosebud, before we’re through. 
Okay? Now, let’s go in and see what kind of view you have from 
up here.
Keep the ceiling light off please, so that I don’t have to look at a 
double of this dour room reflected in your window. One of your 
dim lamps should give us all the light we need. There, that’s fine. 
You do have a good view of the city from this height. I think it’s 
perfect, not too far up. I live in a mere two-story house myself and 
being up here makes me dizzily realize what I’m missing. From 
this lofty keep I could nightly observe the city and its constant 
mutations. A different city every night. Yes, Rosie, I have to say 
you’re right -  sarcastic tone and all -  the city is indeed also a vessel. 
And it’s one that obediently takes the shape of very strange 
contents. The Great Chemists are working out unfathomable 
formulae down there. Look at those lights outlining the different 
venues and avenues below, look at their lines and interconnections. 
They’re like a skeleton of something . . . the skeleton of a dream, 
the hidden framework ready at any moment to shift its structure to 
support a new shape. The Great Chemists are always dreaming 
new things and risking that they may wake up while doing so. 
Should that ever happen you can be assured there will be hell to 
pay.My imagination? No, I don’t think it’s vivid at all. On the

6 o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
contrary, it’s not nearly potent enough. My poor imaginative 
faculties have always needed . . . extensions. That’s why I’m here 
with you. You’re smiling again, or rather you’re smirking. Funny 
word, smirk. Rather like an extraterrestrial surname. Simon 
Smirk. How do you think that sounds?
Yes, maybe we are wasting too much time. But of course we’ll 
have to endure just one more delay while I rummage around in my 
briefcase and remove what you’ve been waiting for. So you hope 
it’s good dope, eh? Well, you’ll have a chance to find out, since you 
seem so anxious to become a vessel yourself for my chemicals. No, 
stay seated just where you are please. There’s no reason for you to 
glimpse every little secret I’ve got in here. All you’re interested in 
seeing is one squat little bottle screwed tightly closed with a black 
cap . . . and here it is!
Yes, it does look like a bottle of powdered light. That’s very 
observant. What is it? I thought you would know by now. Here, 
hold out your hand and you can have a closer look. Just a little 
powdery mound in the middle of your sweaty palm, about one 
brainful to be precise. Doesn’t it look like pulverized diamonds? It 
glitters, yes it does. I don’t blame you for thinking it might be 
dangerous to snort, or whatever else you imagine you’re supposed 
to do with it. But by watching your hand very closely you’ll see 
that you don’t have to do anything at all.
See, it dissolved right into your palm. Disappeared completely, 
except for a few stray grains. But don’t worry about them. Calm 
down, the burning will soon go away. There’s no point in trying to 
rub the drug oíT your hand. It’s in your system now. And it 
certainly won’t help to get excited, nor are threats of any use to 
you. Please remain seated in that chair.
Can you feel any effects yet? I mean besides the fact that you’re 
no longer able to move your arms or legs. That’s just the beginning 
of this nightly entertainment. You see my glittering powder has 
now made possible a very interesting relationship between us. 
Between you and me, my red red rose. The drug has rendered you 
fantastically sensitive to the shaping influence of a certain form of 
energy, namely that which is being generated by me, or rather 
through me. To put it romantically, I’m now dreaming you. That’s 
really the only way I can explain it that you might understand. 
Not dreaming about you, like some old love song. I’m dreaming you. 
Your arms and legs don’t respond to your brain’s commands 
because I’m dreaming of someone who is as still as a statue. I 
hope you can appreciate how remarkable this is.
Damn! I suppose that was your attempt to scream. You really

TH E  CHYMIST
6 l
are terrified, aren’t you? Just to be safe, perhaps I’d better dream 
of someone who hasn’t anything to scream with. There, that 
should do it. You do look strange, though, like that. But we’ve 
only just begun. These minor tricks are child’s play and I’m sure 
don’t impress you in the least. Soon I’ll show you that I can really 
make an impression, once I put my mind to it.
Is there something in your eyes? Yes, I can see there is. A 
question. Right now you would like to ask, if only you still had the 
means to do so, what’s to become of old Rosie? It’s only fair that 
you should know.
We are presently coming into perfect tune with each other, my 
dreams and my dream girl. You are about to become the flesh and 
blood kaleidoscope of my imagination. In the latter stages of this 
game anything might happen. Your form will know no limits of 
variety, for now the Great Chemists themselves are working 
through me. Soon I will put my dreaming in the hands of greater 
forces, and I’m sure there will be some surprises for both of us. That 
is one thing which never changes.
Nevertheless, there is still a problem with this process. It’s not 
really perfect, certainly not marketable, as we say in the pill 
business. And wouldn’t that be boring if it were perfect? What I 
mean to say is that under the stress of such diverse and alien 
metamorphoses, the original structure of the object somehow 
breaks down in a way even I don’t understand. The consequence 
of the thing is simple: you can never be as you once were. I’m very 
sorry. You’ll have to remain in whatever curious incarnation you 
take on at the dream’s end. Which should rattle the wits of 
whoever is unfortunate enough to find you. But don’t worry, 
you will not live long after I leave here. And by then you will 
have experienced god-like powers of proteation which I myself 
cannot hope to know, no matter how intimately I may try.
And now I think we can proceed with what has been your 
destiny all along. Are you ready? I am entirely ready and by 
degrees am giving myself over to those forces which, with any luck, 
I will never completely comprehend. Can you feel us both being 
caught up in the great web of delirium? Can you feel the fevers of 
this chemist? The power of my dreaming, my dreaming, my 
dreaming, my . . .
Now Rose of madness - Bloom!

DRINK TO ME ONLY 
WITH LABYRINTHINE 
EYES
E
veryone at the party comments on them. They ask if I had 
them altered in some way, suggest that I’ve tucked some 
strange crystallized lenses under my eyelids. I tell them no, tha
I was born with these singular optic organs; they’re not from some 
optometrist’s bag of tricks, not the result of surgical mayhem. Of 
course they find this hard to believe, especially when I tell them I 
was also born with the full powers of a master hypnotist . . . and 
from there I rapidly evolved, advancing into a mesmeric wild­
erness untrod before or since by any others of my calling. No, I 
wouldn’t say business or profession, I would have to say calling. What 
else do you call it when you’re destined from birth, marked by 
fate’s stigmata? At this point they smile politely, saying that they 
really enjoyed the show and that I certainly am good at what I do. 
I tell them how grateful I am for the opportunity to perform for 
such fancy persons in such a fancy house. Unsure to what extent 
I’m just kidding them, they nervously twirl the stems of their 
champagne glasses, the beverage sparkling and the crystal twink­
ling under a chandelier’s kaleidoscopic blaze. Despite all the 
beauty, power, and prestige socializing in this rather baroque 
room tonight, I think they know how basically ordinary they all 
are. They are very impressed by me and my assistant, who have 
been asked to mingle with the guests and amuse them in whatever 
way we can. One gentleman with a flushed face looks across the 
room at my assistant, guzzling his drink as he does so. “Would you 
like to meet her,” I ask. “You bet,” he replies. They all do; they all 
want to know you, my somnambule.
Earlier in the evening we presented our show to these lovely 
people. I instructed the host of the party to serve no alcohol before 
our performance, and to arrange the furniture of this wonderfully 
ornate room in a way that would allow everyone a perfect view of

us on our little platform. He complied obediently, of course. He 
also conceded to my request for payment in advance. Such an 
agreeable man, giving in to the will of another so readily.
At the start of the show I am alone before a silent audience. All 
illumination is cancelled except a single spotlight which I have set 
up on the floor exactly two point two meters from the stage. The 
spotlight focuses on a pair of metronomes, their batons sweeping 
back and forth in perfect unison like windshield wipers in the rain: 
smoothly back and smoothly forth, back and forth, back and forth. 
And at the tip of each baton is a luminous replica of each of my 
eyes swaying left and right in full view of everyone, while my voice 
speaks to them from a shadowy edge of the stage. First I give a brief 
lecture on hypnosis, its name and nature. After that I say: “Now, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, please direct your attention to that tall 
black cabinet with the stunning gold embellishments running riot 
upon its surface. Within stands the most beautiful creature you 
have ever laid eyes on. She is everything you can imagine in the 
way of physical perfection. Everything. And just for you she is 
already in the deepest trance. You will see her.” There is a 
dramatic pause during which my eyes fix upon that beast of a 
congregation, keeping my control. Then I look back toward the 
cabinet and softly utter the simple but strategic words: “Darling, 
you may come out now.”
The trick door opens, seemingly of its own will. Suddenly the 
audience emits a quiet gasp, and for a second I panic. Then there is 
applause, reassuring me that everything is all right, that they like 
the thing they see within the cabinet. What they see is standing 
upright inside, almost as tall as the cabinet itself. She is wearing a 
tiny outfit entirely of sequins, a vulgar costume whose rampant 
glitter somehow transcends the cliché, resurrecting its vaudevillian 
soul. Her gaze is fixed on an infinity slightly above the heads of 
everyone. “Darling?” I say invitingly. At this pre-arranged signal 
she begins to totter within the box. Finally she teeters into a 
forward fall, straight down toward the hard surface of the stage. At 
the last moment I rush over and catch her rigid and unflinching 
figure before it hits. There is applause while I restore her to a 
vertical position.
Now begins the performance proper, which is a regimented 
array of the usual mesmerian gimmicks. I place the somnambule’s 
hypnotically stiffened body horizontally between two chairs and 
ask some behemoth from the audience to come up and sit on her. 
The man is only too glad to do this. Then I command the 
somnambule to become inhumanly limp, after which I stuff her
DRINK TO ME ONLY W IT H  L A B Y R IN T H IN E  EYES 
63

6 4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
into a small box which resembles a coffin. (And inwardly I titter at 
my tasteless joke.) Next I fire a gun loaded with blanks straight at 
her, not six inches from her face, and she doesn’t wince one bit. We 
perform a few other routines in defiance of death and pain, 
afterward moving on to the memory tricks. In one of them I 
have everybody in the audience call out in turn his or her full name 
and birthdate. Then my somnambule repeats this information 
when requested at random to do so by individual audience 
members. She gets all the names right - and of course everyone 
is amazed - but she systematically fails to reply with the right 
dates. Instead she forecasts a future occasion which never coincides 
with the birthdate she was given. Some of the years of the dates she 
offers are in distant posterity and some disturbingly near. I express 
astonishment at my somnambule’s behavior, explaining to the 
audience that portentous fortune-telling is not normally part of the 
show. I apologize for this ominous display of clairvoyance and vow 
to make it up to them with an unbelievably diverting finale. A 
blare of heavenly horns would not be inappropriate at this point.
I signal my assistant to move to the precise center of the stage. 
Here she positions herself with legs outspread to form an upside- 
down V out of her lower body. Another signal from me, and her 
arms rise slowly until they are stretched outward to their furthest 
limit, fingertips tensely straining for that extra millimeter or so. A 
final signal commands her nodding head to lift fully erect upon the 
muscle-knotted column of her neck, eyes glaring out at the 
audience. The eyes beyond the edge of the stage glare back at 
her with the same gaze. “Now,” I admonish them with poised 
palm, “there must be total silence. This means no coughs, no sniffs, 
no clearing of throats.” And they obey this unreasonable com­
mand; their bodies are silent, for I am their master. They are a 
noiseless maze of flesh. “Ladies and Gentlemen,” I continue, “you 
are about to see something that I need not tout with tawdry 
preliminaries. My assistant is now in the deepest possible trance. 
The particles of her being are obeisant to forces beyond mundane 
existence, beyond life, death, and so on and so forth. At my 
instruction she will begin an astounding metamorphosis -  entirely 
through the power of hypnotic energy -  which will reveal to you 
one of the multitudinous unseen facets of the human diamond. 
Nothing more need be said. My dear, you may commence your 
change of form, code name: Sarah McFinn.”
There she stands - arms, legs, towering head - my five-pointed 
somnambule: a star. “Already you can see the glowing,” I tell the 
audience. “She begins to luminesce; she begins to effloresce; and now

she approaches such radiance that up here on stage I am nearly 
blinded. But there is no pain, there is anything but eyesore.” No one 
in the audience is even squinting, I notice, for the beams from her 
body - this labyrinth of light! - are dream beams without physical 
properties. “Keep watching,” I shout at them, pointing to the 
human luminary. “Are those snow-white wings you see sprouting 
beyond the horizon of her shoulders? Have the slender lengths of her 
arms, her legs, her neck all turned to a quivering, angelified 
alabaster? Is she not the very image of celestiality discamate?”
But I cannot sustain the moment. The light fades in the eyes of 
the audience, growing dimmer by the second, and my assistant 
collapses back into an earthly incarnation. I am exhausted. What’s 
worse, all our efforts seem to have been wasted, for the audience 
answers this spectacle with only perfunctory applause. I can 
hardly believe it, but the finale fell flat. They don’t understand. 
They actually like all the mock-death and bogus-pain stufT better. 
These are what fascinates them. Bah. Double bah.
“Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen,” I say when the lights 
come back on and the meager applause dies entirely. “I hope my 
beautiful assistant and I haven’t bored you too much this evening. 
You do look a little sleepy, as if you’ve been lulled into a trance 
yourselves. Which is not such a bad feeling, is it? Sinking deep into 
a downy darkness, resting your souls on pillows stuffed with soft 
shadows. But our host informs me that things will liven up very 
soon. Certainly you will awake when a little chime commands you 
to do so. Remember, it’s wake-up time when you hear the chime,” 
I repeat. “And now I believe we can prosecute this evening’s 
festivities.”
I help my assistant down from the platform and we mix with the 
rest of the partiers. Drinks are served and the noise level in the 
room rises several decibels. The party’s populus begins to coagu­
late into groups here and there. I separate myself from a boisterous 
congregation surrounding my assistant and me, but nobody seems 
to notice. They are entranced with my sequined somnambule. She 
dazzles them -  a sun at the center of a drab galaxy, her costume 
catching the light of that monstrous chandelier winking with a 
thousand eyes. Everyone seems to be trying to command her 
attention; but she just smiles, so vacant and full of grace, not 
even sipping the drink some lucky person was allowed to place in 
her slender hand. They are transfixed, just like lady spiders during 
the mating ritual. After all, didn’t I tell them that my lanky 
hypnotizee was their very own vision of fleshly perfection? And 
perfection is master! Or at least one’s idea of it.
DRINK TO ME ONLY WITH LABYRINTHINE EYES 
65

66
THOMAS LIG O TTI
But I too have my admirers. One dark-suited bore asks me if 
hypnosis can help him stop drinking; another inquires if I can show 
him and his partners the way to undiscovered realms of wealth. I 
hand them each a business card with a cloud-gray pearl finish, on 
which is printed a non-existent phone number and a phony 
address in a real city. As for the name: Cosimo Fanzago. What 
else would one expect from a performing mesmerist extraordinaire.
I have other cards with names like Gaudenzio Ferrari and Johnny 
Tiepolo printed on them. Nobody’s caught on yet. But am I not as 
much an artist as they were?
And while I am being accosted by people who need cures or aids 
for their worldliness, I am watching you, dear somnambule. 
Watching you waltz about this remarkable room. It is not like 
the other rooms in this great house. Someone really let Fancy have 
its wild way in here. It harkens back to a time, centuries ago, when 
your somnambulating predecessors did their sleepwalking act for 
high society. You fit in so well with this room of leftover rococo. It’s 
a delight to see you make your way about the irregular circum­
ference of this room, where the wall undulates in gentle peaks and 
hollows, its surface sinewed with a maze of chinoiserie. The 
serpentine pattern makes it difficult to distinguish the wall’s 
recesses from its protrusions. Some of the guests shift their weight 
wallwards and find themselves leaning on air, stumbling sideways 
like comedians from an old movie. But you, my perfect sleepwalk­
er, have no trouble; you lean at the right times and in the right 
places. And your eyes play beautifully to whatever camera focuses 
on you; indeed, you take so many of your cues from others that one 
might suspect you of having no life of your own. Let’s sincerely 
hope not!
Now I watch as you are encouraged to be seated in an elegant 
chair of blinding brocade, its delicate arms the texture of cartilage 
and its color like some powdery disc in a woman’s cosmetics case. 
Your high heels make subtle points in the intricate scheme of the 
carpet, puncturing its arabesque flights of imagination. Now I 
watch as our host draws you over to the bar he has hospitably set 
up in this cornerless room. He waves his hand and indicates to you 
the many bottleshapes to choose from, shapes both normale and 
baroque. The baroquely shaped bottles are doing more interesting 
things with light and shadow than their normal brothers, and you 
select one of these with a gesture of robotic finesse. He pours two 
drinks while you watch, and while you watch I am watching you 
watch. Guiding you to another part of the room, he shows you a 
tableful of delicate figurines, each one caught in a paralyzed stance

of some ancient dance. He places one of them in your hand, and 
you pass it back and forth before your unfocused eyes, as if trying to 
awaken yourself with this distraction of movement. But you never 
will, not without my help.
Now he directs you to a part of the room where there is soft 
music and dancing. But there are no windows in this room, only 
tall smoky mirrors, and as you pass from one end to the other you 
are caught between foggy looking-glasses facing their twins, 
creating endless files of somnambules in a false infinity beyond 
the walls. Then you dance with our host, though while he is gazing 
straightforwardly at you, you are gazing abstractly at the ceiling. 
O, that ceiling! In epic contrast to the capricious volutions of the 
rest of the room - designs tendriled to tenebrosity - the ceiling is a 
dark, chalky blue without a hint of flourish. In its purity it suggests 
a bottomless pool or an infinite sky wiped clean of stars. You are 
dancing in eternity, my quadrillioning mannequin. And the dance 
is indeed a long one, for another wants to cut in on our gracious 
host and become your partner. Then another. And another. They 
all want to embrace you; they are all taken in by your frigid 
elegance, your postures and poses like frozen roses. I am only 
waiting until everyone has had bodily contact with your powers of 
animal magnetism.
And while I watch and wait, I notice that we have an unex­
pected spectator looking down on us from above. Beyond the wide 
archway at the end of the room is a staircase leading to the second 
floor; and up there he is sitting, trying to glimpse all the grown-ups, 
his pajama-clad legs dangling between the Doric posts of the 
balustrade. I can tell he prefers the classic decor elsewhere 
predominating in this house. With moderate stealth I leave the 
main floor audience behind and pay a visit to the balcony, which I 
quite ignored during my performance earlier.
Creeping up the triple-tiered and white-carpeted stairway, I sit 
down on the floor beside the child. “Did you see my little show 
with the lady?” I ask him. He shakes his head horizontally, his 
mouth as tight as an unopened tulip. “Can you see the lady now? 
You know the one I mean.” I take a shiny chrome-plated pen 
from the inside pocket of my coat and point down toward the 
room where the party is going on. At this distance the features of 
my sequined siren cannot be seen in any great detail. “Well, can 
you see her?” His head bobs on the vertical. Then I whisper: 
“And what do you think?” His two lips open and casually reply: 
“She . . . she’s yucky.” I breathe easier now. From this height 
she does indeed appear merely “yucky,” but you can never know
DRINK TO ME ONLY W IT H  L A B Y R IN T H IN E  EYES 
6j

6 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
what the sharp sight of children may perceive. And it is certainly 
not my intention tonight to make any child’s eyes roll the wrong 
way.“Now listen closely to everything I say,” I say in a very soft but 
not condescending tone, making sure the child’s attention is held 
by my voice and by the gleaming pen on which his eyes are now 
focused. He is a good subject for a child, who usually have 
wandering eyes and minds. He agrees with me that he is feeling 
rather sleepy now, that bedtime is imminent. “And when you go 
back to your room, you will fall right to sleep and have wonderful 
dreams. You will not awaken until morning, no matter what sounds 
you hear outside your door. Understand?” He nods; he is a great 
nodder, this one. “Very good. And for being such an agreeable 
subject, I’m going to make you a present of this beautiful pen of 
sterling silver, which you will keep with you always as a reminder 
that nothing is what it seems to be. Do you know what I’m talking 
about?” His head moves slowly and gently up and down with the 
chilling appearance of deep wisdom. “All right, then. But before 
you go back to your room, I want you to tell me if there’s a back 
stairway by which I may leave.” His finger points down the hall 
and to the left. “Thank you, young man. Thank you very much. 
Now off to bed and to your wonderful dreams.” He disappears into 
the Piranesian darkness at the end of the hallway.
For a moment I stand staring down into that merry room 
below, where the laughing and the dancing have reached their 
zenith. My fickle somnambule herself seems to be caught up in 
the party’s web, and has forgotten all about her master. She’s left 
me on the sidelines, a many-tendriled, mazy wallflower. But I’m 
not jealous; I can understand why they’ve taken you away from 
me. They simply can’t help themselves, now can they? I told 
them how beautiful and perfect you were, and they can’t resist 
you, my love.
Unfortunately they failed to appreciate the best part of you, 
preferring to lose themselves in the labyrinth of your grosser 
illusions. Didn’t I show our well-behaved audience an angelized 
version of you? And you saw their reaction. They were bored and 
just sat in their seats like a bunch of stiffs. Of course, what can you 
expect? They wanted the death stuff, the pain stuff. All that flashy 
junk. They wanted cartwheels of agonized passion; somersaults 
into fires of doom; nosedives, if you will, into the frenzied pageant 
of vulnerable flesh. They wanted a tangible thrill.
And now that their own miniature pageant seems to have 
reached its peak, I think the time is right to awaken this mob

from its hypnotic slumber and thrill the daylights out of them. It is 
time for the chime.
There is indeed a back stairway just where the boy indicated, 
one which leads me to a back hallway, back rooms, and finally a 
back door. And all these backways lead me to a vast yard where a 
garden is silhouetted beneath the moon and a small wood sways in 
the distance. A thick lawn pads my footsteps as I work my way 
around to the fine facade of this house.
I am standing on the front porch now, just behind its tall 
columns and beneath a lamp hanging at the end of a long brazen 
chain. I pause for a moment, savoring each voluptuous second. 
The serene constellations above wink knowingly. But not even 
these eyes are deep enough to outgaze me, to deceive the deceiver, 
illude the illusionist. To tell the truth, I am a very bad mesmeric 
subject, unable to be drawn in by Hypnos’ Heaven. For I know 
how easily one can be led past those shimmering gates, only to 
have a trap door spring open once you are inside. Then down you 
go! I would rather be the attendant loitering outside Mesmer’s 
Maze than its deluded victim bumbling about within.
It is said that death is a great awakening, an emergence from the 
trance of life. Ha, I have to laugh. Death is the consummation of 
mortality and - to let out a big secret - only heightens mortal 
susceptibilities. Of course, it takes a great master to pry open a pair 
of postmortem eyes once they are sewn tightly closed by Mr. D. 
And even afterward there is so little these creatures are good for. As 
conversationalists they are incredibly vacant; the things they tell 
you are no more than sweet nullities. But there is not much else you 
can do with them, they are so hideous and smell to high heaven. So 
mostly we just talk. Sometimes, however, I recruit them for my 
show, if I can manage to get their awkward forms out of the 
mausoleum, hospital, morgue, medical school, or funeral empor­
ium I have deviously insinuated my way into. But there is one 
great problem: You just can’t make them beautiful. One is not a 
sorcerer!
But perhaps one is a mental prestidigitator, an unusually adept 
whammy artist. One may make an audience think them beautiful, 
mistake them for spellbinding, snake-eyed charmers. One can do 
this at least, and loves to.
Even now I hear them still laughing, still dancing, still making a 
fuss over my charismatic doll of the dead. We showed them what 
you might be, O Seraphita, now let’s show them what you really 
are. I have only to press this glowing little button of a doorbell to 
sound the chime which will awaken them, to send the toll rolling
DRINK TO ME ONLY W IT H  L A B Y R IN T H IN E  EYES 
69

70
THOMAS LIGOTTI
throughout the house. Then they’ll see. They’ll see the sepulchral 
wounds: your eyes recessed in their sockets, sunken into mouths - 
those labyrinthine pits! They’ll wake up and find their nice 
dancing clothes all clotted with putrescent goo. And wait’ll they 
get a sniff of that stiff. They will be amazed.

EYE OF THE LYNX
N
o architectural go-betweens divided the doorway - a side 
entrance off a block of diverse but connected buildings - from 
the sidewalk. The sidewalk itself was conjugally flush with the cu
that bordered a street which in turn radiated off a boulevard of 
routine clamor, and all of this was enveloped by December’s musty 
darkness. Sidewalk doorway, doorway sidewalk. I don’t want to 
make too much of the matter, except to say that this peculiarity, if 
it was one, made an impression on me: there was no physical 
introduction to the doorway, surely not in the form of a little 
elevated slab of cement, certainly not even a single stair of stone. 
No structure of any kind prefaced the door. And it was recessed 
into the building itself with such deliberate shallowness that it 
almost looked painted directly onto the wall. I looked over at the 
traffic light above the intersection; it was amber going on red. I 
looked back at the door. The sidewalk seemed to slip right under it, 
urging one to step inside. So I did, after noting that the wall 
around the doorway was done up, somewhat ineptly, like a castle 
tower flanked by toothy merlons.
Inside I was immediately greeted by a reception committee of 
girls very professionally lounging in what looked like old church 
pews along an old wall. The narrow vestibule in which I found 
myself scintillated with a reddish haze that seemed not so much 
light as electric vapor. In the far upper corner of this entranceway 
a closed circuit camera was bearing down on us all, and I 
wondered how the camera’s eye would translate that redly dyed 
room into the bluish hues of a security monitor. Not that it was any 
of my business. We might all be electronically meshed into a crazy 
purpurean tapestry, and that would have been just fine.
A fair-haired girl in denim slacks and leather jacket stood up 
and approached me. In the present light her blandness was 
actually more a murky tomato soup or greasy ketchup than fresh 
strawberry. She delivered a mechanical statement that began 
“Welcome to the House of Chains,” and went on and on, spelling 
out various services and specific terms and finally concluding with

72
THOMAS LIGOTTI
a legal disclaimer of some carefully phrased sort. “Yes, yes,” I said. 
“I’ve read the ads, the ones set in that spikey Gothic type, the ones 
that look like a page out of an old German bible. I’ve come to the 
right place, haven’t I?”
“Sure you have,” I thought to myself. “Sure you have,” echoed 
the blonde with blood-dyed hair. “What will it be tonight?” I 
inwardly asked me. “What will it be tonight?” she asked aloud. 
“Do you see anything you like?” we both asked me at the same 
time. From my expression and casual glances somewhere beyond 
the claustrophobic space of that tiny foyer, she could see right 
away that I didn’t see anything, or at least that I wanted her to 
think I didn’t. We were on the same infra-red wavelength.
We stood there for a moment while she took a long delicious sip 
from a can of iced tea, pretending with half-closed eyes that it was 
the best thing she’d ever washed her insides with. Then she pushed 
a button next to an intercom on the wall behind her and turned 
her head to whisper some words, though still keeping those violent 
eyes hooked on mine.
And what did those eyes tell me? They told me of her life as she 
lived it in fantasy: a Gothic tale of a baronness deprived of her title 
and inheritance by a big man with bushy eyebrows, which he 
sometimes sprinkles with glitter. (She once dreamed that he did.) 
And now this high-born lady spends much of her time haunting 
second-hand shops, trying to reclaim her aristocratic accoutre­
ments and various articles of her wardrobe which were dispersed at 
auction by the glitter-browed man who came out of the forest one 
spring when she was away visiting a Carmelite nunnery. So far 
she’s done pretty well for herself, managing to assemble many 
items that for her are charged with sentiment. Her collection 
includes several dresses in her favorite shade of monastic black. 
Each of them tapers in severely under the bustline, while belling- 
out below the waist. A bib-like bodice buttons in her ribs, 
ascending to her neck where a strip of dark velvet is seized by a 
pearl brooch. At her wrist: a frail chain from which dangles a 
heart-shaped locket, a whirlpooling lock of golden hair inside. She 
wears gloves, of course, long and powdery pale. And tortuous hats 
from a mad milliner, with dependent veils like the fine cloth screen 
in a confessional, delicate flags of mourning repentance. But she 
prefers her enveloping hoods, the ones that gather with innumer­
able folds at the shoulders of heavy capes lined in satin that shines 
like a black sun. Capes with deep pockets and generous inner 
pouches for secreting precious souvenirs, capes with silk strings 
that tie about her neck, capes with weighted hems which none­

EYE OF TH E LYNX
73
theless flutter weightlessly in midnight gusts. She loves them 
dearly.
Just so is she attired when the glitter-browed villain peers in her 
apartment window, accursing the casement and her dreams. What 
can she do but shrink with terror? Soon she is only doll-size in dark 
doll’s costume. Nevertheless, quivering bones and feverish blood 
are the stuffings of this doll, its entrails tickled by fear’s funereal 
plume. It flies to a corner of the room and cringes within enormous 
shadows, sometimes dreaming there throughout the night - of 
carriage wheels rioting in a lavender mist or a pearly fog, of 
nacreous fires twitching beyond the margins of country roads, of 
cliffs and stars. Then she awakes and pops a mint into her mouth 
from an unravelled roll on the nightstand, afterwards smoking half 
a cigarette before crawling out of bed and grimacing in the light of 
late afternoon.
“C’mon,” she said after releasing the button of the intercom. “I 
think I can help you.”
“But I thought you couldn’t leave the reception area,” I 
explained, almost apologetically. “Of course, if I’d known . . .”
“C’mon,” she repeated with both hands in her jacket pockets. 
And her loud heels led me out of that room where every face wore a 
fake blush.
We walked though a pair of swinging doors which met in the 
middle and were bound like books, imitation leather tightly 
stretched across their broad boards and thick spines. Title page:
House of Chains: A Romance in Red Decorated with 
Divers Woodcuts
Page one: Deep into December, as the winds of winter howled 
beyond the walls, two children, one blond and the other dark, 
found themselves in the heart of a great castle in the heart of a 
gloomy forest. The central chamber of the castle, as is a heart’s 
wont, glowed with a warm red light, though the surrounding 
masonry was of damp gray stone. A great many people of the court 
capered about, traveling aloft or below by means of sundry 
stairways, ingressing and egressing through the queerly shaped 
portals of shadowed corridors (which seemed everywhere), and 
thronging here and there as in the curious bazaars of oriental 
scenes. Uncouth voices and harsh music fell upon the children’s 
ears.Decoration opposite opening page: Two children, one blond

74
THOMAS LIGOTTI
and the other not; passing through a tunnel of tangled forest which 
looks as if it’s about to descend and devour them both. The girl, 
open mouthed, is pointing with her left hand while holding onto 
her brother with the right; the boy, all eyes, seems to be gazing in 
every direction at once, amazed at the pair’s wondrous incarcera­
tion.“Can I get the ninety-eight cent tour,” I asked my hostess. “I’m 
from out of town. We don’t have anything like this where I come 
from. I’m paying for this, right?”
Half of her mouth found it possible to smirk. “Sure,” she said, 
drawing out the word well past its normal duration. She moved in 
a couple of false directions before guiding me toward some metal 
steps which clanged as we descended into a blur of crimson 
shadows. The vicious vapor followed us downstairs, of course, 
tagging along like an insanely devoted familiar.
Surprisingly enough, there was a# window in the vaguely 
institutional basement of the House of Chains (I was beginning 
to enjoy that name), but it was composed of empty panes looking 
out upon a phony landscape. Pictured were vast regions of volcanic 
desolation towered over by prehistoric mountains which poked 
into a dead-end darkness. The scene was illuminated by a low-watt 
bulb. I felt a bit like a child peeking into a department store model 
of Santa’s workshop, but I can’t say it didn’t create a mood.
“Nice painting,” I said to my companion. “Kind of spooky, 
don’t you think?” I looked at her for a reply to my patter, but no 
counter-patter was forthcoming. She simply stared at me as if I’d 
just told a joke she didn’t get.
“There’s not much down here,” she finally said. “Just a couple 
of hallways that don’t go anywhere and a bunch of rooms, most of 
them locked. If you want to see something spooky, go to the end of 
that hall and open the door on the right.”
I faithfully followed her instructions. On the door handle hung a 
rather large animal collar at the end of a chain leash. The chain 
jingled a little when I pushed open the door. The red light in the 
hallway barely allowed me to see inside, but there was little to see 
anyway except a small, empty room. Its floor was bare cement and 
there was straw laid down upon it. The smell was terrific.
“Well?” she asked when I returned down the hallway.
“It’s a start,” I answered, winking the subtlest possible wink. 
We just stood for a moment gazing at each other in a light the color 
of fresh meat. Then she led me back upstairs.
“Where did you say you’re from?” she asked as that noisy stairway 
amplified our footsteps into reverberant dungeonlike echoes.

EYE OF TH E LYNX
75
“It’s a real small place,” I replied. “About a hundred miles 
outstate. It’s not even on the maps.”
“And you’ve never been to a place like this before?”
“Uh-uh, never.”
She stopped at the top of the stairs. “Then before we go any 
further,” she said, “I want to give you some advice and tell you to 
go back where you came from.”
I just looked at her, shaking my head slowly and insolently.
“Okay, then. Let’s go.”
We went.
And there was much to see on the way - a Punch and Judy 
panorama which was staged between the chasmical folds of a 
playhouse curtain of rich inky red, and getting redder every 
passing second. Each scene flipped by like a page in a story­
book: that frozen stage where the players are stiffened with 
immortality and around which the only thing that stirs is the 
reader’s roving eye.
Locked doors were no obstacle.
Behind one, where every wall of the room was painted with 
heavy black bars from floor to ceiling, the Queen of the Singing 
Kingdom - riding crop raised high - sat atop her magic flying 
leopard, which unfortunately had been recently transformed into a 
human. And, sadly, the animal had lost one of its paws. What good 
fortune that it could still fly! But did it want to? Or did it prefer to 
lumber lamely around its cage, with the Queen herself growing out 
of its back like a Siamese twin, her royal blood and his beast’s now 
flowing together, tributaries from distant worlds mingling in a 
hybrid harmony. The animal was so pleased that it yowled a tune 
as the Queen beat time upon its flanks with her stinging crop. Sing, 
leopard, sing!
Behind another door, one with a swastika splashed negligently 
on its front in such a way that the paint had dripped from every 
appendage of the spidery symbol, was a scene similar to the 
previous. Inside, some colored lights were angled down upon 
the floor, where a very small man, his hunchback possibly 
artificial, knelt with head bowed low. His hands were lost in a 
pair of enormous gloves with shapeless fingers which lolled around 
like ten drunken jacks-in-the-box. One of the numb fingers was 
trapped beneath the pointy toe at the base of a lofty boot. See the 
funny clown! Or rather jester in a jingly cap. His ringed eyes 
patiently gazed upwards into the darkness, attentive to the hollow 
voice hurling anger from on high. The voice was playing up the 
moral disparity between its proudly booted self and that humi-

7 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Hated freak upon the floor, contrasting its warrior’s leaping 
delights with the fool’s dragging sack of amusements. But couldn't 
the stooping hunchback’s fun be beautiful too? his eyes whispered with 
their elliptical mouths. But couldn’t— Silence! Now the little 
monkey was going to get it.
Behind still another door, which had no distinguishing marks, a 
single candle glowed through red glass, just barely keeping the 
room out of total blackness. It was hard to tell how many were in 
there, more than a couple, less than a horde. They were all wearing 
the same gear, little zippers and big zippers like silver stitches 
scarring their outfits. One very little one had an eyelash caught in 
it, I could tell that much. For the rest of it, they might as well have 
been human shadows that merged softly with one another, 
proclaiming threats of ultimate mayhem and wielding oversized 
straight razors. But although these gleaming blades were always 
potently poised, they never came down. It was only make-believe, 
just like everything else I had seen.
The next door, and for me the last, was at the end of an 
exhausting climb in what must have been a tower.
“Here’s where you get your money’s worth, mister,” said my 
date, blind to the signs of apprehension - clutching my coat, lightly 
pawing my cheek - I was beginning to exhibit like an insecure 
artist about to reveal his unseen canvasses.
“Show me the worst,” I said, eyeing the undersized door before us.
The situation here was as transparent as the others. Only this 
time it wasn’t pet leopards, pathetic clowns, or paranoid shadows. 
It was, in fact, two new characters: a wicked witch and her 
assistant in the form of an enchanted puppet. The clumsy little 
creature, due to an incorrigibly mischievous temperament, had 
behaved badly. Now the witch was in the process, which she had 
down to perfection, of putting him back in line. She swept across 
the room, her dark dress swirling like a maelstrom, her hideous face 
sunken into an abundant hood. Behind her a stained-glass window 
shone with all the excommunicated tints of corruption. By the light 
of this infernal rainbow of wrinkled cellophane, she collared her 
naughty assistant and chained him hands and feet to a formidable- 
looking stone wall, which buckled aluminum-like when he col­
lapsed against it. She angled down her hooded face and whispered 
into his wooden ear.
“Do you know what I do with little puppets who’ve been bad?” 
she inquired. “Do you?”
The puppet trembled a bit and would have beamed bright with 
perspiration had he been made of flesh and not wood.

EYE OF TH E LYNX
77
“I’ll tell you what I do,” the witch continued half-sweetly. “I 
make them touch the fire. I burn them from the legs up.”
Then, surprisingly, the puppet smiled.
“And what will you do,” the puppet asked, “with all those old 
dresses, gloves, veils, and capes when I’m gone? What will you do 
in your low-rent castle with no one to stare, his brow of glittering 
silver, into the windows of your dreams?”
Perhaps the puppet was perspiring after all, for his brow was 
now glistening with tiny flecks of starlight.
The witch stepped back and whipped ofí her black hood, 
exposing blond hair beneath it. She wanted to know how I knew 
about all that stufT, which she had never revealed to anyone. She 
accused me of peeping-tomism, of breaking and entering, and of 
illicit curiosity in general.
“Let me out of these chains and I’ll tell you all about myself,” I 
shouted.
“Forget it,” she answered. “I'm going to get someone to throw 
you out of here.”
“Then I’ll just have to release myself,” I said more calmly.
The manacles opened around my ankles, my wrists, and the 
chains fell away.
“You can’t pretend,” I continued as I approached her, “that 
there isn’t something familiar about me. After all we’ve meant to 
each other, after all we’ve done together, over and over and over. 
You’re not bored, are you? I hate to think what that would mean. . . 
for both of us. You’ve been cooped up here in this silly place too 
long. For someone like you, that can be deadly. You’ve always 
known you were special, haven’t you? That someday - and it was 
always just around the corner, wasn’t it? - great things were going 
to happen, great things that didn’t quite have a name yet. But they 
were there, as real as the velvet embrace of your favorite cape, the 
one with the silver chain that draws its curtainy wings together at 
your bosom. As real as the tall candles you love to light during 
storms, and which you drunkenly knocked over once, burning 
your right hand. No, don’t cover up the scar, I’m sure no one’s 
noticed it before now. You love those storms, don’t you, with their 
chains of raindrops whipping against your windows. All that 
craving for noise and persecution. All that beautiful craziness! 
The storms: your eyes stared into their eyes, and into mine.
“But now you’re in danger of losing all that, which is why I 
showed up tonight. You’ve got to get out of this tinsellated side­
show. This is for hicks, this is small time. You can do better than 
this. I can take you places where the stories of tortuous romance

7«
THOMAS LIGOTTI
and the storms never end. I’ll take you there. Please, don’t back 
away from me. There’s nowhere to go and your eyes tell me you 
want the same things I do. If you’re worried about the hardships of 
traveling to strange faraway places, don’t! You’re almost there 
now. Just fall into my arms, into my heart, into— There, that was 
easy, wasn’t it?”
Afterward I retraced my steps down stairways and through 
corridors of scarlet darkness. “Goodnight, everybody!” I said to 
the girls in the reception room. Back out on the street, I paused and 
looked at that peculiar door again. I could now see the logic of 
doing away with gratuitous barriers between one place and 
another, between those on the outside and those within. Bring 
down the walls! But watch out for escapees.
Actually she made only a single attempt. It wasn’t serious, 
though. A drunk I passed on the sidewalk saw an arm shoot out 
at him from underneath my shirt, projecting chest-high at a perfect 
right angle to the rest of me. He staggered over, shook the hand 
with a jolly vigor, and then proceeded on his way. And I proceeded 
on mine, once I’d got her safely back inside her fabulous prison, a 
happy captive of my heart. We fled down the sidewalk. We 
breathed the cold of that winter night. We were one forever.
At the corner the amber traffic light had finally burst into a 
glorious red as my old flame and I approached the ultimate 
intersection of our flesh . . .  as well as our dreams.

THE CHRISTMAS EVES 
OF AUNT ELISE: 
A TALE OF POSSESSION 
IN OLD GROSSE POINTE
W
e pronounced her name with a distinct “Z” sound - 
Remember, Jack, remember - the way some people slur Missus 
into Mizzuz or for Christmas say Chrizmuzz. It was at 
remarkable home in Grosse Pointe that she insisted our family, 
both its wealthy and its unwealthy side, celebrate each Christmas 
Eve in a style that exuded the traditional, the old-fashioned, the 
antique. Actually, Aunt Elise constituted the wealthy side of the 
family all on her own. Her husband had died many years before, 
leaving his wife with a prosperous real estate business but no 
children. Not surprisingly, Aunt Elise undertook the ownership 
and management of the firm with phenomenal success, perpetuat­
ing our heirless uncle’s family name on for-sale signs planted in 
front lawns all over the state. But what was Uncle’s first name, a 
young nephew or niece sometimes wondered. Or, as it was more 
than once put by one of us children: “Where’s Uncle Elise?” To 
which the rest of us answered in unison: “He’s at his ease,” a 
response we learned from none other than our widowed aunt 
herself.
Aunt Elise was without husband or offspring of her own, true 
enough. But she loved all the ferment of big families, and every 
holiday season she possessed as much in relations both young and 
no longer young as she did in her real estate returns, her tangible 
and intangible assets and investments, and her abundant hard 
cash. Her house was something of an Elizabethan country manor 
in style while remaining modest, even relatively miniature, in 
scale. It fit very nicely -  when it existed - into a claustrophobic 
cluster of trees on some corner acreage a few steps uphill from Lake 
Shore Drive, profiling rather than facing the lake itself. A rather

8 o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
dull exterior of soot-gray stones somewhat camouflaged the old 
place in its woodland hideaway; until one caught sight of its 
diamond-paned windows - kept brilliant by the personal atten­
tion of Aunt Elise herself, no less - and one realized that a house in 
fact existed where before there seemed to be only shadowed 
emptiness.
Around Christmastime these many-faceted windows took on a 
candied glaze in the pink, blue, green, and other-colored lights 
strung about their perimeters. More often in the old days - 
Remember them, Jack - a thick December fog rolled ofT the not- 
yet-frozen lake and those kaleidoscopic windows would throw their 
spectrums into the softening mist. This, to my child’s senses, was 
the image and atmosphere defining the winter holiday: a serene 
congregation of colors whose confused murmurings divulged to 
this world rumors of strange and solemn services that were 
concurrently taking place in another. This was the celebration, 
this the festival. Why did we leave it all behind us, leave it outside? 
And as I was guided up the winding front walk toward the house, a 
parent’s hand in either of mine, I always stopped short, pulling 
Mom and Dad back like a couple of runaway horses, and for a 
brief, futile moment refused to go inside.
After my first Christmas - chronologically my fifth - I knew 
what happened inside the house, and year after year there was 
little change either in the substance or surface details of the 
program. For those from large families, this scene is a little too 
familiar to bother describing. Perhaps even lifelong orphans are 
jaded to it. Still, there are others to whom depictions of the unusual 
uncles, the loveable grandparents, and the common run of cousins 
will always be fresh and dear; those who delight in multiple 
generations of characters crowding the page, who are warmed 
by the feel of their paper flesh. I tell you they share these desires 
with my Aunt Elise, and her spirit is in them.
She always occupied and dominated, for the duration of these 
Christmas Eves, the main room of her house. This room I never 
saw except as a fantasy of ornamentation, an hallucinatorium in 
holiday dress. Right now I can only hope to portray a few of its 
highlights. First of all holly, both fresh and artificial, hung down 
the walls from wherever it was possible to hang - from the frames of 
paintings, from the stained-wood shelves of a thousand gewgaws, 
even from the velvety embossed pattern of the wallpaper itself, 
intertwining with its vegetable swirls and flourishes, if my memory 
sees this accurately. And from fixtures above, including a chan­
delier delicately sugared with tiny Italian lights, down came

gardens of mistletoe in mid-air. The huge fireplace blazed with 
a festive inferno, and before its cinder-spitting hearth was a 
protective screen, at either end of which stood a pair of thick 
brass posts; and over the crown of each post - whose shape and 
design I never glimpsed - were two puppet Santas, slipped on like 
socks and drooping a little to one side, their mittens outstretched in 
readiness to give someone a tiny, angular hug. In a corner, the one 
beside the front window, a sturdy evergreen was somewhere 
hidden beneath every imaginable type of dangling, roping, or 
blinking decoration, as well as being dolled up with ridiculous 
satin bows in pastel shades, lovingly tied by human hands. The 
same hands did their work on the presents beneath the tree, and 
year after year these seemed, like everything else in the room, to be 
in exactly the same place, as if the gifts of last Christmas had never 
been opened, quickening in me the nightmarish sense of a ritual 
forever reenacted without hope of escape. (Somehow I am still 
possessed by this same feeling of entrapment, and after all these 
years.) My own present was always at the back of that horde of 
packages, almost against the wall behind the tree. It was tied up 
with a pale purple ribbon and covered with pale blue wrapping 
paper upon which little bears in infants’ sleeping gowns dreamed 
of more pale blue presents which, instead of more bears, had little 
boys dreaming upon them. I spent much of a given Christmas Eve 
sitting near this gift of mine, mostly to find refuge from the others 
rather than to wonder at the thing inside. It was always something 
in the way of underwear, nightwear, or socks, never the nameless 
marvel which I fervently hoped to receive from my obscenely well- 
heeled aunt. Nobody seemed to mind that I sat on the other side of 
the room from where most of them congregated to talk or sing 
carols to the music of an ancient organ, which Aunt Elise played 
with her back to her audience, and to me.
Slee - eep in heav - enly peace.
“That was very good,” she said without turning around. As 
usual the sound of her voice led you to expect that any moment she 
would clear her throat of some sticky stuff which was clinging to its 
insides. Instead she switched off the electric organ, after which 
gesture some of the gathering, dismissed, left for other parts of the 
house.
“We didn’t hear Old Jack singing with us,” she said, turning tp 
look across the room where I was seated in a large chair beside a 
fogged window. On that occasion I was about twenty or twenty- 
one, home from school for Christmas. I had drunk quite a bit of 
Aunt Elise’s holiday punch, and felt like answering: “Who cares if
TH E  CHRISTMAS EVES OF AUNT ELISE 
8l

82
THOMAS LIGOTTI
you didn’t hear Old Jack singing, you old bat?” But instead I 
simply stared her way, drunkenly taking in her features, with 
prejudice, for the family scrapbook of my memory: tight-haired 
head (like combed wires), calm eyes of someone in an old portrait 
(someone long gone), high cheekbones highly colored (less rosily 
than like a rash), and the prominent choppers of a horse charging 
out of nowhere in a dream. I had no worry about my future ability 
to recall these features, even though I had secretly vowed this 
would be the last Christmas Eve I would view them. So I could 
aííord to be tranquil in the face of Aunt Elise’s taunts that evening. 
Anyway, further confrontation between the two of us was aborted 
when some of the children began clamoring for one of their aunt’s 
stories. “And this time a true story, Auntie. One that really 
happened.”
“All right,” she answered, adding that “maybe Old Jack would 
like to come over and sit with us.”
“Too old for that, thank you. Besides, I can hear you just fine 
from—” 
“Well,” she began before I’d finished, “let me think a 
moment. There are so many, so many. Anyhow, here’s one of them. 
This happened before any of you were born, a few winters after I 
moved into this neighborhood with your uncle. I don’t know if you 
ever noticed, but a little ways down the street there’s an empty lot 
where there should be, used to be, a house. You can see it from the 
front window over there,” she said, pointing to the window beside 
my chair. I let my eyes follow her finger out that window and, 
through the fog, I witnessed the empty lot of her story.
“There was once a house on that lot, a beautiful old house with 
more floors and more windows than this one, more of everything. 
The house was lived in by a very old man who never went out and 
who never invited anyone to visit him, at least no one that I ever 
noticed. And after the old man died, what do you think happened 
to the house?”
“It disappeared,” answered some of the children, jumping the 
gun.“In a way, I suppose it did disappear. Actually what happened 
was that some men came and tore the house down brick by brick, 
shingle by shingle. I think the old man who lived there must have 
been very mean to want that to happen to his house after he died.”
“How do you know he wanted it?” I interjected, trying to spoil 
her assumption.
“What other sensible explanation is there?” Aunt Elise an­
swered. “Anyhow,” she went on, “I think that the old man just 
couldn’t stand the thought of anyone else living in the house and

TH E CHRISTMAS EVES OF AUNT ELISE
83
being happy there, because surely he wasn’t. But maybe there was 
also another reason,” said Aunt Elise, drawing out these last words 
and torturing them at length with her muddled vocal system. The 
children sitting on the carpet before her listened with a new 
intentness, while the blazing logs seemed to start up a little more 
noisily in the fireplace.
“Maybe by destroying his house, making it disappear, the old 
man thought he was taking it with him into the other world. 
People who have lived alone for a very long time often think and 
do very strange things,” she emphasized, though I’m sure no one 
except me thought to apply this final statement to the storyteller 
herself. Tell everything, Jack. She went on:
“Now what would lead a person to such conclusions about the 
old man, you may wonder? Did something strange happen with 
him and his house, after both of them were gone? I’ll tell you, 
because one night, yes, something did happen.
“One night - a foggy winter’s night like this one, oh my little 
children - someone came walking down this exact street and 
paused at the property line of the house of the old man who 
was now dead. This someone was a young man whom many people 
had seen wandering around here off and on for some years. I 
myself, I tell you, once confronted him and asked him what 
business he had with us and with our homes, because that’s what 
he seemed most interested in. Any who, this young man called 
himself an an-tee-quarian, and he said he was very interested in 
old things, particularly old houses. And he had a very particular 
interest in that strange old house of the old man. A number of times 
he had asked if he could look around inside, but the old man 
always refused. Most of the time the house was dark and seemed as 
if no one was home, even though someone always was.
“Imagine the young man’s surprise, then, when he now saw not 
a dark empty place, no, but a place of bright Christmas lights 
shining all fuzzy through the fog. Could this be the old man’s 
house? Lit up with these lights? Yes, it could, because there was the 
old man himself standing at the window with a rather friendly look 
on his face. At least for him it was. So, one last time, the young man 
thought he would try his luck with the old house. He rang the bell 
and the front door slowly opened wide. The old man didn’t say 
anything, but merely stepped back and allowed the other to enter. 
Finally the young antiquarian would be able to study the inside of 
the house to his heart’s content. Along the way, in narrow halls 
and long-abandoned rooms, the old man stood silently beside his 
guest, smiling all the time.”

8 4
THQMAS LIGOTTI
“I can’t imagine how you know this part of your true story, Aunt 
Elise,” I interrupted.
“Aunt Elise knows,” asserted one of my little cousins just to shut 
me up, saving my aunt the trouble. She went on:
“After the young man had looked all around the house, both 
men sat down in the deep comfortable chairs of the front parlor 
and talked a while about the house. But it wasn’t too long before 
that smile on the old man’s face, that quiet little smile, began to 
bother his visitor in a peculiar way. At last the young man claimed 
he had to go, glancing down at the watch he had drawn from his 
pocket. And when he looked up again . . . the old man was gone. 
This startled the young man for a moment. He checked the nearby 
rooms and hallways for his host, calling “sir, sir” because he never 
found out the old man’s name. And though he could have been in a 
dozen different places, the owner of the house didn’t seem to be 
anywhere in particular that the young man could see. So the 
antiquarian decided just to leave without saying goodbye or thank 
you or anything like that.
“But he didn’t get as far as the front door when he stopped dead 
in his tracks because of what he saw through the front window. 
There seemed to be no street anymore, no street lamps or side­
walks, not even any houses, besides the one he was in, of course. 
There was only the fog and some horrible, tattered shapes 
wandering aimlessly within it. The young man could hear them 
crying. What was this place, and where had the old house taken 
him? He didn’t know what to do except stare out the window. And 
when he saw the face reflected in the window, he thought for a 
second that the old man had returned and was standing behind 
him again, smiling his quiet smile.
“But then the young man realized that this was now his own 
face, and, like those terrible, ragged creatures lost in the fog, he too 
began to cry.
“After that night, no one around here ever saw the young man 
again, just as no one has ever seen the house that was torn down. At 
least no one has yet!
“Well, did you like that story, children?”
I felt tired, more tired than I’d ever been in my life. I barely had 
the strength, it seemed, to push myself out of the chair into which 
I’d sunk down so deep. I brushed up against bodies and shuffled 
slowly under the stares of remote faces. Where was I going? Was I 
in want of another drink? Did I have to find a bathroom for my old 
body? No, none of these served as my motive.
It could almost have been hours later that I was walking down a

TH E CHRISTMAS EVES OF AUNT ELISE
8 5
foggy street. The fog formed impenetrable white walls around me, 
narrow corridors leading nowhere and rooms without windows. I 
didn’t walk very far before realizing I could go no farther.
But finally I did see something. What I saw was simply a cluster 
of Christmas lights, innocent colors beaming against the fog. But 
what could they have signified that they should seem so horrible to 
me? Why did this peaceful vision of inaccessible and hazy wonder, 
which possessed such marvelous appeal in my childhood, now 
strike me with all the terror of the impossible? The colors bled into 
the fog and were sopped up as if by a horrible gauze which drank 
the blood of rainbows. These were not the colors I had loved, this 
could not be the house. But it was, for there at the window stood its 
owner, and the sight of her thin smiling face crippled my body and 
my brain.
Then I remembered: Aunt Elise was dead now and her house, at 
the instruction of her will, had been dismantled brick by brick, 
shingle by shingle.
“Uncle Jack, wake up,” urged young voices at close range, 
though technically, being an only child, I was not their uncle. 
More accurately, I was just a friendly elder member of the family 
who’d nodded off in a chair. It was Christmas Eve, and as usual I 
had had a little too much to drink.
“We’re gonna sing carols, Uncle Jack,” said the voices again. 
Then they went away.
I went away too, retrieving my overcoat from the bedroom 
where it lay buried in a communal grave under innumerable other 
overcoats. Everyone else was singing songs to the strumming of 
guitars in the living room. (I liked their bland music infinitely 
better than the rich, rotting vibrations of Aunt Elise’s cathedral- 
esque keyboard of Christmas Eves past.) Foregoing all rituals of 
departure, I slipped quietly out the back door in the kitchen.
Though I do not remember very much about it, I must have 
gone to Grosse Pointe, to the empty land on which my aunt’s house 
once stood. So many things I can remember so clearly from long 
ago - and at my age - but not this thing. Leave out nothing, Jack. 
Remember. I must have gone to Grosse Pointe, to the open land on 
which my aunt’s house once stood. But I do not remember what it 
was like that Christmas Eve. Remember, Jack. How thick the fog 
must have been, if there was fog and not merely a slow descent of 
snow, or nothing. Would those old lights be there? You shall 
remember.
But I must have gone to Grosse Pointe that night, I must have 
gone there. Because what I do remember is this: standing before

8 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the door of a house which no longer existed. And then seeing that 
door begin to open in a slow, monumental sweep, receding with all 
the ponderous labor of a clock’s barely budging hands. Another 
hand also moved with a monstrous languor, as it reached out and 
laid itself upon me. Then her face looked into mine, and the last 
thing I remember is that great, gaping smile, and the words: 
“Merry Christmas, Old Jack!”
Oh, PH never forget the look on his face when I said these words. I had him 
at last, him and his every thought, all the pretty pictures of his mind. Those 
weeping demons, those souls forever lost to happiness, came out of the fog and 
took away his body. He was one of them now, crying like a baby! But I have 
kept the best part, all his beautiful memories, all those lovely times we had - 
the children, the presents, the colors of those nights! Anyhow, they are mine 
now. Tell us of those years, Old Jack, the years that were never yours. They 
were always mine, and now I have them to play with like toys according to my 
will. Oh, how nice, how nice and lovely to have my little home. How nice and 
lovely to live in a land where it’s always dead with darkness, and where it’s 
always alive with lights! And where it will always, forever after, be just like 
Christmas Eve.

THE LOST ART OF 
TWILIGHT
I have painted it, tried to at least. Oiled it, watercolored it, 
smeared it upon a mirror which I positioned to rekindle the 
glow of the real thing. And always in the abstract. Never actual 
sinking suns in spring, autumn, winter skies; never a sepia light 
descending over the trite horizon of a lake, not even the particular 
lake I like to view from the great terrace of my massive old 
mansion. But these Twilights of mine were not merely abstrac­
tion, which after all is just a matter of technique, a method for 
keeping out the riff-raff of the real world. Other painterly 
abstractionists may claim that nothing is represented by their 
canvasses, and probably nothing is: a streak of iodine red is just 
a streak of iodine red, a patch of flat black equals a patch of flat 
black. But pure color, pure light, pure lines and their rhythms, 
pure form in general all means much more than that. The others 
have only seen their dramas of shape and shade; I - and it is 
impossible to insist on this too strenuously - I have been there. And 
my twilight abstractions did in fact represent some reality, some­
where, sometime: a zone formed by palaces of soft and sullen color 
standing beside seas of scintillating pattern and beneath sadly 
radiant skies; a zone in which the visitor himself is transformed into 
a formal essence, a luminous presence, free of substances - a citizen 
of the abstract. And a zone (I cannot sufficiently amplify my 
despair on this point, so I will not try) that I will never know again.
Only a few weeks ago I was sitting out on the terrace, watching 
the early autumn sun droop into the above-mentioned lake, 
talking to Aunt T. Her heels clomped with a pleasing hollowness 
on drab flagstones. Silver-haired, she was attired in a gray suit, a 
big bow flopping up to her lower chins. In her left hand was a long 
envelope, neatly caesarianed, and in her right hand the letter it 
had contained, folded in sections like a triptych.
“They want to see you,” she said, gesturing with the letter. 
“They want to come here.”

8 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“I don’t believe it,” I said and skeptically turned in my chair to 
watch the sunlight stretching in long cathedral-like aisles across 
the upper and lower levels of the lawn.
“If you would only read the letter,” she insisted.
“It’s in French, no? Can’t read.”
“Now that’s not true, to judge by those books you’re always 
stacking in the library.”
“Those happen to be art books. I just look at the pictures.” 
“You like pictures, André” she asked in her best matronly ironic 
tone. “I have a picture for you. Here it is: they are going to be 
allowed to come here and stay with us as long as they like. There’s 
a family of them, two children and the letter also mentions an 
unmarried sister. They’re travelling all the way from Aix-en- 
Provence to visit America, and while on their trip they want to 
see their only living blood relation here. Do you understand this 
picture? They know who you are and, more to the point, where 
you are.”
“I’m surprised they would want to, since they’re the ones— 
“No, they’re not. They’re from your father’s side of the family. 
The Duvals,” she explained. “They do know all about you but 
say,” Aunt T. here consulted the letter for a moment, “that they 
are sans prejuge.”
“The generosity of such creatures freezes my blood. Phenomenal 
scum. Twenty years ago these people do what they did to my 
mother, and now they have the gall, the gall, to say they aren’t 
prejudiced against me.”
Aunt T. gave me a warning hrumph to silence myself, for just 
then Rops walked out onto the terrace bearing a tray with a 
slender glass set upon it. I dubbed him Rops because he, as much 
as his artistic namesake, never failed to give me the charnel house 
creeps.
He cadavered over to Aunt T. and served her her afternoon 
cocktail.
“Thank you,” she said, taking the glass of cloudy stuff 
“Anything for you, sir?” he asked, now holding the tray over his 
chest like a silver shield.
“Ever see me have a drink, Rops,” I asked back. “Ever see me—” 
“André, behave. That’ll be all, thank you.”
Rops left our sight in a few bony strides. “You can continue your 
rant now,” said Aunt T. graciously.
“I’m through. You know how I feel,” I replied and then looked 
away toward the lake, drinking in the dim mood of the twilight in 
the absence of normal refreshment.

TH E  LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
89
“Yes, I do know how you feel, and you’ve always been wrong. 
You’ve always had these romantic ideas of how you and your 
mother, rest her soul, have been the victims of some monstrous 
injustice. But nothing is the way you like to think it is. They were 
not backward peasants who, we should say, saved your mother. 
They were wealthy, sophisticated members of her own family. And 
they were not superstitious, because what they believed about your 
mother was the truth.”
“True or not,” I argued, “they believed the unbelievable - they 
acted on it - and that I call superstition. What reason could they 
possibly—”
“What reason? I have to say that at the time you were in no 
position to judge reasons, considering that we knew you only as a 
slight swelling inside your mother’s body. But I was actually there. 
I saw the ‘new friends’ she had made, that ‘aristocracy of blood,’ as 
she called it, in contrast to her own people’s hard-earned wealth. 
But I don’t judge her, I never have. After all, she had just lost her 
husband - your father was a good man and it’s a shame you never 
knew him - and then to be carrying his child, the child of a dead 
man . . . She was frightened, confused, and she ran back to her 
family and her homeland. Who can blame her if she started acting 
irresponsibly. But it’s a shame what happened, especially for your 
sake.”
“You are indeed a comfort, Auntie,” I said with now regrettable 
sarcasm.
“Well, you have my sympathy whether you want it or not. I 
think I’ve proven that over the years.”
“Indeed you have,” I agreed, and somewhat sincerely.
Aunt T. poured the last of her drink down her throat and a little 
drop she wasn’t aware of dripped from the corner of her mouth, 
shining in the crepuscular radiance like a pearl.
“When your mother didn’t come home one evening -  I should 
say morning -  everyone knew what had happened, but no one said 
anything. Contrary to your ideas about their superstitiousness, 
they actually could not bring themselves to believe the truth for 
some time.”
“It was good of all of you to let me go on developing for a while, 
even as you were deciding how to best hunt my mother down.”
“I will ignore that remark.”
“I’m sure you will.”
“We did not hunt her down, as you well know. That’s another of 
your persecution fantasies. She came to us, now didn’t she? 
Scratching at the windows in the night—”

9 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“You can skip this part, I already—”
“—swelling full as the fullest moon. And that was strange, 
because you would actually have been considered a dangerously 
premature birth according to normal schedules; but when we 
followed your mother back to the mausoleum of the local 
church, where she lay during the daylight hours, she was carrying 
the full weight of her pregnancy. The priest was shocked to find 
what he had living, so to speak, in his own backyard. It was 
actually he, and not so much any of your mother’s family, who 
thought we should not allow you to be brought into the world. And 
it was his hand that ultimately released your mother from the life of 
her new friends, and immediately afterward she began to deliver, 
right in the coffin in which she lay. The blood was terrible. If we 
did—”
“It’s not necessary to— ”
“—hunt down your mother, you should be thankful that I was 
among that party. I had to get you out of the country that very 
night, back to America. I—”
At that point she could see that I was no longer listening, was 
gazing with a distracted intensity on the pleasanter anecdotes of 
the setting sun. When she stopped talking and joined in the view, I 
said:“Thank you, Aunt T., for that little bedtime story. I never tire of 
hearing it.”
“I’m sorry, André, but I wanted to remind you of the truth.” 
“What can I say? I realize I owe you my life, such as it is.” 
“That’s not what I mean. I mean the truth of what your mother 
became and what you now are.”
“I am nothing. Completely harmless.”
“That’s why we must let the Duvals come and stay with us. To 
show them that the world has nothing to fear from you, because 
that’s what I believe they’re actually coming to see. That’s the 
message they’ll carry back to your family in France.”
“You really think that’s why they’re coming?”
“I do. They could make quite a bit of trouble for you, for us.” 
I rose from my chair as the shadows of the failing twilight 
deepened. I went and stood next to Aunt T. against the stone 
balustrade of the terrace, and whispered:
“Then let them come.”

TH E  LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
91
n
I am an offspring of the dead. I am descended from the deceased. I 
am the progeny of phantoms. My ancestors are the illustrious 
multitudes of the defunct, grand and innumerable. My lineage is 
longer than time. My name is written with embalming fluid in the 
book of death. A noble name is mine.
In the immediate family, the first to meet his maker was my own 
maker: he rests in the tomb of the unknown father. But while the 
man did manage to sire me, he breathed his last breath in this 
world before I drew my first. He was felled by a single stroke, his 
first and last. In those final moments, so I’m told, his erratic and 
subtle brainwaves made strange designs across the big green eye of 
the EEG monitor. The same doctor who told my mother that her 
husband was no longer among the living also informed her, on the 
very same day, that she was pregnant. Nor was this the only 
poignant coincidence in the lives of my parents. Both of them 
belonged to wealthy families from Aix-en-Provence in southern 
France. However, their first meeting took place not in the old 
country but in the new, at the American university they each 
happened to be attending. And so two neighbors crossed a cold 
ocean to come together in a mandatory science course. When they 
compared notes on their common backgrounds, they knew it was 
destiny at work. They fell in love with each other and with their 
new homeland. The couple later moved into a rich and prestigious 
suburb (which I will decline to mention by name or state, since I 
still reside there and, for reasons that will eventually become 
apparent, must do so discreetly). For years the couple lived in 
contentment, and then my immediate male forbear died just in 
time for fatherhood, becoming the appropriate parent for his son- 
to-be.
Offspring of the dead.
But surely, one might protest, I was born of a living mother; 
surely upon arrival in this world I turned and gazed into a pair of 
glossy maternal eyes. Not so, as I think is evident from my earlier 
conversation with dear Aunt T. Widowed and pregnant, my 
mother had fled back to Aix, to the comfort of family estates 
and secluded living. But more on this in a moment. Meanwhile I 
can no longer suppress the urge to say a few things about my 
ancestral hometown.
Aix-en-Provence, where I was born but never lived, has many 
personal, though necessarily second-hand associations for me.

92
THOMAS LIGOTTI
However, it is not just a connection between Aix and my own life 
that maintains such a powerful grip on my imagination, a lifelong 
idée fixe which actually has more to do with a few unrelated facts in 
the history of the region. Two pieces of historical data, to be exact. 
Separate centuries, indeed epochs, play host to these data, and 
they likewise exist in entirely different realms of mood, worlds 
apart in implication. Nevertheless, from a certain point of view 
they can impress one as inseparable opposites. The first one is as 
follows: in the seventeenth century there occurred the spiritual 
possession by divers demons of the nuns belonging to the Ursuline 
convent at Aix. Excommunication was soon in coming for the 
tragic sisters, who had been seduced into assorted blasphemies by 
the like of Grésil, Sonnillon, and Vérin. De Plancy’s Dictionnaire 
infernal respectively characterizes these demons, in the words of an 
unknown translator, as “the one who glistens horribly like a 
rainbow of insects; the one who quivers in a horrible manner; 
and the one who moves with a particular creeping motion.” There 
also exist engravings of these kinetically and chromatically weird 
beings, unfortunately static and in black and white. Can you 
believe it? What people are these - so stupid and profound -  that 
they could devote themselves to such nonsense? Who can fathom 
the science of superstition? (For, as an evil poet once scribbled, 
superstition is the reservoir of all truths.) This, then, is one side of 
my imaginary Aix. The other side, and the second historical datum 
I offer, is simply the birth in 1839 of Aix’s most prominent citizen: 
Cézanne. His figure haunts the landscape of my brain, wandering 
about the Provençal countryside in search of his pretty pictures.
These, then, are the two aspects of my personal Aix. Together 
they fuse into a single image, as grotesque and coherent as a 
pantheon of gargoyles amid the splendor of a medieval church.
Such was the world to which my mother re-emigrated some 
decades ago, this Notre Dame world of horror and beauty. It’s no 
wonder that she was seduced into the society of those beautiful 
strangers, who promised her an escape from the world of mortality 
where shock and suffering had taken over, driving her into exile. I 
understood from Aunt T. that it all began at a summer party on 
the estate grounds of Ambroise and Paulette Valraux. The 
Enchanted Wood, as this place was known to the hautes classes in 
the vicinity. The evening of the party was as perfectly temperate as 
the atmosphere of dreams, which one rarely notices to be either 
sultry or frigid. Lanterns were hung high up in the lindens, guide- 
lights leading to a heard-about heaven. A band played.
It was a mixed crowd at the party. And as usual there were

TH E LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
93
present a few persons whom nobody seemed to know, exotic 
strangers whose elegance was their invitation. Aunt T. did not 
pay much attention to them at the time, and her account is rather 
sketchy. One of them danced with my mother, having no trouble 
coaxing the widow out of social retirement. Another with labyr­
inthine eyes whispered to her by the trees. Alliances were formed 
that night, promises made. Afterward my mother began going out 
on her own to rendezvous after sundown. Then she stopped 
coming home. Térèse - nurse, confidante, and personal maid 
whom my mother had brought back with her from America - 
was hurt and confused by the cold snubs she had lately received 
from her mistress. My mother’s family was elaborately reticent 
about the meaning of her recent behavior. (“And in her condition, 
mon Dieu/”) Nobody knew what measures to take. Then some of 
the servants reported seeing a pale, pregnant woman lurking 
outside the house after dark.
Finally a priest was taken into the family’s confidence. He 
suggested a course of action which no one questioned, not even 
Térèse. They lay in wait for my mother, righteous soulhunters. 
They followed her drifting form as it returned to the mausoleum 
when daybreak was imminent. They removed the great stone lid 
of the sarcophagus and found her inside. “Diabolique” one of 
them exclaimed. There was some question about how many 
times and in what places she should be impaled. In the end 
they pinned her heart with a single spike to the velvet bed on 
which she lay. But what to do about the child? What would it be 
like? A holy soldier of the living or a monster of the dead. 
(Neither, you fools!) Fortunately or unfortunately, I’ve never 
been sure which, Térèse was with them and rendered their 
speculations academic. Reaching into the bloodied matrix, she 
helped me to be born. I was now heir to the family fortune, and 
Térèse took me back to America. She was extremely resourceful 
in this regard, arranging with a sympathetic and avaricious 
lawyer to become the trustee of my estate. This required a little 
magic act with identities. It required that Térèse, for reasons of 
her own which I’ve never questioned, be promoted from my 
mother’s maid to her posthumous sister. And so my Aunt T. was 
christened, born in the same year as I.
Naturally all this leads to the story of my life, which has no more 
life in it than story. It’s not for the cinema, it is not for novels; it 
wouldn’t even fill out a single lyric of modest length. It might make 
a piece of modem music: a slow, throbbing drone like the lethargic 
pumping of a premature heart. Best of all, though, would be the

94
THOMAS LIGOTTI
depiction of my life story as an abstract painting: a twilight world, 
indistinct around the edges and without center or focus; a bridge 
without banks, tunnel without openings; a crepuscular existence 
pure and simple. No heaven or hell, only a quiet haven between 
life’s hysteria and death’s tenacious darkness. (And you know, 
what I most loved about twilight is the sense, as one looks down the 
dimming west, not that it is some fleeting transitional moment, but 
that there’s actually nothing before or after it: that that's all there is.) 
My life never had a beginning, so naturally I thought it would 
never end. Naturally, I was wrong.
Well, and what was the answer to those questions hastily put by 
the monsters who stalked my mother? Was my nature to be souled 
humanness or soulless vampirism? The answer: none of the above. 
I existed between two worlds and had little claim upon the assets or 
liabilities of either. Neither living nor dead, unalive or undead, not 
having anything to do with such tedious polarities, such tiresome 
opposites, which ultimately are no more different from each other 
than a pair of imbecilic monozygotes. I said no to life and death. 
No, Mr. Springbud. No, Mr. Worm. Without ever saying hello or 
goodbye, I merely avoided their company, scorned their gaudy 
invitations.
Of course, in the beginning Aunt T. tried to care for me as if I 
were a normal child. (Incidentally, I can perfectly recall every 
moment of my life from birth, for my existence took the form of one 
seamless moment, without forgettable yesterdays or expectant 
tomorrows). She tried to give me normal food, which I always 
regurgitated. Later she prepared for me a sort of puréed meat, 
which I ingested and digested, though it never became a habit. 
And I never asked her what was actually in that preparation, for 
Aunt T. wasn’t afraid to use money, and I knew what money could 
buy in the way of unusual food for an unusual infant. I suppose I 
did become accustomed to similar nourishment while growing 
within my mother’s womb, feeding on a potpourri of blood types 
contributed by the citizens of Aix. But my appetite was never very 
strong for physical food.
Stronger by far was my hunger for a kind of transcendental fare, 
a feasting of the mind and soul: the astral banquet of Art. There I 
fed. And I had quite a few master chefs to plan the menu. Though 
we lived in exile from the world, Aunt T. did not overlook my 
education. For purposes of appearance and legality, I have earned 
diplomas from some of the finest private schools in the world. 
(These, too, money can buy.) But my real education was even 
more private than that. Tutorial geniuses were well paid to visit

TH E LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
95
our home, only too glad to teach an invalid child of nonetheless 
exceptional promise.
Through personal instruction I scanned the arts and sciences. 
Yes, I learned to quote my French poets,
Gaunt immortality in black and gold,
Wreathed consoler hideous to behold.
The beautiful lie of a mother’s womb,
The pious trick -  for it is the tomb!
but mostly in translation, for something kept me from ever 
attaining more than a beginner’s facility in that foreign tongue. 
I did master, however, the complete grammar, every dialect and 
idiom of the French eye. I could read the inner world of Redon 
(who was almost born an American) -  his grand isolé paradise of 
black. I could effortlessly comprehend the outer world of Manet 
and the Impressionists - that secret language of light. And I could 
decipher the impossible worlds of the surrealists -  those twisted 
arcades where brilliant shadows are sewn to the rotting flesh of 
rainbows.
I remember in particular a man by the name of Raymond, who 
taught me the rudimentary skills of the artist in oils. I recollect 
vividly showing him a study I had done of that sacred phenom­
enon I witnessed each sundown. Most of all I recall the look in his 
eyes, as if they beheld the rising of a curtain upon some terribly 
involved outrage. He abstractedly adjusted his delicate spectacles, 
wobbling them around on the bridge of his nose. His gaze shifted 
from the canvas to me and back again. His only comment was: 
“The shapes, the colors are not supposed to lose themselves that 
way. Something . . . no, impossible.” Then he asked to be 
permitted use of the bathroom facilities. At first I thought this 
gesture was meant as a symbolic appraisal of my work. But he was 
quite in earnest and all I could do was give him directions to the 
nearest chamber of convenience in a voice of equal seriousness. He 
walked out of the room with the first two fingers of his right hand 
pressing upon the pulse in his left wrist. And he never came back.
Such is a thumbnail sketch of my half-toned existence: twilight 
after twilight after twilight. And in all that blur of time I but 
occasionally, and then briefly, wondered if I too possessed the same 
potential for immortality as my undead mother before her life was 
aborted and I was born. It is not a question that really bothers one 
who exists beyond, below, above, between -  triumphantly outside - 
the clashing worlds of human fathers and enchanted mothers.

96
THOMAS LIGOTTI
I did wonder, though, how I would explain, that is conceal, my 
unnatural mode of being from my visiting relatives. Despite the 
hostility I showed toward them in front of Aunt T., I actually 
desired that they should take a good report of me back to the real 
world, if only to keep it away from my own world in the future. For 
days previous to their arrival, I came to think of myself as a certain 
stock character in Gothic stories: the stranger in a strange castle of 
a house, that shadowy figure whom the hero travels over long 
distances to encounter, a dark soul hiding his horrors. In short, a 
medieval geek perpetrating strange deeds in secret sanctums. I 
expected they would soon have the proper image of me as all 
impotence and no impetus. And that would be that.
But never did I anticipate being called upon to face the almost 
forgotten realities of vampirism - the taint beneath the paint of the 
family portrait.
m
The Duval family, and unmarried sister, were arriving on a night 
flight which we would meet at the airport. Aunt T. thought this 
would suit me fine, considering my tendency to sleep most of the 
day and arise with the setting sun. But at the last minute I suffered 
an acute seizure of stage fright. “The crowds,” I appealed to Aunt 
T. She knew that crowds were the world’s most powerful talisman 
against me, as if it had needed any at all. She understood that I 
would not be able to serve on the welcoming committee, and Rops’ 
younger brother Gerald, a good seventy-five if he was a day, drove 
her to the airport alone. Yes, I promised Aunt T., I would be 
sociable and come out to meet everyone as soon as I saw the lights 
of the big black car floating up our private drive.
But I wasn’t and I didn’t. I took to my room and drowsed before 
a television with the sound turned off. As the colors danced in the 
dark, I submitted more and more to an anti-social sleepiness. 
Finally I instructed Rops, by way of the estate-wide intercom, to 
inform Aunt T. and company that I wasn’t feeling very well and 
needed to rest. This, I figured, would be in keeping with the façade 
of a harmless valetudinarian, and a perfectly normal one at that. A 
night-sleeper. Very good, I could hear them saying to their souls. 
And then, I swear, I actually turned off the television and slept real 
sleep in real darkness.
But things became less real at some point deep into the night. I 
must have left the intercom open, for I heard little metallic voices

TH E LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
97
emanating from that little metallic square on my bedroom wall. In 
my state of quasi-somnolence it never occurred to me that I could 
simply get out of bed and make the voices go away by switching ofF 
that terrible box. And terrible it indeed seemed. The voices spoke a 
foreign language, but it wasn’t French, as one might have 
suspected. Something more foreign than that. Perhaps a cross 
between a madman talking in his sleep and the sonar screech of a 
bat. I heard the voices chattering and chattering with each other 
until I fell soundly asleep once more. And their dialogue had ended 
before I awoke, for the first time in my life, to the bright eyes of 
morning.
The house was quiet. Even the servants seemed to have duties 
that kept them soundless and invisible. I took advantage of my 
wakefulness at that early hour and prowled unnoticed about the 
old place, figuring everyone else was still in bed after their long and 
somewhat noisy night. The four rooms Aunt T. had set aside for 
our guests all had their big panelled doors closed: a room for the 
mama and papa, two others close by for the kids, and a chilly 
chamber at the end of the hall for the maiden sister. I paused a 
moment outside each room and listened for the revealing songs of 
slumber, hoping to know my relations better by their snores and 
whistles and monosyllables grunted between breaths. But they 
made none of the usual racket. They hardly made any sounds at 
all, though they echoed one another in making a certain noise that 
seemed to issue from the same cavity. It was a kind of weird 
wheeze, a panting from the back of the throat, the hacking of a 
tubercular demon. Having had an earful of strange cacophonies 
the night before, I soon abandoned my eavesdropping without 
regret.
I spent the day in the library, whose high windows I noticed 
were designed to allow a maximum of natural reading light. 
However, I drew the drapes on them and kept to the shadows, 
finding morning sunshine not everything it was said to be. But it 
was difficult to get much reading done. Any moment I expected to 
hear foreign footsteps descending the doubled-winged staircase, 
crossing the black and white marble chessboard of the front hall, 
taking over the house. Nevertheless, despite my expectations, and 
to my increasing sense of unease, the family never appeared.
Twilight came and still no mama and papa, no sleepy-eyed son 
or daughter, no demure sister remarking with astonishment at the 
inordinate length of her beauty sleep. And no Aunt T., either. 
They must’ve had quite a time the night before, I thought. But I 
didn’t mind being alone with the twilight. I undraped the three

98
THOMAS LIGOTTI
west windows, each of them a canvas depicting the same scene in 
the sky. My private Salon d’Automne.
It was an unusual sunset. Having sat behind opaque drapery all 
day, I had not realized that a storm was pushing in and that much 
of the sky was the precise shade of old suits of armor one finds in 
museums. At the same time, patches of brilliance engaged in a 
territorial dispute with the oncoming onyx of the storm. Light and 
darkness mingled in strange ways both above and below. Shadows 
and sunshine washed together, streaking the landscape with an 
unearthly study of glare and gloom. Bright clouds and black folded 
into each other in a no-man’s land of the sky. The autumn trees 
took on the appearance of sculptures formed in a dream, their 
leaden-colored trunks and branches and iron-red leaves all locked 
in an infinite and unliving moment, unnaturally timeless. The gray 
lake slowly tossed and tumbled in a dead sleep, nudging uncon­
sciously against its breakwall of numb stone. A scene of contra­
diction and ambivalence, a tragicomedic haze over all. A land of 
perfect twilight.
I was in exaltation: finally the twilight had come down to earth, 
and to me. I had to go out into this rare atmosphere, I had no 
choice. I left the house and walked to the lake and stood on the 
slope of stiff grass which led down to it. I gazed up through the 
trees at the opposing tones of the sky. I kept my hands in my 
pockets and touched nothing, except with my eyes.
Not until an hour or more had elapsed did I think of returning 
home. It was dark by then, though I don’t recall the passing of the 
twilight into evening, for twilight suffers no ostentatious finales. 
There were no stars visible, the storm clouds having moved in and 
wrapped up the sky. They began sending out tentative drops of 
rain. Thunder mumbled above and I was forced back to the house, 
cheated once again by the night.
In the front hall I called out names in the form of questions. 
Aunt T.? Rops? Gerald? M. Duval? Madame? Everything was 
silence. Where was everyone? I wondered. They couldn’t still be 
asleep. I passed from room to room and found no signs of 
occupation. A day of dust was upon all surfaces. Where were 
the domestics? At last I opened the double doors to the dining 
room. Was I late for the supper Aunt T. had planned to honor our 
visiting family?
It appeared so. But if Aunt T. sometimes had me consume the 
forbidden fruit of flesh and blood, it was never directly from the 
branches, never the sap taken warm from the tree oflife itself. Yet 
here were spread the remains of just such a feast. It was the

TH E LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
99
ravaged body of Aunt T., though they’d barely left enough on her 
bones for identification. The thick white linen was clotted like an 
unwrapped bandage. “Rops!” I shouted. “Gerald, somebody!” 
But I knew the servants were no longer in the house, that I was 
alone.
Not quite alone, of course. This soon became apparent to my 
twilight brain as it dipped its way into total darkness. I was in the 
company of five black shapes which stuck to the walls and soon 
began flowing along their surface. One of them detached itself and 
moved toward me, a weightless mass which felt icy when I tried to 
sweep it away and put my hand right through the thing. Another 
followed, unhinging itself from a doorway where it hung down. A 
third left a blanched scar upon the wallpaper where it clung like a 
slug, pushing itself off to join the attack. Then came the others 
descending from the ceiling, dropping onto me as I stumbled in 
circles and flailed my arms. I ran from the room but the things had 
me closely surrounded. They guided my flight, heading me down 
hallways and up staircases. Finally they cornered me in a small 
room, a dusty little place I had not been in for years. Colored 
animals frolicked upon the walls, blue bears and yellow rabbits. 
Miniature furniture was draped with graying sheets. I hid beneath 
a tiny elevated crib with ivory bars. But they found me and closed 
in.They were not driven by hunger, for they had already feasted. 
They were not frenzied with a murderer’s bloodlust, for they were 
cautious and methodical. This was simply a family reunion, a 
sentimental gathering. Now I understood how the Duvals could 
afford to be sans préjugé. They were worse than I, who was only a 
half-breed, hybrid, a mere mulatto of the soul: neither a blood- 
warm human nor a blood-drawing devil. But they -  who came 
from an Aix on the map - were the purebreds of the family.
And they drained my body dry.
IV
When I regained awareness once more, it was still dark and there 
was a great deal of dust in my throat. Not actually dust, of course, 
but a strange dryness I had never before experienced. And there 
was another new experience: hunger. I felt as if there were a chasm 
of infinite depth within me, a great abyss which needed to be filled
- flooded with oceans of blood. I was one of them now, reborn into 
a hungry death. Everything I had shunned in my impossible,

IOO
THOMAS LIGOTTI
blasphemous ambition to avoid living and dying, I now had 
become. A sallow, ravenous thing. A beast with a hundred stirring 
hungers. André of the graveyards.
The five of them had each drunk from my body by way of five 
separate fountains. But the wounds had nearly sealed by the time I 
awoke in the blackness, owing to the miraculous healing capabil­
ities of the dead. The upper floors were all in shadow now, and I 
made my way toward the light coming from downstairs. An 
impressionistic glow illuminated the wooden banister at the top 
of the stairway, where I emerged from the darkness of the second 
floor, and this sight inspired in me a terrible ache of emotion I’d 
never known before: a feeling of loss, though of nothing I could 
specifically name, as if somehow the deprivation lay in my future.
As I descended the stairs I saw that they were already waiting to 
meet me, standing silently upon the black and white squares of the 
front hall. Papa the king, mama the queen, the boy a knight, the 
girl a dark little pawn, and a bitchy maiden bishop standing 
behind. And now they had my house, my castle, to complete the 
pieces on their side. On mine there was nothing.
“Devils,” I screamed, leaning hard upon the staircase rail. 
“Devils,” I repeated, but they still appeared horribly undis­
tressed, perhaps uncomprehending of my outburst. “Diables” I 
reiterated in their own loathsome tongue.
But neither was French their true language, as I found out when 
they began speaking among themselves. I covered my ears, trying 
to smother their voices. They had a language all their own, a style 
of speech well-suited to dead vocal organs. The words were 
breathless, shapeless rattlings in the back of their throats, parched 
scrapings at the mausoleum portal. Arid gasps and dry gurgles 
were their dialects. These grating intonations were especially 
disturbing as they emanated from the mouths of things that had 
at least the form of human beings. But worst of all was my 
realization that I understood perfectly well what they were saying.
The boy stepped forward, pointing at me while looking back 
and speaking to his father. It was the opinion of this wine-eyed and 
rose-lipped youth that I should have suffered the same end as Aunt 
T. With an authoritative impatience the father told the boy that I 
was to serve as a sort of tour guide through this strange new land, a 
native who could keep them out of such difficulties as foreign 
visitors sometimes get into. Besides, he grotesquely concluded, I 
was one of the family. The boy was incensed and coughed out an 
incredibly foul characterization of his father. The things he said 
could only have been conveyed by that queer hacking patois,

TH E LOST ART OF T W IL IG H T
IOI
which suggested feelings and relationships of a nature incom­
prehensible outside of the world it mirrors with disgusting perfec­
tion. It is the discourse of hell on the subject of sin.
An argument ensued, and the father’s composure turned to an 
infernal rage. He finally subdued his son with bizarre threats that 
have no counterparts in the language of ordinary malevolence. 
After the boy was silenced he turned to his aunt, seemingly for 
comfort. This woman of chalky cheeks and sunken eyes touched 
the boy’s shoulder and easily drew him toward her with a single 
finger, guiding his body as if it were a balloon, weightless and toy­
like. They spoke in sullen whispers, using a personal form of 
address that hinted at a long-standing and unthinkable allegiance 
between them.
Apparently aroused by this scene, the daughter now stepped 
forward and used this same mode of address to get my attention. 
Her mother abruptly gagged out a single syllable at her. What she 
called her daughter might possibly be imagined, but only with 
reference to the lowliest sectors of the human world. Their own 
words, their choking rasps, carried the dissonant overtones of 
another world altogether. Each perverse utterance was a rioting 
opera of evil, a choir shrieking psalms of intricate blasphemy and 
enigmatic lust.
“I will not become one of you,” I thougkt I screamed at them. But 
the sound of my voice was already so much like theirs that the 
words had exactly the opposite meaning I intended. The family 
suddenly ceased bickering among themselves. My outburst had 
consolidated them. Each mouth, cluttered with uneven teeth like a 
village cemetery overcrowded with battered gravestones, opened 
and smiled. The expression on their faces told me something about 
my own. They could see my growing hunger, see deep down into 
the dusty catacomb of my throat which cried out to be anointed 
with bloody nourishment. They knew my weakness.
Yes, they could stay in my house. {Famished.)
Yes, I could make arrangements to cover up the disappearance 
of the servants, for I am a wealthy man and know what money can 
buy. (Please, my family, Pm famished.)
Yes, their safety could be insured and their permanent asylum 
perfectly feasible. {Please, Pm famishing to dust.)
Yes, yes, yes. I agreed to everything; everything would be taken 
care of. (To dust!)
But first I begged them, for heaven’s sake, to let me go out into 
the night.
Night, night, night, night. Night, night, night.

102
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Now twilight is an alarm, a noxious tocsin which rouses me to an 
endless eve. There is a sound in my new language for that 
transitory time of day preceding the dark hours. The sound 
clusters together curious shades of meaning and shadowy impres­
sions, none of which belong to my former conception of an abstract 
paradise: the true garden of unearthly delights. The new twilight is 
a violater, desecrator, stealthy graverobber; death-bell, life-knell, 
curtain-raiser; banshee, siren, howling she-wolf. And the old 
twilight is dead. I am even learning to despise it, just as I am 
learning to love my eternal life and eternal death. Nevertheless, I 
wish them well who would attempt to destroy my precarious 
immortality, for my rebirth has taught me the torment of begin­
nings, while the idea of endings has assumed in my thoughts a 
tranquil significance. And I cannot deny those who would avenge 
the exsanguinated souls of my past and future. Yes, past and 
future. Endings and beginnings. In brief, Time now exists, 
measured like a perpetual holiday consisting only of midnight 
revels. I once had an old family from an old world, and now I have 
new ones. A new life, a new world. And this world is no longer one 
where I can languidly gaze upon rosy sunsets, but another in 
which I must fiercely draw a full-bodied blood from the night.
Night . . . after night . . . after night.

THE TROUBLES OF 
DR. THOSS
hen Alb Indys first heard the name of Dr. Thoss, he had
some difficulty locating its speaker, or even discerning how 
many voices had spoken it. Initially the words seemed to emanate 
from an old radio in another apartment, for Alb Indys had no such 
device of his own. But he finally realized that this name had been 
uttered, in a rather harsh voice, just outside the corner window, 
and only window, of his room. After spending the night, not 
unusually, walking the floor or slumping wide-eyed in his only 
chair, he had been in bed since morning. Now, at mid-afternoon, 
he remained unslept and was still attired in pale gray pajamas. 
Bolstered by huge pillows, he was sitting up against the headboard. 
Upon his lap rested a drawing book filled with stiff sheets of paper, 
very white. A bottle of black ink was in reach on the sidetable next 
to his bed, and a shapely black pen with a sharp silvery nib was 
held tightly in his right hand. That Alb Indys was at that moment 
busy with a pen-and-ink rendering of the window, along with the 
empty chair beside it, was perhaps the chief reason that, very 
vaguely, he had overheard the words spoken beyond it.
He gave the drawing book a somewhat rough toss farther down 
the bed, where it fell against a lump swelling in the blankets: more 
than likely the creation of a wadded pair of trousers or an old shirt, 
possibly both, given the habits of Alb Indys. The window was 
partly open and, walking over to it without steadiness, he 
discreetly pushed it out a little more. They should have been just 
below the window, those speakers whom Alb Indys wished would 
go on speaking. He remembered hearing a voice say, “It’s going to 
be the end of someone’s troubles,” or words to that effect, with the 
name of Dr. Thoss figuring in the discussion. The name was 
unfamiliar to him and gave rise to an enthusiasm that had much 
less to do with hope, which Alb Indys tried to keep at a minimum, 
than it did with pure nervous expectancy: the anticipation of new 
and unknown possibilities. But the talking had stopped, and just as

104
THOMAS LIGOTTI
he was becoming interested in this doctor. Where were they, those 
two? He was sure there were two, though there might have been a 
third. How could so many have simply vanished?
When he fully extended the window casement, Alb Indys saw no 
one on the street. He stretched forward for a better look and 
strands of blond hair, almost white, fell across his face, and then by 
a sudden salty breeze were blown back, thin and loose. It was not a 
very brilliant day, not one of excess activity. A few silhouettes and 
shadows maneuvered in the dimness on the other side of unre­
flecting windows. The stones of the street, so sparkling and 
picturesque for those enjoying a holiday here, succumbed to 
dullness out of season. Alb Indys fixed on one of them which 
looked dislodged in the pavement, imagining he heard it working 
itself free, creaking around in its stony cradle. But the noise was 
that of metal hinges squeaking somewhere in the wind. He quickly 
found them, his hearing made keen by insomnia. They were 
attached to a wooden sign hung outside the uppermost window 
of an old building. The structure ascended in peaks and slants and 
ledges piled over ledges into the gray sky, until at its highest, 
turreted point swung the sign. Alb Indys could never clearly make 
out its four capital letters so far above, though he had gazed up at 
them a thousand times. (And how often it seemed that something 
gazed back at him from that high window.) But a radio station 
need not be a visual presence in an old resort town, only an aural 
landmark, a voice for vacationers signalling the “sound beside the 
sea.”Alb Indys closed the window and returned to his thin-lined 
representation of it. Though he began the picture in the middle of 
a sleepless night, he did not copy the constellations beyond the 
window panes, keeping the drawing unmarred by any artistic 
suggestion of those star-filled hours. Nothing was in the window 
but the pure whiteness of the page, the pale abyss of unshut eyes. 
After making a few more marks on the picture, completing it, he 
signed his work very neatly in the lower right-hand corner. This 
page would later be put in one of the large portfolios which lay 
stacked upon a desk across the room.
What else was contained in these portfolios? Two sorts of things, 
two types of artwork which between them described the nature 
and limits of Alb Indys’s pictorial talents. The first type included 
such scenes as the artist had recently executed: images drawn from 
his immediate surroundings, an immediacy that extended no 
farther than the sights observable in his own room. This was 
not his first study of the window, the subject he most often returned

TH E TROUBLES OF DR. THOSS
105
to and always in the same plain style. Sometimes he sat in the chair 
beside the window and portrayed his bed, lumpy and unmade, 
with occasional attention to the sidetable (noting each nick that 
blemished its original off-white surface) and the undecorated lamp 
which stood upon it (recording each chip that pocked its glassy 
smoothness). The desk-side of the room also received its fair share 
of treatments: the wall at that end of the room was the most 
tempting of the four, in itself a subtle canvas that had been painted 
and pitted and painted again, coated and repeatedly scraped of 
infinitesimal, seatown organisms, leaving it shrivelled and pasty 
and incurably damp. No pictures were hung to patch either this or 
any other wall of the room, though a tall bookcase obscured who 
knows what unseen worlds behind it. Transitory compositions - a 
flung shoe leaning toe-up against a bedpost, a dropped glove 
which hazard endowed with a pointing index finger - formed 
the remaining examples of this first type of drawing in which the 
artist indulged.
And the second type? Was it more interesting than the first? 
Perhaps, though not where the imagination is concerned; because 
Alb Indys had none whatever, or at least none that he could 
readily make use of. Whenever he tried to form a picture of 
something, anything, in his imagination, all he saw was a blank: 
a new page with nothing on it, or perhaps a very old page that had 
retained the nothingness of its original mintage. Once he nearly 
had a vision of something, a few specks flying across a fuzzy 
background of white snow in a white sky - and there was a 
garbled voice which he had not intentionally conjured. But it 
all fizzled out after a few seconds into a silent stretch of emptiness. 
This artistic handicap, however, was anything but a frustration or 
a disappointment to Alb Indys. He did not often test the powers of 
his imagination, for he somehow knew that there was as much to 
be lost as gained in doing so. In any case, there were other ways to 
make a picture, and we have already seen one of them, not a very 
unusual one. Here now is another.
This second method was a type of artistic forgery, though it 
might just as well be described by the term which Alb Indys 
himself preferred - collaboration. And who were his collaborators? 
In many instances, there was no way of knowing: anonymous 
penmen, mostly, of illustrations in very old books and periodicals, 
ones entirely forgotten. His shelves were full of them, dark and 
massive, their worn covers incredibly tender to the touch. French, 
Flemish, German, Swedish, Russian, Polish, any cultural source of 
published material would do as long as its pictures spoke the

i o 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
language of dark lines and vacant spaces. In fact, the more 
disparate the origins of these images, the better they served his 
purpose: because Alb Indys liked to take a century-old engraving 
of a subarctic landscape, studiously plagiarize its manner of 
suggesting icy mountains and a vast stretch of frozen whiteness; 
then select an equally old depiction of a cathedral in a town he had 
never heard of, painstakingly transport it stone by stone deep into 
the glacial wasteland; and finally, from still older pages, transcribe 
with all possible fidelity an unknown artist’s conception of assorted 
devils and demons, making them dance down from the ice-mad 
mountains and invade the helpless cathedral. This was the typical 
process and product of his work with collaborators, who Alb Indys 
thought were actually in collaboration with one another and not 
with him at all. He was merely the inheritor of lost images; he was 
their resurrector, their invoker, their medium, and under his 
careful eye and steady hand there took place a mingling of artistic 
forms, their disparate anatomies tumbling out of the years to create 
the nightmare of his art. And it seemed perfectly natural to Alb 
Indys that, like everything else, even the most inviolable or obscure 
phenomena eventually find their way from good dreams into bad, 
or from bad dreams into the wholly abysmal.
At the moment he was working on a new collaboration, but all 
he had as yet was its barest beginnings: a sickle-shaped scar of 
moon, a common enough image which Alb Indys wanted to 
remove from one black sky and fix in another. Its relocation 
could have provided him with a way to waste the rest of the 
afternoon. However, the commotion outside the window earlier 
had upset the pace of his day and given it a new rhythm. Almost 
any event could do this to an insomniac’s delicate routine, so as yet 
there was no reason to contemplate the exceptional. An appear­
ance by his landlord, whether rent-hungry or merely casual, 
sometimes altered his course for weeks to come. Before, his 
thoughts were of nothing, genuinely; but now old preoccupations 
had become stirred up and sharpened in his awareness. Was there 
anything special about this doctor, this Thoss? Alb Indys could not 
help wondering. Was he like the others, or was he a doctor who 
would hear, really hear you? Not one had yet heard him, not one 
had offered him a remedy worth the name.
If there was a new doctor who had set up practice in the seaside 
town, Alb Indys could encounter none of the man’s cures, either 
real or pretended, by staying at home. He needed to find some 
things out for himself, make inquiries, get out into the world. When 
was the last time he had had a good meal? Perhaps that would be a

way to begin, and afterward he could take it from there. One could 
always get acceptable food at the place right around the corner, no 
reason to fear they were going to give him poison! Good, he 
thought. And after he ate he might have a nice walk for him­
self, gain some advantage from the fresh air and scenery of this 
town. After all, many people came here for vaguely therapeutic 
reasons, believing there were medicines dispensed by the very 
mood of the town’s quaint streets and its sea-licked landscape. It 
might even happen that his maladies would disappear of their own 
accord, leaving him with no need for this doctor, this Thoss.
He dressed himself in dark, heavy clothes and made sure to lock 
the door behind him. But he had forgot to shut the window 
properly and a breeze edged in, disturbing the pages of the 
drawing book on his bed, fluttering them against that lump in 
the blankets.
At the restaurant Alb Indys found a small table in a quiet, 
comfortable corner, where he sat facing the rear wall and an 
empty chair. He ordered something to eat from a large board, 
nicely lettered, which was propped up on an easel at the front of 
the room. Because of his distance from this board, and a certain 
atmospheric dimness of the place, only a single word in bold letters 
was easily readable.
“Fish,” he had said.
“Fish of the day?”
“Yes,” he had answered, mechanically and without a trace of 
the anticipation he thought he might feel.
But despite his enduring lack of interest in daily meals, he did 
not regret this outing. A little lamp attached to the wall next to 
him, its light muffled by a grayish shade of some coarse fabric, 
created a slightly nocturnal ambiance. If he kept his gaze fixed 
upon a certain knotty plank in the wall, at a point just above the 
empty chair opposite him, everything peripheral to his left eye’s 
vision faded into a dark fog, while the little lamp to his right cast an 
island of illumination upon the table before him, instilling the 
illusion that he was lost in some glowing and isolated corner of an 
endless night. But he could not sustain the illusion: the state of mild 
delight into which he fooled himself faded, while shapes around 
him sharpened.
Yet without this sharpening would he have noticed the news­
paper someone had left behind on the seat of that empty chair? 
Messily bunched and repeatedly creased, it was still a welcome 
sight to his eyes. At this point he needed something of this kind,
TH E  TROUBLES OF DR. THOSS 
IO7

i o 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
something to peruse in the rich glow of the lamp that was guiding 
him through an artificial night, preparing him for the authentic 
one in which he would have to face the unpredictable verdict 
which either terminated or terribly elongated his wakefulness. He 
reached for the pages, rustled them, unfolded and refolded them 
like an arrangement of bedcovers. His eyes followed dark letters 
across ruddy paper, and at last his mind was out of its terrible 
school for a while. When the food arrived he made way for the 
plate, building a nest of print and pictures around it: advertise­
ments for the town’s shops and businesses, weather forecasts, 
happenings on the west shore, and a feature article entitled 
“THE REAL STORY OF DR. THOSS - Local Legend Re­
vived.” A brief note explained that the article, written some years 
ago, was periodically reprinted when interest in the subject 
seemed, for one reason or another, newly aroused. Alb Indys 
paused over his meal for a moment and smiled, feeling disap­
pointed and slightly relieved at the same time. It now appeared 
that he had been inspired by a misunderstanding, by imaginary 
consultations with a legendary doctor and his fictitious cures.
Who, then? What? When and why? His name, according to the 
article, may indeed have been that of a real doctor, one who lived 
either in the distant past or whose renown was imported, by 
recollection and rumor, from a distant place. A number of people 
associated him with the following vague but poignant tragedy: an 
excellent physician, and a most respected figure in the community, 
was psychically deranged one night by some incident of indefinite 
character; afterward he continued to make use of his training in 
physic but in a wholly new fashion, in a difFerent key altogether 
from that of his former practice. This went on for some time before, 
violently, he was stopped. Decapitation, drowning in the nearby 
sea, or both were the prevailing conclusions to the real doctor’s 
legend. Of course, the particulars vary, as do those of a second, and 
more widely circulated, version.
This variant Dr. Thoss was a recluse of the witch-days, less a 
doctor of medicine than one deeply schooled at forbidden uni­
versities of the supernatural. Or was he naturally a very wise man 
who was simply misunderstood? Histories of the period are 
unhelpful in resolving such questions. No definite misbehavior is 
attributed to him, except perhaps that of keeping an unpleasant 
little companion. The creature, according to most who know this 
Thossian legend, is said to possess the following traits: it is smallish, 
“no bigger than a man’s head”; shrivelled and rotting, as if with 
disease or decomposition; speaks in a rough voice; and moves

about by means of numerous appendages of special qualities, 
called “miracle claws” by some. There was good reason, the 
article went on, to put this abbreviated marvel at the center of 
this legend, for the creature may not have been merely a diabolical 
companion of Dr. Thoss but the mysterious doctor himself. Was his 
tale, then, a cautionary one, illustrating what happened to those 
who, either from evil or benevolent motives, got “into trouble” 
with the supernatural? Or was Dr. Thoss itself intended to serve as 
no more than an agent of spectral hideousness, a bogie for children 
and the secluded campfire? Ultimately the point of the legend is 
unclear, the article asserted, beyond evoking a certain uneasiness 
in those of superactive imagination.
But an even greater obscurity surrounded one last morsel of lore 
concerning who the doctor was and what he was about. It related 
to the way his name had come to be employed by certain people 
and under certain circumstances. Not the place for a scholarly 
inquest into regional expressions, the article merely cited an 
example, one that no doubt was already familiar to many of the 
newspaper’s readers. This particular usage was based on the idea - 
and the following verb must be stressed - of “feeding one’s troubles 
to the sea (or ‘wind’) and Dr. Thoss,” as if this figure - whatever its 
anatomical or metaphysical identity - were some kind of eater of 
others’ suffering. A concluding note invited readers to submit 
whatever smatterings they could to enlarge upon this tiny daub 
of local color.
End of the real story of Dr. Thoss.
Alb Indys had read the article with interest and appetite, more 
than he ever hoped to have, and he now pushed both crumpled 
newspaper and decimated meal away from him, sitting for a 
moment in blurry reflection on both. The surface of the old 
table, jaundiced by the little lamp above it, somehow seemed to 
be decaying in its grain, dissolving into a putrid haze. Possibly his 
attention had simply wandered too far when he heard, or thought 
he heard, a strange utterance. And it was delivered in a distorted, 
dry-throated voice, as though transmitted by garbled shortwave. 
“Yes, my name is Thoss,” the voice had said. “I am a doctor.” 
“Excuse me, will there be anything else you’d like to order?” 
Shaken back to life, Alb Indys declined further service, paid his 
bill, and left. On his way out, for no defensible reason, he 
scrutinized every face in the room. But none of them could have 
said it, he assured himself.
In any case, the doctor was now exposed as only a phantasm of 
local superstition. Or was he? To be perfectly honest about it, Alb
TH E TROUBLES OF DR. THOSS 
IOg

n o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Indys had to credit the nonexistent healer with some part of his 
present well-being. How he had eaten, and every bit! True, it was 
not much of a day - the town was a tomb and the sky its vault - but 
for him a secret sun was glowing somewhere, he could feel it. And 
there were hours remaining before it had to set, hours. He walked 
to the end of the street where it dipped down a steep hill and the 
sidewalk ended in a flight of old stone stairs that had curving grins 
sliced into them. He continued walking to the edge of town, and 
then down a narrow road which led to one of the few places he 
could abide outside his own room.
Alb Indys approached the old church from the graveyard side 
and, as he closed in, only the great hexagonal peak, hornlike, could 
be seen projecting above the brown-leafed trees. Surrounding the 
graveyard was a barrier of thin black bars, with a thicker bar 
connecting them through the middle, spinelike. There was no gate, 
and the road he was on freely entered the church grounds. To his 
left and right were headstones and monuments, little marble slabs 
and golden plaques. They formed a forest of memorials, clumps of 
crosses and groves of gravestones. Some of them were very small 
and oddly shaped, and so loosened by time that they almost 
seemed to rock back and forth in the wind. But could one of 
them have just now fallen down entirely? Something was missing 
that had been there before, seemingly had sunk or slid away. Alb 
Indys watched for a moment, then proceeded toward the church. 
When he reached the edge of the graveyard he turned around, 
surveying not only the stones themselves but also the spaces 
between them. And the wind was pulling at his fine pale locks.
Standing in full view of the church, Alb Indys could not resist 
elevating his gaze to the height of that spire which rose from a 
square central tower whose four corners put out four lesser points. 
This great structure -  with its dark, cowl-shaped windows and 
broken roman-numeraled clock - was buttressed by two low- 
roofed transepts which squatted and slanted on either side of it. 
Beneath the cloud-filled sky the church was an even shade of 
grayish white, unblemished by shadows. And from behind the 
church, where pale scrubby grasses edged toward a steep descent 
into sand and sea, came the sound of tossing waves, a hissing sound 
which Alb Indys perceived as somehow dry and electronic.
As always, there was no one else in the church at this time of day 
(and with hours remaining of it). Everything was very simple 
inside, very solemn and quiet and serenely lighted. The dark- 
paned windows along either wall confused all time, bending dawns 
into twilights, suspending minutes in eternity. Alb Indys slid into a

TH E TROUBLES OF DR. THOSS
III
pew at the back and rested his hands at his sides. His eyes were 
fixed on the distant apse, where everything - pillars, pictures, 
pulpit - appeared as an unfocused fragment of itself, folded within 
shadows that seemed to be the creation of dark hours. But his 
insomnia was not at issue here: suffering and transgressions alike 
were reprieved in this place that shut out time. He followed each 
moment as it tried to move past him: each was smothered by the 
stillness, and he watched them die. “But trouble feeds in the wind 
and hides in the window,” he drowsily said to himself from 
somewhere inside his now dreaming brain.
Suddenly everything seemed wrong and he wanted to leave, but 
he could not leave because someone was speaking from the pulpit. 
Yes, a pulpit in such ^ large, such an enormous, church would be 
equipped with its microphone, but then why whisper in such 
confused language and so rapidly, like a single voice trying to 
be more? What were the voices saying now? No, he would rather 
not hear, because now everything was happening that he wished 
would not happen, and it was so late at night, and with so many 
hours left to sleep, finally to sleep for hours and hours, he would not 
be able to get away in time. If he could only move, just turn his 
head a little. And if he could only get his eyes to open and see what 
was wrong. The voices kept repeating without fading, multiplying 
in the fantastically spacious church. Then, with an effort sufficient 
to move the earth itself, he managed to turn his head just enough to 
look out a window in the east transept. And without even opening 
his tightly closed eyelids, he saw what was in the window. But he 
suddenly awoke for an entirely different reason, because finally he 
understood what the voices were saying. They said they were a 
doctor, and their name was—
Alb Indys had to get home, even if all the way there the sound of 
the sea was hissing behind him like a broken radio, and even if the 
wind rushed by his ears like breaking waves of air. There was not 
much daylight left and tonight, of all nights, he did not want to 
catch anything, did not want to be caught, that is, in the damp and 
chill of an off-season sundown. What misjudgements he had made 
that day, what mistakes, there was no question about it. And what 
a doctor to call upon to treat one’s troubles . . .
An eternity of sleeplessness was to be preferred, if those were the 
dreams sleep had in waiting. Gratefully he would hold on to his old 
troubles, with the permission of the world, the wind, and the 
legendary Dr. Thoss.
And when Alb Indys reached his room, he was thinking about a 
gleaming crescent moon ready to be placed in a new scene, and he

112
THOMAS LIOOTTI
was thankful to have some project, any project, to fill the hours of 
that night. Exhausted, he threw his dark coat in a heap on the 
floor, then sat down on the bed to remove his shoes. He was 
holding the second one in his hand when he turned and, for some 
reason, began to contemplate that lump he had left in the bed­
covers. Without reasoning why, he elevated the shoe directly 
above this shapeless swelling, held it aloft for a few moments, 
then let it drop straight down. The lump collapsed with a little 
poof, as if it had been an old hat with no head inside, or a 
magician’s silk scarf that only seemed to have a plump white 
dove hidden under it. Enough of this for one day, Alb Indys 
thought sleepily, there was work he could be doing.
But when he picked up the drawing book of stiff clean pages 
from where he had earlier abandoned it on the bed, he saw that the 
work he intended to do had, by some miracle, already been done. 
He looked at the drawing of the window, the drawing he had 
finished off* earlier that day with his meticulous signature. Was it 
only because he was so tired that he could not recall darkening 
those window panes and carving that curved scar of moon behind 
them? Could he have forgotten about scoring that bone-white 
cicatrix into the flesh of night? But he was holding that particular 
moon in reserve for one of his “collaborations” and this was not one 
of those. This belonged to that other type of drawing: he only 
penned, in these, what was enclosed within the four-walled frame 
of his room, never anything outside it. Then why did he ink in this 
night and this moon, and with the collaboration of what other 
artistic hand? If only he were not so drained by chronic insomnia, 
all those lost dreams hissing in his head, perhaps he could have 
thought more clearly about it. His dozing brain might even have 
noticed another change in the picture, for something now squatted 
in the chair which formerly had been unoccupied. But there was 
too much sleep to catch up on, and, as the sun went out in the 
window, Alb Indys shut his eyes languorously and lay down upon 
his bed.
And he never would have wakened that night, which seemed as 
white as winter, if it had not been for the noise. The window was lit 
up by a silvery blade of moon. It brightened the chair, whose two 
thin arms had other arms overhanging each of them, flexing slowly 
in the room’s stillness. White night, white noise. As if speaking in 
static, the parched, crackling voice repeatedly said: I am a doctor. 
Then the occupant of the chair hopped gracefully onto the bed 
with a single thrust of its roundish body, and its claws began their 
work, delivering the sleeper to his miraculous remedy . . .

T H E  TROUBLES OF DR. THOSS
M3
It was the landlord who eventually found him, though there was 
considerable difficulty identifying what lay on the bed. A rumor 
spread throughout the seaside town about a swift and terrible 
disease, something that perhaps one of the vacationers had 
brought in. But no other trouble was reported. Much later, the 
entire incident was confused by preposterous elaborations, which 
had the efTect of relegating all of its horrors to the doubtful realm of 
regional legend.

MASQUERADE OF A 
DEAD SWORD: A 
TRAGEDIE
When the world uncovers some dark disguise 
Embrace the darkness with averted eyes.
Psalms of the Silent
I 
Faliol’s Rescue
No doubt the confusions of carnival night were to blame, in some 
measure, for many unforeseen incidents. Every violation of routine 
order was being perpetrated by the carousing mob, their cries of 
celebration providing the upper voices to a strange droning pedal 
point which seemed to be sustained by the night itself. Having 
declared their town an enemy of silence, the citizens of Soldori took 
to the streets; there they conspired against solitude and, to 
accompanying gyrations of squealing abandon, sabotaged monot­
ony. Even the duke, a cautious man and one not normally given to 
those gaudy agendas of his counterparts in Lynnese or Daranzella, 
was now holding an extravagant masquerade, if only as a strategic 
concession to the little patch of world under his rule. Of all the 
inhabitants of the Three Towns, the subjects of the Duke of Soldori
- occasionally to the duke’s own dismay - were the most loving of 
amusement. In every quarter of this principality, frolicking 
celebrants combed the night for a new paradise, and were as 
likely to find it in a blood-match as in a song. All seemed anxious, 
even frantic to follow blindly the entire spectrum of diversion, to 
dawdle about the lines between pain and pleasure, to obscure their 
vision of both past and future.
So perhaps three well-drunk and boar-faced men seated in a 
roisterous hostelry could be excused for not recognizing Faliol, 
whose colors were always red and black. But this man, who had

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
115
just entered the thickish gloom of that drinking house, was attired 
in a craze of colors, none of them construed to a pointed efTect. One 
might have described this outfit as motley gone mad. Indeed, 
perhaps what lay beneath this fool’s patchwork were the familiar 
blacks and reds that no other of the Three Towns - neither those 
who were dandies, nor those who were sword-whores (however 
golden their hearts), nor even those who, like Faliol himself, were 
both - would have dared to parody. But these notorious colors 
were now buried deep within a rainbow of rags which were tied 
about the man’s arms, legs, and at every other point of his person, 
seeming to hold him together like tom strips hurriedly applied to 
the storm-fractured joists of a sagging roof. Before he had closed 
the door of that cave-like room behind him, the draft rushing in 
from the street made his ragged livery come alive like a mass of 
tattered flags flapping in a calamitous wind.
But even had he not been cast as a tatterdemalion, there was still 
so much else about Faliol that was unlike his former self. His sword, 
a startling length of blade to be pulled along by this ragman, 
bobbed about unbuckled at his left side. His dagger, whose sheath 
bore a mirror of polished metal (which now seemed a relic of more 
dandified days), was strung loosely behind his left shoulder, ready 
to fall at any moment. And his hair was trimmed monkishly close 
to the scalp, leaving little reminder of a gloriously hirsute era. But 
possibly the greatest alteration, the greatest problem and mystery 
of Faliol’s travesty of his own image, was the presence on his face of 
a pair of. . . spectacles. And owing that the glass of these spectacles 
was unevenly blemished, as thoiigh murky currents flowed be­
neath their brittle surface, the eyes behind them were obscured.
Still, there remained any number of signs by which a discerning 
scrutiny could have identified the celebrated Faliol. For as he 
moved toward a seat adjacent to the alcove where the booming- 
voiced trio was ensconsed, he moved with a scornful, somehow 
involuntary assuredness of which no reversals of fate could 
completely unburden him. And his boots, though their fine black 
leather had gone gray with the dust of roads that a zealous 
equestrian such as Faliol would never have trod, still jangled 
with a few of those once innumerable silver links from which 
dangled small, agate-eyed medallions, ones exactly like that larger, 
onyx-eyed medallion which in other days hung from a silver chain 
around his lean throat. The significance of this particular orna­
ment was such that Faliol - though often questioned, but never 
twice by the same inquisitor - avoided revelations of any kind.
Now, however, no medallion of any kind was displayed upon

116
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Faliol’s chest; and since he had lost or renounced the inkish eye of 
onyx, he had acquired two eyes of shadowed glass. Each lens of the 
spectacles reflected, like twin moons, the glow of the lantern above 
the place where Faliol seated himself. As if unaware that he was 
not settled in some cloistered cell of lucubration, he removed from 
somewhere within his shredded clothes a small book having the 
words Psalms of the Silent written in raised letters upon its soft, worn 
cover. And the cover was black, while the letters were the red of 
autumn leaves.
“Faliol, a scholar?” someone whispered in the crowded depths of 
the room, while another added: “And a scholar of his own grief, so 
I’ve heard.”
Faliol unfixed the tiny silver clasp and opened the book some­
where toward its middle, where a thin strip of red velvet cloth, one 
the same shade as the letters upon the cover of the book, marked 
his place. And if there had been a miniature mirror bound in place 
of the book’s left-hand leaf, Faliol could have seen three thuggish 
men gazing mutely, not to say thoughtfully, in his direction. 
Moreover, if there had been a second mirror set at the same 
angle on the book’s right-hand leaf, he could also have noticed a 
fourth pair of eyes spying on him from the other side of the 
hostelry’s engrimed window panes.
But there were only long, stem-looking letters written - to be 
precise handwritten, in Faliol’s own hand - upon the opposing 
leaves of the book. Thus Faliol could not have seen either of these 
parties who, for reasons separate or similar, were observing him. 
He saw only two pale pages elegantly dappled by the words of 
somber verses. Then a shadow passed across these pages, and 
another, and another.
The three men were now standing evenly spaced before Faliol, 
though he continued to read as if they were not present. He read 
until the lantern above was extinguished, its stump of tallow 
snufled out by the middleman’s hugely knuckled stumps of flesh. 
Clasping his book closed, Faliol replaced it within the rags around 
his heart and sat perfectly still. The three men seemed to watch in a 
trance of ugsome hilarity at this slowly and solemnly executed 
sequence of actions. The face at the windowpanes merely pressed 
closer to witness what, in its view, was a soundless scene.
Some harsh words appeared to be addressed to the man in rags 
by the three men standing before him. The first of them splashed 
some ale in the spectacled face, as did the second man from his 
enormous tankard. Then more ale - this time expectorated - was 
received by the victim as the third man’s contribution to what

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
ll7
became quite a lengthy series of petty torments. But Faliol 
remained silent and as motionless as possible, thereby expressing 
an attitude of mind and body which seemed only to provoke 
further the carnival-mad souls of the three Soldorians. As the 
moments passed, the men waxed more cruel and their torments 
more inventive. Finally, they jostled a bloody-mouthed Faliol out 
of his seat, two of them pinioned him against the planks of the wall, 
someone snatched his spectacles . . .
Two blue eyes were suddenly revealed: they firmly clenched 
themselves closed, then reopened as if bursting out of black depths 
and into the light. FalioPs mouth stretched wide to let out a 
perfectly silent scream or one beyond human hearing -  the scream 
of a mute under torture. But very soon his features relaxed, while 
his ragged chest began pumping up and down with an even 
rhythm.
The one who had taken FalioPs spectacles had turned away and 
his clumsy fingers were fiddling with delicate silver stems, fumbling 
with two shadowy lenses that were more precious than he knew. 
Thus amused and diverted, he did not perceive that Faliol was 
terrifying both of his companions out of their wits, that they had 
loosened their grasp on him, and that he had drawn his dagger 
from its shoulder-sheath.
“Where—” he started to shout to his loutish comrades as they 
ran bleeding from the hostelry’s horror. Then he turned about-face 
to feel Faliol’s sword against his greasy leather doublet. He saw, he 
must have seen, that the blade was unclean but very sharp; and he 
must have felt it scrape playfully against the chain-mail vest 
concealed beneath his doublet’s sorry cover. Soon Faliol was 
lowering his blade until it reached the spot where the vest’s 
protection no longer protected. “Now put them on, that you 
might see,” he quietly instructed the giant with the pair of tiny 
toy spectacles. “Put . . . them . . . on,” he said in a calm, dead 
voice.
The giant, his lip-licking tongue visibly parched, obeyed the 
command.
Everyone in the room leaned closer to see the giant in dark 
spectacles, and so did the well-groomed face at the hostelry 
window. Most of the men laughed -  drunkenly and anonymously
- but a few remained silent, if they did not in fact become silent, at 
this sight. “And a scholar of the wildest folly, too,” someone 
whispered. Faliol himself grinned like a demon, his eyes widening 
at his work. After a few moments he returned his sword to its 
sheath, and even so the giant held his transfixed position. Faliol

118
THOMAS LIGOTTI
put away his dagger, and the giant did not budge a hair. A 
hopeless paralytic, he stood with arms hanging limp and thick at 
his enormous flanks, slightly trembling. The giant’s face was 
extraordinarily pale, his grizzled cheeks like two mounds of snow 
that had been sown with ashes. Above them, circles of glass 
gleamed like two black suns.
All laughter had ceased by now, and many turned away from 
the unwonted spectacle. The giant’s meaty lips were opening and 
closing, very slowly and very much in the manner of a dying fish 
gasping in the dry air. But the giant, having worn Faliol’s own 
eyes, was not dying in his body: only his mind was a corpse. “The 
wildest folly,” whispered the same voice.
Gently, almost contritely, Faliol removed the spectacles from the 
face of the grotesque idol, though he waited until he was outside 
the hostelry before replacing them on his own.
“Sir,” called a voice from the shadows of the street. Faliol 
paused, but only as if considering the atmosphere of the night 
and not necessarily in response to an unknown accoster. “Please 
allow me to identify myself with the name Streldone. My messen­
ger spoke with you in Lynnese? Good, that is a blessing. Here is my 
coach, so that we need not talk in all this confusion,” he said, 
gesturing toward the jerking shadows of that carnival night. And 
when the coach began moving down streets on the circumference 
of the festivities, this expensively attired man - though he was just 
barely more than a youth -  continued to speak to a silent Faliol.
“I was informed that you had arrived in Soldori not long ago, 
and have been following you since, waiting for a discreet moment 
to approach you. Of course you were aware of my presence,” he 
said, pausing to scan Faliol’s expressionless face. “Well, but this is 
all something I know nothing about. In any event, how unfortu­
nate that you were forced to reveal yourself back in that sty of a 
drinking house. But I suppose you couldn’t allow yourself to 
undergo much more of that treatment merely for the sake of 
anonymity. No harm done, I’m sure.”
“And I am sure,” Faliol replied in a monotone, “that three very 
sad men would disagree with you.”
The young man laughed briefly at what he understood to be a 
witticism. “In any event, their kind will have their throats 
wrapped in the red cord sooner or later. The duke is quite severe 
when it comes to the lawlessness of others. Which brings me to 
what I require of you tonight, assuming that we need not bargain 
over the terms my messenger proposed to you in Lynnese. Very 
well,” said Streldone, though obviously he had been prepared to

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
I!9
haggle over the matter. But he left no pause which might have 
been filled with the second thoughts of this hired sword, who 
looked and acted more like one of the clockwork automatons which 
performed their mechanical routines high above the town square 
of Soldori. Thus, with a slow turn of his head and a set movement 
of his hand, Faliol received the jeweled pouch containing one-half 
his payment. Streldone promised that the other portion would 
follow upon the accomplishment of their night’s work, as he now 
portrayed its reasons and aims.
It seemed there was a young woman of a noble and wealthy 
family, a young woman whom Streldone loved and who loved him 
in return. At least she loved him to the point of accepting his 
proposal of marriage and cleaving to his vision of their future as 
two who would be one. But there was also another, a man who 
called himself, or who was called, Wynge. Streldone referred to 
him thereafter as the Sorcerer, by way of further severing his 
adversary from the dignity of an authentic name. As Streldone 
explained the situation, the Sorcerer had appropriated the young 
woman for himself. This unnatural feat was achieved, Streldone 
hated to say, not only with the compliance of the young woman’s 
father, but also through the powerful offices of the Duke of Soldori 
himself. Both men, according to Streldone, had been persuaded in 
this affair because the Sorcerer had promised to supply them, by 
means of alchemical transmutations of base metals into gold and 
silver, with an unending source of riches to finance their wars and 
undertakings of ambition. Without bothering to embellish the 
point, Streldone declared that his beloved, in their present state 
of separation, were two of the most wretched beings in all the world 
and two of the most deserving of assistance in their struggle to be 
reunited. And tonight Faliol must help untangle them from the 
taut, controlling strings of the Sorcerer and his compatriots in evil.
“Do I have your attention, sir?” Streldone abruptly asked.
Faliol vouchsafed his understanding of the matter by repeating 
to its last detail Streldone’s account of his plight.
“Well, I am glad to know that your wits really are in order, 
however distracted you may seem. In any event, tonight the 
Sorcerer is attending the duke’s masquerade at the palace. She 
will be with him. Help me steal her back, so that we may both 
escape from Soldori, and I will fill the empty part of that pouch.”
Faliol asked if Streldone had possessed the foresight to have 
brought along a pair of costumes to enable their entrance to the 
masquerade. Streldone, somewhat vainly, produced from the 
shadows of the coach two such costumes, one that was appropriate

120
THOMAS LIGOTTI
to a knight of the old days and the other that of a court jester of the 
same period. Faliol reached out for the wildly patterned costume 
with the jeering mask.
“But I am afraid,” said Streldone, “that I intended that 
costume for myself. The other is more suited to allow your 
sword—”
“No sword will be needed,” Faliol assured his nervous compa­
nion. “This will be everything,” he added, holding the hook-nosed 
fool’s face opposite his own.
They were now traveling in the direction of the palace, and 
Soldori’s carnival began to thicken about the wheels of Streldone’s 
coach. Gazing upon the nocturnal confusion, Faliol’s eyes were as 
dark and swirled with shadows as the raving night itself.
II 
The Story of the Spectacles
His eyes fixed and clouded as a blind man’s, the mage sat before a 
small circular table upon which a single wax taper burned in its 
plain silver stick. Illuminated by the modest flame, the surface of 
the table was inlaid with esoteric symbols, a constellation of designs 
which reduced essential forces of existence to a few, rather 
picturesque, patterns. But the mage was not occupied with 
these. He was simply listening to someone who was raving in 
the shadows of that most secret chamber. The hour was late and 
the night was without a moon: the narrow window behind the 
beardless, pallid face of the mage was a solid sheet of blackness 
gleaming in the candlelight. Every so often someone would move 
before this window, his hands running through his thick dark hair 
as he spoke, or tried to speak. Occasionally he would move toward 
the candleflame, and a glimpse could be caught of his fine attire in 
blacks and reds, his shining blue eyes, his fevered face. Calmly, the 
mage listened to the man’s wild speech.
“Not if I have become mad but of what my madness consists is 
the knowledge I seek from you. And please understand that I have 
no hopes, only a searing curiosity to riddle the corpse of my dead 
soul. As for the assertion that I have always been engaged in deeds 
which one might deem mad, I would be obliged to answer - Yes, 
countless deeds, countless mad games of flesh and steel. Having 
confessed that, I would also avow that these were sanctioned 
provocations of chaos, known in some form to the body of the 
world and even blessed by it, if the truth be spoken. But I have 
provoked another thing, a new madness which arrives from a

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
121
world that is on the wrong side of light, a madness that is 
unsanctioned and without the seal of our natural selves. It is a 
forbidden madness, a saboteur from outside the body of known 
laws. And as you know, I have been the subject of its sabotage.
“Since the madness began working its destruction, I have 
become an adept of every horror which can be thought or sensed 
or dreamed. In my dreams - have I not told you of them? - there are 
scenes of slaughter without purpose, without constraint, and 
without end. I have crept through dense forests not of trees but 
of tall pikes planted in the earth; and upon each of them a crudely 
formed head has been fixed. These heads all wear faces which 
would forever blind the one who saw them anywhere but in a 
dream. And they follow my movements not with earthly eyes but 
with shadows rolling in empty sockets. Sometimes the heads speak 
as I pass through their hideous ranks, telling me things I cannot 
bear to hear. Nor can I shut out their words, and I listen until I have 
learned the horrors of each brutal head. And the voices from their 
ragged mouths, so clear, so precise to my ears, that every word is a 
bright flash in my dreaming brain, a brilliant new coin minted for 
the treasure houses of hell. At the end of my mad dream the heads 
make an effort to . . . laugh, creating a blasphemous babble which 
echoes throughout that terrible forest. And when I awaken I find 
myself standing on some hillside where I have never been, and for a 
moment the night continues to reverberate with fading laughter.
“But did I say that I awoke? If I did, then that is only one more 
madness among many. For to awaken, as I once understood this 
miracle, means to reinherit a world of laws which for a time were 
lost, to rise into the light of the world as one falls into the darkness 
of dream. But for me there is no sense of breaking through the 
envelope of sleep, that delicate membrane which excludes merely a 
single universe while containing countless more. It seems that I 
remain a captive of these dreams, these visions. For when that one 
leaves off this one begins, each giving way to the other like a 
labyrinth of connected rooms which will never lead to freedom 
beyond their strange walls. And for all that I can know, I am even 
now the inhabitant of such a room, and at any moment -  I beg 
forgiveness, wise man - you may begin to disembowel weeping 
children before my eyes and smear their entrails upon the floor so 
that in them you may read my future, a future without escape from 
those heads, that hillside, and from what comes after.
“There is a citadel in which I am a prisoner and which holds 
within it a type of school, a school of torture. Ceremonial 
stranglers, their palms grooved by the red cord, stalk the corridors

122
THOMAS LIGOTTI
of this place or lie snoring in its shadows, dreaming of perfect 
throats. Artists of mayhem curse softly as their mutilated canvasses 
prematurely expire of their elegant lacerations. And somewhere 
the master carnefex, the supreme inquisitor waits as I am dragged 
across crude, incredibly crude floors and am presented to his 
rolling, witless eyes. Then my arms, my legs, everything is 
shackled, and I am screaming to die while the Torture of the 
Question . . .”
“Enough,” said the mage without raising his voice.
“Enough,” the madman repeated. “And so have I said num­
berless times. But there is no end, there is no hope. And this endless, 
hopeless torment incites me with a desire to turn its power on 
others, even to dream of turning it on all. To see the world drown 
in oceans of agony is the only vision which now brings me any relief 
from my madness, from a madness which is not of this world” 
“Though neither is it of any other world,” said the mage in the 
same quiet voice.
‘But I have also had visions of butchering the angels,” replied 
the madman, as if to argue the absolute hopelessness of his mania.
“You have envisioned precisely what you believe you have not 
envisioned. But how could you have known this, when it is the 
nature of what you have seen - this anima mundi of the oldest 
philosophers and alchemists - to deceive and to pose as the soul of 
another world, not the soul of the world we know? There is only 
one world and one soul of that world, which appears in beauty or 
in boredom or in madness according to how deeply anima mundi has 
revealed itself to you. It is something which is not there when you 
look and there again when you look away.”
“You speak as if it were a god or demon.”
“There is no other or truer way. Like god or demon, it is an 
assemblage of ourselves though not of ourselves alone. But no 
further words now,” finished the mage.
He then instructed the madman to seat himself at the table of 
arcane designs and to wait there with his eyes calmly closed. And 
for what remained of that moonless night the mage worked secretly 
in another part of his house, returning to the wretched dreamer 
just before dawn. In one of his hands was the product of his labors: 
a pair of strangely darkened spectacles, as if they had shadows 
sealed within them.
“Do not open your unhappy eyes, my friend, but listen to my 
words. I know the visions you have known, for they are visions I 
was born to know. There are eyes within our eyes, and when these 
others open all becomes confusion and horror. The meaning of my

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
123
long life consists of the endeavor to seize and settle these visions, 
until my natural eyes themselves have altered in accordance with 
them. Now, for what reasons I cannot say, anima mundi has revealed 
itself to you in its most savage aspect; which is to say, its secret face. 
Thus, your life will never again be as you have known it. All the 
pleasures of the past are now defiled, all your hopes violated 
beyond hope. There are things which only madmen fear because 
only madmen may truly conceive of them. Your world is presently 
black with the scars of madness, but you must make it blacker still 
in order to find any soundness or peace. You have seen both too 
much and not enough. Through the shadow-fogged lenses of these 
spectacles, you will be blinded so that you may see with greater 
sight. Through their darkly clouded glass the lesser madness of 
anima mundi will diffuse into the infinite, all-penetrating vision of 
things in which madness is the sole substance and thereby becomes 
absent and meaningless for its very ubiquity and absolute mean­
ing. But what would murder another man’s mind will bring yours 
peace, while making you a puppet of peace rather than its prince.
“Henceforth, all things will be in your eyes a distant play of 
shadows that fretfully strive to impersonate something real, ghosts 
that clamor to pass themselves as flesh, masks that desperately flit 
about to conceal the stillness of the void behind them -  henceforth, 
all things will be reduced in your eyes to their inconsequential 
essence. And all that once shined for you -  the steel, the stars, the 
eyes of another - will lose its luster and take its place among the 
other shadows. All will be dulled in the power of your vision, which 
will give you to see that the greatest power, the only power, is to 
care for nothing.
“Please know that this is the only way I may help you, for my life 
has taught me that no single soul may be restored where there is no 
hope of restoring the soul of the world itself. One final word: you 
must never be without these spectacles or your furies will return to 
you. There, now you may open your eyes.”
Faliol sat very still for some time. At first he did not notice that 
one of the mage’s own eyes was closed, covered by a sagging eyelid. 
What at last he saw this and perceived the sacrifice, he said, “And 
how may I serve you, wise man?”
In the window behind the two seated figures, the dull light of 
dawn was grappling with the darkness of the past night, with the 
shadows that seemed almost to be clinging to the window’s glass, or 
were sealed within it.

124
THOMAS LIGOTTI
m  
Anima Mundi
While the revelers in the streets of Soldori remedied their dis­
contents by throwing ofT the everyday face of orthodoxy, those 
attending the masquerade at the duke’s palace found their 
deliverance by donning other faces, other bodies, and perhaps 
other souls. The anonymity of that night - no unmasking was 
expected to be held - enabled a multitude of sins against taste, 
from the most subtle to the most grotesque indiscretions. The 
society of the court had transformed itself into a race of gods or 
monsters, competing at once with the brightest and highest of stars 
and the strangest of the world’s lower creatures. Many would 
undoubtedly spend the succeeding days or weeks in darkened 
rooms behind closed doors, so that the effects their disguises had 
wrought on their bodies might be known to none. For a few rare 
spirits, this by necessity would be their last appearance in the eyes 
of the court before a final seclusion. All were quite clearly arrayed 
as if something unparalleled, and possibly conclusive, was to occur 
that night. Musicians played in several of the palace’s most 
sumptuous and shimmering halls, glittering glasses were filled 
by fountains of unnaturally colored wine, and maskers swarmed 
about like living gargoyles freed from the cathedral’s stone. All, or 
nearly all, were straining from some unheard of antic, suffering the 
pleasures of expectancy.
But as the hours passed, hopes dissolved. The duke - in essence a 
simple man, even a dull one - took no initiative to unloose the 
abundant possibilities of the masquerade; and, as if secretly aware 
of these perilous directions, he restrained the efforts of others to 
pursue them, to digress from the night’s steadily unwinding course. 
No coaxing could sway him: he allowed several odd witticisms to 
pass unacknowledged, and he feigned that certain dubious sugges­
tions and proposals were obscure to his mind. Unnourished by any 
source in the duke’s own nature, every attempt at innovation 
curled at its colourful edges and died. The initial strangeness of the 
masked gathering went stale: voices began to sound as though they 
were transacting business of some tedious sort, and even the sight of 
a jester, albeit one with darkness within the eyes of his mask, 
offered no special merriment to this sullen assembly.
Accompanying the jester, who made no lively movements, was a 
knight out of armor, dressed in radiant blues and golds, a 
crusader’s cross emblazoned upon his chest, and over his face a 
white silk mask of blandly noble expression. The odd duo pro­

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
*25
gressed from room to dazzling, crowded room of the palace, as if 
they were negotiating a thick wood in search of something or 
someone. The knight appeared nervous, his hand too obviously 
ready to go for the sword at his side, his head patrolling with 
skittish alertness the bizarre world around him. The jester, on the 
other hand, was altogether more composed and methodical, and 
with excellent reason: he knew, as the knight did not, that their 
purpose was not a difficult one, especially as they would enjoy the 
complicity of Wynge himself, whom the knight had called the 
Sorcerer and whom the jester addressed as a wise man mage. Had 
Faliol not been invited to Soldori by a certain messenger who 
served two masters? And was not Wynge eager to release himself 
from the unhappy girl who had sought his advice in a certain 
matter (such innocence he could hardly believe still existed in the 
world) and who became a pawn in her father and the duke’s game? 
For himself he was unconcerned, but they had also placed the girl’s 
fate in his hands. Once she was out of the scene, these two men, 
both emulous of a god’s glory, would lose the power with which 
they manipulated the mage, whose retorts and formulas they 
wanted to provide them with magical riches. Under the present 
circumstances, the knight might easily regain his beloved, and the 
jester would finally make good a debt, settling the price he owed 
for a pair of spectacles.
The two characters paused at the hugely arched entrance to the 
last, and most intimate, of the masquerade’s many rooms. Pulling 
at the knight’s golden sleeve, the jester angled his pointed, sneering 
muzzle toward a costumed pair in the far corner. These distant 
figures were impersonating two monarchs of the old days, a king 
and queen in ancient robes and stoles and many-horned crowns.
“How can you be sure that they are the ones?” whispered the 
knight to the buffoon at his side.
“Boldly approach and take her hand. You will be sure, but say 
nothing until you have led yourselves back through these rooms 
and to freedom.”
“But the Sorcerer,” objected the knight. “He could have us both 
executed.”
“All is safe. While I engage him as the king’s jester, you will 
make ofT with the queen. Trust that what I tell is true.”
“I do trust you,” said the knight, as he surreptitiously stufTed a 
jeweled pouch twice the size of the first into the belt of the jester.
The two characters separated and merged with the murmuring 
crowd. A few moments later, the jester arrived first at their 
destination. From a distance he seemed to speak a few words

126
THOMAS LIGOTTI
into the king’s ear and then suddenly leaped back to play the fool 
before him, hopping about wildly. The knight bowed before the 
queen and then without ostentation led her away to other rooms. 
Although her masked face smothered all expression, the manner in 
which she placed her hand upon his appeared to reveal her 
knowledge of the knight’s identity. After they had gone, the jester 
ceased his antics and approached the stern and statue-like king.
“I shall watch the duke’s men around us, who may have been 
watching you, wise man.”
“And I shall see that our two little babes find their way through 
the forest,” replied the mock-monarch, who abruptly strode off.
But that was not part of your design, thought Faliol. And neither was 
the pseudo-king’s playful voice that of the solemn mage. The dark 
eyes of the jester’s mask followed the movements of the imposter, 
until he passed through the hugely arched entrance and became 
lost in the dreamlike throng of the next room. Faliol had just 
started in pursuit when a strange commotion in another part of the 
palace swiftly conveyed its anxieties and rumors through all the 
rooms of the masquerade.
But now that something unheard of had finally occurred, it 
seemed neither to delight nor relieve any of those same souls who 
had wished for a unique happening on that carnival night.
The disturbance originated in the centermost room of that 
labyrinth of rooms composing the arena of the masquerade. To 
the surrounding as well as the peripheral rooms, including the one 
in which Faliol was now caught by the crushing crowd, there first 
traveled sounds of sudden amusement. These were quickly trans­
formed, however, into ambiguous outbursts of surprise, even 
shock. Finally, the uproar took on the character of intense horror 
- all voices in alarm and confusion, all movements alarmed and 
confused. Word passed rapidly, though less and less reliably, from 
mouth to mouth, room to room. Something terrible had hap­
pened, something which had begun, or was initially perceived, as a 
fabulous hoax. No one knew exactly how it was possible, but there 
suddenly appeared in the midst of the most populated room some 
outlandish spectacle: two gruesome figures whose costumes went 
far beyond anything previously displayed at the masque. Someone 
said they were most closely akin to giant leeches or worms, for they 
did not walk upright but writhed along the floor. Another had 
heard that the creatures possessed countless tiny legs, and thus 
more properly resembled centipedes of some type. Still others 
contributed further characteristics - many-taloned claws, repti­
lian tails, near-human faces - which made up the composition of

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
127
the fantastic beasts. But whatever may have been the initial 
reaction to these, presumably artificial, creatures - at some point 
they inspired the crowd with unreasoning panic. And however the 
subsequent actions may have transpired, the consequence was that 
these bizarre intruders were hacked and torn and trampled 
beyond recognition by the frenzied, nightmarish gathering.
Tragically, once the massacre was accomplished, it was not the 
slaughtered remains of two uncanny monsters that the masquer­
aders - their masks removed - looked down upon. Instead, it was 
two of their own - a knight and queen of the old days - whose 
blood was spreading across the intricate designs of the palace floor. 
Their bodies, once so far from each other, were now all but 
indistinguishable.
Throwing ofT his jester’s face, Faliol worked himself near enough 
to the scene to confirm the horror with his own shaded eyes, merely 
to confirm it. For the image delivered to his mind immediately 
took its place among the seamless and unending flow of hellish 
eidola which constituted anima mundi and which, in his vision, was a 
monotonous tapestry of the terrible ceaselessly unfurling itself in 
the faintest tones of shadowy gray. Thus, the appalling tableau he 
now witnessed was neither more nor less sinister in his sight than 
any other which the world might show him.
“Look again, Fa-fa-faliol,” said a voice behind him, as a forceful 
boot propelled him within inches of the carnage.
But why was everything painted so brilliantly now, when a 
moment ago it seemed so dull, so unspectacular? Why did every 
piece of severed flesh quiver with color? And even more vividly 
than their red-smeared forms did the horrible fates of these 
unhappy beings affect Faliol’s mind and feelings. He had been 
hired to save them and he could do . . . nothing. His thoughts were 
now careening wildly through crimson corridors within him, 
madly seeking solutions but falling at every turn into blind corners 
and flailing hopelessly against something immovable, impossible. 
He pressed his hands over his face, hoping to blacken the radiant 
scene. But everything remained invincibly there before his eyes - 
everything save his spectacles.
Now the duke’s voice broke the brief lull of the dazed and 
incredulous assembly. It shouted orders, demanded answers. It 
proclaimed the ruler’s prophetic misgivings concerning the mas­
querade and its dangers: he had long known that something of this 
nature might occur, and had done what he could to prevent its 
coming to pass. On the spot, he outlawed all future occasions of this 
kind and called for arrests and interrogations, the Torture of the

128
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Question to be liberally implemented. Exodus was instantaneous - 
the palace became a chaos of fleeing freaks.
“Faliol!” called a voice that sounded too clear, within all the 
confusion, to have its origin outside his own mind. “I have what 
you’re looking for. They’re with me now, right here in my hand, 
not lost forever.”
When Faliol turned around, he saw the masked king standing 
some distance away, unmolested by the frantic mob. The king’s 
hand was holding out the spectacles, as if they were the dangling 
head of a conquered foe. Fighting his way toward the unknown 
persecutor, Faliol continued to remain several steps behind him as 
he was led by this demon through all the rooms where the 
masquerade once flourished, and then deeper into the palace. 
At the end of a long silent corridor, the gaudy, flapping train of a 
royal robe disappeared into a doorway. Faliol followed the 
fluttering bait and at last entered a dim chamber with a single 
window, before which stood the mummer in a sparkling silk mask. 
The spectacles were still held by the velvet fingers of a tightly 
gloved hand. Watching as the dark lenses flashed in the candle­
light, Faliol’s eyes burned as much with questions as with madness. 
“Where is the mage?” he demanded.
“The mage is no more. Quickly, what else?”
“Who are you?”
“Wasted question, you know who I am. What else?”
“What are you?”
“Another one like the other. Say I’m a sorcerer, very well?” 
“And you killed the mage as you did the others.”
“The others? How could you have not heard that rattling 
pantomime, all those swords and swift feet? Didn’t you hear that 
there was a pair of leviathan leeches, or something in that way, 
menacing the guests? True, I had a hand in the illusion, but my 
hand contained no gouging blade. A shambles, you saw it with 
your own eyes.”
“In their fate you saw your own future. Even a sorcerer may be 
killed.”
“Agreed, even a sorcerer with three eyes, or two eyes, or one.” 
“Who are you to have destroyed the mage?”
“In fact, he destroyed himself - an heroic act, I’m sure - some 
days ago. And he did it before my own eyes, as if in spite. As for 
myself, I confess that I’m disappointed to be so far beneath your 
recognition. We have met previously, please remember. But it was 
many years past, and I suppose you became forgetful as well as 
dim-sighted once you put those pieces of glass over your eyes. You

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
129
see why the mage had to be stopped. He ruined you as a madman, 
as my madman.
“But you might recall that you had another career before the 
madness took you, did you not? Buh-buh-brave Faliol. Don’t you 
remember how you were made that way? Don’t you wish to 
remember that you were Faliol the dandy before we met on the 
road that day? It was I - in my role as a charmseller - who 
outfitted you with that onyx-eyed amulet which you once wore 
around your neck, and which made you the skillful mercenary you 
once were. That you loved to be.
“And how everyone else loved you that way: to see a weakling 
transformed into a man of strength and of steel is the stuff of public 
comment, of legend, of the crowd’s amusement. And how much more 
do they love to witness the reverse of this magical process: to see the 
mighty laid low, the lord of the sword made mad. This was the 
little drama I had planned. You were supposed to be my madman, 
Faliol, not the placid fool of that magician - a real lost soul of 
torments in red and black, not a pathetic monk chanting silent 
psalms in pale breaths. Don’t you understand? It was that Wynge, 
or whatever his name was, who ruined you, who undid all my 
schemes for your tragic and colorful history. Because of him I had 
to change my plans and chase you down to this place. Blame him, 
if anyone, for the slaughter of those innocents and for what you are 
about to suffer. You know my ways, we are not strangers.”
“No, demon horror, we are not. You are indeed the foul thing 
the wise man described to me, all the dark powers which we cannot 
understand but can only hate.”
“Powers? At least the magician spoke of me as a being, albeit a 
type of god or demon. But I might even be regarded as a person of 
sorts, someone who is just like everybody else, but not quite like 
anyone. I honor him for his precise vision, as far as it went. But 
you’re wrong to contend that no one understands me; and as for 
hating the one who stands before you - nothing, in truth, could be 
farther from truth. Listen, do you hear those brawling voices in the 
streets beyond the window. Those are not voices filled with hate. 
In fact, they could not possibly hold a greater love for me. And 
reciprocally I love them, every one of them: all I do is for them. Did 
you think that my business was the exceptional destinies of heroes 
and magicians, of kings and queens, saints and sinners, of all the so- 
called great? Such extravagant freaks come and go, they are 
puppets who dance before the eternal eyes of my true children. 
Only in these multitudes do I live, and through their eyes I see my 
own glory.”

i3o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“You see but your own foulness.”
“No, the foulness is yours alone to see, Faliol. You see something 
that, for them, truly does not exist. This is a privileged doom 
reserved for creatures such as yourself. A type of consolation.”
“You have said enough.”
“Liar! You know that you wish my speech to go on, because you 
fear what will happen when I stop speaking. But I haven’t said 
what I came here to say, or rather to ask. You know the question, 
don’t deny it, Faliol. The one you dreamed in those dreams that 
were not dreams. The torture of the question you dreaded to hear 
asked, and dreaded more to have answered.”
“Demon!”
“What is the face of the soul of the world?”
“No, it is not a face . .. it is only—”
“Yes, Faliol, it is this face,” said the masked figure as it peeled 
away its mask. “But why have you hidden your eyes that way, 
Faliol? And why have you fallen to your knees? Don’t you 
appreciate the vision I’ve shown you? Could you ever have 
imagined that your life would lead you into the presence of such 
a sight? Your spectacles cannot save you now, now that you have 
seen. They are only so much glinting glass - there, listen to how 
they crunch into smaller and smaller fragments upon the fine, cool 
marble of the floor. No more spectacles, no more magic, no more 
magician. And I think, too, no more Faliol. Can you understand 
what I’m telling you now, jester? Well, what have you got to say? 
Nothing? How black your madness must be to make you so rude a 
buffoon. How black. But see, even though you cannot, how I’ve 
provided these escorts to show you the way back to the carnival, 
which is where a fool belongs. And be sure that you make my 
favorite little children laugh, or I will punish you. Yes, I can still 
punish you, Faliol. A living man can always be punished, so 
remember to be good. I will be watching. I am always watch­
ing. Farewell, then, fool.”
A glazen-eyed guard on either side of him, Faliol was dragged 
from the duke’s palace and given to the crowd which still rioted in 
the streets of Soldori. And the crowd embraced the mad, sightless 
jester, hoisting his jingling form upon their shoulders and shaking 
him like a toy as they carried him along. In its scheme to strangle 
silence forever, Soldori’s unruled populus bellowed a robust refrain 
to Faliol’s sickly moans. And his blind eyes gazed up at an onyx- 
black night which they could not see, which his vanished mind 
could no longer comprehend.
But there must have been some moment, however brief, in

MASQUERADE OF A DEAD SWORD
which Faliol regained his old enlightenment and which allowed 
him to accomplish such a crucial and triumphant action. Was it 
solely by his own sleeping strength, fleetingly aroused, that he 
attained his greatest prize? If not, then what power could have 
enabled his trembling hands to reach so deeply into those haggard 
sockets, and with a gesture brave and sure dig out the awful seeds 
of his suffering? However it was done, the deed was done well. For 
as Faliol perished his face was flushed with a crimson glory.
And the crowd fell silent, and a new kind of confusion spread 
among them - those heads which were always watching - when it 
was found that what they were bearing through the streets of 
Soldori was only Faliol’s victorious corpse.

DR. VOKE AND 
MR. VEECH
here is a stairway. It climbs crooked up the side of total
darkness. Yet its outlines are visible, like a scribble of light­
ning engraved upon a black sky. And though standing unsup­
ported, it does not fall. Nor does it end its jagged ascent until it has 
reached the obscure loft where Voke, the recluse, has cloistered 
himself. Someone named Cheev is making his way up the stairway, 
which seems to trouble him somehow. Though the angular 
scaffolding as a whole is secure enough, Cheev appears hesitant 
to place his full weight on the individual steps. A victim of vague 
misgivings, he ascends in weird mincing movements. Every so 
often he looks back over his shoulder at the stairs he has just 
stepped upon, as if expecting to see the imprints of his soles there, 
as if the stairs are not made of solid wood but molded of soft clay. 
But the stairs are unchanged.
Cheev is wearing a long, brightly colored coat. The huge 
splinters on the railing of the stairway sometimes snag his bulky 
sleeves. They also snag his bony hands, but Cheev is more 
exasperated by the destruction of expensive cloth than undear 
flesh. While climbing, he sucks at a small puncture in his forefinger 
to keep from staining his coat with blood. At the seventeenth stair 
above the seventeenth, and last, landing - he trips. The long tails of 
the coat become tangled between Cheev*s legs and there is a 
ripping sound as he falls. At the end of his patience, Cheev 
removes the coat and flings it over the side of the stairway into 
the black abyss. Cheev’s arms and legs are very thin.
There is only a single door at the top of the stairs. Behind it is 
Voke’s loft, which appears to be a cross between a playroom and a 
place of torture. No doubt Cheev notices this when, with five 
widely splayed fingers pushing against the door, he enters.
The darkness and silence of the great room are compromised 
only by noisy jets of blue-green light flickering spasmodically along 
the walls. But for the most part the room lies buried in shadows.

DR. YOKE AND MR. VEECH
*33
Even its exact height is uncertain, since above the convulsive 
illumination almost nothing can be seen by even the sharpest 
pair of eyes, never mind Cheev’s squinting little slits. Part of the 
lower cagework of the crisscrossing rafters is visible, but the ceiling 
is entirely obscured, if in fact Voke’s sanctum has been provided 
with one.
Somewhere above the gritty floor, more than a few life-size dolls 
hang suspended by wires which gleam and look gummy like wetted 
strands of a spider web. But none of the dolls is seen in whole: the 
long-beaked profile of one juts into the light; the shiny satin legs of 
another find their way out of the upper dimness; a beautifully pale 
hand glows in the distance; while much closer the better part of a 
harlequin dangles into view, cut off at the neck by blackness. Much 
of the inventory of this vast room appears only as parts and pieces 
of objects which manage to push their way out of the smothering 
dark. Upon the grainy floor, a long low box thrusts a corner of itself 
into the scene, showing off reinforced edges of bright metal strips 
plugged with heavy bolts. Pointed and strangely shaped instru­
ments bloom out of the loam of shadows; they are crusted with . . . 
age. A great wheel appears at quarterphase in the room’s night. 
Other sections, appendages, and gear-works of curious machines 
complicate this immense gallery.
As Cheev progresses through the half-light, he is suddenly halted 
by a metal arm with a soft black handle. He backs off and 
continues to shuffle through the chamber, grinding sawdust, 
sand, perhaps pulverized stars underfoot. The dismembered limbs 
of dolls and puppets are strewn about the floor, drained of their 
stuffings. Posters, signs, billboards, and leaflets of various sorts are 
scattered around like playing cards, their bright words disarranged 
into nonsense. Countless other objects, devices, and leftover goods 
stock the room, more than one could possibly take notice of. But 
they are all, in some way, like those which have been described. 
One wonders, then, how they could all add up to such an 
atmosphere o f. . . isn’t repose the word? Yes, but a certain kind 
of repose: the repose of ruin.
“Voke,” Cheev calls out. “Doctor, are you here?”
Within the darkness ahead a tall rectangle suddenly appears, 
like a ticket-seller’s booth at a carnival. The lower part is 
composed of wood and the upper part of glass; its interior is lit 
up by an oily red glare. Slumped forward on its seat inside the 
booth, as if asleep, is a well-dressed dummy: nicely-fitting black 
jacket and vest with bright silver buttons, a white high-collar shirt 
with silver cufflinks, and a billowing cravat which displays a

134
THOMAS LIGOTTI
pattern of moons and stars. Because his head is forwardly inclined, 
the dummy’s only feature of note is the black sheen of its painted 
hair.Cheev approaches the booth a little cautiously. He fails to 
notice, or considers irrelevant, the inanimate character of the 
figure inside. Through a semi-circular opening in the glass, Cheev 
slides his hand into the booth, apparently with the intention of 
giving the dummy’s arm a shake. But before his own arm creeps 
very far toward its goal, several things occur in succession: the 
dummy casually lifts its head and opens its eyes . .. it reaches out 
and places its wooden hand on Cheev’s hand of flesh . . . and its 
jaw drops open to dispense a mechanical laugh - yah-ha-ha-ha-ha, 
yah-ha-ha-ha-ha.
Wresting his hand away from the lurid dummy, Cheev staggers 
backward a few chaotic steps. The dummy continues to give forth 
its mocking laughter, which flaps its way into every niche of the 
evil loft and flies back as peculiar echoes. The dummy’s face is 
vacant and handsome; its eyes roll like mad marbles. Then, from 
out of the shadows behind the dummy’s booth, steps a figure that is 
every bit as thin as Cheev, though much taller. His outfit is not 
unlike the dummy’s, but the clothes hang on him, and what there 
is left of his sparse hair falls like old rags across his bone-white 
scalp.
“Did you ever wonder, Mr. Veech,” Voke begins, parading 
slowly toward his guest while holding one side of his coat like the 
train of a gown, “did you ever wonder what it is that makes the 
animation of a wooden dummy so horrible to see, not to mention to 
hear. Listen to it, I mean really listen. Ya-ha-ha-ha-ha: a stupid 
series of sounds that becomes excruciatingly eloquent when uttered 
by the Ticket Man. They are a species of poetry that sings what 
should not be sung, that speaks what should not be spoken. But 
what in the world is it laughing about. Nothing, it would seem. No 
clear motives or impulses make the dummy laugh, and yet it does! 
Ya-ha-ha-ha-ha, just as pure and as evil as can be.
“ ‘What is this laughter for?’ you might be wondering, Mr. 
Veech. It seems to be for your ears alone, doesn’t it? It seems to be 
directed at every nameless secret of your being. It seems . . . 
knowing. And it is knowing, but in another way from what you 
suppose, in another direction entirely. It is not you the dummy 
knows, it is only itself. The question is not: ‘What is the laughter 
for,’ not at all. The question is: ‘Where does it come from?’ This is 
the thing of real horror, in fact. The dummy terrorizes you, while 
he is really the one in terror.

DR. VOKE AND MR. VEECH
*35
“Think of it: wood waking up. I can’t put it any clearer than that. 
And let’s not forget the paint for the hair and lips, the glass for the 
eyes. These too are aroused from a sleep that should never have 
been broken; these too are now part of a tingling network of 
dummy-nerves, alive and aware in a way we cannot begin to 
imagine. This is something too painful for tears and so the dummy 
laughs in your face, trying to give vent to an evil that was no part of 
his old home of wood and paint and glass. But this evil is now the 
very essence of its new home - our world, Mr. Veech. This is what 
is so horrible about the laughing Ticket Man. Go to sleep now, 
dummy. There, he has his nice silence back. Be glad I didn’t make 
one that screams, Mr. Veech. And be glad the dummy is, after all, 
just a device.
“Well, to what do I owe your presence here today. It is day, isn’t 
it, or very close to it?”
“Yes, it is,” replies Cheev.
“Good, I like to keep abreast of things. What’s your latest?” 
Voke inquires, proceeding to saunter slowly about and admiring 
the clutter of his loft.
Cheev leans back against a vague mound of indefinable objects 
and stares at the floor. He sounds drowsy. “I wouldn’t have come 
here, but I didn’t know what else to do. How can I tell you? The 
past days and nights, especially the nights, like icy hells. I suppose I 
should say that there is someone . . . ”
“Whom you have taken a liking to,” Voke finishes.
“Yes, but then there is someone else . . .”
“Who is somehow an obstacle, someone whose existence helps to 
insure that your nights will be frosty ones. This seems very 
straightforward. Tell me, what is her name, the first someone?” 
“Prena,” answers Cheev after some hesitation.
“And his, the second.”
“Lamm, but why do you need their names to help me?” 
“Their names, like your name, and mine for that matter, are of 
no actual importance. I was just maintaining a polite interest in 
your predicament, nothing more. As for helping you, that assumes 
I have some control over this situation, which thankfully I don’t.” 
“But I thought,” stammers Cheev, “the loft, your devices, you 
seem to have a certain . . . knowledge.”
“Like the dummy’s knowledge? You shouldn’t have depended 
on it. Now you just have one more disappointment to contend 
with. One more pain. But listen, can’t you just stick it out? For one 
reason or another, you could end up forgetting all about this 
Prena, this Lamm; you might come to realize that they are merely

13 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
two shadows sewn together by their own delirium. It’s something 
to consider. Anything can happen in this world of ours.”
“I can’t wait any more, Doctor,” says Cheev in a nervous, 
shadowy voice.
“Well, you know what they say: Something is no worse than 
something or other with your own shadow. I forget exactly how it 
goes.”
“I am my own shadow,” Cheev replies.
“Yes, I can see that. Listen now, let us speak hypothetically for a 
moment. Are you familiar with the Street of Wavering Peaks? I 
know it has a more common name, but I like to call it that because 
of all those tall, slanty houses.”
Cheev nods to indicate that he too knows the street.
“Well - and I promise nothing, remember, I make no pledges or 
vows - but if you can somehow manage to bring both of your 
friends through that street tonight, I think there might be a 
solution to your problem, if you really want one. Do you mind 
what form the solution takes?”
Cheev timidly turns his head side to side, meaning he does not 
mind.
“You really are serious, aren’t you?”
Cheev says nothing in reply. Voke shrugs and gradually fades 
back to his point of origin within the deepest shadows of the room. 
The red light in the booth of the Ticket Man also fades like a setting 
sun, until the only color left in the room is the ultramarine of the 
flames burning on the walls. Cheev continues to gaze into the upper 
reaches of the loft for a few more moments, as if he can already see 
the slender rooftops of the houses in the Street of Wavering Peaks.
By night, façades of the houses on either side of this narrow street 
are fused, as if cut from a single piece of very old cardboard. 
Bonded by shadows and plastered together by moonlight, one 
house undulates into the next. Aside from their foundations and a 
few floors with shuttered windows, they are all roof. Splendidly 
they rise into the night, often reaching fantastic altitudes. At angles 
determined by an unknown system of forces and fixed forever on 
destiny’s tilt, they fall into and across the sky.
Tonight the sky is a swamp of murky clouds glowing in the false 
fire of the moon. From the direction of the street’s arched 
entranceway, three approaching figures are preceded by three 
elongated shadows. One figure walks ahead, leading the way but 
lacking the proper gestures of knowledge and authority. Behind 
are the shapes of a man and a woman, side by side with only a slice 
of evening’s soft radiance between them.

DR. YOKE AND MR. VEECH
*37
Toward the end of the street, the leading figure stops and the 
other two catch up with him. They are now all three standing 
outside one of the loftiest of the peaked houses. This house appears 
also to serve as a business of some kind, since a large sign, which 
swings a little in the wind and is muddled by shadows, displays a 
painted picture of the goods or services sold there: a pair of tongs, 
or something similar, laying crosswise upon what is perhaps a 
poker, or some other lengthy implement. But the business is closed 
for the night and the shutters are secured. A round attic window 
high above seems to be no more than an empty socket, though 
from the street - where the three figures have assumed the 
tentative postures of somnambulists - it is difficult to tell exactly 
what things are like up there. And now a fog begins to cut ofT their 
gaze from the upper regions of the Street of Wavering Peaks.
Cheev looks vaguely distressed, apparently unsure just how 
much longer they should loiter in this place. Not being privy to 
what is supposed to occur, if anything, what action should he take? 
All he can do at the moment is stall. But everything is soon brought 
to a conclusion, very quickly yet without a sense of haste or 
violence.
One moment Cheev is drowsily conversing with his two com­
panions, both of them looking sternly suspicious at this point; the 
next moment it is as if they are two puppets who have been 
whisked upwards on invisible strings, into the fog and out of sight. 
It all happens so suddenly that they do not make a sound, though a 
little later there are faint, hollow screams from high above. Cheev 
has fallen to his knees and is covering his face with his bony hands.
Two went up, but only one comes down, suspended a few inches 
from the ground and swinging a little in the wind. Cheev uncovers 
his eyes and looks at the thing. Yes, there is only one, but this one 
has too many . . . there is too much of everything on this body. 
Two faces sharing a single head, two mouths that have fallen silent 
forever with parted lips. The thing continues to hang in the air 
even after Cheev has completely collapsed on the Street of 
Wavering Peaks.
Voke’s next meeting with Cheev is as unexpected as the last one. 
There is a disturbance in the loft, and the rigid recluse lugs his 
bones out of the shadows to investigate. What he sees is Cheev and 
the Ticket Man both screaming with laughter. Their cachinna- 
tions stir up the stagnant air of the loft; they are two maniac twins 
crying and cackling with a single voice.
“What’s going on here, Mr. Veech?” demands Yoke.

138
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Cheev ignores him and continues his laughing duet with the 
dummy. Even after Voke touches the booth and says, “Go to sleep, 
dummy,” Cheev still laughs all by himself, as if he too is an 
automaton without control over his actions. Voke knocks Cheev to 
the floor, which seems to hit the right mechanism to shut off his 
voice. At least he is quiet for a few moments. Then he raises his eyes 
from the floor and glares up at Voke.
“Why did you have to do that to them?” he asks with a deeply 
stricken reproachfulness. His voice is rough from all that laughter; 
it sounds like grinding machinery.
“I’m not going to pretend I don’t know what you’re talking 
about. I have heard about what happened, not that I should care. 
But you can’t hold me responsible, Mr. Veech. I never leave my 
loft, you know that. However, you’re perfectly free to go, if you go 
now. Haven’t you caused me enough trouble! ”
“Why did it have to happen like that?” Cheev protests.
“How should I know? You said you didn’t mind what form the 
solution to your problem took. Besides, I think it all worked out for 
the best. Those two were making a fool of you, Mr. Veech. They 
wanted each other and now they have each other, so to speak, 
while you are free to move on to your next disaster. Wait one 
moment, I know what’s bothering you,” says Voke with sudden 
enlightenment. “You’re distressed because it all ended up with 
their demise and not yours. Death is always the best thing, Mr. 
Veech, but who would have thought you could appreciate such a 
view? I’ve underestimated you, no doubt about it. My apologies.” 
“No,” screams Cheev, quivering like a sick animal. Voke now 
becomes excited.
“No? Noooo? What is the matter with you, young friend? Why 
do you set me up for these disappointments? I’ve had quite 
enough without your adding to the heap. Take a lesson from the 
Ticket Man here. Do you see him whining? No, he is silent, he is 
still. A dummy’s silence is the most soothing silence of all, and his 
stillness is the perfect stillness of the unborn. He could be making 
a fuss, but he isn’t. And it is precisely his lack of action, his 
unfulfilled nature that makes him the ideal companion, my only 
true friend it seems. Dead wood, I adore you. Look at how his 
hands rest upon his lap in empty prayer. Look at the noble 
bearing of his collapsed and powerless limbs. Look at his numb 
lips muttering nothing, and look at those eyes - how they gaze on 
and on forever!”
Voke takes a closer look at the dummy’s eyes, and his own begin 
to lower with dark intentness. He leans against the booth for the

DR. YOKE AND MR. VEECH
139
closest possible scrutiny, his hands adhering to the glass as if by the 
force of some powerful suction. Inside the booth, the dummy’s eyes 
have changed. They are now dripping little drops of blood, which 
appear black in the red haze surrounding him.
Voke pulls himself away from the booth and turns to Cheev.
“You’ve been tampering with him!” he bellows as best he can.
Cheev blinks a few leftover tears of false laughter out of his eyes, 
and his lips form a true smile. “I didn’t do a thing,” he whispers 
mockingly. “Don’t blame me for your troubles!”
Voke seems to be momentarily paralyzed with outrage, though 
his face is twisted by a thousand thoughts of action. Cheev 
apparently is aware of the danger and his eyes search throughout 
the room, possibly for a means of escape or for a weapon to use 
against his antagonist. He fixes on something and begins to move 
toward it in a crouch.
“Where do you think you’re going?” says Voke, now liberated 
from the disabling efTects of his rage.
Cheev is trying to reach something on the floor that is the 
approximate size and shape of a coffin. Only one corner of the long 
black box sticks out of the shadows into the bluish green glare of 
the loft. A thick strip of gleaming silver edges the object and is 
secured to it with silvery bolts.
“Get away from there,” shouts Voke as Cheev stoops over the 
box, fingering its lid.
But before he can open it, before he can make another move, 
Voke makes his.
“I’ve done my best for you, Mr. Veech, and you’ve given me 
nothing but grief. I’ve tried to deliver you from the fate of your 
friends . . . but now I deliver you to it. Join them, Cheev”
At these words, Cheev’c body begins to rise in a puppet’s hunch, 
then soars up into the tenebrous rafters and beyond, transported 
by unseen wires. His arms and legs twitch uncontrollably during 
the elevation, and his screams . . . fade.
But Voke pays no attention to his victim’s progress. His baggy 
clothes flapping hysterically, he rushes to the object so recently 
threatened with violation. He drags it toward an open spot on the 
floor. The light from the walls, ghastly and oceanic, shines on the 
coffin’s silky black surface. Voke is on his knees before the coffin, 
tenderly testing its security with his fingertips. As if each accu­
mulated moment of deliberation were a blasphemy, he suddenly 
lifts back the lid.
Laid out inside is a young woman whose beauty has been 
unnaturally perpetuated by a fanatic of her form. Voke gazes

140
THOMAS LIGOTTI
for some time at the corpse, then finally says: “Always the best 
thing, my dear. Always the best thing.”
He is still kneeling before the coffin as his features begin to 
undergo the ravages of various, obviously conflicting, phases of 
feeling. Eyes, mouth, the whole facial structure is called upon to 
perform gruesome acrobatics of expression. Ultimately an impos­
sible task is relieved or avoided by laughter: the liberating laughter 
of an innocent derangement, of a virgin madness. Voke rises to his 
feet by the powers of his idiotic hilarity. He begins to move about 
in a weird dance - hopping and bouncing and bobbing. His 
laughter grows worse as he gyres aimlessly, and his gestures 
become more convulsive. Through complete lack of attention, 
or perhaps by momentarily regaining it, Voke makes his way out of 
the loft and is now laughing into the dark abyss beyond the 
precarious railing at the top of the crooked stairway. His final 
laugh seems to stick in his throat; he goes over the railing and falls 
without a sound, his baggy clothes flapping uselessly.
Thus the screams you now hear are not those of the plummeting 
Voke. Neither are they the screams of Cheev, who is long gone, nor 
the supernatural echoes of Prena and Lamm’s cries of horror. 
These screams, the ones from beyond the door at the top of the 
stairs, belong only to a dummy who now feels warm drops of blood 
sliding thickly over his lacquered cheeks, and who has been left - 
alone and alive - in the shadows of an abandoned loft. And his eyes 
are rolling like mad marbles.

DR. LOCRIAN’S ASYLUM
ears passed and no one in our town, no one I could name,
allotted a single word to that great ruin which marred the 
evenness of the horizon. Nor was mention made of that darkly 
gated patch of ground closer to the town’s edge. Even in days more 
remote, few things were said about these sites. Perhaps someone 
would propose tearing down the old asylum and razing the burial- 
ground where no inmate had been interred for a generation or 
more; and perhaps a few others, swept along by the moment, 
would nod their heart’s assent. But the resolution always remained 
poorly formed, very soon losing its shape entirely, its impetus dying 
a gentle death in the gentle old streets of our town.
Then how can I explain that sudden turn of events, that 
overnight conversion which set our steps toward that hulking 
and decayed edifice, trampling its graveyard along the way? In 
answer, I propose the existence of a secret movement, one con­
ducted in the souls of the town’s citizens, and in their dreams. 
Conceived thus, the mysterious conversion loses some of its 
mystery: one need only accept that we were all haunted by the 
same revenant, that certain images began to establish themselves 
deep within each of us and became part of our hidden lives. 
Finally, we resolved that we could no longer live as we had been.
When the idea of positive action first arose, the residents of the 
humble west end of town were the most zealous and impatient. For 
it was they who had sufTered the severest unease, living as they did 
in close view of the wild plots and crooked headstones of that 
crowded strip of earth where mad minds had come to be shut away 
for eternity. But we all shared the burden of the crumbling asylum 
itself, which seemed to be visible from every corner of town -  from 
the high rooms of the old hotel, from the quiet rooms of our houses, 
from streets obscured by morning mist or twilight haze, and from 
my own shop whenever I looked out its front window. The setting 
sun would always be half-hidden by that massive silhouette, that 
huge broken headstone of some unspeakable grave. But more 
disturbing than our own view of the asylum was the idiotic gaze

I 4 2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
that it seemed to cast back at us, and through the years certain 
shamefully superstitious persons actually claimed to have seen 
mad-eyed and immobile figures staring out from the asylum’s 
windows on nights when the moon shone with unusual brightness 
and the dark sky above the town appeared to contain more than its 
usual share of stars. Although few people spoke of such experiences, 
almost everyone had seen other sights at the asylum that no one 
could deny. And what strange things were brought to mind 
because of them; all over town vague scenes were inwardly 
envisioned.
As children, most of us had paid a visit at some time to that 
forbidden place, and later we carried with us memories of our 
somber adventures. Over the years we came to compare what we 
experienced, compiling this knowledge of the asylum until it 
became unseemly to augment it further.
By all accounts that old institution was a chamber of horrors, if 
not in its entirety then at least in certain isolated corners. It was not 
simply that a particular room attracted notice for its atmosphere of 
desolation: the gray walls pocked like sponges, the floor filthied by 
the years entering freely through broken windows, and the shallow 
bed withered after supporting so many nights of futile tears and 
screaming. There was something more.
Perhaps one of the walls to such a room would have built into it 
a sliding panel, a long rectangular slot near the ceiling. And on the 
other side would be another room, an unfurnished room which 
seemed never to have been occupied. But leaning against one wall 
of this other room, directly below the sliding panel, would be some 
long wooden sticks; and mounted at the ends of these sticks would 
be horrible little puppets.
Another room might be completely bare, yet its walls would be 
covered with pale fragments of weird funereal scenes. By removing 
some loose floorboards at the center of the room, one would 
discover several feet of earth piled upon an old, empty coffin. 
And then there was a very special room, a room I had visited 
myself, that was located on the uppermost floor of the asylum and 
contained a great windowless skylight. Positioned under that 
opening upon the heavens, and fixed securely in place, stood a 
long table with huge straps hanging from its sides.
There may have been other rooms of a strange type which 
memory has forbidden to me. But somehow none of them was 
singled out for comment during the actual dismantling of the 
asylum, when most of us were busy heaving the debris of years 
through great breaches we had made in the asylum’s outer walls,

DR. L O C R IA N ’S ASYLUM
!43
while some distance away the rest of the town witnessed the 
wrecking in a cautious state of silence. Among this group was 
Mr. Harkness Locrian, a thin and large-eyed old gentleman whose 
silence was not like that of the others.
Perhaps we expected Mr. Locrian to voice opposition to our 
project, but he did not do so at any stage of the destruction. 
Although no one, to my knowledge, suspected him of preserving 
any morbid sentiment for the old asylum, it was difficult to forget 
that his grandfather had been the director of the Shire County 
Sanitarium during its declining years and that his father had 
closed down the place under circumstances that remained an 
obscure episode in the town’s history. If we spoke very little about 
the asylum and its graveyard, Mr. Locrian spoke of them not at all. 
This reticence, no doubt, served only to strengthen in our minds 
the intangible bond which seemed to exist between him and the 
awful ruin that sealed the horizon. Even I, who knew the old man 
better than anyone else in the town, regarded him with a degree of 
circumspection. Outwardly, of course, I was courteous to him, 
even friendly; he was, after all, the oldest and most reliable patron 
of my business. And not long after the demolition of the asylum was 
concluded, and the last of its former residents’ remains had been 
exhumed and hastily cremated, Mr. Locrian paid me a visit.
At the very moment he entered the shop, I was examining some 
books which had just arrived for him by special order. But even if I 
had grown jaded to such coincidences following years of dealing in 
books, which have some peculiarity about them that breeds events 
of this nature, there was something unpleasant about this parti­
cular freak of timing.
“Afternoon,” I greeted. “You know, I was just looking over. .
“I see,” he said, approaching the counter where tiers of books 
left very little open space. As he glanced at these new arrivals - 
hardly interested, it seemed - he slowly unbuttoned his overcoat, a 
bulky thing which made his head appear somewhat small for his 
body. How easily I can envision him on that day. And even now 
his voice sounds clear in my memory, a voice that was far too quiet 
for the old man’s harshly brilliant eyes. After a few moments he 
turned and casually began to wander about the shop, as if seeking 
out observers who might be secluded among its stacks. He rounded 
a corner and momentarily left my view. “So at last it’s done,” he 
said. “Something of a feat, a striking page of local history.”
“I suppose it is,” I answered, watching as Mr. Locrian traversed 
the rear aisle of the shop, appearing and disappearing as he passed 
by several rows of shelves.

144
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Without doubt it is,” he replied, proceeding straight down the 
aisle in front of me. Finally reaching the counter behind which I 
stood, he placed his hands upon it, leaned forward, and asked: 
“But what has been achieved, what has really changed?”
The tone of voice in which he posed this question was both 
sardonic and morose, carrying undesirable connotations that 
echoed in all the remote places where truth had been shut up and 
abandoned like a howling imbecile. Nonetheless, I held to the lie.
“If you mean that there’s very little difference now, I would 
have to agree. Only the removal of an eyesore. That was all we 
intended to do. Simply that.”
Then I tried to draw his attention to the books that had arrived 
for him, but I was coldly interrupted when he said: “We must be 
walking different streets, Mr. Crane, and seeing quite different 
faces, hearing different voices in this town. Tell me,” he asked, 
suddenly animated, “did you ever hear those stories about the 
sanitarium? What some people saw in its windows? Perhaps you 
yourself were one of them.”
I said nothing, which he might have accepted as a confirmation 
that I was one of those people. He continued:
“And isn’t there much the same feeling now, in this town, as 
there was in those stories? Can you admit that the days and nights 
are much worse now than they were . . . before? Of course, you 
may tell me that it’s just the moodiness of the season, the chill, the 
dour afternoons you observe through your shop window. On my 
way here, I actually heard some people saying such things. They 
also said other things which they didn’t think I could hear. 
Somehow everyone seems to know about these books of mine, 
Mr. Crane.”
He did not look at me while delivering this last remark, but 
began to pace slowly from one end of the counter to the other, then 
back again.
“I’m sorry, Mr. Locrian, if you feel that I’ve violated some 
confidence. I never imagined that it would make any difference.” 
He paused in his pacing and now gazed at me with an expression 
of almost paternal forgiveness.
“Of course,” he said in his earlier, quiet voice. “But things are 
very different now, will you allow that?”
“. . . Yes,” I conceded.
“But no one is sure exactly in what way they are different.” 
“No,” I agreed.
“Did you know that my grandfather, Doctor Harkness Locrian, 
was buried in that graveyard?”

DR. L O C R IA N ’S ASYLUM
145
Feeling a sudden surprise and embarrassment, I replied: “I’m 
sure if you had said something.” But it was as if I were the one who 
had said nothing at all, nothing that would deter him from what he 
had come to tell me.
“Is this safe to sit in?” he asked, pointing to an old chair by the 
front window. And beyond the window, unobstructed, the pale 
autumn sun was sinking down.
“Yes, help yourself,” I said, noticing some passers-by who had 
noticed Mr. Locrian and looked oddly at him.
“My grandfather,” Mr. Locrian continued, “felt at home with 
his lunatics. You may be startled to hear such a thing. Although 
the house that is now mine was once his, he did not spend his time 
there, not even to sleep. It was only after they closed down the 
sanitarium that he actually became a resident of his own home, 
which was also the home of myself and my parents, who now had 
charge of the old man. Of course, you probably don’t remember. . .
“My grandfather passed his final years in a small upstairs room 
overlooking the outskirts of town, and I recall seeing him day after 
day gazing through his window at the sanitarium . . . ”
“I had no idea,” I interjected. “That seems rather—”
“Please, before you are led to think that his was merely a 
sentimental attachment, however perverse, let me say that it 
was no such thing. His feelings with respect to the sanitarium 
were in fact quite incredible, owing to the manner in which he had 
used his authority at that place. I found out about this when I was 
still very young, but not so young that I could not understand the 
profound conflict that existed between my father and grandfather. 
I disregarded my parents’ admonitions that I not spend too much 
time with the old man, succumbing to the mystery of his presence. 
And one afternoon he revealed himself.
“He was gazing through the window and never once turned to 
face me. But after we had sat in silence for some time, he started to 
whisper something. ‘They questioned,’ he said. ‘They accused. 
They complained that no one in that place ever became well.’ 
Then he smiled and began to elaborate. ‘What things had they 
seen,’ he hissed, ‘to give them such . . . wisdom? They did not look 
into the faces,’ no, he did not say ‘faces’ but ‘eyes.’ Yes, he said,
‘ . . . did not look into the eyes of those beings, the eyes that 
reflected the lifeless beauty of the silent, staring universe itself.’ 
“Those were his words. And then he talked about the voices of 
the patients under his care. He whispered, and I quote, that ‘the 
wonderful music of those voices spoke the supreme delirium of the 
planets as they go round and round like bright puppets dancing in

146
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the blackness.’ In the wandering words of those lunatics, he told 
me, the ancient mysteries were restored.
“Like all true mysteriarchs,” Mr. Locrian went on, “my grand­
father desired a knowledge that was unspoken and unspeakable. 
And every volume of the strange library he left to his heirs attests to 
this desire. As you know, I have added to this collection in my own 
way, as did my father. But our reasons were not those of the old 
doctor. At his sanitarium, Dr. Locrian had done something very 
strange, something that perhaps only he possessed both the 
knowledge and the impulse to do. It was not until many years 
later that my father attempted to explain everything to me, as I 
now am attempting to explain it to you.
“I have said that my grandfather was and always had been a 
mysteriarch, never a philanthropist of the mind, not a restorer of 
wounded psyches. In no way did he take a therapeutic approach 
with the inmates at the sanitarium. He did not view them as souls 
that were possessed, either by demons or by their own painful 
histories, but as beings who held a strange alliance with other 
orders of existence, who contained within themselves a particle of 
something eternal, a golden speck of magic which he thought 
might be enlarged. Thus, his ambition led him not to relieve his 
patients’ madness, but to exasperate it -  to let it breathe with a life of 
its own. And this he did in certain ways that wholly eradicated 
what human qualities remained in these people. But sometimes 
that peculiar magic he saw in their eyes would seem to fade, and 
then he would institute his ‘proper treatment,’ which consisted of 
putting them through a battery of hellish ordeals intended to 
loosen their attachment to the world of humanity and to project 
them further into the absolute, the realm of the ‘silent, staring 
universe’ where the ultimate insanity of the infinite void might 
work a rather paradoxical cure. The result was something as 
pathetic as a puppet and as magnificent as the stars, something 
at once dead and never dying, a thing utterly without destiny and 
thus imperishable, possessing that abysmal absence of mind, that 
infinite vacuity which is the essence of all that is immortal. And 
somehow, in his last days, my grandfather used this same proce­
dure on himself, reaching into spaces beyond death.
“I know this to be true, because one night late in my childhood, 
I awoke and witnessed the proof. Leaving my bed, I walked down 
the moonlit hallway, feeling irresistibly drawn toward the closed 
door of my grandfather’s room. Stopping in front of that door, I 
turned its cold handle and slowly pushed back its strange noctur­
nal mass. Peeking timidly into the room, I saw my grandfather

DR. L O C R IA N ’S ASYLUM
*47
sitting before the window in the bright moonlight. My curiosity 
must have overcome my horror, for I actually spoke to this specter. 
‘What are you doing here, Grandfather?’ I asked. And without 
turning away from the window, he slowly and tonelessly replied: 
‘We are doing just what you see.’ Of course, what I saw was an old 
man who belonged in his grave, but who was now staring out his 
window across to the windows at the sanitarium, where others who 
were not human stared back.
“When I fearfully alerted my parents to what I had seen, I was 
surprised that my father responded not with disbelief but with 
anger: I had disobeyed his warnings about my grandfather’s 
room. Then he revealed the truth just as I now reveal it to you, 
and year after year he reiterated and expanded upon this secret 
learning: why that room must always be kept shut and why the 
sanitarium must never be disturbed. You may not be aware that 
an earlier effort to destroy the sanitarium was aborted through 
my father’s intervention. He was far more attached than I could 
ever be to this town, which ceased to have a future long ago. 
How long has it been since a new building was added to all the 
old ones? This place would have crumbled in time. The natural 
course of things would have dismantled it, just as the asylum 
would have disappeared had it been left alone. But when all of 
you took up those implements and marched toward the old ruin, 
I felt no desire to interfere. You have brought it on yourselves,” 
he complacently ended.
“And what is it we have done?” I asked in a cold voice, now 
suppressing a mysterious outrage.
“You are only trying to preserve what remains of your mind’s 
peace. You know that something is very wrong in this town, that 
you should never have done what you did, but still you cannot 
draw any conclusion from what I have told you.”
“With all respect, Mr. Locrian, how can you imagine that I 
believe anything you’ve told me?”
He laughed weakly. “Actually, I don’t. As you say, how could I? 
Without being somewhat mad, that is. But in time you will. And 
then I will tell you more things, things you will not be able to keep 
yourself from believing.”
As he pushed himself up from the chair by the window, I asked: 
“Why tell me anything? Why did you come here today?”
“Why? Because I thought that perhaps my books had arrived, 
let me just take them like that. And also because everything is 
finished now. The others,” he shrugged, “. . . hopeless. You are the 
only one who could understand. Not now, but in time.”

148
THOMAS LIGOTTI
And now I do understand what the old man told me as I never 
could on that autumn day some forty years ago.
It was toward the end of that same sullen day, in the course of a 
bleak twilight, that they began to appear. Like figures quietly 
emerging from the depths of memory, they struggled in the 
shadows and slowly became visible. But even if the transition 
had been subtle, insidiously graduated, it did not long go un­
noticed. By nightfall they were distractingly conspicuous through­
out the town, always framed in some high window of the structures 
they occupied: the rooms above the shops in the heart of the town, 
the highest story of the old hotel, the empty towers of civic 
buildings, the lofty turrets and grand gables of the most distin­
guished houses, and the attics of the humblest homes.
Their forms were as softly luminous as the autumn constellations 
in the black sky above, their faces glowing with the same fixed 
expression of placid vacuity. And the attire of these apparitions 
was grotesquely suited to their surroundings. Buried many years 
before in antiquated clothes of a formal and funereal cut, they 
seemed to belong to the dying town in a manner its living members 
could not emulate. For the streets of the town now lost what life 
was left in them and became the dark corridors of a museum where 
these waxen nightmares had been put on exhibition.
In daylight, when the figures in the windows took on a dull 
wooden appearance that seemed less maddening, some of us 
ventured into those high rooms. But nothing was ever found on 
the other side of their windows, nothing save a tenantless room 
which no light would illuminate and which sooner or later inspired 
any living occupant with a demented dread. By night, when it 
seemed we could hear them erratically tapping on the floors above 
us, their presence in our homes drove us out into the streets. Day 
and night we became sleepless vagrants, strangers in our own 
town. Eventually we may have ceased to recognize one another. 
But one name, one face was still known to all - that of Mr. 
Harkness Locrian, whose gaze haunted each one of us.
It was undoubtedly in his house that the fire began which 
mindlessly consumed every corner of the town. There were 
attempts made to oppose its path, but they were half-hearted 
and soon abandoned. For the most part we stood in silence, 
vacantly staring as the flames burned their way up to the high 
windows where spectral figures posed like portraits in their frames.
Ultimately these demons were exorcized, their windows left 
empty. But only after the town had been annulled by the 
holocaust.

DR. L O C R IA N ’S ASYLUM
149
Nothing more than charred wreckage remained. Afterward it 
was reported that one of our citizens had been taken by the fire, 
though none of us inquired into the exact circumstances under 
which old Mr. Locrian met his death.
There was, of course, no eflòrt made to recover the town we had 
lost: when the first snow fell that year, it fell upon ruins grown cold 
and dreadful. But now, after the passing of so many years, it is not 
the ashen rubble of that town which haunts each of my hours; it is 
that one great ruin in whose shadow my mind has been interned.
And if they have kept me in this room because I speak to faces 
that appear at my window, then let them protect this same room 
from violations after I am gone. For Mr. Locrian has been true to 
his promise; he has told me of certain things when I was ready to 
hear them. And he has other things to tell me, secrets surpassing all 
insanity. Commending me to an absolute cure, he will have 
immured another soul within the black and boundless walls of 
that eternal asylum where stars dance forever like bright puppets 
in the silent, staring void.

THE SECT OF THE 
IDIOT
The primal chaos, Lord of All . . . the blind idiot god - Azathoth.
Necronomicon
T
he extraordinary is a province of the solitary soul. Lost the 
very moment the crowd comes into view, it remains within the 
great hollows of dreams, an infinitely secluded place that prepar
itself for your arrival, and for mine. Extraordinary joy, extraor­
dinary pain - the fearful poles of the world that both menaces and 
surpasses this one. It is a miraculous hell towards which one 
unknowingly wanders. And its gate, in my case, was an old town 
- whose allegiance to the unreal inspired my soul with a holy 
madness long before my body had come to dwell in that incom­
parable place.
Soon after arriving in the town - whose identity I must allow to 
remain secret, along with my own - I was settled in a high room 
overlooking the ideal of my dreams through diamond panes. How 
many times had I already lingered before a figmentation of these 
windows through which I now gazed truly upon the old town? 
Having roamed its streets in reverie, I could finally become 
enveloped by their sensual visions.
I discovered an infinite stillness on foggy mornings, miracles of 
silence on indolent afternoons, and the strangely flickering tableau 
of neverending nights. A sense of serene enclosure was conveyed by 
every aspect of the old town. There were balconies, railed porches, 
and jutting upper stories of shops and houses that created inter­
mittent arcades over sidewalks. Colossal roofs overhung entire 
streets and transformed them into the corridors of a single 
structure containing an uncanny multitude of rooms. And these 
fantastic crowns were echoed below by lesser roofs that drooped

TH E SECT OF TH E IDIOT
above windows like half-closed eyelids and turned each narrow 
doorway into a magician’s cabinet harboring deceptive depths of 
shadow.
It is difficult to explain, then, how the old town also conveyed a 
sense of endlessness, of proliferating unseen dimensions, at the same 
time that it served as the very image of a claustrophobe’s night­
mare. Even the infinite nights above the great roofs of the town 
seemed merely the uppermost level of an earthbound estate, at 
most a musty old attic in which the stars were useless heirlooms and 
the moon a dusty trunk of dreams. And this paradox was precisely 
the source of the town’s enchantment. I imagined the heavens 
themselves as part of an essentially interior decor. By day: heaps of 
clouds like dustballs floated across the empty rooms of the sky. By 
night: a fluorescent map of the cosmos was painted upon a great 
black ceiling. How I desired to live forever in this domain of 
medieval autumns and mute winters, serving out my sentence of 
life among all the visible and invisible wonders I had only dreamed 
about from so far away.
But no existence, however visionary, is without its trials and 
traps. After only a few days in the old town, I had been made 
acutely sensitive by the solitude of the place and by the solitary 
manner of my life. Late one afternoon I was relaxing in a chair 
beside those kaleidoscopic windows, when there was a knock at the 
door. It was only the faintest of knocks, but so unexpected was this 
elementary event, and so developed was my sensitivity, that it 
seemed like some unwonted upheaval of atmospheric forces, a kind 
of cataclysm of empty space, an earthquake in the invisible. 
Hesitantly I walked across the room and stood before the door, 
which was only a simple brown slab without molding around its 
frame. I opened it.
“Oh,” said the little man waiting in the hallway outside. He had 
neatly groomed silver hair and strikingly clear eyes. “This is 
embarrassing. I must have been given the wrong address. The 
handwriting on this note is such chaos,” he said, looking at the 
crumpled piece of paper in his hand. “Ha! Never mind, I’ll go back 
and check.”
However, the man did not immediately leave the scene of his 
embarrassment; instead, he pushed himself upwards on the points 
of his tiny shoes and stared over my shoulder into my room. His 
entire body, compact as it was in stature, seemed to be in a state of 
concentrated excitement. Finally he said, “Beautiful view from 
your room,” and he smiled a very tight little smile.
“Yes, it is,” I replied, glancing back into the room and not really

152
THOMAS LIGOTTI
knowing what to think. When I turned around the man was gone.
For a few startled moments I did not move. Then I stepped into 
the hallway and gazed up and down its dim length. It was not very 
wide, nor did it extend a great distance before turning a window- 
less corner. All the doors to the other rooms were closed, and not 
the slightest noise emerged from any of them. At last I heard what 
sounded like footsteps descending flights of stairs on the floors 
below, faintly echoing through the silence, speaking the quiet 
language of old rooming houses. I felt relieved and returned to 
my room. The rest of the day was uneventful, though somewhat 
colored by a whole spectrum of imaginings. And that night I 
experienced a very strange dream, the culmination, it seemed, of 
both my lifetime of dreaming and of my dreamlike sojourn in the 
old town. Certainly my view of the town was thereafter drama­
tically transformed. And yet, despite the nature of the dream, this 
change was not immediately for the worse.
In the dream I occupied a small dark room, a high room whose 
windows looked out on a maze of streets which unravelled beneath 
an abyss of stars. But although the stars were spread across a great 
reaching blackness, the streets below were bathed in a stale gray 
dimness which suggested neither night nor day nor any natural 
phase between them. Gazing out the window, I felt that cryptic 
proceedings were taking place in secluded corners of this scene, 
vague observances without any kind of reality to them. There 
seemed to be special cause for me to worry about certain things 
that were happening in one of the other high rooms of the town, a 
particular room whose location was nevertheless unknown to me. I 
had the idea that a peculiar correspondence existed between the 
activities in that room and my own life, but at the same time I felt 
infinitely removed from them: what transpired in the other room 
in no sense concerned my personal fate, yet somehow would 
profoundly affect it. I seemed to be an unseen speck lost in the 
convolutions of strange schemes. And it was this very remoteness 
from the designs of my dream universe, this feeling of fantastic 
homelessness amid a vast alien order, that was the source of 
unnameable terrors. I was no more than an irrelevant parcel of 
living tissue caught in a place I should not be, threatened with 
being snared in some great dredging net of doom, an incidental 
shred of flesh pulled out of its element of light and into an icy 
blackness. In the dream nothing supported my existence, which I 
felt at any moment might be horribly altered or simply . . . ended. 
In the profoundest meaning of the expression, my life was of no 
matter.

THE SECT OF THE IDIOT
153
But still I could not keep my attention from straying into that 
other room, sensing what elaborate plots were evolving there. I 
thought I could see indistinct figures occupying that spacious 
chamber, a place furnished with only a few chairs of extremely 
odd design and commanding a dizzying view of the starry black­
ness. The great round moon of the dream created sufficient 
illumination for the night’s purposes, painting the walls of the 
mysterious room a deep aquatic blue; the stars, unneeded and 
ornamental, presided as lesser lamps over this gathering and its 
nocturnal offices.
As I observed this scene - though not “bodily” present, as is the 
way with dreams - it became my conviction that certain rooms 
offered a marvelous solitude for such functions or festivities. Their 
atmosphere, that intangible quality which exists apart from its 
composing elements of shape and shade, was of a dreamy cast, a 
state in which time and space had become deranged: a few 
moments there might count as centuries or millenia, and the 
tiniest niche might encompass a universe. Nevertheless, at the 
same time this atmosphere seemed no different from that of the old 
rooms, the high and lonely rooms I had known in waking life, even 
if this room appeared to border on the voids of astronomy and its 
windows opened onto the infinite outside. And I found myself 
speculating that, if the room itself was not one of a unique species, 
perhaps it was the occupants that had introduced the singular 
element.
Although each of them was completely draped in a massive 
cloak, the manner in which this material descended in strange 
foldings to the floor, and the unusual structure of the chairs in 
which these creatures were seated, betrayed an oddness that 
inspired my curiosity and my terror. I could not help wondering 
what these robes might conceal. Who were these beings, so 
unnaturally shaped? With their tall, angular chairs arranged in 
a circle, they appeared to be leaning in every direction, like 
unsettled monoliths. It was as if they were assuming postures 
that were mysteriously symbolic, locking themselves in patterns 
hostile to mundane analysis. In like fashion, their heads inclined in 
a skewed relationship to the rest of their lofty forms, nodding in 
ways heretical to terrestrial anatomy. And they whispered almost 
incessantly, for I can think of no more precise word to describe the 
soft buzzing which seemed to serve them as speech. Or was it the 
suspension of this sound that conveyed their unknown messages to 
one another, those infrequent but remarkable silences which 
terrified me far more than the alien murmur?

154
THOMAS LIGOTTI
But the dream offered another detail which possibly related to 
the mode of communication among these whispering figures who 
sat in stagnant moonlight. For projecting out of the bulky sleeves 
dangling at each figure’s side were thin and delicate appendages 
that appeared to have withered away, wilted claws bearing 
numerous talons that tapered off into drooping tentacles. And 
all of these stringy digits seemed to be working together with lively 
and unceasing agitation.
At first sight of these gruesome gestures I felt myself about to 
awaken, to carry back into the world a sense of terrible enlight­
enment without sure meaning or possibility of expression in any 
language except the whispered vows of this eerie sect. But I 
remained longer in this dream, far longer than was natural. I 
witnessed the insect-like nervousness of those shrivelled mandibles, 
the brittle excitement of these members which seemed to be 
revealing an intolerable knowledge, some ultimate disclosure 
concerning the order of things. Such movements suggested an 
array of hideous analogies: the spinning legs of spiders, the greedy 
rubbing of a fly’s spindly feelers, the rippling of a lizard’s tongue or 
the twitching of its tail. But my cumulative sensation in the dream 
was only partially involved with what I would call the triumph of the 
grotesque; for much greater was a quite different perception, one 
accompanied by a bizarre elation tainted with nausea. This 
revelation - in keeping with the style of certain dreams - was 
complicated and exact, allowing no ambiguities or confusions to 
comfort the dreamer. And what was imparted to my witnessing 
mind was the vision of a world in a trance: a hypnotized parade of 
beings sleepwalking to the odious manipulations of their whisper­
ing masters, those hooded freaks who were themselves among the 
hypnotized. For there was a power superseding theirs, a power 
which they served and from which they merely emanated, some­
thing which was beyond the universal hypnosis by virtue of its very 
mindlessness, its awesome idiocy. These cloaked masters, in turn, 
partook in some measure of godhood, passively presiding as 
enlightened zombies over the multitudes of the entranced, that 
frenetic domain of the human sphere.
And it was at this place in my dream that I came to believe that 
there obtained a terrible intimacy between myself and those 
whispering effigies of chaos whose existence I dreaded for its very 
remoteness from mine. Had these beings, for some grim purpose 
comprehensible only to themselves, allowed me to intrude upon 
their infernal wisdom? Or was my unwanted access to such putrid 
arcana merely the outcome of some loathsome fluke in the universe

TH E SECT OF TH E IDIOT
155
of atoms, a chance intersection among the demonic elements of 
which all creation is composed? But the truth was notwithstanding 
in the face of these insanities; whether by calculation or accident, I 
was the victim of the unknown. And I finally succumbed to an 
ecstatic horror at this insufferable insight.
On waking, it seemed that I had carried back with me a tiny, 
jewel-like particle of this horrific ecstasy, and, by some alchemy of 
association, this darkly crystalline substance infused its magic into 
my image of the old town.
Although I formerly believed myself to be the consummate knower 
of the town’s secrets, the following day was one of unforeseen 
discovery. The streets that I looked upon that motionless morning 
were filled with new secrets and seemed to lead me to the very 
essence of the extraordinary. And a previously unknown element 
appeared to have emerged in the composition of the town, one that 
must have been hidden within its most obscure quarters. I mean to 
say that, while these quaint, archaic facades still put on all the 
appearance of a dreamlike repose, there now existed, in my sight, 
evil stirrings beneath this surface. The town had more wonders 
than I knew, a secreted cache of blasphemous offerings. Yet 
somehow this formula of deception, of corruption in disguise, 
served to intensify the town’s most attractive aspects: a wealth 
of unsuspected sensations was now provoked by a few slanting 
rooftops, a low doorway, or a narrow backstreet. The mist 
spreading evenly through the town early that morning was 
luminous with dreams.
The whole day I wandered in a fevered exaltation throughout 
the old town, seeing it as if for the first time. I scarcely stopped a 
moment to rest, and I am sure I did not pause to eat. By late 
afternoon I might also have been suffering from a strain on my 
nerves, for I had spent many hours nurturing a rare state of mind 
in which the purest euphoria was invaded and enriched by chaotic 
currents of fear. Each time I rounded a streetcorner or turned my 
head to catch some beckoning sight, the darkest tremors were 
inspired by the hybrid spectacle I witnessed - splendid scenes 
broken with malign shadows, the lurid and the lovely forever lost 
in each other’s embrace. And when I passed under the arch of an 
old street and gazed up at the towering structure before me, I was 
nearly overwhelmed.
My recognition of the place was immediate, though I had never 
viewed it from my present perspective. And suddenly it seemed I 
was no longer outside in the street and staring upwards, but was

156
THOMAS LIGOTTI
looking down from the room just beneath that peaked roof. It was 
the highest room on the street, and no window from any of the 
other houses could see into it. The building itself, like some of those 
surrounding it, seemed to be empty, perhaps abandoned. I 
contemplated several ways by which I could force entry, but 
none of these methods was needed: the front door, contrary to 
my initial observation, was slightly ajar.
The place was indeed abandoned, stripped of furnishings and 
fixtures, its desolate, tunnel-like hallways visible only in the sickly 
light that shone through unwashed, curtainless windows. Identical 
windows also appeared on the landing of each section of the 
staircase that climbed up through the central part of the house 
like a crooked spine. I stood in a near cataleptic awe of the world I 
had wandered into, this decayed paradise. It was a place of strange 
atmospherics of infinite melancholy and unease, the everlasting 
residue of some cosmic misfortune. I ascended the stairs with a 
solemn, mechanical intentness, stopping only when I had reached 
the top and found the door to a certain room.
And even at the time, I asked myself: could I have entered this 
room with such unhesitant resolve if I truly expected to find 
something extraordinary within it? Was it ever my intention to 
confront the madness of the universe, or at least my own? I had to 
confess that although I had accepted the benefits of my dreams and 
fancies, I did not profoundly believe in them. At the deepest level I 
was their doubter, a thorough skeptic who had indulged a too-free 
imagination, and perhaps a self-made lunatic.
To all appearances the room was unoccupied. I noted this fact 
without the disappointment born of real expectancy, but also with 
a strange relief. Then, as my eyes adjusted to the confusing twilight 
of the room, I saw the circle of chairs.
They were as strange as I had dreamed, more closely resembling 
devices of torture than any type of practical or decorative object. 
Their tall backs were slightly bowed and covered with a coarse 
hide unlike anything I had ever beheld; the arms were like blades 
and each had four semicircular grooves cut into it that were spaced 
evenly across its length; and below were six jointed legs jutting 
outwards, a feature which transformed the entire piece into some 
crablike thing with the apparent ability to scuttle across the floor. 
If, for a stunned moment, I felt the idiotic impulse to install myself 
in one of these bizarre thrones, I quickly extinguished this desire 
upon observing that the seat of each chair, which at first appeared 
to be composed of a smooth and solid cube of black glass, was in 
fact only an open cubicle filled with a murky liquid which quivered

TH E SECT OF TH E IDIOT
157
strangely when I passed my hand over its surface. And as I did this 
I could feel my entire arm tingle in a way which sent me stumbling 
backward to the door of that horrible room and which made me 
loathe every atom of flesh gripping the bones of that limb. I turned 
around to exit but was stopped by a figure standing in the 
doorway.
Although I had previously met the man, he now seemed to be 
someone quite different, someone openly sinister rather than 
merely enigmatic. When he had disturbed me the day before, I 
could not have suspected his alliances: his manner had been 
unusual but very polite, and he had offered no reason to question 
his sanity. Now he appeared to be no more than a malignant 
puppet of madness. From the twisted stance he assumed in the 
doorway to the vicious and imbecilic expression that possessed the 
features of his face, he was a thing of strange degeneracy. Before I 
could back away from him, he took my trembling hand. “Thank 
you for coming to visit,” he said in a voice that was a parody of his 
former politeness. He pulled me close to him; his eyelids lowered 
and his mouth widely grinned, as if he were enjoying a pleasant 
breeze on a warm day. And then he said, “They want you with 
them on their return. They want their chosen ones.”
Nothing can describe what I felt on hearing these words which 
could only have meaning in a nightmare. Their implications were 
a quintessence of hellish delirium, and at that instant all the 
world’s wonder turned suddenly to dread. I tried to free myself 
from the madman’s grasp, shouting at him to let go of my hand. 
“ Your hand?” he shouted back at me. Then he began to repeat the 
phrase over and over, laughing as if some sardonic joke had 
reached a conclusion within the depths of his lunacy. In his foul 
merriment he weakened, and I escaped. As I rapidly descended the 
many stairs of the old building, his laughter pursued me as hollow 
reverberations which filled the shadowy edifice.
And that freakish, echoing laughter remained with me as I 
wandered dazed in darkness, trying to flee my own thoughts and 
sensations. Gradually the terrible sounds that filled my brain 
subsided, but they were now replaced by a new terror -  the 
whispering of strangers whom I passed on the streets of the old 
town. And no matter how low they spoke or how quickly they 
silenced one another with embarrassed throat-clearings and stern 
looks, their words reached my ears in fragments that I was able to 
reconstruct because of their frequent repetition. The most common 
terms were deformity and disfigurement. If I had not been so 
distraught I might have approached these persons with a sem­

158
THOMAS LIGOTTI
blance of politeness, cleared my own throat, and said, “I beg your 
pardon, but I could not help overhearing . . . And what exactly 
did you mean, if I may ask, when you said . . .” But I discovered 
for myself what those words meant - how terrible, poor man - when I 
returned to my room and stood before the mirror on the wall, 
holding my head in balance with a supporting hand on either side.
For only one of those hands was mine.
The other belonged to them.
Life is the nightmare that leaves its mark upon you in order to 
prove that it is, in fact, real. And to sufTer a solitary madness seems 
the joy of paradise when compared to the extraordinary condition 
in which one’s own madness merely echoes that of the world 
outside. I have been lured away by dreams; all is nonsense now.
Let me write, while I still am able, that the transformation has 
not limited itself. I now find it difficult to continue this manuscript 
with either hand; these twitching tentacles can barely grasp the 
pen, and I am losing the will to push a shrivelled paw across this 
page. While I have put myself at a great distance from the old 
town, its influence is undiminished. In these matters there is a 
terrifying freedom from the laws of space and time. I am bound by 
greater laws, strange powers that are at their work as I look 
helplessly on.
In the interest of others, I have taken precautions to conceal my 
identity and the precise location of a horror which cannot be 
helped; yet, I have also taken pains to reveal, as if with malicious 
intent, the existence and nature of those same horrors. Ultimately, 
neither my motives nor my actions are of any consequence: they 
are both well known to the things that whisper in the highest room 
of an old town. They know what I write and why I am writing it. 
Perhaps they are even guiding my pen by means of a hand that is 
an extension of their own. And if I ever desired to see what lay 
beneath those dark robes, I will soon be able to satisfy this curiosity 
with only a glance in my mirror.
I must return to the old town, for now my home can be nowhere 
else. But my manner of passage to that place cannot be the same, 
and when I enter again that world of dreams it will be by way of a 
threshold which no human being has ever crossed . . . nor ever 
shall.

THE GREATER FESTIVAL 
OF MASKS
T
here are only a few houses in the district where Noss begins his 
excursions. Nonetheless, they are spaced in such a way that 
suggests some provision has been made to accommodate a great
number of them, like a garden from which certain growths have 
been removed or have yet to appear. It even seems to Noss that 
these hypothetical houses, the ones now absent, may at some point 
change places with those which can be seen, in order to enrich the 
lapses in the landscape and give the visible a rest within nullity. 
And of these houses now stretching high or spreading low there will 
remain nothing to be said, for they will have entered the empty 
spaces, which are merely blank faces waiting to gain features. Such 
are the declining days of the festival, when the old and the new, the 
real and the imaginary, truth and deception, all join in the 
masquerade.
But even at this stage of the festival some have yet to take a large 
enough interest in tradition to visit one of the shops of costumes 
and masks. Until recently Noss was among this group, for reasons 
neither he nor anyone else could clearly explain. Now, however, he 
is on his way to a shop whose every shelf is crammed and flowing 
over, even at this late stage of the festival, with costumes and 
masks. In the course of his little journey, Noss keeps watching as 
buildings become more numerous, enough to make a street, many 
narrow streets, a town. He also observes numerous indications of 
the festival season. These signs are sometimes subtle, sometimes 
blatant in nature. For instance, not a few doors have been kept 
ajar, even throughout the night, and dim lights are left burning in 
empty rooms. On the other hand, someone has ostentatiously 
scattered a bunch of filthy rags in a certain street, shredded rags 
that are easily disturbed by the wind and twist gaily about. But 
there are many other gestures of festive abandonment: a hat, all 
style mangled out of it, has been jammed into the space where a 
board is missing in a high fence; a poster stuck to a crumbling wall

i 6 o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
has been diagonally torn in half, leaving a scrap of face fluttering at 
its edges; and into strange pathways of caprice revelers will go, but 
to have shorn themselves in doorways, to have littered the shadows 
with such wiry clippings and tumbling fluff. Reliquiae of the 
hatless, the faceless, the tediously groomed. And Noss passes it 
all by with no more, if no less, than a glance.
His attention appears more sharply awakened as he approaches 
the center of the town, where the houses, the shops, the fences, the 
walls are more, much more . . . close. There seems barely enough 
space for a few stars to squeeze their bristling light between the 
roofs and towers above, and the outsized moon - not a familiar face 
in this neighborhood - must suffer to be seen only as a fuzzy 
anonymous glow mirrored in silvery windows. The streets are 
more tightly strung here, and a single one may have several names 
compressed into it from end to end. Some of the names may be 
credited less to deliberate planning, or even the quirks of local 
history, than to an apparent need for the superfluous, as if a street 
sloughed off its name every so often like an old skin, the extra ones 
insuring that it would not go completely nameless. Perhaps a 
similar need could explain why the buildings in this district exhibit 
so many pointless embellishments: doors which are elaborately 
decorated yet will not budge in their frames; massive shutters 
covering blank walls behind them; enticing balconies, well-railed 
and promising in their views, but without any means of entrance; 
stairways that enter dark niches . . . and a dead end. These 
structural adornments are mysterious indulgences in an area so 
pressed for room that even shadows must be shared. And so must 
other things. Backyards, for example, where a few fires still burn, 
the last of the festival pyres. For in this part of town the season is 
still at its peak, or at least the signs of its termination have yet to 
appear. Perhaps revelers hereabouts are still nudging each other in 
corners, hinting at preposterous things, coughing in the middle of 
jokes. Here the festival is not dead. For the delirium of this rare 
celebration does not radiate out from the center of things, but seeps 
inward from remote margins. Thus, the festival may have begun in 
an isolated hovel at the edge of town, if not in some lonely 
residence in the woods beyond. In any case, its agitations have 
now reached the heart of this dim region, and Noss has finally 
resolved to visit one of the many shops of costumes and masks.
A steep stairway leads him to a shrunken platform of a porch, 
and a little slot of a door puts him inside the shop. And indeed its 
shelves are crammed and flowing over with costumes and masks. 
The shelves are also very dark and mouth-like, stuffed into silence

TH E  GREATER FESTIVAL OF MASKS
by the wardrobes and faces of dreams. Noss pulls at a mask that is 
over-hanging the edge of one shelf - a dozen fall down upon him. 
Backing away from the avalanche of false faces, he looks at the 
sardonically grinning one in his hand.
“Excellent choice,” says the shopkeeper, who steps out from 
behind a long counter in the rearguard of shadows. “Put it on and 
let’s see. Yes, my gracious, this is excellent. You see how your entire 
face is well-covered, from the hairline to just beneath the chin and 
no farther. And at the sides it clings snugly. It doesn’t pinch, am I 
right?” The mask nods in agreement. “Good, that’s how it should 
be. Your ears are unobstructed - you have very nice ones, by the 
way - while the mask holds on to the sides of the head. It is 
comfortable, yet secure enough to stay put and not fall ofT in the 
heat of activity. You’ll see, after a while you won’t even know 
you’re wearing it! The holes for the eyes, nostrils, and mouth are 
perfectly placed for your features; no natural function is inhibited, 
that is a must. And it looks so good on you, especially up close, 
though I’m sure also at a distance. Go stand over there in the 
moonlight. Yes, it was made for you, what do you say? I’m sorry, 
what?”
Noss walks back toward the shopkeeper and removes the mask.
“I said alright, I suppose I’ll take this one.”
“Fine, there’s no question about it. Now let me show you some of 
the other ones, just a few steps this way.”
The shopkeeper pulls something down from a high shelf and 
places it in his customer’s hands. What Noss now holds is another 
mask, but one that somehow seems to be . . . impractical. While 
the other mask possessed every virtue of conformity with its 
wearer’s face, this mask is neglectful of such advantages. Its 
surface forms a strange mass of bulges and depressions which 
appear unaccommodating at best, possibly pain-inflicting. And 
it is so much heavier than the first one.
“No,” says Noss, handing back the mask, “I believe the other 
will do.”
The shopkeeper looks as if he is at a loss for words. He stares at 
Noss for many moments before saying: “May I ask a personal 
question? Have you lived, how shall I say this, here all your life?”
The shopkeeper is now gesturing beyond the thick glass of the 
shop’s windows.
Noss shakes his head in reply.
“Well, then there’s no rush. Don’t make any hasty decisions. 
Stay around the shop and think it over, there’s still time. In fact, it 
would be a favor to me. I have to go out for a while, you see, and if

IÖ2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
you could keep an eye on things I would greatly appreciate it. 
You’ll do it, then? Good. And don’t worry,” he says, taking a large 
hat from a peg that poked out of the wall, “I’ll be back in no time, 
no time at all. If someone pays us a visit, just do what you can for 
them,” he shouts before closing the front door behind him.
Now alone, Noss takes a closer look at those outlandish masks 
the shopkeeper had just shown him. While differing in design, as 
any good assortment of masks must, they all share the same 
impracticalities of weight and shape, as well as having some very 
oddly placed apertures for ventilation, and too many of them. 
Outlandish indeed! Noss gives these new masks back to the shelves 
from which they came, and he holds on tightly to the one that the 
shopkeeper had said was so perfect for him, so practical in every 
way. After a vaguely exploratory shuffle about the shop, Noss finds 
a stool behind the long counter and there falls asleep.
It seems only a few moments later that he is awakened by some 
sound or other. Collecting his wits, he gazes around the dark shop, 
as if searching for the source of hidden voices which are calling to 
him. Then the sound returns, a soft thudding sound behind him 
and far off into the shadowy rooms at the rear of the shop. Hopping 
down from the stool, Noss passes through a narrow doorway, 
descends a brief flight of stairs, passes through another doorway, 
ascends another brief flight of stairs, walks down a short and very 
low hallway, and at last arrives at the back door. It rumbles again 
once or twice.
“Just do what you can for them,” Noss remembers. But he looks 
uneasy. On the other side of that door there is only a tiny plot of 
ground surrounded by a high fence.
“Why don’t you come around the front?” he shouts through the 
door. But there is no reply, only a request.
“Please bring five of those masks to the other side of the fence. 
That’s where we are now. There’s a fire, you’ll see us. Well, can 
you do this or not?”
Noss leans his head into the shadows by the wall: one side of his 
face is now in darkness while the other is indistinct, blurred by a 
strange glare which is only an impostor of true light. “Give me a 
moment, I’ll meet you there,” he finally replies. “Did you hear 
me?”There is no response from the other side. Noss turns the door 
handle, which is unexpectedly warm, and through a thread-like 
crack peers out into the backyard. There is nothing to be seen 
except a square of blackness surrounded by the tall wooden slabs of 
the fence, and a few thin branches twisting against a pale sky. But

THE G REATER FESTIVAL OF MASKS
163
whatever signs of pranksterism Noss perceives or is able to fabricate 
to himself, there is no defying the traditions of the festival, even if 
one can claim to have merely adopted this town and its seasonal 
practices, however rare they may be. For innocence and excuses are 
not harmonious with the spirit of this fabulously infrequent 
occasion. Therefore, Noss retrieves the masks and brings them 
to the rear door of the shop. Cautiously, he steps out.
When he reaches the far end of the yard - a much greater 
distance from the shop than it had seemed - he sees a faint glow of 
fire through the cracks in the fence. There is a small door with 
clumsy black hinges and only a hole for a handle. Setting the five 
masks aside for a moment, Noss squats down and peers through the 
hole. On the other side of the fence is a dark yard exactly like the 
one on his side, save for the fire burning upon the ground. 
Gathered around the blaze are several figures - five, perhaps 
four - with hunched shoulders and spines curving toward the 
light of the flames. They are all wearing masks which at first seem 
securely fitted to their faces. But, one by one, these masks appear to 
loosen and slip down, as if each is losing hold upon its wearer. 
Finally, one of the figures pulls his off completely and tosses it into 
the fire, where it curls and shrinks into a wad of bubbling 
blackness. The others follow this action when their time comes. 
Relieved of their masks, the figures resume their shrugging stance. 
But the light of the fire now shines on four, yes four, smooth and 
faceless faces.
“These are the wrong ones, you little idiot,” says someone who is 
standing in the shadows by the fence. And Noss can only stare 
dumbly as a hand snatches up the masks and draws them into the 
darkness. “We have no more use for these!” the voice shouts.
Noss runs in retreat toward the shop, the five masks striking his 
narrow back and falling face-up on the ground. For he has gained 
a glimpse of the speaker in the shadows and now understands why 
those masks are no good to them now.
Once inside the shop, Noss leans upon the long counter to catch 
his breath. Then he looks up and sees that the shopkeeper has 
returned.
“There were some masks I brought out to the fence. They were 
the wrong ones,” he says to the shopkeeper.
“No trouble at all,” the other replies. “I’ll see that the right ones 
are delivered. Don’t worry, there’s still time. And how about you, 
then?”
“Me?”
“And the masks, I mean.”

164
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Oh, I’m sorry to have bothered you in the first place. It’s not at 
all what I thought . . . That is, maybe I should just—”
“Nonsense! You can’t leave now, you see. Let me take care of 
everything. Listen to me, I want you to go to a place where they 
know how to handle cases like this, at times like this. You’re not the 
only one who is a little frightened tonight. It’s right around the 
corner, this - no, that way, and across the street. It’s a tall gray 
building, but it hasn’t been there very long so watch you don’t miss 
it. And you have to go down some stairs around the side. Now will 
you please follow my advice?”
Noss nods obediently.
“Good, you won’t be sorry. Now go straight there. Don’t stop for 
anyone or anything. And here, don’t forget these,” the shopkeeper 
reminds Noss, handing him an unmatching pair of masks. “Good 
luck!”
Though there doesn’t seem to be anyone or anything to stop for, 
Noss does stop once or twice and dead in his tracks, as if someone 
behind him has just called his name. Then he thoughtfully caresses 
his chin and his smooth cheeks; he also touches other parts of his 
face, frantically, before proceeding toward the tall gray building. 
By the time he reaches the stairway at the side of the building, he 
cannot keep his hands ofT himself. Finally Noss puts on one of the 
masks - the sardonically grinning one. But somehow it no longer 
fits him the way it once did. It keeps slipping, little by little, as he 
descends the stairs, which look worn down by countless footsteps, 
bowed in the middle by the invisible tonnage of time. Yet Noss 
remembers the shopkeeper saying that this place hadn’t been here 
very long.
The room at the bottom, which Noss now enters, also looks very 
old and is very . . . quiet. At this late stage of the festival the room 
is crowded with occupants who do nothing but sit silently in the 
shadows, with a face here and there reflecting the dull light. These 
faces are horribly simple; they have no expression at all, or very 
slight expressions and ones that are strange. But they are finding 
their way back, little by little, to a familiar land of faces. And the 
process, if the ear listens closely, is not an entirely silent one. 
Perhaps this is how a garden would sound if it could be heard 
growing in the dead of night. It is that soft creaking of new faces 
breaking through old flesh. And they are growing very nicely. At 
length, with a torpid solemnity, Noss removes the old mask and 
tosses it away. It falls to the floor and lies there grinning in the dim 
glow of that room, fixed in an expression that, in days to come, 
many will find strange and wonder at.

TH E GREATER FESTIVAL OF MASKS
165
For the old festival of masks has ended, so that a greater festival 
may begin. And of the old time nothing will be said, because 
nothing will be known. But the old masks, false souls, will find 
something to remember, and perhaps they will speak of those days 
when they are alone behind doors that do not open, or in the 
darkness at the summit of stairways leading nowhere.

THE MUSIC OF THE 
MOON
ith considerable interest, and some disquiet, I listened while
a small pale man named Tressor told of his experience, his 
mild voice barely breaking the silence of a moonlit room. It seems 
he was one of those who could not sleep, and so he often spent this 
superfluous time walking until daybreak, exchanging his natural 
rest for those nocturnal visions which our city will disclose to 
certain eyes. And who can resist such enchantment, even with the 
knowledge that it is really a secret evil which gilds our world with 
wonders, while this same evil may ultimately ruin both these 
wonders and our world. Above all, this paradox may pertain to 
the ones who find no rest in their beds.
But to gaze up and glimpse some unusual shape loping across 
steep roofs with a bewildering agility might be compensation for 
many nights of sleepless hells. Or to hear a nearly sensible 
murmuring, by moonlight, in one of our narrow streets, and to 
follow these whispers through the night without ever being able to 
close in on them, yet without their ever fading in the slightest 
degree - this very well might relieve the wearing effects of a 
monotonous torment. And what if most of these incidents remain 
inconclusive, and what if they are left as merely enticing episodes, 
undocumented and underdeveloped? May they not still serve their 
purpose? And how many has our city saved in this manner, staying 
their hands from the knife, the rope, or the poison vial? However, 
as Tressor’s story was an exaggeration, a heightened as well as 
embellished version of such vague adventures, I was not surprised 
that its outcome was more than normally conclusive, if what I 
believe has happened to him is true.
During one of his blank nights of insomnia, he had wandered 
into the older section of town where there is unreserved activity at 
all hours. But Tressor was only interested in exhausting, not 
engaging those hours, in using them up with as little pain as 
possible. Thus, he gave no more than modest scrutiny to the

THE MUSIC OF TH E MOON
167
character standing by the steps of a rotten old building, except 
to note that this man was roughly his own stature and that he 
seemed to be loitering to no special purpose, his hands buried deep 
in the huge pouches of his overcoat and his eyes gazing upon the 
passersby with a look of profound patience. The building outside of 
which he stood was itself a rather plain structure, one notable only 
for its windows, the way some faces are distinctive solely by virtue 
of an interesting pair of eyes. These windows were not the slender 
rectangles of most of the other buildings along the street, but were 
in the shape of half-circles divided into several slice-shaped panes. 
And in the moonlight they seem to shine in a particularly striking 
way, though possibly this is merely an effect of contrast to the 
surrounding area, where a few clean pieces of glass will inevitably 
draw attention to themselves. I cannot say for certain which may 
be upheld as the explanation.
In any case, Tressor was passing by this building, the one with 
those windows, when the man standing by the steps shoved 
something at him, leaving it in his grasp. And as he did so, he 
looked straight and deep into poor Tressor’s eyes, which Tressor 
was quick to lower and fix upon the object in his hand. What 
had been given to him was a small sheet of paper, and further 
down the street Tressor paused by a lamp-post to read the thin 
lines of tiny letters. Printed in black ink on one side of a coarse, 
rather gummy grade of pulp, the handbill announced an 
evening’s entertainment later that same night at the building 
he had just passed. Tressor looked back at the man who had 
handed him this announcement, but he was no longer standing 
in his place. And for a moment this seemed very odd, for despite 
his casual, even restful appearance of waiting for no one and for 
nothing, this man did seem to have been somehow attached to 
that particular spot outside the building, and now his sudden 
absence caused Tressor to feel . . . confused.
Once again Tressor scanned the page in his hand, absent- 
mindedly rubbing it between his thumb and fingers. It did have 
a strange texture, like ashes mixed with grease. Soon, however, he 
began to feel that he was giving the matter too much thought; and, 
as he resumed his insomniac meandering, he flung the sheet aside. 
But before it reached the pavement, the handbill was snatched out 
of the air by someone walking very swiftly in the opposite 
direction. Glancing back, Tressor found it difficult to tell which 
of the other pedestrians had retrieved the paper. He then con­
tinued on his way.
But later that night, desperate for some distraction which mere

i 6 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
walking seemed no longer able to provide him, he returned to the 
building whose windows were shining half-circles.
He entered through the front door, which was unlocked and 
unattended, proceeding through silent, empty hallways. Along the 
walls were lamps in the form of dimly glowing spheres. Turning a 
corner, Tressor was suddenly faced with a black abyss, within 
which an unlighted stairway began to take shape as his eyes grew 
accustomed to the greater dark. After some hesitation he went up 
the stairs, playing a brittle music upon the old planks. From the 
first landing of the stairway he could see the soft lights above, and 
rather than turning back he ascended toward them. The second 
floor, however, much resembled the first, as did the third and all 
the succeeding floors. Reaching the heights of the building, Tressor 
began to roam around once again, even opening some of the doors.
But most of the rooms behind these doors were dark and empty, 
and the moonlight that shone through the perfectly clear windows 
fell upon bare, dust-covered floors and plain walls. Tressor was 
about to turn around and leave that place for good, when he 
spotted at the end of the last hallway a door with a faint yellow 
aura leaking out at its edges. He walked up to this door, which was 
slightly opened, and cautiously pushed it back.
Peering into the room, Tressor saw the yellowish globe of light 
which hung from the ceiling. Scanning slowly down the walls, he 
spied small, shadowlike things moving in corners and along the 
floor molding - the consequences of inept housekeeping, he 
concluded. Then he saw something by the far wall which made 
him quickly withdraw back into the hallway. What he had 
glimpsed were the dark outlines of four strangely shaped figures 
leaning upon the wall, the tallest of which was nearly as tall as he 
was and the smallest, far smaller. But once out in the hallway, he 
found these images had become clearer in his mind. He now felt 
almost sure of their true nature, although I have to confess that I 
could not imagine what they might have been until he spoke the 
keyword: “cases.”
Venturing back into the room, Tressor stood before the closed 
cases which in all likelihood belonged to a quartet of musicians. 
They looked very old and were bound like books in some murky 
cloth. Tressor ran his fingers along this material, then before long 
began fingering the tarnished metal latches of the violin case. But 
he suddenly stopped when he saw a group of shadows rising on the 
wall in front of him.
“Why have you come in here?” asked a voice which sounded 
both exhausted and malicious.

THE MUSIC OF TH E  MOON
169
“I saw the light,” answered Tressor without turning around, 
still crouching over the violin case. Somehow the sound of his own 
voice echoing in that empty room disturbed him more than that of 
his interrogator, though he could not at the moment say why this 
was. He counted four shadows on the wall, three of them tall and 
trim, and the fourth somewhat smaller but with an enormous, 
misshapen head.
“Stand up,” ordered the same voice as before. Tressor stood up.
“Turn around.”
Tressor slowly turned around. And he was relieved to see 
standing before him three rather ordinary-looking men and a 
woman whose head was enveloped by pale, ragged clouds of 
hair. Moreover, among the men was the one who had given 
Tressor the handbill earlier that night. But he now seemed to be 
much taller than he had been outside in the street.
“You handed me the paper,” Tressor reminded the man as if 
trying to revive an old friendship. And again his voice sounded 
queer to him as it reverberated in that empty room.
The tall man looked to his companions, surveying each of the 
other three faces in turn, as though reading some silent message in 
their expressionless features. Then he removed a piece of paper 
from inside his coat.
“You mean this,” he said to Tressor.
“Yes, that’s it.”
They all smiled gently at him, and the tall man said, “Then 
you’re in the wrong place. You should be one floor up. But the 
main stairway won’t take you to it. There’s another, smaller flight 
of stairs in the back hallway. You should be able to see it. Are your 
eyes good?”
“Yes.”
“Good as they look?” asked one of the other men.
“I can see very well, if that’s what you mean.”
“Yes, that’s exactly what we mean,” said the woman.
Then the four of them stepped back to make a path for Tressor, 
two on either side of him, and he started to walk from the room.
“There are already some people upstairs for the concert,” said 
the tall man as Tressor reached the door. “We will be up shortly - 
to play!”
“Yes . . . yes . . . yes,” muttered the others as they began 
fumbling with the dark cases containing their instruments.
“ Their voices,” thought Tressor, “not my voice.”
As Tressor later explained it to me, the voices of the musicians, 
unlike his own, made no echoes of any kind in the empty room.

,7°
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Nevertheless, Tressor went to find the stairway, which at first 
looked like an empty shaft of blackness in the corner of the back 
hall. Guided by the fragile railing that twisted in a spiral, he 
reached the uppermost level of the old building. And there the 
hallways were much narrower than those below, mere passage­
ways lit by spherical lamps which were caked with dust and no 
longer appeared at even intervals. There were also fewer doors, 
and these could be better found by touch than by sight. But 
Tressor’s eyes were very good, as he claimed, and he found the 
room where a number of people were already gathered, true to the 
musicians' claim.
I can imagine that it was not easy for Tressor to decide 
whether or not to go through with what he had started that 
night. If the inability to sleep sometimes leads a sufferer into 
strange or perilous consolations, Tressor still retained enough of a 
daylight way of thought to make a compromise. He did not enter 
the room where he saw people slumped down in seats scattered 
about, the black silhouettes of human heads visible only in the 
moonlight which poured through the pristine glass of those 
particular windows. Instead, he hid in the shadows farther 
down the hallway. And when the musicians arrived upstairs, 
burdened with their instruments, they filed into the moonlit room 
without suspecting Tressor’s presence outside. The door closed 
behind them with a click that did not echo in the narrow 
hallway.
For a few moments there was only silence, a purer silence than 
Tressor had ever known, like the silence of a dark, lifeless world. 
Then sound began to enter the silence, but so inconspicuously that 
Tressor could not tell when the absolute silence had ended and an 
embellished silence had begun. Sound became music, slow and 
muffled music in the soft darkness, somewhat muted as it passed 
through the intervening door. At first there seemed to be only a 
single note wavering alone in a universe of darkness and silence, 
coaxing its hearers to an understanding of its subtle voice, to sense 
its secrets and perhaps to hear the unheard. The single note then 
burst into a shower of tones, proliferating harmonies, and at that 
exact moment a second note began to follow the same course; then 
another note, and another. There was now more music than could 
possibly be contained by that earlier silence, expansive as it may 
have seemed. Soon there was no space remaining for silence, or 
perhaps music and silence became confused, indistinguishable 
from each other, as colors may merge into whiteness. And at 
last, for Tressor, that interminable sequence of wakeful nights,

TH E MUSIC OF T H E MOON
171
each a mirror to the one before it and the one to follow, was finally 
broken.
When Tressor awoke, the light of a quiet gray dawn filled the 
narrow hallway where he lay hunched between peeling walls. 
Recalling in a moment the events of the previous night, he 
scrambled to his feet and began walking toward the room whose 
door was still closed. He put his ear up to the rough wood but 
heard no sounds on the other side. In his mind a memory of 
wonderful music rose up and then quickly faded. As before, the 
music sounded muffled to him, diminished in its power because he 
had been too fearful to enter the room where the music was played. 
But he entered it now.
And he was surprised to see the audience still in their seats, 
which were all facing four empty chairs and four abandoned 
instruments of varying size. The musicians themselves were 
nowhere in sight.
The spectators were all dressed in white, hooded robes woven of 
some gauzy material, almost like ragged shrouds wrapped tightly 
around them. They were very quiet and very still, perhaps sleeping 
that profound sleep from which Tressor had just risen. Tressor felt 
a strange fear of this congregation, strange because he also sensed 
that they were completely helpless and no more capable of 
voluntary action than a roomful of abandoned dolls. As his eyes 
became sharper in the grayish twilight of the room, the robes worn 
by these paralyzed figures began to look more and more like 
bandages of some kind, a heavy white netting which bound them 
securely. “But they were not bandages, or robes, or shrouds,” 
Tressor finally told me. “They were webs, thick layers of webs 
which I first thought covered everyone’s entire body.”
But this was only how it appeared to Tressor from his per­
spective behind the mummified audience. For as he moved along 
the outer edge of the terrible gathering, progressing toward the 
four empty chairs at the front of the room, he saw that each stringy 
white cocoon was woven to expose the face of its inhabitant. And 
he also saw that the expressions on these faces were very similar, 
and that they might almost have been described as serene, if only 
those faces had been whole. But none of them seemed to have any 
eyes: the crowd was faced in the same direction to witness a 
spectacle it could no longer see, gazing at nothing with bleeding 
sockets. All save one of them, as Tressor finally discovered.
At the end of a rather chaotic row of chairs in the back of the 
room, one member of the dead audience stirred in his seat. As

172
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Tressor slowly approached this figure, with vague thoughts of 
rescue in his mind, he noticed that its eyelids were shut. Without 
delaying for an instant, he began tearing at the webs which 
imprisoned the victim, speaking words of hope as he worked at 
the horrible mesh. But then the closed eyelids of the bound figure 
popped open and looked around, ultimately focusing on Tressor.
“You’re the only one,” said Tressor, laboring at the webby 
bonds.
“Shhhh,” said the other, “I’m waiting.”
Tressor paused in confusion, his fingers tangled with a gruesome 
stufT which felt sticky and abrasive, intolerably strange to touch.
“They might return,” insisted Tressor, even though he was not 
entirely sure whom he meant by “they.”
“They will return,” answered the other’s soft but excited voice. 
“With the moon they will return with their wonderful music.” 
Appalled by this enigma, fearful of things he could not name, 
Tressor began to back away. And I suspect that from within a 
number of those hollow sockets, four of them to be exact, the tiny 
eyes of strange creatures were watching him as he fled that horrible 
room.
Afterward Tressor visited me night after night to tell me about the 
music, until it seemed I could almost hear it myself and could tell 
his story as my own. Soon he talked only about the music, as he 
recalled hearing it somewhat dulled by a closed door. When he 
tried to imagine what it would be like to have heard the music, as 
he phrased it, “in the flesh,” it was obvious that he had forgotten 
the fate of those who did hear it in this way. His voice became more 
and more faint as the music grew louder and clearer in his mind. 
Then one night Tressor stopped coming to visit me.
And now it seems that I am the one who cannot sleep, especially 
when I see the moon hovering above our city -  the moon all pale 
and fat, glaring down on us from within its gauzy webs of clouds. 
And how can I rest beneath its enchanting gaze? How difficult it is 
to keep myself from straying into a certain section of town as night 
after night I wander strange streets alone.

THE JOURNAL OF 
J.P. DRAPEAU
Introduction
It was late and we had been drinking. My friend, a poet who can 
become very excitable at times, looked across the table at me. Then 
he revived a pet grievance of his as though I had not heard it all 
before.
“Where is the writer,” he began, “who is unstained by any 
habits of the human, who would be the ideal of everything alien 
to living, and whose own eccentricity, in its darkest phase, would 
turn in on itself to form increasingly more complex patterns of 
strangeness? Where is the writer who has remained his entire life 
in some remote dream that he inhabited from his day of birth, if 
not long before? Where is the writer from some mist-shrouded 
backwater of the earth - the city of Bruges itself, that withered 
place which some dreamer has described as ‘a sumptuous corpse 
of the Middle Ages that sings to itself from innumerable bell- 
towers and lays bony bridges across the black veins of its old 
canals.’
“But perhaps our writer’s home would have to be an even older, 
more decaying Bruges in some farther, more obscure Flanders . . . 
the one envisioned by Breughel and by Ensor. Where is the writer 
who was begotten by two passionate masks in the course of those 
macabre festivities called kermesse? Who was abandoned to develop 
in his own way, left to a lonely evolution in shadowed streets and 
beside sluggish canals. Who was formed by the dreams around him 
as much as those within him, and who filled himself with strange 
learning. Where is this writer, the one whose entangled hallucina­
tions could only be accommodated by the most intimate of diaries? 
And this diary, this journal of the most unnecessary man who ever 
lived, would be a record of the most questionable experiences ever 
known, and the most beautiful.”
“Of course, there is no such writer,” I replied. “But there’s

*74
THOMAS LIGOTTI
always Drapeau. Out of anyone I could name, he most nearly 
meets, if I may say, those rather severe prerequisites of yours. Living 
the whole of his life in Bruges, keeping those notebooks of his, and 
he—”
But my friend the poet only moaned in despair:
“Drapeau, always Drapeau.”
Excerpts from the journal
April 31, 189-
I have noticed that certain experiences are allowed to languish in 
the corners of life, are not allowed to circulate as freely as others. My 
own, for example. Since childhood, not one day has passed in 
which I have failed to hear the music of graveyards. And yet, to my 
knowledge, never has another soul on earth made mention of this 
phenomenon. Is the circulation of the living so poor that it cannot 
carry these dead notes? It must be a mere trickle!
December 24, 189-
Two tiny corpses, one male and the other female, live in that 
enormous closet in my bedroom. They are also very old, but still 
they are quick enough to hide themselves whenever I need to enter 
the closet to get something. I keep all my paraphernalia in there, 
stuffed into trunks or baskets and piled quite out of reach. I can’t 
even see the floor or the walls any longer, and only if I hold a light 
high over my head can I study the layers of cobwebs floating about 
near the ceiling. After I close the door of the closet, its two 
miniature inhabitants resume their activities. Their voices are 
only faint squeaks which during the day hardly bother me at 
all. But sometimes I am kept awake far into the night by those 
interminable conversations of theirs.
May 31, 189-
After serving out the hours of a night in which sleep was absolutely 
forbidden, I went out for a walk. I had not gone far when I became 
spectator to a sad scene. Some yards ahead of me on the street, an 
old man was being forcibly led from a house by two other men. 
They had him in restraints and were delivering him to a waiting 
vehicle. Laughing hysterically, the man was apparently destined 
for the asylum. As the struggling trio reached the street, the eyes of 
the laughing man met my own. Suddenly he stopped laughing. 
Then, in a burst of resistance, he broke free of his escorts, ran

TH E JO U R N A L  OF J. P. DRAPEAU
*75
toward me, and fell right into my arms. Since his own were so 
tightly bound, I had to hold up his full weight.
“Never tell them what it means,” he said frantically, almost 
weeping.
“How can I tell them what I don’t know?”
“Swear!” he demanded.
But by then his pursuers had caught up with him. As they 
dragged him ofThe began laughing just as before, and the peals of 
his laughter, in the early morning quiet, were soon devoured by 
the pealing of several church bells. Poor lunatic. This was one of 
the most malignant conspiracies I had ever witnessed; the bells, I 
mean. (They are everywhere.) This was also what made me decide 
that I had better keep the madman’s secret after all.
August U 189-
As a child I maintained some very strange notions. For instance, I 
used to believe that during the night, while I slept, witches and 
monkeys removed parts of my body and played games with them, 
hiding my arms and legs, rolling my head across the floor. Of 
course I abandoned this belief as soon as I entered school, but not 
until much later did I discover the truth about it. After assimilat­
ing many facts from various sources and allowing them to mingle 
in my mind, I realized something. It happened one night as I was 
crossing a bridge that stretched over a narrow canal. (This was in a 
part of town fairly distant from where I live.) Pausing for a 
moment, as I usually do when crossing one of these bridges, I 
gazed not down into the dark waters of the canal, as I also usually 
do, but upwards through the branches of overhanging trees. It was 
those stars, I knew that now: certain of them had been promised 
specific parts of my body; in the darkest hours of the night, when 
one is unusually sensitive to such things, I could -  and still can, 
though just barely -  feel the force of these stars tugging away at 
various points, eager for the moment of my death when each of 
them might carry ofF that part of me which is theirs by right. Of 
course a child would misinterpret this experience. And how often I 
have found that every superstition has its basis in truth.
October 9, 189-
Last night I visited one of the little theaters and stood at the back 
for a while. Onstage was a magician, shiny black hair parted 
straight down the middle, with full prestidigitorial regalia about 
him: a long box to his left (moons and stars), a tall box to his right 
(oriental designs), and before him a low table covered with a red

176
THOMAS LIGOTTI
velvet cloth littered with divers objects. The audience, a full house, 
applauded wildly after each illusion. At one point the magician 
divided the various sections of his assistant into separate boxes, 
which he then proceeded to move to distant areas of the stage, 
while the dismembered hands and feet continued to wiggle about 
and a decapitated head laughed loudly. The audience was at great 
pains to express its amusement. “Isn’t it incredible!” exclaimed a 
man standing beside me. “If you say so,” I replied, and then 
headed for the exit, realizing that for me such things simply do not 
hold much interest.
November 1, 189-
From the earliest days of man there has endured the conviction 
that there is an order of existence which is entirely strange to him. 
It does indeed seem that the strict order of the visible world is only 
a semblance, one providing certain gross materials which become 
the basis for subtle improvisations of invisible powers. Hence, it may 
appear to some that a leafless tree is not a tree but a signpost to 
another realm; that an old house is not a house but a thing 
possessing a will of its own; that the dead may throw off that 
heavy blanket of earth to walk in their sleep, and in ours. And these 
are merely a few of the infinite variations on the themes of the 
natural order as it is usually conceived.
But is there really a strange world? Of course. Are there, then, 
two worlds? Not at all. There is only our own world and it alone is 
alien to us, intrinsically so by virtue of its lack of mysteries. If only 
it actually were deranged by invisible powers, if only it were 
susceptible to real strangeness, perhaps it would seem more like 
a home to us, and less like an empty room filled with the echoes of 
this dreadful improvising. To think that we might have found 
comfort in a world suited to our nature, only to end up in one so 
resoundingly strange!
January 1, 189-
There is a solitary truth which, whether for good or ill I don’t 
know, cannot yet be expressed on this earth. This is very strange, 
since everything - outward scenes as much as inward ones - 
suggests this truth and like some fantastic game of charades is 
always trying to coax the secret into the open. The eyes of certain 
crudely fashioned dolls are especially suggestive. And distant 
laughter. In rare moments I feel myself very close to setting it 
down in my journal, just as I would any other revelation. It would 
only be a few sentences, I’m sure. But whenever I feel them

TH E JO U R N A L OF J.P. DRAPEAU
*77
beginning to take shape in my mind, the page before me will 
not welcome my pen. Afterward I become fatigued with my failure 
and suffer headaches that may last for days. At these times I also 
tend to see odd things reflected in windows. Even after a full week 
has passed I may continue to wake up in the middle of the night, 
the silence of my room faintly vibrant with a voice that cries out to 
me from another universe.
March 30, 190-
Out of sheer absent-mindedness I had stared at my reflection in the 
mirror a little too deeply. I should say that that mirror has been 
hanging from that wall for more years, I would guess, than I have 
been on this earth. It’s no surprise, then, that sooner or later it 
should get the edge on me. Up to a certain point there were no 
problems to speak of: there were only my eyes, my nose, my mouth, 
and that was that. But then it began to seem that those eyes were 
regarding me, rather than I them; that that mouth was about to 
speak things I had no notion of. Finally, I realized that an entirely 
different creature was hiding behind my face, making it wholly 
unrecognizable to me. Let me say that I spent considerable time 
reshaping my reflection into what it should be.
Later, when I was out walking, I stopped dead on the street. 
Ahead of me, standing beneath a lamp hanging from an old wall, 
was the outline of a figure of my general size and proportions. He 
was looking the other way but very stiffly and very tense, as if 
waiting anxiously for the precise moment when he would suddenly 
twist about-face. If that should happen, I knew what I would see: 
my eyes, my nose, my mouth, and behind those features a being 
strange beyond all description. I retraced my steps back home and 
went immediately to bed.
But I couldn’t sleep. All night long a greenish glow radiated 
from the mirror in triumph.
No Date
I had just finished a book* in which there is an old town strung 
with placid meandering canals. I closed the book and went over to 
the window. This is an old town, if medieval counts as old, strung 
with placid meandering canals. The town in the book is often mist 
shrouded. This town is often mist shrouded. That town has close 
crumbling houses, odd arching bridges, innummerable church 
towers, and narrow twisting streets that end in queer little 
courtyards. So has this one, needless to say. And the infinitely
* Possibly the novel Bruges-la-morte (1892) by Georges Rodenbach. (T.L.)

i 7 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
hollow sounding of the bells in the book, at early morning and 
sullen twilight, is the same as your sounding bells, my lovely town. 
Thus, I pass easily between one town and the other, pleasantly 
confusing them.
O my storybook town, strange as death itself, I have made your 
mysteries mine, mine yours, and have sufTered a few brief chapters 
in your sumptuous history of decay. I have studied your most 
obscure passages and found them as dark as the waters of your 
canals.
My town, my storybook, myself, how long we have held on! But 
it seems we will have to make up for this endurance and each, in 
our turn, will disappear. Every brick of yours, every bone of mine, 
every word in our book - everything gone forever. Everything, 
perhaps, except the sound of those bells, haunting an empty mist 
through an eternal twilight.

VASTARIEN
ithin the blackness of his sleep a few lights began to glow like
candles in a cloistered cell. Their illumination was unsteady 
and dim, issuing from no definite source. Nonetheless, he now 
discovered many shapes beneath the shadows: tall buildings whose 
rooftops nodded groundward, wide buildings whose facades 
seemed to follow the curve of a street, dark buildings whose 
windows and doorways tilted like badly hung paintings. And 
even if he found himself unable to fix his own location in this 
scene, he knew where his dreams had delivered him once more.
Even as the warped structures multiplied in his vision, crowding 
the lost distance, he possessed a sense of intimacy with each of 
them, a peculiar knowledge of the spaces within them and of the 
streets which coiled themselves around their mass. Once again he 
knew the depths of their foundations, where an obscure life seemed 
to establish itself, a secret civilization of echoes flourishing among 
groaning walls. Yet upon his probing more extensively into such 
interiors, certain difficulties presented themselves: stairways that 
wandered off-course into useless places; caged elevators that urged 
unwanted stops on their passengers; thin ladders ascending into a 
maze of shafts and conduits, the dark valves and arteries of a 
petrified and monstrous organism.
And he knew that every corner of this corroded world was 
prolific with choices, even if they had to be made blindly in a place 
where clear consequences and a hierarchy of possibilities were 
lacking. For there might be a room whose shabby and soundless 
decor exudes a desolate serenity which at first attracts the visitor, 
who then discovers certain figures enveloped in plush furniture, 
figures that do not move or speak but only stare; and, concluding 
that these weary mannikins have exercised a bizarre indulgence in 
repose, the visitor must ponder the alternatives: to linger or to 
leave?
Eluding the claustral enchantments of such rooms, his gaze now 
roamed the streets of this dream. He scanned the altitudes beyond 
the high sloping roofs: there the stars seemed to be no more than

i 8 o
THOMAS LIGOTTI
silvery cinders which showered up from the mouths of great 
chimneys and clung to something dark and dense looming 
above, something that closed in upon each black horizon. It 
appeared to him that certain high towers nearly breached this 
sagging blackness, stretching themselves nightward to attain the 
farthest possible remove from the world below. And toward the 
peak of one of the highest towers he spied vague silhouettes that 
moved hectically in a bright window, twisting and leaning upon 
the glass like shadow-puppets in the fever of some mad dispute.
Through the mazy streets his vision slowly glided, as if carried 
along by a sluggish draft. Darkened windows reflected the beams 
of stars and streetlamps; lighted windows, however dim their glow, 
betrayed strange scenes which were left behind long before their 
full mystery could overwhelm the dreaming traveller. He wan­
dered into thoroughfares more remote, soaring past cluttered 
gardens and crooked gates, drifting alongside an expansive wall 
that seemed to border an abyss, and floating over bridges that 
arched above the black purling waters of canals.
Near a certain street corner, a place of supernatural clarity and 
stillness, he saw two figures standing beneath the crystalline glaze 
of a lamp ensconsed high upon a wall of carved stone. Their 
shadows were perfect columns of blackness upon the livid pave­
ment; their faces were a pair of faded masks concealing profound 
schemes. And they seemed to have lives of their own, with no 
awareness of their dreaming observer, who wished only to live with 
these specters and know their dreams, to remain in this place where 
everything was transfixed in the order of the unreal.
Never again, it seemed, could he be forced to abandon this realm 
of beautiful shadows.
Victor Keirion awoke with a brief convulsion of his limbs, as if he 
had been chaotically scrambling to break his fall from an imagin­
ary height. For a moment he held his eyes closed, hoping to 
preserve the dissipating euphoria of the dream. Finally he blinked 
once or twice. Moonlight through a curtainless window allowed 
him the image of his outstretched arms and his somewhat twisted 
hands. Releasing his awkward hold on the edge of the sheeted 
mattress, he rolled onto his back. Then he groped around until his 
fingers found the cord dangling from the light above the bed. A 
small, barely furnished room appeared.
He pushed himself up and reached toward the painted metal 
nightstand. Through the spaces between his fingers he saw the pale 
gray binding of a book and some of the dark letters tooled upon its

VASTARIEN
181
cover: V, S, R, N. Suddenly he withdrew his hand without 
touching the book, for the magical intoxication of the dream 
had died, and he feared that he would not be able to revive it.
Freeing himself from the coarse bedcovers, he sat at the edge of 
the mattress, elbows resting on his legs and hands loosely folded. 
His hair and eyes were pale, his complexion rather grayish, 
suggesting the color of certain clouds or that of long confine­
ment. The single window in the room was only a few steps away, 
but he kept himself from approaching it, from even glancing in its 
direction. He knew exactly what he would see at that time of night: 
tall buildings, wide buildings, dark buildings, a scattering of stars 
and lights, and some lethargic movement in the streets below.
In so many ways the city outside the window was a semblance of 
that other place, which now seemed impossibly far off and 
inaccessible. But the likeness was evident only to his inner 
vision, only in the recollected images he formed when his eyes 
were closed or out of focus. It would be difficult to conceive of a 
creature for whom this world - its bare form seen with open eyes -  
represented a coveted paradise.
Now standing before the window, his hands tearing into the 
pockets of a papery bathrobe, he saw that something was missing 
from the view, some crucial property that was denied to the stars 
above and the streets below, some unearthly essence needed to save 
them. The word unearthly reverberated in the room. In that place 
and at that hour, the paradoxical absence, the missing quality, 
became clear to him: it was the element of the unreal.
For Victor Keirion belonged to that wretched sect of souls who 
believe that the only value of this world lies in its power -  at certain 
times - to suggest another world. Nevertheless, the place he now 
surveyed through the high window could never be anything but 
the most gauzy phantom of that other place, nothing save a 
shadowy mimic of the anatomy of that great dream. And 
although there were indeed times when one might be deceived, 
isolated moments when a gift for disguise triumphs, the imperso­
nation could never be perfect or lasting. No true challenge to the 
rich unreality of Vastarien, where every shape suggested a 
thousand others, every sound disseminated everlasting echoes, 
every word founded a world. No horror, no joy was the equal of 
the abysmally vibrant sensations known in this place that was 
elsewhere, this spellbinding retreat where all experiences were 
interwoven to compose fantastic textures of feeling, a fine and 
dark tracery of limitless patterns. For everything in the unreal 
points to the infinite, and everything in Vastarien was unreal,

IÖ2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
unbounded by the tangible lie of existing. Even its most humble 
aspects proclaimed this truth: what door, he wondered, in any 
other world could imply the abundant and strange possibilities 
that belonged to the entrancing doors in the dream?
Then, as he focused his eyes upon a distant part of the city, he 
recalled a particular door, one of the least suggestive objects he had 
ever confronted, intimating little of what lay beyond.
It was a rectangle of smudged glass within another rectangle of 
scuffed wood, a battered thing lodged within a brick wall at the 
bottom of a stairway leading down from a crumbling street. And 
it pushed easily inward, merely a delicate formality between the 
underground shop and the outside world. Inside was an open 
room vaguely circular in shape, unusual in seeming more like the 
lobby of an old hotel than a bookstore. The circumference of the 
room was composed of crowded bookshelves whose separate 
sections were joined to one another to create an irregular 
polygon of eleven sides, with a long desk standing where a 
twelfth would have been. Beyond the desk stood a few more 
bookshelves arranged in aisles, their monotonous length leading 
into shadows. At the furthest point from this end of the shop, he 
began his circuit of the shelves, which appeared so promising in 
their array of old and ruddy bindings, like remnants of some 
fabulous autumn.
Very soon, however, the promise was betrayed and the mystique 
of the Librairie de Grimoires, in accord with his expectations, was 
stripped away to reveal, in his eyes, a side-show of charlatanry. For 
this disillusionment he had only himself to blame. Moreover, he 
could barely articulate the nature of the discrepancy between what 
he had hoped to find and what he actually found in such places. 
Aside from this hope, there was little basis for his belief that there 
existed some other arcana, one of a different kind altogether from 
that proffered by the books before him, all of which were sodden 
with an obscene reality, falsely hermetic ventures which consisted 
of circling the same absurd landscape. The other worlds portrayed 
in these books inevitably served as annexes of this one; they were 
impostors of the authentic unreality which was the only realm of 
redemption, however gruesome it might appear. And it was this 
terminal landscape that he sought, not those rituals of the “way” 
that never arrives, heavens or hells that are mere pretexts for 
circumnavigating the real and revelling in it. For he dreamed of 
strange volumes that turned away from all earthly light to become 
lost in their own nightmares, pages that preached a nocturnal

VASTARIEN
183
salvation, a liturgy of shadows, catechism of phantoms. His 
absolute: to dwell among the ruins of reality.
And it seemed to surpass all probability that there existed no 
precedent for this dream, no elaboration of this vision into a word, 
a delirious bible that would be the blight of all others - a scripture 
that would begin in apocalypse and lead its disciple to the wreck of 
all creation.
He had, in fact, come upon passages in certain books that 
approached this ideal, hinting to the reader - almost admonishing 
him - that the page before his eyes was about to ofTer a view from 
the abyss and cast a wavering light on desolate hallucinations. To 
become the wind in the dead of winter, so might begin an enticing verse 
of dreams. But soon the bemazed visionary would falter, retracting 
the promised scene of a shadow kingdom at the end of all entity, 
perhaps offering an apologetics for this lapse into the unreal. The 
work would then once more take up the universal theme, disclosing 
its true purpose in belaboring the most futile and profane of all 
ambitions: power, with knowledge as its drudge. The vision of a 
disastrous enlightenment, of a catastrophic illumination, was 
conjured up in passing and then cast aside. What remained was 
invariably a metaphysics as systematically trivial and debased as 
the physical laws it purported to transcend, a manual outlining the 
path to some hypothetical state of absolute glory. What remained 
lost was the revelation that nothing ever known has ended in glory; 
that all which ends does so in exhaustion, in confusion, and debris.
Nevertheless, a book that contained even a false gesture toward 
his truly eccentric absolute might indeed serve his purpose. 
Directing the attention of a bookseller to selected contents of 
such books, he would say: “I have an interest in a certain subject 
area, perhaps you will see . . . that is, I wonder, do you know of 
other, what should I say, sources that you would be able to 
recommend for my . .
Occasionally he was referred to another bookseller or to the 
owner of a private collection. And ultimately he would be forced to 
realize that he had been grotesquely misunderstood when he found 
himself on the fringe of a society devoted to some strictly demonic 
enterprise.
The very bookshop in which he was now browsing represented 
only the most recent digression in a search without progress. But he 
had learned to be cautious and would try to waste as little time as 
possible in discovering if there was anything hidden for him here. 
Certainly not on the shelves which presently surrounded him.

184
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Have you seen our friend?” asked a nearby voice, startling him 
somewhat. Victor Keirion turned to face the stranger. The man 
was rather small and wore a black overcoat; his hair was also black 
and fell loosely across his forehead. Besides his general appearance, 
there was also something about his presence that made one think of 
a crow, a scavenging creature in wait. “Has he come out of his 
hole?” the man asked, gesturing toward the empty desk and the 
dark area behind it.
“I’m sorry, I haven’t seen anyone,” Keirion replied. “I only 
now noticed you.”
“I can’t help being quiet. Look at these little feet,” the man said, 
pointing to a highly polished pair of black shoes. Without thinking, 
Keirion looked down; then, feeling duped, he looked up again at 
the smiling stranger.
“You look very bored,” said the human crow.
“I’m sorry?”
“Never mind. I can see that I’m bothering you.” Then the man 
walked away, his coat flapping slightly, and began browsing some 
distant bookshelves. “I’ve never seen you in here before,” he said 
from across the room.
“I’ve never been in here before,” Keirion answered.
“Have you ever read this?” the stranger asked, pulling down a 
book and holding up its wordless black cover.
“Never,” Keirion replied without so much as glancing at the 
book. Somehow this seemed the best action to take with this 
character, who appeared to be foreign in some indefinable way, 
intangibly alien.
“Well, you must be looking for something special,” continued 
the other man, replacing the black book on its shelf. “And I know 
what that’s like, when you’re looking for something very special. 
Have you ever heard of a book, an extremely special book, that is 
not . . . yes, that is not about something, but actually is that 
something?”
For the first time the obnoxious stranger had managed to 
intrigue Keirion rather than annoy him. “That sounds . . . ,” 
he started to say, but then the other man exclaimed:
“There he is, there he is. Excuse me.”
It seemed that the proprietor - that mutual friend - had finally 
made his appearance and was now standing behind the desk, 
looking toward his two customers. “My friend,” said the crow-man 
as he stepped with outstretched hand over to the smoothly bald 
and softly fat gentleman. The two of them briefly shook hands; 
they whispered for a few moments. Then the crow-man was invited

VASTARI EN
i85
behind the desk, and - led by the heavy, unsmiling bookseller - 
made his way into the darkness at the back of the shop. In a distant 
corner of that darkness the brilliant rectangle of a doorway 
suddenly flashed into outline, admitting through its frame a 
large, twoheaded shadow.
Left alone among the worthless volumes of that shop, Victor 
Keirion felt the sad frustration of the uninvited, the abandoned. 
More than ever he had become infected with hopes and curiosities 
of an indeterminable kind. And he soon found it impossible to 
remain outside that radiant little room the other two had entered, 
and on whose threshold he presently stood in silence.
The room was a cramped bibliographic cubicle within which 
stood another cubicle formed by free-standing bookcases, creating 
four very narrow aisleways in the space between them. From the 
doorway he could not see how the inner cubicle might be entered, 
but he heard the voices of the others whispering within. Stepping 
quietly, he began making his way along the perimeter of the room, 
his eyes voraciously scanning a wealth of odd-looking volumes.
Immediately he sensed that something of a special nature 
awaited his discovery, and the evidence for this intuition began 
to build. Each book that he examined served as a clue in this 
delirious investigation, a cryptic sign which engaged his powers of 
interpretation and imparted the faith to proceed. Many of the 
works were written in foreign languages he did not read; some 
appeared to be composed in ciphers based on familiar characters 
and others seemed to be transcribed in a wholly artificial crypto­
graphy. But in every one of these books he found an oblique 
guidance, some feature of more or less indirect significance: a 
strangeness in the typeface, pages and bindings of uncommon 
texture, abstract diagrams suggesting no orthodox ritual or occult 
system. Even greater anticipation was inspired by certain illu­
strated plates, mysterious drawings and engravings that depicted 
scenes and situations unlike anything he could name. And such 
works as Cynothoglys or The Noctuary of Tine conveyed schemes so 
bizarre, so remote from known texts and treatises of the esoteric 
tradition, that he felt assured of the sense of his quest.
The whispering grew louder, though no more distinct, as he 
edged around a corner of that inner cubicle and anxiously noted 
the opening at its far end. At the same time he was distracted, for 
no apparent reason, by a small grayish volume leaning within a 
gap between larger and more garish tomes. The little book had 
been set upon the highest shelf, making it necessary for him to 
stretch himself, as if on an upright torture rack, to reach it. Trying

i 8 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
not to give away his presence by the sounds of his pain, he finally 
secured the ashen-colored object - as pale as his own coloring - 
between the tips of his first two fingers. Mutely he strained to slide 
it quietly from its place; this act accomplished, he slowly shrunk 
down to his original stature and looked into the book’s brittle 
pages.
It seemed to be a chronicle of strange dreams. Yet somehow the 
passages he examined were less a recollection of unruled visions 
than a tangible incarnation of them, not mere rhetoric but the 
thing itself. The use of language in the book was arrantly 
unnatural and the book’s author unknown. Indeed, the text 
conveyed the impression of speaking for itself and speaking only 
to itself, the words flowing together like shadows that were cast by 
no forms outside the book. But although this volume appeared to 
be composed in a vernacular of mysteries, its words did inspire a 
sure understanding and created in their reader a visceral appre­
hension of the world they described, existing inseparable from it. 
Could this truly be the invocation of Vastarien, that improbable 
world to which those gnarled letters on the front of the book 
alluded? And was it a world at all? Rather the unreal essence of 
one, all natural elements purged by an occult process of extraction, 
all days distilled into dreams and nights into nightmares. Each 
passage he entered in the book both enchanted and appalled him 
with images and incidents so freakish and chaotic that his usual 
sense of these terms disintegrated along with everything else. 
Rampant oddity seemed to be the rule of the realm; imperfection 
became the source of the miraculous - wonders of deformity and 
marvels of miscreation. There was horror, undoubtedly. But it was 
a horror uncompromised by any feeling of lost joy or thwarted 
redemption; rather, it was a deliverance by damnation. And if 
Vastarien was a nightmare, it was a nightmare transformed in 
spirit by the utter absence of refuge: nightmare made normal.
“I’m sorry, I didn’t see that you had drifted in here,” said the 
bookseller in a high thin voice. He had just emerged from the inner 
chamber of the room and was standing with arms folded across his 
wide chest. “Please don’t touch anything. And may I take that 
from you?” The right arm of the bookseller reached out, then 
returned to its former place when the man with the pale eyes did 
not relinquish the merchandise.
“I think I would like to purchase it,” said Keirion. “I’m sure I 
would, if. .
“Of course, if the price is reasonable,” finished the bookseller. 
“But who knows, you might not be able to understand how

VASTARIEN
valuable these books can be. That one . . .’’ he said, removing a 
little pad and pencil from inside his jacket and scribbling briefly. 
He ripped off*the top sheet and held it up for the would-be buyer to 
see, then confidently put away all writing materials, as if that 
would be the end of it.
“But there must be some latitude for bargaining,” Keirion 
protested.
“I’m afraid not,” answered the bookseller. “Not with something 
that is the only one of its kind, as are many of these volumes. Yet 
that one book you are holding, that single copy . . . ”
A hand touched the bookseller’s shoulder and seemed to switch 
ofThis voice. Then the crow-man stepped into the aisleway, his eyes 
fixed upon the object under discussion, and asked: “Don’t you find 
that the book is somewhat . . . difficult?”
“Difficult,” repeated Keirion. “I’m not sure ... If you mean 
that the language is strange, I would have to agree, but—”
“No,” interjected the bookseller, “that’s not what he means at 
all.”“Excuse us for a moment,” said the crow-man.
Then both men went back into the inner room, where they 
whispered for some time. When the whispering ceased, the book­
seller came forth and announced that there had been a mistake. 
The book, while something of a curiosity, was worth a good deal 
less than the price earlier quoted. The revised evaluation, while 
still costly, was nevertheless within the means of this particular 
buyer, who agreed at once to pay it.
Thus began Victor Keirion’s preoccupation with a certain book 
and a certain hallucinated world, though to make a distinction 
between these two phenomena ultimately seemed an error: the 
book, indeed, did not merely describe that strange world but, in 
some obscure fashion, was a true composition of the thing itself, its 
very form incarnate.
Each day thereafter he studied the hypnotic episodes of the little 
book; each night, as he dreamed, he carried out shapeless expedi­
tions into its fantastic topography. To all appearances it seemed he 
had discovered the summit or abyss of the unreal, that paradise of 
exhaustion, confusion, and debris where reality ends and where 
one may dwell among its ruins. And it was not long before he found 
it necessary to revisit that twelve-sided shop, intending to question 
the obese bookseller on the subject of the book and unintentionally 
learning the truth of how it came to be sold.
When he arrived at the bookstore, sometime in the middle of a

i 8 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
grayish afternoon, Victor Keirion was surprised to find that the 
door, which had opened so freely on his previous visit, was now 
firmly locked. It would not even rattle in its frame when he 
nervously pushed and pulled on the handle. Since the interior of 
the store was lighted, he took a coin from his pocket and began 
tapping on the glass. Finally, someone came forward from the 
shadows of the back room.
“Closed,” the bookseller pantomimed on the other side of the 
glass.“But . . .” Keirion argued, pointing to his wristwatch. 
“Nevertheless,” the wide man shouted. Then, after scrutinizing 
the disappointed patron, the bookseller unlocked the door and 
opened it far enough to carry on a brief conversation. “And what is 
it I can do for you. I’m closed, so you’ll have to come some other 
time if—”
“I only wanted to ask you something. Do you remember the 
book that I bought from you not long ago, the one—”
“Yes, I remember,” replied the bookseller, as if quite prepared 
for the question. “And let me say that I was quite impressed, as of 
course was . . . the other man.”
“Impressed?” Keirion repeated.
“Flabbergasted is more the word in his case,” continued the 
bookseller. “He said to me, ‘The book has found its reader,’ and 
what could I do but agree with him?”
“I’m afraid I don’t understand,” said Keirion.
The bookseller blinked and said nothing. After a few moments 
he reluctantly explained: “I was hoping that by now you would 
understand. He hasn’t contacted you? The man who was in here 
that day?”
“No, why should he?”
The bookseller blinked again and said: “Well, I suppose there’s 
no reason you need to stand out there. It’s getting very cold, don’t 
you feel it?” Then he closed the door and pulled Keirion a little to 
one side of it, whispering: “There’s just one thing I would like to 
tell you. I made no mistake that day about the price of that book. 
And it was the price - in full - which was paid by the other man, 
don’t ask me anything else about him. That price, of course, minus 
the small amount that you yourself contributed. I didn’t cheat 
anyone, least of all him. He would have been happy to pay even 
more to get that book into your hands. And although I’m not 
exactly sure of his reasons, I think you should know that.”
“But why didn’t he simply purchase the book for himself?” 
asked Keirion.

VASTARIEN
189
The bookseller seemed confused. “It was of no use to him. 
Perhaps it would have been better if you hadn’t given yourself 
away when he asked you about the book. How much you knew.” 
“But I don’t know anything, apart from what I’ve read in the 
book itself. I came here to find—”
“—Nothing, I’m afraid. You’re the one who should be telling 
me, very impressive. But I’m not asking, don’t misunderstand. 
And there’s nothing more I can tell you, since I’ve already violated 
every precept of discretion. This is such an exceptional case, 
though. Very impressive, if in fact you are the reader of that book.” 
Realizing that, at best, he had been led into a dialogue of 
mystification, and possibly one of lies, Victor Keirion had no 
regrets when the bookseller held the door open for him to leave.
But before very many days, and especially nights, had passed he 
learned why the bookseller had been so impressed with him, and 
why the crowlike stranger had been so generous: the bestower of 
the book who was blind to its mysteries. In the course of those days, 
those nights, he learned that the stranger had given only so that he 
might possess the thing he could gain in no other way, that he was 
reading the book with borrowed eyes and stealing its secrets from 
the soul of its rightful reader. At last it became clear what was 
happening to him throughout those strange nights of dreaming.
On each of those nights the shapes of Vastarien slowly pushed 
through the obscurity of his sleep, a vast landscape emerging from 
its own profound slumber and drifting forth from a place without 
name or dimension. And as the crooked monuments became 
manifest once again, they seemed to expand and soar high above 
him, drawing his vision toward them. Progressively the scene 
acquired nuance and articulation; steadily the creation became 
dense and intricate within its black womb: the streets were sinuous 
entrails winding through that dark body, and each edifice was the 
jutting bone of a skeleton hung with a thin musculature of 
shadows.
But just as his vision reached out to embrace fully the mysterious 
and jagged form of the dream, it all appeared to pull away, 
abandoning him on the edge of a dreamless void. The landscape 
was receding, shrinking into the distance. Now all he could see was 
a single street bordered by two converging rows of buildings. And 
at the opposite end of that street, rising up taller than the buildings 
themselves, stood a great figure in silhouette. This looming colossus 
made no movement or sound but firmly dominated the horizon 
where the single remaining street seemed to end. From this 
position the towering shadow was absorbing all other shapes into

i g o
THOMAS LIG O TTI
its own, which gradually was gaining in stature as the landscape 
withdrew and diminished. And the outline of this titanic figure 
appeared to be that of a man, yet it was also that of a dark and 
devouring bird.
Although for several nights Victor Keirion managed to 
awake before the scavenger had thoroughly consumed what 
was not its own, there was no assurance that he would always 
be able to do so and that the dream would not pass into the 
hands of another. Ultimately, he conceived and executed the 
act that was necessary to keep possession of the dream he had 
coveted for so long.
Vastarien, he whispered as he stood in the shadows and moonlight 
of that bare little room, where a massive metal door prevented his 
escape. Within that door a small square of thick glass was 
implanted so that he might be watched by day and by night. 
And there was an unbending web of heavy wire covering the 
window which overlooked the city that was not Vastarien. Never, 
chanted a voice which might have been his own. Then more 
insistently: never, never, never . . .
When the door was opened and some men in uniforms entered 
the room, they found Victor Keirion screaming to the raucous 
limits of his voice and trying to scale the thick metal mesh veiling 
the window, as if he were dragging himself along some unlikely 
route of liberation. Of course, they pulled him to the floor; they 
stretched him out upon the bed, where his wrists and ankles were 
tightly strapped. Then through the doorway strode a nurse who 
carried a slender syringe crowned with a silvery needle.
During the injection he continued to scream words which 
everyone in the room had heard before, each outburst developing 
the theme of his unjust confinement: how the man he had 
murdered was using him in a horrible way, a way impossible to 
explain or make credible. The man could not read the book - 
there, that book - and was stealing the dreams which the book had 
spawned. Stealing my dreams, he mumbled softly as the drug began 
to take effect. Stealing my . . .
The group remained around the bed for a few moments, silently 
staring at its restrained occupant. Then one of them pointed to the 
book and initiated a conversation now familiar to them all.
“What should we do with it? It’s been taken away enough times 
already, but then there’s always another that appears.”
“And there’s no point to it. Look at these pages -  nothing, 
nothing written anywhere.”

VASTARIEN
“So why does he sit reading them for hours? He does nothing 
else.”
“I think it’s time we told someone in authority.”
“Of course, we could do that, but what exactly would we say? 
That a certain inmate should be forbidden from reading a certain 
book? That he becomes violent?”
“And then they’ll ask why we can’t keep the book away from 
him or him from the book? What should we say to that?”
“There would be nothing we could say. Can you imagine what 
lunatics we would seem? As soon as we opened our mouths, that 
would be it for all of us.”
“And when someone asks what the book means to him, or even 
what its name is . . . what would be our answer?”
As if in response to this question, a few shapeless groans arose 
from the criminally insane creature who was bound to the bed. But 
no one could understand the meaning of the word or words that he 
uttered, least of all himself. For he was now far from his own words, 
buried deep within the dreams of a place where everything was 
transfixed in the order of the unreal; and whence, it truly seemed, 
he would never return.


PART 2
Grimscribe


THE LAST FEAST OF 
HARLEQUIN
í.
My interest in the town of Mirocaw was first aroused when I heard 
that an annual festival was held there which promised to include, 
to some extent, the participation of clowns among its other 
elements of pageantry. A former colleague of mine, who is now 
attached to the anthropology department of a distant university, 
had read one of my recent articles (“The Clown Figure in 
American Media,” Journal of Popular Culture), and wrote to me 
that he vaguely remembered reading or being told of a town 
somewhere in the state that held a kind of “Fool’s Feast” every 
year, thinking that this might be pertinent to my peculiar line of 
study. It was, of course, more pertinent than he had reason to 
think, both to my academic aims in this area and to my personal 
pursuits.
Aside from my teaching, I had for some years been engaged in 
various anthropological projects with the primary ambition of 
articulating the significance of the clown figure in diverse cultural 
contexts. Every year for the past twenty years I have attended the 
pre-Lenten festivals that are held in various places throughout the 
southern United States. Every year I learned something more 
concerning the esoterics of celebration. In these studies I was an 
eager participant - along with playing my part as an anthropol­
ogist, I also took a place behind the clownish mask myself. And I 
cherished this role as I did nothing else in my life. To me the title of 
Clown has always carried connotations of a noble sort. I was an 
adroit jester, strangely enough, and had always taken pride in the 
skills I worked so diligently to develop.
I wrote to the State Department of Recreation, indicating what 
information I desired and exposing an enthusiastic urgency which 
came naturally to me on this topic. Many weeks later I received a 
tan envelope imprinted with a government logo. Inside was a

i g 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
pamphlet that catalogued all of the various seasonal festivities of 
which the state was officially aware, and I noted in passing that 
there were as many in late autumn and winter as in the warmer 
seasons. A letter inserted within the pamphlet explained to me 
that, according to their voluminous records, no festivals held in the 
town of Mirocaw had been officially registered. Their files, none­
theless, could be placed at my disposal if I should wish to research 
this or similar matters in connection with some definite project. At 
the time this offer was made I was already laboring under so many 
professional and personal burdens that, with a weary hand, I 
simply deposited the envelope and its contents in a drawer, never 
to be consulted again.
Some months later, however, I made an impulsive digression 
from my responsibilities and, rather haphazardly, took up the 
Mirocaw project. This happened as I was driving north one 
afternoon in late summer with the intention of examining some 
journals in the holdings of a library at another university. Once out 
of the city limits the scenery changed to sunny fields and farms, 
diverting my thoughts from the signs that I passed along the 
highway. Nevertheless, the subconscious scholar in me must have 
been regarding these with studious care. The name of a town 
loomed into my vision. Instantly the scholar retrieved certain 
records from some deep mental drawer, and I was faced with 
making a few hasty calculations as to whether there was enough 
time and motivation for an investigative side trip. But the exit sign 
was even hastier in making its appearance, and I soon found myself 
leaving the highway, recalling the roadsign’s promise that the 
town was no more than seven miles east. 
*
These seven miles included several confusing turns, the forced 
taking of a temporarily alternate route, and a destination not even 
visible until a steep rise had been fully ascended. On the descent 
another helpful sign informed me that I was within the city limits 
of Mirocaw. Some scattered houses on the outskirts of the town 
were the first structures I encountered. Beyond them the numerical 
highway became Townshend Street, the main avenue of Mirocaw.
The town impressed me as being much larger once I was within 
its limits than it had appeared from the prominence just outside. I 
saw that the general hilliness of the surrounding countryside was 
also an internal feature of Mirocaw. Here, though, the effect was 
different. The parts of the town did not look as if they adhered very 
well to one another. This condition might be blamed on the 
irregular topography of the town. Behind some of the old stores 
in the business district, steeply roofed houses had been erected on a

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
*97
sudden incline, their peaks appearing at an extraordinary eleva­
tion above the lower buildings. And because the foundations of 
these houses could not be glimpsed, they conveyed the illusion of 
being either precariously suspended in air, threatening to topple 
down, or else constructed with an unnatural loftiness in relation to 
their width and mass. This situation also created a weird distortion 
of perspective. The two levels of structures overlapped each other 
without giving a sense of depth, so that the houses, because of their 
higher elevation and nearness to the foreground buildings, did not 
appear diminished in size as background objects should. Conse­
quently, a look of flatness, as in a photograph, predominated in 
this area. Indeed, Mirocaw could be compared to an album of old 
snapshots, particularly ones in which the camera had been upset in 
the process of photography, causing the pictures to develop on an 
angle: a cone-roofed turret, like a pointed hat jauntily askew, 
peeked over the houses on a neighboring street; a billboard 
displaying a group of grinning vegetables tipped its contents 
slightly westward; cars parked along steep curbs seemed to be 
flying skyward in the glare-distorted windows of a five-and-ten; 
people leaned lethargically as they trod up and down sidewalks; 
and on that sunny day the clock tower, which at first I mistook 
for a church steeple, cast a long shadow that seemed to extend an 
impossible distance and wander into unlikely places in its 
progress across the town. I should say that perhaps the dishar­
monies of Mirocaw are more acutely affecting my imagination in 
retrospect than they were on that first day, when I was primarily 
concerned with locating the city hall or some other center of 
information.
I pulled around a corner and parked. Sliding over to the other 
side of the seat, I rolled down the window and called to a passerby: 
“Excuse me, sir,” I said. The man, who was shabbily dressed and 
very old, paused for a moment without approaching the car. 
Though he had apparently responded to my call, his vacant 
expression did not betray the least awareness of my presence, 
and for a moment I thought it just a coincidence that he halted on 
the sidewalk at the same time I addressed him. His eyes were 
focused somewhere beyond me with a weary and imbecilic gaze. 
After a few moments he continued on his way and I said nothing to 
call him back, even though at the last second his face began to 
appear dimly familiar. Someone else finally came along who was 
able to direct me to the Mirocaw City Hall and Community 
Center.
The city hall turned out to be the building with the clock tower.

THOMAS LIGOTTI
Inside I stood at a counter behind which some people were 
working at desks and walking up and down a back hallway. On 
one wall was a poster for the state lottery: a jack-in-the-box with 
both hands grasping green bills. After a few moments, a tall, 
middle-aged woman came over to the counter.
“Can I help you?” she asked in a neutral, bureaucratic voice.
I explained that I had heard about the festival - saying nothing 
about being a nosy academic - and asked if she could provide me 
with further information or direct me to someone who could.
“Do you mean the one held in the winter?” she asked.
“How many of them are there?”
“Just that one.”
“I suppose, then, that that’s the one I mean.” I smiled as if 
sharing a joke with her.
Without another word, she walked ofT into the back hallway. 
While she was absent I exchanged glances with several of the 
people behind the counter who periodically looked up from their 
work.
“There you are,” she said when she returned, handing me a 
piece of paper that looked like the product of a cheap copy 
machine. Please Come to the Fun, it said in large letters. Parades, it 
went on, Street Masquerade, Bands, The Winter Raffle, and The 
Coronation of the Winter Queen. The page continued with the 
mention of a number of miscellaneous festivities. I read the words 
again. There was something about that imploring little “please” at 
the top of the announcement that made the whole affair seem like a 
charity function.
“When is it held? It doesn’t say when the festival takes place.”
“Most people already know that.” She abruptly snatched the 
page from my hands and wrote something at the bottom. When 
she gave it back to me, I saw “Dec. 19-21” written in blue-green 
ink. I was immediately struck by an odd sense of scheduling on the 
part of the festival committee. There was, of course, solid anthro­
pological and historical precedent for holding festivities around the 
winter solstice, but the timing of this particular event did not seem 
entirely practical.
“If you don’t mind my asking, don’t these days somewhat 
conflict with the regular holiday season? I mean, most people 
have enough going on at that time.”
“It’s just tradition,” she said, as if invoking some venerable 
ancestry behind her words.
“That’s very interesting,” I said as much to myself as to her.
“Is there anything else?” she asked.

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
199
“Yes. Could you tell me if this festival has anything to do with 
clowns? I see there’s something about a masquerade.”
“Yes, of course there are some people in . . . costumes. I’ve never 
been in that position myself. . . that is, yes, there are clowns of a 
sort.”
At that point my interest was definitely aroused, but I was not 
sure how much further I wanted to pursue it. I thanked the woman 
for her help and asked the best means of access to the highway, not 
anxious to retrace the labyrinthine route by which I had entered 
the town. I walked back to my car with a whole flurry of half­
formed questions, and as many vague and conflicting answers, 
cluttering my mind.
The directions the woman gave me necessitated passing through 
the south end of Mirocaw. There were not many people moving 
about in this section of town. Those that I did see, shuffling 
lethargically down a block of battered storefronts, exhibited the 
same sort of forlorn expression and manner as the old man from 
whom I had asked directions earlier. I must have been traversing a 
central artery of this area, for on either side stretched street after 
street of poorly tended yards and houses bowed with age and 
indifference. When I came to a stop at a streetcorner, one of the 
citizens of this slum passed in front of my car. This lean, morose, 
and epicene person turned my way and sneered outrageously with 
a taut little mouth, yet seemed to be looking at no one in 
particular. After progressing a few streets farther, I came to a 
road that led back to the highway. I felt delectably more 
comfortable as soon as I found myself traveling once again 
through the expanses of sun-drenched farmlands.
I reached the library with more than enough time for my 
research, and so I decided to make a scholarly detour to see what 
material I could find that might illuminate the winter festival held 
in Mirocaw. The library, one of the oldest in the state, included in 
its holdings the entire run of the Mirocaw Courier. I thought this 
would be an excellent place to start. I soon found, however, that 
there was no handy way to research information from this news­
paper, and I did not want to engage in a blind search for articles 
concerning a specific subject.
I next turned to the more organized resources of the newspapers 
for the larger cities located in the same county, which incidentally 
shares its name with Mirocaw. I uncovered very little about the 
town, and almost nothing concerning its festival, except in one 
general article on annual events in the area that erroneously 
attributed to Mirocaw a “large Middle-Eastern community”

2 0 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
which every spring hosted a kind of ethnic jamboree. From what I 
had already observed, and from what I subsequently learned, the 
citizens of Mirocaw were solidly midwestern-American, the prob­
able descendants in a direct line from some enterprising pack of 
New Englanders of the last century. There was one brief item 
devoted to a Mirocavian event, but this merely turned out to be an 
obituary notice for an old woman who had quietly taken her life 
around Christmastime. Thus, I returned home that day all but 
empty-handed on the subject of Mirocaw.
However, it was not long afterward that I received another 
letter from the former colleague of mine who had first led me to 
seek out Mirocaw and its festival. As it happened, he rediscovered 
the article that caused him to stir my interest in a local “Fool’s 
Feast.” This article had its sole appearance in an obscure festschrift 
of anthropology studies published in Amsterdam twenty years ago. 
Most of these papers were in Dutch, a few in German, and only one 
was in English: “The Last Feast of Harlequin: Preliminary Notes 
on a Local Festival.” It was exciting, of course, finally to be able to 
read this study, but even more exciting was the name of its author: 
Dr. Raymond Thoss.
2.
Before proceeding any further, I should mention something about 
Thoss, and inevitably about myself. Over two decades ago, at my 
alma mater in Cambridge, Mass., Thoss was a professor of mine. 
Long before playing a role in the events I am about to describe, he 
was already one of the most important figures in my life. A striking 
personality, he inevitably influenced everyone who came in 
contact with him. I remember his lectures on social anthropol­
ogy, how he turned that dim room into a brilliant and profound 
circus of learning. He moved in an uncannily brisk manner. When 
he swept his arm around to indicate some common term on the 
blackboard behind him, one felt he was presenting nothing less 
than an item of fantastic qualities and secret value. When he 
replaced his hand in the pocket of his old jacket this fleeting magic 
was once again stored away in its well-worn pouch, to be retrieved 
at the sorcerer’s discretion. We sensed he was teaching us more 
than we could possibly learn, and that he himself was in possession 
of greater and deeper knowledge than he could possibly impart. 
On one occasion I summoned up the audacity to offer an 
interpretation - which was somewhat opposed to his own -

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
201
regarding the tribal clowns of the Hopi Indians. I implied that 
personal experience as an amateur clown and special devotion to 
this study provided me with an insight possibly more valuable than 
his own. It was then he disclosed, casually and very obiter dicta, 
that he had actually acted in the role of one of these masked tribal 
fools and had celebrated with them the dance of the kachinas. In 
revealing these facts, however, he somehow managed not to add to 
the humiliation I had already inflicted upon myself. And for this I 
was grateful to him.
Thoss’s activities were such that he sometimes became the object 
of gossip or romanticized speculation. He was a field worker par 
excellence, and his ability to insinuate himself into exotic cultures 
and situations, thereby gaining insights where other anthropolo­
gists merely collected data, was renowned. At various times in his 
career there had been rumors of his having “gone native” à la the 
Frank Hamilton Cushing legend. There were hints, which were 
not always irresponsible or cheaply glamorized, that he was 
involved in projects of a freakish sort, many of which focused on 
New England. It is a fact that he spent six months posing as a 
mental patient at an institution in western Massachusetts, gather­
ing information on the “culture” of the psychically disturbed. 
When his book Winter Solstice: The Longest Night of a Society was 
published, the general opinion was that it was disappointingly 
subjective and impressionistic, and that, aside from a few moving 
but “poetically obscure” observations, there was nothing at all to 
give it value. Those who defended Thoss claimed he was a kind of 
super-anthropologist: while much of his work emphasized his own 
mind and feelings, his experience had in fact penetrated to a rich 
core of hard data which he had yet to disclose in objective 
discourse. As a student of Thoss, I tended to support this latter 
estimation of him. For a variety of tenable and untenable reasons, 
I believed Thoss capable of unearthing hitherto inaccessible strata 
of human existence. So it was gratifying at first that this article 
entitled “The Last Feast of Harlequin” seemed to uphold the 
Thoss mystique, and in an area I personally found captivating.
Much of the content of the article I did not immediately 
comprehend, given its author’s characteristic and often strategic 
obscurities. On first reading, the most interesting aspect of this 
brief study - the “notes” encompassed only twenty pages - was the 
general mood of the piece. Thoss’s eccentricities were definitely 
present in these pages, but only as a struggling inner force which 
was definitely contained - incarcerated, I might say - by the 
somber rhythmic movements of his prose and by some gloomy

20 2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
references he occasionally called upon. Two references in parti­
cular shared a common theme. One was a quotation from Poe’s 
“The Conqueror Worm,” which Thoss employed as a rather 
sensational epigraph. The point of the epigraph, however, was 
nowhere echoed in the text of the article save in another passing 
reference. Thoss brought up the well-known genesis of the modern 
Christmas celebration, which of course descends from the Roman 
Saturnalia. Then, making it clear he had not yet observed the 
Mirocaw festival and had only gathered its nature from various 
informants, he established that it too contained many, even more 
overt, elements of the Saturnalia. Next he made what seemed to 
me a trivial and purely linguistic observation, one that had less to 
do with his main course of argument than it did with the equally 
peripheral Poe epigraph. He briefly mentioned that an early sect of 
the Syrian Gnostics called themselves “Saturnians” and believed, 
among other religious heresies, that mankind was created by 
angels who were in turn created by the Supreme Unknown. 
The angels, however, did not possess the power to make their 
creation an erect being and for a time he crawled upon the earth 
like a worm. Eventually, the Creator remedied this grotesque state 
of affairs. At the time I supposed that the symbolic correspon­
dences of mankind’s origins and ultimate condition being asso­
ciated with worms, combined with a year-end festival recognizing 
the winter death of the earth, was the gist of this Thossian 
“insight,” a poetic but scientifically valueless observation.
Other observations he made on the Mirocaw festival were also 
strictly etic; in other words, they were based on second-hand 
sources, hearsay testimony. Even at that juncture, however, I 
felt Thoss knew more than he disclosed; and, as I later discov­
ered, he had indeed included information on certain aspects of 
Mirocaw suggesting he was already in possession of several keys 
which for the moment he was keeping securely in his own pocket. 
By then I myself possessed a most revealing morsel of knowledge. A 
note to the “Harlequin” article apprised the reader that the piece 
was only a fragment in rude form of a more wide-ranging work in 
preparation. This work was never seen by the world. My former 
professor had not published anything since his withdrawal from 
academic circulation some twenty years ago. Now I suspected 
where he had gone.
For the man I had stopped on the streets of Mirocaw and from 
whom I tried to obtain directions, the man with the disconcert­
ingly lethargic gaze, had very much resembled a superannuated 
version of Dr. Raymond Thoss.

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
203
3.
And now I have a confession to make. Despite my reasons for being 
enthusiastic about Mirocaw and its mysteries, especially its rela­
tionship to both Thoss and my own deepest concerns as a scholar - 
I contemplated the days ahead of me with no more than a feeling 
of frigid numbness and often with a sense of profound depression. 
Yet I had no reason to be surprised at this emotional state, which 
had little relevance to the outward events in my life but was 
determined by inward conditions that worked according to their 
own, quite enigmatic, seasons and cycles. For many years, at least 
since my university days, I have suffered from this dark malady, 
this recurrent despondency in which I would become buried when 
it came time for the earth to grow cold and bare and the skies 
heavy with shadows. Nevertheless, I pursued my plans, though 
somewhat mechanically, to visit Mirocaw during its festival days, 
for I superstitiously hoped that this activity might diminish the 
weight of my seasonal despair. In Mirocaw would be parades and 
parties and the opportunity to play the clown once again.
For weeks in advance I practiced my art, even perfecting a new 
feat of juggling magic, which was my special forte in foolery. I had 
my costumes cleaned, purchased fresh makeup, and was ready. I 
received permission from the university to cancel some of my 
classes prior to the holiday, explaining the nature of my project 
and the necessity of arriving in the town a few days before the 
festival began, in order to do some preliminary research, establish 
informants, and so on. Actually, my plan was to postpone any 
formal inquiry until after the festival and to involve myself 
beforehand as much as possible in its activities. I would, of 
course, keep a journal during this time.
There was one resource I did want to consult, however. 
Specifically, I returned to that outstate library to examine those 
issues of the Mirocaw Courier dating from December two decades 
ago. One story in particular confirmed a point Thoss made in the 
“Harlequin” article, though the event it chronicled must have 
taken place after Thoss had written his study.
The Courier story appeared two weeks after the festival had ended 
for that year and was concerned with the disappearance of a 
woman named Elizabeth Beadle, the wife of Samuel Beadle, a 
hotel owner in Mirocaw. The county authorities speculated that 
this was another instance of the “holiday suicides” which seemed 
to occur with inordinate seasonal regularity in the Mirocaw

204
THOMAS LIGOTTI
region. Thoss documented this phenomenon in his “Harlequin” 
article, though I suspect that today these deaths would be neatly 
categorized under the heading “seasonal affective disorder”. In 
any case, the authorities searched a half-frozen lake near the 
outskirts of Mirocaw where they had found many successful 
suicides in years past. This year, however, no body was discov­
ered. Alongside the article was a picture of Elizabeth Beadle. Even 
in the grainy microfilm reproduction one could detect a certain 
vibrancy and vitality in Mrs. Beadle’s face. That an hypothesis of 
“holiday suicide” should be so readily posited to explain her 
disappearance seemed strange and in some way unjust.
Thoss, in his brief article, wrote that every year there occurred 
changes of a moral or spiritual cast which seemed to affect 
Mirocaw along with the usual winter metamorphosis. He was 
not precise about its origin or nature but stated, in typically 
mystifying fashion, that the effect of this “subseason” on the town 
was conspicuously negative. In addition to the number of suicides 
actually accomplished during this time, there was also a rise in 
treatment of “hypochondriacal” conditions, which was how the 
medical men of twenty years past characterized these cases in 
discussions with Thoss. This state of affairs would gradually worsen 
and finally reach a climax during the days scheduled for the 
Mirocaw festival. Thoss speculated that given the secretive nature 
of small towns, the situation was probably even more intensely 
pronounced than casual investigation could reveal.
The connection between the festival and this insidious subsea- 
sonal climate in Mirocaw was a point on which Thoss did not come 
to any rigid conclusions. He did write, nevertheless, that these two 
“climatic aspects” had had a parallel existence in the town’s 
history as far back as available records could document. A late 
nineteenth-century history of Mirocaw County speaks of the town 
by its original name of New Colstead, and castigates the towns­
people for holding a “ribald and soulless feast” to the exclusion of 
normal Christmas observances. (Thoss comments that the histor­
ian had mistakenly fused two distinct aspects of the season, their 
actual relationship being essentially antagonistic.) The “Harle­
quin” article did not trace the festival to its earliest appearance 
(this may not have been possible), though Thoss emphasized the 
New England origins of Mirocaw’s founders. The festival, there­
fore, was one imported from this region and could reasonably be 
extended at least a century; that is, if it had not been brought over 
from the Old World, in which case its roots would become 
indefinite until further research could be done. Surely Thoss’s

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
205
allusion to the Syrian Gnostics suggested the latter possibility 
could not entirely be ruled out.
But it seemed to be the festival’s link to New England that 
nourished Thoss’s speculations. He wrote of this patch of geogra­
phy as if it were an acceptable place to end the search. For him, the 
very words “New England” seemed to be stripped of all traditional 
connotations and had come to imply nothing less than a gateway 
to all lands, both known and suspected, and even to ages beyond 
the civilized history of the region. Having been educated partly in 
New England, I could somewhat understand this sentimental 
exaggeration, for indeed there are places that seem archaic 
beyond chronological measure, appearing to transcend relative 
standards of time and achieving a kind of absolute antiquity which 
cannot be logically fathomed. But how this vague suggestion 
related to a small town in the Midwest I could not imagine. 
Thoss himself observed that the residents of Mirocaw did not 
betray any mysteriously primitive consciousness. On the contrary, 
they appeared superficially unaware of the genesis of their winter 
merrymaking. That such a tradition had endured through the 
years, however, even eclipsing the conventional Christmas holi­
day, revealed a profound awareness of the festival’s meaning and 
function.
I cannot deny that what I had learned about the Mirocaw 
festival did inspire a trite sense of fate, especially given the 
involvement of such an important figure from my past as Thoss. 
It was the first time in my academic career that I knew myself to be 
better suited than anyone else to discern the true meaning of 
scattered data, even if I could only attribute this special authority 
to chance circumstances.
Nevertheless, as I sat in that library on a morning in mid 
December I doubted for a moment the wisdom of setting out for 
Mirocaw rather than returning home, where the more familiar rite 
de passage of winter depression awaited me. My original scheme was 
to avoid the cyclical blues the season held for me, but it seemed this 
was also a part of the history of Mirocaw, only on a much larger 
scale. My emotional instability, however, was exactly what 
qualified me most for the particular fieldwork ahead, though I 
did not take pride or consolation in the fact. And to retreat would 
have been to deny myself an opportunity that might never ofTer 
itself again. In retrospect, there seems to have been no fortuitous 
resolution to the decision I had to make. As it happened, I went 
ahead to the town.

206
THOMAS LIGOTTI
4.
Just past noon, on December 18, I started driving toward 
Mirocaw. A blur of dull, earthen-colored scenery extended in 
every direction. The snowfalls of late autumn had been sparse, and 
only a few white patches appeared in the harvested fields along the 
highway. The clouds were gray and abundant. Passing by a stretch 
of forest, I noticed the black, ragged clumps of abandoned nests 
clinging to the twisted mesh of bare branches. I thought I saw 
black birds skittering over the road ahead, but they were only dead 
leaves and they flew into the air as I drove by.
I approached Mirocaw from the south, entering the town from 
the direction I had left it on my visit the previous summer. This 
took me once again through that part of town which seemed to 
exist on the wrong side of some great invisible barrier dividing the 
desirable sections of Mirocaw from the undesirable. As lurid as this 
district had appeared to me under the summer sun, in the thin 
light of that winter afternoon it degenerated into a pale phantom 
of itself. The frail stores and starved-looking houses suggested a 
borderline region between the material and nonmaterial worlds, 
with one sardonically wearing the mask of the other. I saw a few 
gaunt pedestrians who turned as I passed by, though seemingly not 
because I passed by, making my way up to the main street of 
Mirocaw.
Driving up the steep rise of Townshend Street, I found the sights 
there comparatively welcoming. The rolling avenues of the town 
were in readiness for the festival. Streetlights had their poles 
raveled with evergreen, the fresh boughs proudly conspicuous in 
a barren season. On the doors of many of the businesses on 
Townshend were holly wreaths, equally green but observably 
plastic. However, although there was nothing unusual in this 
traditional greenery of the season, it soon became apparent to 
me that Mirocaw had quite abandoned itself to this particular 
symbol of Yuletide. It was garishly in evidence everywhere. The 
windows of stores and houses were framed in green lights, green 
streamers hung down from storefront awnings, and the beacons of 
the Red Rooster Bar were peacock green floodlights. I supposed 
the residents of Mirocaw desired these decorations, but the effect 
was one of excess. An eerie emerald haze permeated the town, and 
faces looked slightly reptilian.
At the time I assumed that the prodigious evergreen, holly 
wreaths, and colored lights (if only of a single color) demonstrated

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
207
an emphasis on the vegetable symbols of the Nordic Yuletide, 
which would inevitably be muddled into the winter festival of any 
northern country just as they had been adopted for the Christmas 
season. In his “Harlequin” article Thoss wrote of the pagan aspect 
of Mirocaw’s festival, likening it to the ritual of a fertility cult, with 
probable connections to chthonic divinities at some time in the 
past. But Thoss had mistaken, as I had, what was only part of the 
festival’s significance for the whole.
The hotel at which I had made reservations was located on 
Townshend. It was an old building of brown brick, with an 
arched doorway and a pathetic coping intended to convey an 
impression of neoclassicism. I found a parking space in front and 
left my suitcases in the car.
When I first entered the hotel lobby it was empty. I thought 
perhaps the Mirocaw festival would have attracted enough visitors 
to at least bolster the business of its only hotel, but it seemed I was 
mistaken. Tapping a little bell, I leaned on the desk and turned to 
look at a small, traditionally decorated Christmas tree on a table 
near the entranceway. It was complete with shiny, egg-fragile 
bulbs; miniature candy canes; flat, laughing Santas with arms 
wide; a star on top nodding awkwardly against the delicate 
shoulder of an upper branch; and colored lights that bloomed 
out of flower-shaped sockets. For some reason this seemed to me a 
sorry little piece.
“May I help you?” said a young woman arriving from a room 
adjacent to the lobby.
I must have been staring rather intently at her, for she looked 
away and seemed quite uneasy. I could hardly imagine what to say 
to her or how to explain what I was thinking. In person she 
immediately radiated a chilling brilliance of manner and expres­
sion. But if this woman had not committed suicide twenty years 
before, as the newspaper article had suggested, neither had she 
aged in that time.
“Sarah,” called a masculine voice from the invisible heights of a 
stairway. A tall, middle-aged man came down the steps. “I 
thought you were in your room,” said the man, whom I took to 
be Samuel Beadle. Sarah, not Elizabeth, Beadle glanced sideways 
in my direction to indicate to her father that she was conducting 
the business of the hotel. Beadle apologized to me, and then 
excused the two of them for a moment while they went off to 
one side to continue their exchange.
I smiled and pretended everything was normal, while trying to

208
THOMAS LIG O TTI
remain within earshot of their conversation. They spoke in tones 
that suggested their conflict was a familiar one: Beadle’s over- 
protective concern with his daughter’s whereabouts and Sarah’s 
frustrated understanding of certain restrictions placed upon her. 
The conversation ended, and Sarah ascended the stairs, turning 
for a moment to give me a facial pantomime of apology for the 
unprofessional scene that had just taken place.
“Now, sir, what can I do for you?” Beadle asked, almost 
demanded.
“Yes, I have a reservation. Actually, I’m a day early, if that 
doesn’t present a problem.” I gave the hotel the benefit of the 
doubt that its business might have been secretly flourishing.
“No problem at all, sir,” he said, presenting me with the 
registration form, and then a brass-colored key dangling from a 
plastic disc bearing the number 44.
“Luggage?”
“Yes, it’s in my car.”
“I’ll give you a hand with that.”
While Beadle was settling me in my fourth-floor room it seemed 
an opportune moment to broach the subject of the festival, the 
holiday suicides, and perhaps, depending upon his reaction, the 
fate of his wife. I needed a respondent who had lived in the town 
for a good many years and who could enlighten me about the 
attitude of Mirocavians toward their season of sea-green lights.
“This is just fine,” I said about the clean but somber room. 
“Nice view. I can see the bright green lights of Mirocaw just fine 
from up here. Is the town usually all decked out like this? For the 
festival, I mean.”
“Yes, sir, for the festival,” he replied mechanically.
“I imagine you’ll probably be getting quite a few of us out-of- 
towners in the next couple of days.”
“Could be. Is there anything else?”
“Yes, there is. I wonder if you could tell me something about the 
festivities.”
“Such as . . .”
“Well, you know, the clowns and so forth.”
“Only clowns here are the ones that’re . . . well, picked out, I 
suppose you would say.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Excuse me, sir. I’m very busy right now. Is there anything 
else?”
I could think of nothing at the moment to perpetuate our 
conversation. Beadle wished me a good stay and left.

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
209
I unpacked my suitcases. In addition to regular clothing I had 
also brought along some of the items from my clown’s wardrobe. 
Beadle’s comment that the clowns of Mirocaw were “picked out” 
left me wondering exactly what purpose these street masqueraders 
served in the festival. The clown figure has had so many meanings 
in different times and cultures. The jolly, well-loved joker familiar 
to most people is actually but one aspect of this protean creature. 
Madmen, hunchbacks, amputees, and other abnormals were once 
considered natural clowns; they were elected to fulfil a comic role 
which could allow others to see them as ludicrous rather than as 
terrible reminders of the forces of disorder in the world. But 
sometimes a cheerless jester was required to draw attention to 
this same disorder, as in the case of King Lear’s morbid and honest 
fool, who of course was eventually hanged, and so much for his 
clownish wisdom. Clowns have often had ambiguous and some­
times contradictory roles to play. Thus, I knew enough not to 
brashly jump into costume and cry out, “Here I am again!”
That first day in Mirocaw I did not stray far from the hotel. I 
read and rested for a few hours and then ate at a nearby diner. 
Through the window beside my table I watched the winter night 
turn the soft green glow of the town into a harsh and almost totally 
new color as it contrasted with the darkness. The streets of 
Mirocaw seemed to me unusually busy for a small town at 
evening. Yet it was not the kind of activity one normally sees 
before an approaching Christmas holiday. This was not a crowd of 
bustling shoppers loaded with bright bags of presents. Their arms 
were empty, their hands shoved deep in their pockets against the 
cold, which nevertheless had not driven them to the solitude of 
their presumably warm houses. I watched them enter and exit 
store after store without buying; many merchants remained open 
late, and even the places that were closed had left their neons 
illuminated. The faces that passed the window of the diner were 
possibly just stiffened by the cold, I thought; frozen into deep 
frowns and nothing else. In the same window I saw the reflection of 
my own face. It was not the face of an adept clown; it was slack and 
flabby and at that moment seemed the face of someone less than 
alive. Outside was the town of Mirocaw, its streets dipping and 
rising with a lunatic severity, its citizens packing the sidewalks, its 
heart bathed in green: as promising a field of professional and 
personal challenge as I had ever encountered - and I was bored to 
the point of dread. I hurried back to my hotel room.
“Mirocaw has another coldness within its cold,” I wrote in my 
journal that night. “Another set of buildings and streets that exists

210
THOMAS LIGOTTI
behind the visible town’s facade like a world of disgraceful back 
alleys.” I went on like this for about a page, across which I finally 
engraved a big “A?’. Then I went to bed.
In the morning I left my car at the hotel and walked toward the 
main business district a few blocks away. Mingling with the good 
people of Mirocaw seemed like the proper thing to do at that point 
in my scientific sojourn. But as I began laboriously walking up 
Townshend (the sidewalks were cramped with wandering pedes­
trians), a glimpse of someone suddenly replaced my haphazard 
plan with a more specific and immediate one. Through the crowd 
and about fifteen paces ahead was my goal.
“Dr. Thoss,” I called.
His head almost seemed to turn and look back in response to my 
shout, but I could not be certain. I pushed past several warmly 
wrapped bodies and green-scarved necks, only to find that the 
object of my pursuit appeared to be maintaining the same distance 
from me, though I did not know if this was being done deliberately 
or not. At the next corner, the dark-coated Thoss abruptly turned 
right onto a steep street which led downward directly toward the 
dilapidated south end of Mirocaw. When I reached the corner I 
looked down the sidewalk and could see him very clearly from 
above. I also saw how he managed to stay so far ahead of me in a 
mob that had impeded my own progress. For some reason the 
people on the sidewalk made room so that he could move past 
them easily, without the usual jostling of bodies. It was not a 
dramatic physical avoidance, thought it seemed nonetheless 
intentional. Fighting the tight fabric of the throng, I continued 
to follow Thoss, losing and regaining sight of him.
By the time I reached the bottom of the sloping street the crowd 
had thinned out considerably, and after walking a block or so 
farther I found myself practically a lone pedestrian pacing behind 
a distant figure that I hoped was still Thoss. He was now walking 
quite swiftly and in a way that seemed to acknowledge my pursuit 
of him, though really it felt as if he were leading me as much as I 
was chasing him. I called his name a few more times at a volume he 
could not have failed to hear, assuming that deafness was not one 
of the changes to have come over him; he was, after all, not a young 
man, nor even a middle-aged one any longer.
Thoss suddenly crossed in the middle of the street. He walked a 
few more steps and entered a signless brick building between a 
liquor store and a repair shop of some kind. In the “Harlequin” 
article Thoss had mentioned that the people living in this section of

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
211
Mirocaw maintained their own businesses, and that these were 
patronized almost exclusively by residents of the area. I could well 
believe this statement when I looked at these little sheds of 
commerce, for they had the same badly weathered appearance 
as their clientele. The formidable shoddiness of these buildings 
notwithstanding, I followed Thoss into the plain brick shell of what 
had been, or possibly still was, a diner.
Inside it was unusually dark. Even before my eyes made the 
adjustment I sensed that this was not a thriving restaurant cozily 
cluttered with chairs and tables - as was the establishment where I 
had eaten the night before - but a place with only a few disar­
ranged furnishings, and very cold. It seemed colder, in fact, than 
the winter streets outside.
“Dr. Thoss?” I called toward a lone table near the center of the 
long room. Perhaps four or five were sitting around the table, with 
some others blending into the dimness behind them. Scattered 
across the top of the table were some books and loose papers. 
Seated there was an old man indicating something in the pages 
before him, but it was not Thoss. Beside him were two youths 
whose wholesome features distinguished them from the grim 
weariness of the others. I approached the table and they all 
looked up at me. None of them showed a glimmer of emotion 
except the two boys, who exchanged worried and guilt-ridden 
glances with each other, as if they had just been discovered in some 
shameful act. They both suddenly burst from the table and ran 
into the dark background, where a light appeared briefly as they 
exited by a back door.
“I’m sorry,” I said diffidently. “I thought I saw someone I knew 
come in here.”
They said nothing. Out of a back room others began to emerge, 
no doubt interested in the source of the commotion. In a few 
hioments the room was crowded with these tramp-like figures, all 
of them gazing emptily in the dimness. I was not at this point 
frightened of them; at least I was not afraid they would do me any 
physical harm. Actually, I felt as if it was quite within my power to 
pummel them easily into submission, their mousy faces almost 
inviting a succession of firm blows. But there were so many of them.
They slid slowly toward me in a worm-like mass. Their eyes 
seemed empty and unfocused, and I wondered a moment if they 
were even aware of my presence. Nevertheless, I was the center 
upon which their lethargic shuffling converged, their shoes scuffing 
softly along the bare floor. I began to deliver a number of hasty 
inanities as they continued to press toward me, their weak and

212
THOMAS LIGOTTI
unexpectedly odorless bodies nudging against mine. (I understood 
now why the people along the sidewalks seemed to instinctively 
avoid Thoss.) Unseen legs became entangled with my own; I 
staggered and then regained my balance. This sudden movement 
aroused me from a kind of mesmeric daze into which I must have 
fallen without being aware of it. I had intended to leave that 
dreary place long before events had reached such a juncture, but 
for some reason I could not focus my intentions strongly enough to 
cause myself to act. My mind had been drifting farther away as 
these slavish things approached. In a sudden surge of panic I 
pushed through their soft ranks and was outside.
The open air revived me to my former alertness, and I 
immediately started pacing swiftly up the hill. I was no longer 
sure that I had not simply imagined what had seemed, and at the 
same time did not seem, like a perilous moment. Had their 
movements been directed toward a harmful assault, or were they 
trying merely to intimidate me? As I reached the green-glazed 
main street of Mirocaw I really could not determine what had just 
happened.
The sidewalks were still jammed with a multitude of pedestrians, 
who now seemed more lively than they had been only a short time 
before. There was a kind of vitality that could only be attributed to 
the imminent festivities. A group of young men had begun 
celebrating prematurely and strode noisily across the street at 
midpoint, obviously intoxicated. From the laughter and joking 
among the still sober citizens I gathered that, mardi-gras style, 
public drunkenness was within the traditions of this winter festival. 
I looked for anything to indicate the beginnings of the Street 
Masquerade, but saw nothing: no brightly garbed harlequins or 
snow-white pierrots. Were the ceremonies even now in preparation 
for the coronation of the Winter Queen? “The Winter Queen,” I 
wrote in my journal. “Figure of fertility invested with symbolic 
powers of revival and prosperity. Elected in the manner of a high 
school prom queen. Check for possible consort figure in the form of 
a representative from the underworld.”
In the pre-darkness hours of December 19 I sat in my hotel room 
and wrote and thought and organized. I did not feel too badly, all 
things considered. The holiday excitement which was steadily 
rising in the streets below my window was definitely infecting 
me. I forced myself to take a short nap in anticipation of a long 
night. When I awoke, Mirocaw’s annual feast had begun.

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
213
5.
Shouting, commotion, carousing. Sleepily I went to the window 
and looked out over the town. It seemed all the lights of Mirocaw 
were shining, save in that section down the hill which became part 
of the black void of winter. And now the town’s greenish tinge was 
even more pronounced, spreading everywhere like a great green 
rainbow that had melted from the sky and endured, phosphores­
cent, into the night. In the streets was the brightness of an artificial 
spring. The byways of Mirocaw vibrated with activity: on a nearby 
corner a brass band blared; marauding cars blew their horns and 
were sometimes mounted by laughing pedestrians; a man emerged 
from the Red Rooster Bar, threw up his arms, and crowed. I looked 
closely at the individual celebrants, searching for the vestments of 
clowns. Soon, delightedly, I saw them. The costume was red and 
white, with matching cap, and the face painted a noble alabaster. It 
almost seemed to be a clownish incarnation of that white-bearded 
and black-booted Christmas fool.
This particular fool, however, was not receiving the affection 
and respect usually accorded to a Santa Claus. My poor fellow- 
clown was in the middle of a circle of revelers who were pushing 
him back and forth from one to the other. The object of this abuse 
seemed to accept it somewhat willingly, but this little game 
nevertheless appeared to have humiliation as its purpose. “Only 
clowns here are the ones that’re picked out,” echoed Beadle’s voice 
in my memory. “Picked o/ï” seemed closer to the truth.
Packing myself in some heavy clothes, I went out into the green 
gleaming streets. Not far from the hotel I was stumbled into by a 
character with a wide blue and red grin and bright baggy clothes. 
Actually he had been shoved into me by some youths outside a 
drugstore.
“See the freak,” said an obese and drunken fellow. “See the 
freak fall.”
My first response was anger, and then fear as I saw two others 
flanking the fat drunk. They walked toward me and I tensed 
myself for a confrontation.
“This is a disgrace,” one said, the neck of a wine bottle held 
loosely in his left hand.
But it was not to me they were speaking; it was to the clown, who 
had been pushed to the sidewalk. His three persecutors helped him 
up with a sudden jerk and then splashed wine in his face. They 
ignored me altogether.

214
THOMAS LIG O TTI
“Let him loose,” the fat one said. “Crawl away, freak. Oh, he 
flies!”
The clown trotted ofT, becoming lost in the throng.
“Wait a minute,” I said to the rowdy trio, who had started 
lumbering away. I quickly decided that it would probably be futile 
to ask them to explain what I had just witnessed, especially amid 
the noise and confusion of the festivities. In my best jovial fashion I 
proposed we all go someplace where I could buy them each a 
drink. They had no objection and in a short while we were all 
squeezed around a table in the Red Rooster.
Over several drinks I explained to them that I was from out of 
town, which pleased them no end for some reason. I told them 
there were things I did not understand about their festival.
“I don’t think there’s anything to understand,” the fat one said. 
“It’s just what you see.”
I asked him about the people dressed as clowns.
“Them? They’re the freaks. It’s their turn this year. Everyone 
takes their turn. Next year it might be mine. Or yours” he said, 
pointing at one of his friends across the table. “And when we find 
out which one you are—”
“You’re not smart enough,” said the defiant potential freak.
This was an important point: the fact that individuals who 
played the clowns remain, or at least attempted to remain, 
anonymous. This arrangement would help remove inhibitions a 
resident of Mirocaw might have about abusing his own neighbor 
or even a family relation. From what I later observed, the extent of 
this abuse did not go beyond a kind of playful roughhousing. And 
even so, it was only the occasional group of rowdies who actually 
took advantage of this aspect of the festival, the majority of the 
citizens very much content to stay on the sidelines.
As far as being able to illuminate the meaning of this custom, my 
three young friends were quite useless. To them it was just 
amusement, as I imagine it was to the majority of Mirocavians. 
This was understandable. I suppose the average person would not 
be able to explain exactly how the profoundly familiar Christmas 
holiday came to be celebrated in its present form.
I left the bar alone and not unaffected by the drinks I had 
consumed there. Outside, the general merrymaking continued. 
Loud music emanated from several quarters. Mirocaw had fully 
transformed itself from a sedate small town to an enclave of 
Saturnalia within the dark immensity of a winter night. But 
Saturn is also the planetary symbol of melancholy and sterility, 
a clash of opposites contained within that single word. And as I

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
215
wandered half-drunkenly down the street, I discovered that there 
was a conflict within the winter festival itself. This discovery indeed 
appeared to be that secret key which Thoss withheld in his study of 
the town. Oddly enough, it was through my unfamiliarity with the 
outward nature of the festival that I came to know its true nature.
I was mingling with the crowd on the street, warmly enjoying 
the confusion around me, when I saw a strangely designed creature 
lingering on the corner up ahead. It was one of the Mirocaw 
clowns. Its clothes were shabby and nondescript, almost in the 
style of a tramp-type clown, but not humorously exaggerated 
enough. The face, though, made up for the lackluster costume. 
I had never seen such a strange conception for a clown’s counte­
nance. The figure stood beneath a dim streetlight, and when it 
turned its head my way I realized why it seemed familiar. The 
thin, smooth, and pale head; the wide eyes; the oval-shaped 
features resembling nothing so much as the skull-faced, screaming 
creature in that famous painting (memory fails me). This clownish 
imitation rivalled the original in suggesting stricken realms of 
abject horror and despair: an inhuman likeness more proper to 
something under the earth than upon it.
From the first moment I saw this creature, I thought of those 
inhabitants of the ghetto down the hill. There was the same 
nauseating passivity and languor in its bearing. Perhaps if I had 
not been drinking earlier I would not have been bold enough to 
take the action I did. I decided to join in one of the upstanding 
traditions of the winter festival, for it annoyed me to see this 
morbid impostor of a clown standing up. When I reached the 
corner I laughingly pushed myself into the creature - “Whoops!” - 
who stumbled backward and ended up on the sidewalk. I laughed 
again and looked around for approval from the festivalers in the 
vicinity. No one, however, seemed to appreciate or even acknowl­
edge what I had done. They did not laugh with me or point with 
amusement, but only passed by, perhaps walking a little faster 
until they were some distance from this streetcorner incident. I 
realized instantly I had violated some tacit rule of behavior, 
though I had thought my action well within the common prac­
tice. The idea occurred to me that I might even be apprehended 
and prosecuted for what in any other circumstances was certainly a 
criminal act. I turned around to help the clown back to his feet, 
hoping to somehow redeem my ofTense, but the creature was gone. 
Solemnly I walked away from the scene of my inadvertent crime 
and sought other streets away from its witnesses.
Along the various back avenues of Mirocaw I wandered,

2l6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
pausing exhaustedly at one point to sit at the counter of a small 
sandwich shop that was packed with customers. I ordered a cup of 
coffee to revive my overly alcoholed system. Warming my hands 
around the cup and sipping slowly from it, I watched the people 
outside as they passed the front window. It was well after midnight 
but the thick flow of passersby gave no indication that anyone was 
going home early. A carnival of profiles filed past the window and I 
was content simply to sit back and observe, until finally one of 
these faces made me start. It was that frightful little clown I had 
roughed up earlier. But although its face was familiar in its ghastly 
aspect, there was something different about it. And I wondered 
that there should be two such hideous freaks.
Quickly paying the man at the counter, I dashed out to get a 
second glimpse of the clown, who was now nowhere in sight. The 
dense crowd kept me from pursuing this figure with any speed, and 
I wondered how the clown could have made its way sp easily ahead 
of me. Unless the crowd had instinctively allowed this creature to 
pass unhindered through its massive ranks, as it did for Thoss. In 
the process of searching for this particular freak, I discovered that 
interspersed among the celebrating populous of Mirocaw, which 
included the sanctioned festival clowns, there was not one or two, 
but a considerable number of these pale, wraith-like creatures. 
And they all drifted along the streets unmolested by even the 
rowdiest of revelers. I now understood one of the taboos of the 
festival. These other clowns were not to be disturbed and should 
even be avoided, much as were the residents of the slum at the edge 
of town. Nevertheless, I felt instinctively that the two groups of 
clowns were somehow identified with each other, even if the ghetto 
clowns were not welcome at Mirocaw’s winter festival. Indeed, 
they were not simply part of the community and celebrating the 
season in their own way. To all appearances, this group of 
melancholy mummers constituted nothing less than an entirely 
independent festival - a festival within a festival.
Returning to my room, I entered my suppositions into the 
journal I was keeping for this venture. The following are excerpts:
There is a superstitiousness displayed by the residents of 
Mirocaw with regard to these people from the slum section, 
particularly as they lately appear in those dreadful faces 
signifying their own festival. What is the relationship be­
tween these simultaneous celebrations? Did one precede the 
other? If so, which? My opinion at this point -  and I claim no 
conclusiveness for it - is that Mirocaw’s winter festival is the

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
217
later manifestation, that it appeared after the festival of those 
depressingly pallid clowns, in order to cover it up or mitigate 
its effect. The holiday suicides come to mind, and the 
subclimate Thoss wrote about, the disappearance of Eliza­
beth Beadle twenty years ago, and my own experience with 
this pariah clan existing outside yet within the community. Of 
my own experience with this emotionally deleterious subsea­
son I would rather not speak at this time. Still not able to say 
whether or not my usual winter melancholy is the cause. On 
the general subject of mental health, I must consider Thoss’s 
book about his stay in a psychiatric hospital (in western 
Mass., almost sure of that. Check on this book & Mirocaw’s 
New England roots). The winter solstice is tomorrow, albeit 
sometime past midnight (how blurry these days and nights 
are becoming!). It is, of course, the day of the year in which 
night hours surpass daylight hours by the greatest margin. 
Note what this has to do with the suicides and a rise in psychic 
disorder. Recalling Thoss’s list of documented suicides in his 
article, there seemed to be a recurrence of specific family 
names, as there very likely might be for any kind of data 
collected in a small town. Among these names was a Beadle or 
two. Perhaps, then, there is a genealogical basis for the 
suicides which has nothing to do with Thoss’s mystical 
subclimate, which is a colorful idea to be sure and one that 
seems fitting for this town of various outward and inward 
aspects, but is not a conception that can be substantiated.
One thing that seems certain, however, is the division of 
Mirocaw into two very distinct types of citizenry, resulting 
in two festivals and the appearance of similar clowns -  a term 
now used in an extremely loose sense. But there is a connec­
tion, and I believe I have some idea of what it is. I said before 
that the normal residents of the town regard those from the 
ghetto, and especially their clown figures, with superstition. 
Yet it’s more than that: there is fear, perhaps a kind of hatred 
- the particular kind of hatred resulting from some powerful 
and irrational memory. What threatens Mirocaw I think I 
can very well understand. I recall the incident earlier today in 
that vacant diner. “Vacant” is the appropriate word here, 
despite its contradiction of fact. The congregation of that half­
lit room formed less a presence than an absence, even 
considering the oppressive number of them. Those eyes that 
did not or could not focus on anything, the pining lassitude of

218
THOMAS LIGOTTI
their faces, the lazy march of their feet. I was spiritually 
drained when I ran out of there. I then understood why these 
people and their activities are avoided.
I cannot question the wisdom of those ancestral Miroca- 
vians who began the tradition of the winter festival and gave 
the town a pretext for celebration and social intercourse at a 
time when the consequences of brooding isolation are most 
severe, those longest and darkest days of the solstice. A mood 
of Christmas joviality obviously would not be sufficient to 
counter the menace of this season. But even so, there are still 
the suicides of individuals who are somehow cut off, I 
imagine, from the vitalizing activities of the festival.
It is the nature of this insidious subseason that seems to 
determine the outward forms of Mirocaw’s winter festival: 
the optimistic greenery in a period of gray dormancy; the 
fertile promise of the Winter Queen; and, most interesting to 
my mind, the clowns. The bright clowns of Mirocaw who are 
treated so badly; they appear to serve as substitute figures for 
those dark-eyed mummers of the slums. Since the latter are 
feared for some power or influence they possess, they may still 
be symbolically confronted and conquered through their 
counterparts, who are elected for precisely this function. If 
I am right about this, I wonder to what extent there is a 
conscious awareness among the town’s populace of this 
indirect show of aggression. Those three young men I spoke 
with tonight did not seem to possess much insight beyond 
seeing that there was a certain amount of robust fun in the 
festival’s tradition. For that matter, how much awareness is 
there on the other side of these two antagonistic festivals? Too 
horrible to think of such a thing, but I must wonder if, for all 
their apparent aimlessness, those inhabitants of the ghetto are 
not the only ones who know what they are about. No denying 
that behind those inhumanly limp expressions there seems to 
lie a kind of obnoxious intelligence.
Now I realize the confusion of my present state, but as I 
wobbled from street to street tonight, watching those oval­
mouthed clowns, I could not help feeling that all the merry­
making in Mirocaw was somehow allowed only by their 
sufferance. This I hope is no more than a fanciful Thossian 
intuition, the sort of idea that is curious and thought-provok- 
ing without ever seeming to gain the benefit of proof. I know

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
219
my mind is not entirely lucid, but I feel that it may be possible 
to penetrate Mirocaw’s many complexities and illuminate the 
hidden side of the festival season. In particular I must look for 
the significance of the other festival. Is it also some kind of 
fertility celebration? From what I have seen, the tenor of this 
“celebrating” sub-group is one of anti-fertility, if anything. 
How have they managed to keep from dying out completely 
over the years? How do they maintain their numbers?
But I was too tired to formulate any more of my sodden specula­
tions. Falling onto my bed, I soon became lost in dreams of streets 
and faces.
6.
I was, of course, slightly hung over when I woke up late the next 
morning. The festival was still going strong, and blaring music 
outside roused me from a nightmare. It was a parade. A number of 
floats proceeded down Townshend, a familiar color predominat­
ing. There were theme floats of pilgrims and Indians, cowboys and 
Indians, and clowns of an orthodox type. In the middle of it all was 
the Winter Queen herself, freezing atop an icy throne. She waved 
in all directions. I even imagined she waved up at my dark 
window.
In the first few groggy moments of wakefulness I had no 
sympathy with my excitation of the previous night. But I dis­
covered that my former enthusiasm had merely lain dormant, and 
soon returned with an even greater intensity. Never before had my 
mind and senses been so active during this usually inert time of 
year. At home I would have been playing lugubrious old records 
and looking out the window quite a bit. I was terribly grateful in a 
completely abstract way for my commitment to a meaningful 
mania. And I was eager to get to work after I had had some 
breakfast at the coffee shop.
When I got back to my room I discovered the door was 
unlocked. And there was something written on the dresser mir­
ror. The writing was red and greasy, as if done with a clown’s 
make-up pencil - my own, I realized. I read the legend, or rather I 
should say riddle, several times: “What buries itself before it is 
dead?” I looked at it for quite a while, very shaken at how 
vulnerable my holiday fortifications were. Was this supposed to 
be a warning of some kind? A threat to the effect that if I persisted

2 2 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
in a certain course I would end up prematurely interred? I would 
have to be careful, I told myself. My resolution was to let nothing 
deter me from the inspired strategy I had conceived for myself. I 
wiped the mirror clean, for it was now needed for other purposes.
I spent the rest of the day devising a very special costume and 
the appropriate face to go with it. I easily shabbied up my overcoat 
with a torn pocket or two and a complete set of stains. Combined 
with blue jeans and a pair of rather scufFed-up shoes, I had a 
passable costume for a derelict. The face, however, was more 
difficult, for I had to experiment from memory. Conjuring a 
mental image of the screaming pierrot in that painting (The 
Scream, I now recall), helped me quite a bit. At nightfall I exited 
the hotel by the back stairway.
It was strange to walk down the crowded street in this gruesome 
disguise. Though I thought I would feel conspicuous, the actual 
experience was very close, I imagined, to one of complete invisi­
bility. No one looked at me as I strolled by, or as they strolled by, 
or as we strolled by each other. I was a phantom - perhaps the 
ghost of festivals past, or those yet to come.
I had no clear idea where my disguise would take me that night, 
only vague expectations of gaining the confidence of my fellow 
specters and possibly in some way coming to know their secrets. 
For a while I would simply wander around in that lackadaisical 
manner I had learned from them, following their lead in any way 
they might indicate. And for the most part this meant doing almost 
nothing and doing it silently. If I passed one of my kind on the 
sidewalk there was no speaking, no exchange of knowing looks, no 
recognition at all that I was aware of. We were there on the streets 
of Mirocaw to create a presence and nothing more. At least this is 
how I came to feel about it. As I drifted along with my bodiless 
invisibility, I felt myself more and more becoming an empty, 
floating shape, seeing without being seen and walking without 
the interference of those grosser creatures who shared my world. It 
was not an experience completely without interest or even plea­
sure. The clown’s shibboleth of “here we are again” took on a new 
meaning for me as I felt myself a novitiate of a more rarified order 
of harlequinry. And very soon the opportunity to make further 
progress along this path presented itself.
Going the opposite direction, down the street, a pickup truck 
slowly passed, gently parting a sea of zigging and zagging 
celebrants. The cargo in the back of this truck was curious, for 
it was made up entirely of my fellow sectarians. At the end of the 
block the truck stopped and another of them boarded it over the

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
221
back gate. One block down I saw still another get on. Then the, 
truck made a U-turn at an intersection and headed in my 
direction.
I stood at the curb as I had seen the others do. I was not sure the 
truck would pick me up, thinking that somehow they knew I was 
an imposter. The truck did, however, slow down, almost coming to 
a stop when it reached me. The others were crowded on the floor of 
the truck bed. Most of them were just staring into nothingness with 
the usual indifference I had come to expect from their kind. But a 
few actually glanced at me with some anticipation. For a second I 
hesitated, not sure I wanted to pursue this ruse any further. At the 
last moment, some impulse sent me climbing up the back of the 
truck and squeezing myself in among the others.
There were only a few more to pick up before the truck headed 
for the outskirts of Mirocaw and beyond. At first I tried to 
maintain a clear orientation with respect to the town. But as we 
took turn after turn through the darkness of narrow country roads, 
I found myself unable to preserve any sense of direction. The 
majority of the others in the back of the truck exhibited no 
apparent awareness of their fellow passengers. Guardedly, I 
looked from face to ghostly face. A few of them spoke in short 
whispered phrases to others close by. I could not make out what 
they were saying but the tone of their voices was one of innocent 
normalcy, as if they were not of the hardened slum-herd of 
Mirocaw. Perhaps, I thought, these were thrill-seekers who had 
disguised themselves as I had done, or, more likely, initiates of 
some kind. Possibly they had received prior instructions at such 
meetings as I had stumbled onto the day before. It was also likely 
that among this crew were those very boys I had frightened into a 
precipitate exit from that old diner.
The truck was now speeding along a fairly open stretch of 
country, heading toward those higher hills that surrounded the 
now distant town of Mirocaw. The icy wind whipped around us, 
and I could not keep myself from trembling with cold. This 
definitely betrayed me as one of the newcomers among the 
group, for the two bodies that pressed against mine were rigidly 
still and even seemed to be radiating a frigidity of their own. I 
glanced ahead at the darkness into which we were rapidly 
progressing.
We had left all open country behind us now, and the road was 
enclosed by thick woods. The mass of bodies in the truck leaned 
into one another as we began traveling up a steep incline. Above 
us, at the top of the hill, were lights shining somewhere within the

222
THOMAS LIGOTTI
woods. When the road levelled off, the truck made an abrupt turn, 
steering into what looked like a great ditch.
There was an unpaved path, however, upon which the -truck 
proceeded toward the glowing in the near distance.
This glowing became brighter and sharper as we approached it, 
flickering upon the trees and revealing stark detail where there had 
formerly been only smooth darkness. As the truck pulled into a 
clearing and came to a stop, I saw a loose assembly of figures, many 
of which held lanterns that beamed with a dazzling and frosty 
light. I stood up in the back of the truck to unboard as the others 
were doing. Glancing around from that height I saw approxi­
mately thirty more of those cadaverous clowns milling about. One 
of my fellow passengers spied me lingering in the truck and in a 
strangely high-pitched whisper told me to hurry, explaining 
something about the “apex of darkness”. I thought again about 
this solstice night; it was technically the longest period of darkness 
of the year, even if not by a very significant margin from many 
other winter nights. Its true significance, though, was related to 
considerations having little to do with either statistics or the 
calendar.
I went over to the place where the others were forming into a 
tighter crowd, which betrayed a sense of expectancy in the subtle 
gestures and expressions of its individual members. Glances were 
now exchanged, the hand of one lightly touched the shoulder of 
another, and a pair of circled eyes gazed over to where two figures 
were setting their lanterns on the ground about six feet apart. The 
illumination of these lanterns revealed an opening in the earth. 
Eventually the awareness of everyone was focused on this roundish 
pit, and as if by prearranged signal we all began huddling around 
it. The only sounds were those of the wind and our own movements 
as we crushed frozen leaves and sticks underfoot.
Finally, when we had all surrounded this gaping hole, the first 
one jumped in, leaving our sight for a moment but then reappear­
ing to take hold of a lantern which another handed him from 
above. The miniature abyss filled with light, and I could see it was 
no more than six feet deep. One of its walls opened into the mouth 
of a tunnel. The figure holding the lantern stooped a little and 
disappeared into the passage.
Each of us, in turn, dropped into the darkness of this pit, and 
every fifth one took a lantern. I kept to the back of the group, for 
whatever subterranean activities were going to take place, I was 
sure I wanted to be on their periphery. When only about ten of us 
remained on the ground above, I maneuvered to let four of them

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
223
precede me so that as the fifth I might receive a lantern. This was 
exactly how it worked out, for after I had leaped to the bottom of 
the hole a light was ritually handed down to me. Turning about- 
face, I quickly entered the passageway. At that point I shook so 
with cold that I was neither curious nor afraid, but only grateful 
for the shelter.
I entered a long, gently sloping tunnel, just high enough for me 
to stand upright. It was considerably warmer down there than 
outside in the cold darkness of the woods. After a few moments I 
had sufficiently thawed out so that my concerns shifted from those 
of physical comfort to a sudden and justified preoccupation with 
my survival. As I walked I held my lantern close to the sides of the 
tunnel. They were relatively smooth as if the passage had not been 
made by manual digging but had been burrowed by something 
which left behind a clue to its dimensions in the tunnel’s size and 
shape. This delirious idea came to me when I recalled the message 
that had been left on my hotel room mirror: “What buries itself 
before it is dead?”
I had to hurry along to keep up with those uncanny spelunkers 
who preceded me. The lanterns ahead bobbed with every step of 
their bearers, the lumbering procession seeming less and less real 
the farther we marched into that snug little tunnel. At some point I 
noticed the line ahead of me growing shorter. The processioners 
were emptying out into a cavernous chamber where I, too, soon 
arrived. This area was about thirty feet in height, its other 
dimensions approximating those of a large ballroom. Gazing into 
the distance above made me uncomfortably aware of how far we 
had descended into the earth. Unlike the smooth sides of the tunnel, 
the walls of this cavern looked jagged and irregular, as though they 
had been gnawed at. The earth had been removed, I assumed, 
either through the tunnel from which we had emerged, or else by 
way of one of the many other black openings that I saw around the 
edges of the chamber, for possibly they too led back to the surface.
But the structure of this chamber occupied my mind a great deal 
less than did its occupants. There to meet us on the floor of the 
great cavern was what must have been the entire slum population 
of Mirocaw, and more, all with the same eerily wide-eyed and 
oval-mouthed faces. They formed a circle around an altar-like 
object which had some kind of dark, leathery covering draped over 
it. Upon the altar, another covering of the same material con­
cealed a lumpy form beneath.
And behind this form, looking down upon the altar, was the only 
figure whose face was not greased with makeup.

224
THOMAS LIGOTTI
He wore a long snowy robe that was the same color as the wispy 
hair berimming his head. His arms were calmly at his sides. He 
made no movement. The man I once believed would penetrate 
great secrets stood before us with the same professorial bearing that 
had impressed me so many years ago, yet now I felt nothing but 
dread at the thought of what revelations lay pocketed within the 
abysmal folds of his magisterial attire. Had I really come here to 
challenge such a formidable figure? The name by which I knew 
him seemed itself insufficient to designate one of his stature. Rather 
I should name him by his other incarnations: god of all wisdom, 
scribe of all sacred books, father of all magicians, thrice great and 
more - rather I should call him Thoth.
He raised his cupped hands to his congregation and the 
ceremony was underway.
It was all very simple. The entire assembly, which had remained 
speechless until this moment, broke into the most horrendous high- 
pitched singing that can be imagined. It was a choir of sorrow, of 
shrieking delirium, and of shame. The cavern rang shrilly with the 
dissonant, whining chorus. My voice, too, was added to the 
congregation’s, trying to blend with their maimed music. But 
my singing could not imitate theirs, having a huskiness unlike 
their cacophonous keening wail. To keep from exposing myself as 
an intruder I continued to mouth their words without sound. 
These words were a revelation of the moody malignancy which 
until then I had no more than sensed whenever in the presence of 
these figures. They were singing to the “unborn in paradise,” to 
the “pure unlived lives.” They sang a dirge for existence, for all its 
vital forms and seasons. Their ideals were those of darkness, chaos, 
and a melancholy half-existence consecrated to all the many 
shapes of death. A sea of thin, bloodless faces trembled and 
screamed with perverted hopes. And the robed, guiding figure 
at the heart of all this -  elevated over the course of twenty years to 
the status of high priest - was the man from whom I had taken so 
many of my own life’s principles. It would be useless to describe 
what I felt at that moment and a waste of the time I need to 
describe the events which followed.
The singing abruptly stopped and the towering white-haired 
figure began to speak. He was welcoming those of the new 
generation -  twenty winters had passed since the “Pure Ones” 
had expanded their ranks. The word “pure” in this setting was a 
violence to what sense and composure I still retained, for nothing 
could have been more foul than what was to come. Thoss -  and I 
employ this defunct identity only as a convenience - closed his

THE LAST FEAST OF H A R LEQ U IN
225
sermon and drew closer to the dark-skinned altar. Then, with all 
the flourish of his former life, he drew back the topmost covering. 
Beneath it was a limp-limbed effigy, a collapsed puppet sprawled 
upon the slab. I was standing toward the rear of the congregation 
and attempted to keep as close to the exit passage as I could. Thus, 
I did not see everything as clearly as I might have.
Thoss looked down upon the crooked, doll-like form and then 
out at the gathering. I even imagined that he made knowing eye- 
contact with myself. He spread his arms and a stream of contin­
uous and unintelligible words flowed from his moaning mouth. 
The congregation began to stir, not greatly but perceptibly. Until 
that moment there was a limit to what I believed was the evil of 
these people. They were, after all, only that. They were merely 
morbid, self-tortured souls with strange beliefs. If there was 
anything I had learned in all my years as an anthropologist it 
was that the world is infinitely rich in strange ideas, even to the 
point where the concept of strangeness itself had little meaning for 
me. But with the scene I then witnessed, my conscience bounded 
into a realm from which it will never return.
For now was the transformation scene, the culmination of every 
harlequinade.
It began slowly. There was increasing movement among those 
on the far side of the chamber from where I stood. Someone had 
fallen to the floor and the others in the area backed away. The 
voice at the altar continued its chanting. I tried to gain a better 
view but there were too many of them around me. Through the 
mass of obstructing bodies I caught only glimpses of what was 
taking place.
The one who had swooned to the floor of the chamber seemed to 
be losing all former shape and proportion. I thought it was a 
clown’s trick. They were clowns, were they not? I myself could 
make four white balls transform into four black balls as I juggled 
them. And this was not my most astonishing feat of clownish 
magic. And is there not always a sleight-of-hand inherent in all 
ceremonies, often dependent on the transported delusions of the 
celebrants? This was a good show, I thought, and giggled to 
myself. The transformation scene of Harlequin throwing off his 
fool’s facade. O God, Harlequin, do not move like that! Harlequin, 
where are your arms? And your legs have melted together and 
begun squirming upon the floor. What horrible, mouthing umbi­
licus is that where your face should be? What is it that buries itself 
before it is dead? The almighty serpent of wisdom - the Conqueror 
Worm.

226
THOMAS LIGOTTI
It now started happening all around the chamber. Individual 
members of the congregation would gaze emptily - caught for a 
moment in a frozen trance - and then collapse to the floor to begin 
the sickening metamorphosis. This happened with ever-increasing 
frequency the louder and more frantic Thoss chanted his insane 
prayer or curse. Then there began a writhing movement toward 
the altar, and Thoss welcomed the things as they curled their way 
to the altar-top. I knew now what lax figure lay upon it.
This was Kora and Persephone, the daughter of Ceres and the 
Winter Queen: the child abducted into the underworld of death. 
Except this child had no supernatural mother to save her, no living 
mother at all. For the sacrifice I witnessed was an echo of one that 
had occurred twenty years before, the carnival feast of the 
preceding generation - O came vale! Now both mother and 
daughter had become victims of this subterranean sabbath. I 
finally realized this truth when the figure stirred upon the altar, 
lifted its head of icy beauty, and screamed at the sight of mute 
mouths closing around her.
I ran from the chamber into the tunnel. (There was nothing else 
that could be done, I have obsessively told myself.) Some of the 
others who had not yet changed began to pursue me. They would 
have caught up to me, I have no doubt, for I fell only a few yards 
into the passage. And for a moment I imagined that I too was 
about to undergo a transformation, but I had not been prepared as 
the others had been. When I heard the approaching footsteps of 
my pursuers I was sure there was an even worse fate facing me 
upon the altar. But the footsteps ceased and retreated. They had 
received an order in the voice of their high priest. I too heard the 
order, though I wish I had not, for until then I had imagined that 
Thoss did not remember who I was. It was that voice which taught 
me otherwise.
For the moment I was free to leave. I struggled to my feet and, 
having broken my lantern in the fall, retraced my way back 
through cloacal blackness.
Everything seemed to happen very quickly once I emerged from 
the tunnel and climbed up from the pit. I wiped the reeking 
greasepaint from my face as I ran through the woods and back to 
the road. A passing car stopped, though I gave it no other choice 
except to run me down.
“Thank you for stopping.”
“What the hell are you doing out here?” the driver asked.
I caught my breath. “It was a joke. The festival. Friends 
thought it would be funny . . . Please drive on.”

TH E LAST FEAST OF H A R LE Q U IN
227
My ride let me off about a mile out of town, and from there I 
could find my way. It was the same way I had come into Mirocaw 
on my first visit the summer before. I stood for a while at the 
summit of that high hill just outside the city limits, looking down 
upon the busy little hamlet. The intensity of the festival had not 
abated, and would not until morning. I walked down toward the 
welcoming glow of green, slipped through the festivities unnoticed, 
and returned to the hotel. No one saw me go up to my room. 
Indeed, there was an atmosphere of absence and abandonment 
throughout that building, and the desk in the lobby was unat­
tended.
I locked the door to my room and collapsed upon the bed.
7.
When I awoke the next morning I saw from my window that the 
town and surrounding countryside had been visited during the 
night by a snowstorm, one which was entirely unpredicted. The 
snow was still falling on the now deserted streets of Mirocaw. The 
festival was over. Everyone had gone home.
And this was exactly my own intention. Any action on my part 
concerning what I had seen the night before would have to wait 
until I was away from the town. I am still not sure it will do the 
slightest good to speak up like this. Any accusations I could make 
against the slum populace of Mirocaw would be resisted, as well 
they should be, as unbelievable. Perhaps in a very short while none 
of this will be my concern.
With packed suitcases in both hands I walked up to the front 
desk to check out. The man behind the desk was not Samuel 
Beadle, and he had to fumble around to find my bill.
“Here we are. Everything all right?”
“Fine,” I answered in a dead voice. “Is Mr. Beadle around?”
“No, I’m afraid he’s not back yet. Been out all night looking for 
his daughter. She’s a very popular girl, being the Winter Queen 
and all that nonsense. Probably find she was at a party some­
where.”
A little noise came out of my throat.
I threw my suitcases in the back seat of my car and got behind 
the wheel. On that morning nothing I could recall seemed real to 
me. The snow was falling and I watched it through my windshield, 
slow and silent and entrancing. I started up my car, routinely 
glancing in my rear view mirror. What I saw there is now vividly

228
THOMAS LIGOTTI
framed in my mind, as it was framed in the back window of my car 
when I turned to verify its reality.
In the middle of the street behind me, standing ankle-deep in 
snow, was Thoss and another figure. When I looked closely at the 
other I recognized him as one of the boys whom I surprised in that 
diner. But he had now taken on a corrupt and listless resemblance 
to his new family. Both he and Thoss stared at me, making no 
attempt to forestall my departure. Thoss knew that this was 
unnecessary.
I had to carry the image of those two dark figures in my mind as 
I drove back home. But only now has the full weight of my 
experience descended upon me. So far I have claimed illness in 
order to avoid my teaching schedule. To face the normal flow of 
life as I had formerly known it would be impossible. I am now very 
much under the influence of a season and a climate far colder and 
more barren than all the winters in human memory. And mentally 
retracing past events does not seem to have helped; I can feel 
myself sinking deeper into a velvety white abyss.
At certain times I could almost dissolve entirely into this inner 
realm of awful purity and emptiness. I remember those invisible 
moments when in disguise I drifted through the streets of Mirocaw, 
untouched by the drunken, noisy forms around me: untouchable. 
But instantly I recoil at this grotesque nostalgia, for I realize what 
is happening and what I do not want to be true, though Thoss 
proclaimed it was. I recall his command to those others as I lay 
helplessly prone in the tunnel. They could have apprehended me, 
but Thoss, my old master, called them back. His voice echoed 
throughout that cavern, and it now reverberates within my own 
psychic chambers of memory.
“He is one of us,” it said. “He has always been one of us.”
It is this voice which now fills my dreams and my days and my 
long winter nights. I have seen you, Dr. Thoss, through the snow 
outside my window. Soon I will celebrate, alone, that last feast 
which will kill your words, only to prove how well I have learned 
their truth.
To the memory of H. P. Lovecraft

THE SPECTACLES IN 
THE DRAWER
í.
Last year at this time, perhaps on this very day, Plomb visited me 
at my home. He always seemed to know when I had returned from 
my habitual travelling and always appeared uninvited on my 
doorstep. Although this former residence of mine was pathetically 
run-down, Plomb seemed to regard it as a kind of castle or fortress, 
always gazing up at its high ceilings as if he were witnessing its 
wonders for the first time. That day - a dim one, I think - he did 
not fail to do the same. Then we settled into one of the spacious 
though sparsely furnished rooms of my house.
“And how were your travels?” he asked, as if only in the spirit of 
polite conversation. I could see by his smile -  an emulation of my 
own, no doubt - that he was glad to be back in my house and in my 
company. I smiled too and stood up. Plomb, of course, stood up 
along with me, almost simultaneously with my own movements.
“Shall we go then?” I said. What a pest, I thought.
Our footsteps tapped a moderate time on the hard wooden floor 
leading to the stairway. We ascended to the second floor, which I 
left almost entirely empty, and then up a narrower stairway to the 
third floor. Although I had led him along this route several times 
before, I could see from his wandering eyes that, for him, every 
tendrilled swirl of wallpaper, every cobweb fluttering in the 
corners above, every stale draft of the house composed a suspense­
ful prelude to our destination. At the end of the third-floor hall 
there was a small wooden stairway, no more than a ladder, that led 
to an old storeroom where I kept certain things which I collected.
It was not by any means a spacious room, and its enclosed 
atmosphere was thickened, as Plomb would have emphasized, by its 
claustrophobic arrangement of tall cabinets, ceiling-high shelves, 
and various trunks and crates. This is simply how things worked 
out over a period of time. In any case, Plomb seemed to favor this

230
THOMAS LIGOTTI
state of affairs. “Ah, the room of secret mystery,” he said. “Where 
all your treasures are kept, all the raw wonders cached away.”
These treasures and wonders, as Plomb called them, were, I 
suppose, remarkable from a certain point of view. Plomb loved to 
go through all the old objects and articles, gathering together a lapful 
of curios and settling down on the dusty sofa at the center of this 
room. But it was the new items, whenever I returned from one of my 
protracted tours, that always took precedence in Plomb’s hierarchy 
of wonders. Thus, I immediately brought out the double-handled 
dagger with the single blade of polished stone. At first sight of the 
ceremonial object, Plomb held out the flat palms of his hands, and I 
placed this exotic device upon its rightful altar. “Who could have 
made such a thing?” he asked, though rhetorically. He expected no 
answer to his questions and possibly did not really desire any. And of 
course I offered no more elaborate an explanation than a simple 
smile. But how quickly, I noticed, the magic of that first fragment of 
“speechless wonder,” as he would say, lost its initial surge of 
fascination. How fast that glistening fog, which surrounded only 
him, dispersed to unveil a tedious clarity. I had to move faster.
“Here,” I said, my arm searching the shadows of an open 
wardrobe. “This should be worn when you handle that sacrificial 
artifact.” And I threw the robe about his shoulders, engulfing his 
smallish frame with a cyclone of strange patterns and colors. He 
admired himself in the mirror attached inside the door of the 
wardrobe. “Look at the robe in the mirror,” he practically 
shouted. “The designs are all turned around. How much stran­
ger, how much better.” While he stood there glaring at himself, I 
relieved him of the dagger before he had a chance to do something 
careless. This left his hands free to raise themselves up to the dust- 
caked ceiling of the room, and to the dark gods of his imagination. 
Gripping each handle of the dagger, I suddenly elevated it above 
his head, where I held it poised. In a few moments he started to 
giggle, then fell into spasms of sardonic hilarity. He stumbled over 
to the old sofa and collapsed upon its soft cushions. I followed, but 
when I reached his prostrate form it was not the pale-blue blade 
that I brought down upon his chest - it was simply a book, one of 
many I had put before him. His peaked legs created a lectern on 
which he rested the huge volume, propping it securely as he began 
turning the stiff crackling pages. The sound seemed to absorb him 
as much as the sight of a language he could not even name let alone 
comprehend.
“The lost grimoire of the Abbot of Tine,” he giggled. “Tran­
scribed in the language of—”

THE SPECTACLES IN TH E DRAWER
231
“A wild guess,” I interjected. “And a wrong one.”
“Then the forbidden Psalms of the Silent. The book without an 
author.”
“Without a living author, if you will recall what I told you about 
it. But you’re very wide of the mark.”
“Well, suppose you give me a hint,” he said with an impatience 
that surprised me. “Suppose—”
“But wouldn’t you prefer to guess at its wonders, Plomb?” I 
suggested encouragingly. Some moments of precarious silence 
passed.
“I suppose I would,” he finally answered, and to my relief. Then 
I watched him gorge his eyes on the inscrutable script of the 
ancient volume.
In truth, the mysteries of this Sacred Writ were among the most 
genuine of their kind, for it had never been my intention to dupe 
my disciple - as he justly thought of himself- with false secrets. But 
the secrets of such a book are not absolute: once they are known, 
they become relegated to a lesser sphere, which is that of the 
knower. Having lost the prestige they once enjoyed, these former 
secrets now function as tools in the excavation of still deeper ones 
which, in turn, will suffer the same corrosive fate. And this is the 
fate of all true secrets. Eventually the seeker may conclude - either 
through insight or sheer exhaustion - that this ruthless process is 
neverending, that the mortification of one mystery after another 
has no terminus beyond that of the seeker’s own extinction. And 
how many still remain susceptible to the search? How many pursue 
it to the end of their days with undying hope of some ultimate 
revelation? Better not to think in precise terms just how few the 
faithful are. More to the present point, it seems that Plomb was one 
of their infinitesimal number. And it was my intention to reduce 
that number by one.
The plan was simple: to feed Plomb’s hunger for mysterious 
sensations to the point of nausea . . . and beyond. The only thing 
to survive would be a gutful of shame and regret for a defunct 
passion.
As Plomb lay upon the sofa, ogling that stupid book, I moved 
toward a large cabinet whose several doors were composed of a 
tarnished metal grill work framed by darkest wood. I opened one of 
these doors and exposed a number of shelves cluttered with books 
and odd objects. Upon one shelf, resting there as sole occupant, 
was a very white box. It was no larger, as I mentally envision it, 
than a modest jewelry case. There were no markings on the box, 
except the fingerprints, or rather thumbprints, smearing its smooth

232
THOMAS LIGOTTI
white surface at its opposing edges and halfway along its length. 
There were no handles or embellishments of any kind; not even, at 
first sight, the thinnest of seams to indicate the level at which the 
lower part of the box met the upper part, or perhaps give away the 
existence of a drawer. I smiled a little at the mock intrigue of the 
object, then gripped it from either side, gently, and placed my 
thumbs precisely over the fresh thumbprints. I applied pressure 
with each thumb, and a shallow drawer popped open at the front 
of the box. As hoped, Plomb had been watching me as I went 
through these meaningless motions.
“What do you have there?” he asked.
“Patience, Plomb. You will see,” I answered while delicately 
removing two sparkling items from the drawer: one a small and 
silvery knife which very much resembled a razor-sharp letter 
opener, and the other a pair of old-fashioned wire-rimmed 
spectacles.
Plomb laid aside the now-boring book and sat up straight 
against the arm of the sofa. I sat down beside him and opened 
up the spectacles so that the stems were pointing toward his 
face. When he leaned forward, I slipped them on. “They’re only 
plain glass,” he said with a definite tone of disappointment. “Or 
a very weak prescription.” His eyes rolled about as he at­
tempted to scrutinize what rested upon his own face. Without 
saying a word, I held up the little knife in front of him until he 
finally took notice of it. “Ahhhh, ” he said, smiling. “There’s 
more to it.” “Of course there is,” I said, gently twirling the 
steely blade before his fascinated eyes. “Now hold out your 
palm, just like that. Good, good. You won’t even feel this, 
completely harmless. Now,” I instructed him, “keep watching 
that tiny red trickle.
“Your eyes are now fused with those fantastic lenses, and your 
sight is one with its object. And what exactly is that object? 
Obviously it is everything that fascinates, everything that has 
power over your gaze and your dreams. You cannot even 
conceive the wish to look away. And even if there are no simple 
images to see, nonetheless there is a vision of some kind, an infinite 
and overwhelming scene expanding before you. And the vastness 
of this scene is such that even the dazzling diffusion of all the 
known universes cannot convey its wonder. Everything is so 
brilliant, so great, and so alive: landscapes without end that are 
rolling with life, landscapes that are themselves alive. Unimagin­
able diversity of form and motion, design and dimension. And each 
detail is perfectly crystalline, from the mammoth shapes lurching

THE SPECTACLES IN TH E DRAWER
233
in outline against endless horizons to the minutest cilia wriggling in 
an obscure oceanic niche. Even this is only a mere fragment of all 
that there is to see and to know. There are labyrinthine astro­
nomies, discrete systems of living mass which yet are woven 
together by a complex of intersections, at points mingling in a 
way that mutually affects those systems involved, yielding instan­
taneous evolutions, constant transformations of both appearance 
and essence. You are witness to all that exists or ever could exist. 
And yet, somehow concealed in the shadows of all that you can see 
is something that is not yet visible, something that is beating like a 
thunderous pulse and promises still greater visions: all else is 
merely its membrane enclosing the ultimate thing waiting to be 
born, preparing for the cataclysm which will be both the beginning 
and the end. To behold the prelude to this event must be an 
experience of unbearable anticipation, so that hope and dread 
merge into a new emotion, one corresponding perfectly to the 
absolute and the wholly unknown. The next instant, it seems, will 
bring with it a revolution of all matter and energy. But the seconds 
keep passing, the experience grows more fascinating without 
fulfilling its portents, without extinguishing itself in revelation. 
And although the visions remain active inside you, deep in your 
blood - you now awake.”
Pushing himself up from the sofa, Plomb staggered forward a 
few steps and wiped his bloodied palm on the front of his shirt, as if 
to wipe away the visions. He shook his head vigorously once or 
twice, but the spectacles remained secure.
“Is everything all right?” I asked him.
Plomb appeared to be dazzled in the worst way. Behind the 
spectacles his eyes gazed dumbly, and his mouth gaped with 
countless unspoken words. However, when I said, “Perhaps I 
should remove these for you,” his hand rose toward mine, as if 
to prevent me from doing so. But his effort was half-hearted. 
Folding their wire stems one across the other, I replaced them 
back in their box. Plomb now watched me, as if I were performing 
some ritual of great fascination. He seemed to be still composing 
himself from the experience.
“Well?” I asked.
“Dreadful,” he answered. “But . . .”
“But?”
“But I . . .”
“You?”
“What I mean is - where did they come from?”
“Can’t you imagine that for yourself?” I countered. And for a

2 3 4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
moment it seemed that in this case, too, he desired some simple 
answer, contrary to his most hardened habits. Then he smiled 
rather deviously and threw himself down upon the sofa. His eyes 
glazed over as he fabricated an anecdote to his fancy.
“I can see you,” he said, “at an occultist auction in a disrepu­
table quarter of a foreign city. The box is carried forward, the 
spectacles taken out. They were made several generations ago by a 
man who was at once a student of the Gnostics and a master of 
optometry. His ambition: to construct a pair of artificial eyes that 
would allow him to bypass the obstacle of physical appearances 
and glimpse a far-ofT realm of secret truth whose gateway is within 
the depths of our own blood.”
“Remarkable,” I replied. “Your speculation is so close to truth 
itself that the details are not worth mentioning for the mere sake of 
vulgar correctness.”
In fact, the spectacles belonged to a lot of antiquarian rubbish I 
once bought blindly, and the box was of unknown, or rather 
unremembered, origin - just something I had lying around in my 
attic room. And the knife, a magician’s prop for efficiently slicing 
up paper money and silk ties.
I carried the box containing both spectacles and knife over to 
Plomb, holding it slightly beyond his reach. I said, “Can you 
imagine the dangers involved, the possible nightmare of possessing 
such ‘artificial eyes’?” He nodded gravely in agreement. “And you 
can imagine the restraint the possessor of such a gruesome artifact 
must practice.” His eyes were all comprehension, and he was 
sucking a little at his slightly lacerated palm. “Then nothing would 
please me more than to pass the ownership of this obscure miracle 
on to you, my dear Plomb. I’m sure you will hold it in wonder as 
no one else could.”
And it was exactly this wonder that it Was my malicious aim to 
undermine, or rather to expand until it ripped itself apart. For I 
could no longer endure the sight of it.
As Plomb once again stood at the door of my home, holding his 
precious gift with a child’s awkward embrace, I could not resist 
asking him the question. Opening the door for him, I said, “By the 
way, Plomb, have you ever been hypnotized?”
“I . . .” he answered.
“You,” I prompted.
“No,” he said. “Why do you ask?”
“Curiosity,” I replied. “You know how I am. Well, good-night, 
Plomb.”
And I closed the door behind the most willing subject in the

THE SPECTACLES IN TH E DRAWER
235
world, hoping it would be some time before he returned. “If ever,” 
I said aloud, and the words echoed in the hollows of my home.
2.
But it was not long afterward that Plomb and I had our next 
confrontation, though the circumstances were odd and accidental. 
Late one afternoon, as it happens, I was browsing through a shop 
that dealt in second-hand merchandise of the most pathetic sort. 
The place was littered with rusty scales that once would have given 
your weight for a penny, cock-eyed bookcases, dead toys, furniture 
without style or substance, grotesque standing ashtrays late of 
some hotel lobby, and a hodgepodge of old-fashioned fixtures. For 
me, however, such decrepit bazaars offered more diversion and 
consolation than the most exotic marketplaces, which so often 
made good on their strange promises that mystery itself ceased to 
have meaning. But my second-hand seller made no promises and 
inspired no dreams, leaving all that to those more ambitious 
hucksters who trafficked in such perishable stock in trade. At 
the time I could ask no more of a given gray afternoon than to 
find myself in one of these enchantingly desolate establishments.
That particular afternoon in the second-hand shop brought me 
a brief glimpse of Plomb in a second-hand manner. The visual 
transaction took place in a mirror that leaned against a wall, one of 
the many mirrors that seemed to constitute a specialty of the shop. 
I had squatted down before this rectangular relic, whose frame 
reminded me of the decorated borders of old books, and wiped my 
bare hand across its dusty surface. And there, hidden beneath the 
dust, was the face of Plomb, who must have just entered the shop 
and was standing a room’s length away. While he seemed to 
recognize immediately the reverse side of me, his expression 
betrayed the hope that I had not seen him. There was shock as 
well as shame upon that face, and something else besides. And if 
Plomb had approached me, what could I have said to him? 
Perhaps I would have mentioned that he did not look very well 
or that it appeared he had been the victim of an accident. But how 
could he explain what had happened to him except to reveal the 
truth that we both knew and neither would speak? Fortunately, 
this scene was to remain in its hypothetical state, because a 
moment later he was out the door.
I cautiously approached the front window of the shop in time to 
see Plomb hurrying off into the dull, unreflecting day, his right

236
THOMAS LIGOTTI
hand held up to his face. “It was only my intention to cure him,” I 
mumbled to myself. I had not considered that he was incurable, 
nor that things would have developed in the way they did.
3.
And after that day I wondered, eventually to the point of 
obsession, what kind of hell had claimed poor Plomb for its 
own. I knew only that I had provided him with a type of toy: 
the subliminal ability to feast his eyes on an imaginary universe in 
a rivulet of his own blood. The possibility that he would desire to 
magnify this experience, or indeed that he would be capable of 
such a feat, had not seriously occurred to me. Obviously, however, 
this had become the case. I now had to ask myself how much 
farther could Plomb’s situation be extended. The answer, though I 
could not guess it at the time, was presented to me in a dream.
And it seemed fitting that the dream had its setting in that old 
attic storeroom of my house, which Plomb once prized above all 
other rooms in the world. I was sitting in a chair, a huge and 
enveloping chair which in reality does not exist but in the dream 
directly faces the sofa. No thoughts or feelings troubled me, and I 
had only the faintest sense that someone else was in the room. But I 
could not see who it was, because everything appeared so dim in 
outline, blurry and grayish. There seemed to be some movement in 
the region of the sofa, as if the enormous cushions themselves had 
become lethargically restless. Unable to fathom the source of this 
movement, I touched my hand to my temple in thought. This was 
how I discovered that I was wearing a pair of spectacles with 
circular lenses connected to wiry stems. I thought to myself: “If I 
remove these spectacles I will be able to see more clearly.” But a 
voice told me not to remove them, and I recognized that voice. 
“Plomb,” I said. And then something moved, like a man-shaped 
shadow, upon the sofa. A climate of dull horror began to invade 
my surroundings. “Even if your trip is over,” I said deliriously, 
“you have nothing to show for it.” But the voice disagreed with me 
in sinister whispers that made no sense but seemed filled with 
meaning. I would indeed be shown things, these whispers might 
have said. Already I was being shown things, astonishing things - 
mysteries and marvels beyond anything I had ever suspected. And 
suddenly all my feelings, as I gazed through the spectacles, were 
proof of that garbled pronouncement. They were feelings of a 
peculiar nature which, to my knowledge, one experiences only in

THE SPECTACLES IN THE DRAWER
237
dreams: sensations of infinite expansiveness and ineffable meaning 
that have no place elsewhere in our lives. But although these 
monstrous, astronomical emotions suggested wonders of incredible 
magnitude and character, I saw nothing through those magic 
lenses except this: the obscure shape in the shadows before me as its 
outline grew clearer and clearer to my eyes. Gradually I came to 
view what appeared to be a mutilated carcass, something of a 
terrible rawness, a torn and flayed thing whose every laceration 
could be traced in crystalline sharpness. The only thing of color in 
my grayish surroundings, it twitched and quivered like a gory 
heart exposed beneath the body of the dream. And it made a sound 
like hellish giggling. Then it said: “I am back from my trip,” in a 
horrible, piercing voice.
It was this simple statement that inspired my efforts to tear the 
spectacles from my face, even though they now seemed to be part 
of my flesh. I gripped them with both hands and flung them 
against the wall, where they shattered. Somehow this served to 
exorcise my tormented companion, who faded back into the 
grayness. Then I looked at the wall and saw that it was running 
red where the spectacles had struck. And the broken lenses that lay 
upon the floor were bleeding.
To experience such a dream as this on a single occasion might 
very well be the stufT of a haunting, lifelong memory, something 
that perhaps might even be cherished for its unfathomable depths 
of feeling. But to suffer over and over this same nightmare, as I 
soon found was my fate, leads one to seek nothing so much as a cure 
to kill the dream, to reveal all its secrets and thus bring about a 
selective amnesia.
At first I looked to the sheltering shadows of my home for 
deliverance and forgetfulness, the sobering shadows which at other 
times had granted me a cold and stagnant peace. I tried to argue 
myself free of my nightly excursions, to discourse these visions 
away, lecturing the walls contra the prodigies of a mysterious world. 
“Since any form of existence,” I muttered, “since any form of 
existence is by definition a conflict of forces, or it is nothing at all, 
what can it possibly matter if these skirmishes take place in a world 
of marvels or one of mud? The difference between the two is not 
worth mentioning, or none. Such distinctions are the work of only 
the crudest and most limited perspectives, the sense of mystery and 
wonder foremost among them. Even the most esoteric ecstasy, 
when it comes down to it, requires the prop of vulgar pain in order 
to stand up as an experience. Having acknowledged the truth, 
however provisional, and the reality, if subject to mutation, of all

238
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the strange things in the universe - whether known, unknown, or 
merely suspected - one is left with no recourse than to conclude 
that none of them makes any difference, that such marvels change 
nothing: our experience remains the same. The gallery of human 
sensations that existed in prehistory is identical to the one that 
faces each life today, that will continue to face each new life as it 
enters this world . . . and then looks beyond it.”
And thus I attempted to reason my way back to self-possession. 
But no measure of my former serenity was forthcoming. On the 
contrary, my days as well as my nights were now poisoned by an 
obsession with Plomb. Why had I given him those spectacles! More 
to the point, why did I allow him to retain them? It was time to 
take back my gift, to confiscate those little bits of glass and twisted 
metal that were now harrowing the wrong mind. And since I had 
succeeded too well in keeping him away from my door, I would 
have to be the one to approach his.
4.
But it was not Plomb who answered the rotting door of that house 
which stood at the street’s end and beside a broad expanse of 
empty field. It was not Plomb who asked if I was a newspaper 
journalist or a policeman before closing that gouged and filthy 
door in my face when I replied that I was neither of those persons. 
Pounding on that wobbling door, which seemed about to crumble 
under my fist, I summoned the sunken-eyed man a second time to 
ask if this in fact was Mr. Plomb’s address. I had never visited him 
at his home, that hopeless little box in which he lived and slept and 
dreamed.
“Was he a relative?”
“No,” I answered.
“A friend. You’re not here to collect a bill, because if that’s the 
case . . .”
For the sake of simplicity I interjected that, yes, I was a friend of 
Mr. Plomb.
“Then how is it you don’t know?”
For the sake of my curiosity I said that I had been away on a 
trip, as I often was, and had my own reasons for notifying Mr. 
Plomb of my return.
“Then you don’t know anything,” he stated flatly.
“Exactly,” I replied.
“It was even in the newspaper. And they asked me about him.”

THE SPECTACLES IN THE DRAWER
239
“Plomb,” I confirmed.
“That’s right,” he said, as if he had suddenly become the 
custodian of a secret knowledge.
Then he waved me into the house and led me through its ugly, 
airless interior to a small storage room at the back. He reached 
along the wall inside the room, as if he wanted to avoid entering it, 
and switched on the light. Immediately I understood why the 
hollow-faced man preferred not to go into that room, for Plomb 
had renovated that tiny space in a very strange way. Each wall, as 
well as the ceiling and floor, was a mosaic of mirrors, a shocking 
galaxy of redundant reflections. And each mirror was splattered 
with sinister droplets, as if someone had swung several brushfuls of 
paint from various points throughout the room, spreading dark 
stars across a silvery firmament. In his attempt to exhaust or 
exaggerate the visions to which he had apparently become 
enslaved, Plomb had done nothing less than multiplied these 
visions into infinity, creating oceans of his own blood and enabling 
himself to see with countless eyes. Entranced by such aspiration, I 
gazed at the mirrors in speechless wonder. Among them was one I 
remembered looking into some days - or was it weeks? -  before.
The landlord, who did not follow me into the room, said 
something about suicide and a body ripped raw. This news was 
of course unnecessary, even boring. But I was overwhelmed at 
Plomb’s ingenuity: it was some time before I could look away from 
that gallery of glass and gore. Only afterward did I fully realize 
that I would never be rid of the horrible Plomb. He had broken 
through all the mirrors, projected himself into the eternity beyond 
them.
And even when I abandoned my home, with its hideous attic 
storeroom, Plomb still followed me in my dreams. He now travels 
with me to the ends of the earth, initiating me night after night into 
his unspeakable wonders. I can only hope that we will not meet in 
another place, one where the mysteries are always new and dreams 
never end. Oh, Plomb, will you not stay in that box where they 
have put your riven body?

FLOWERS OF THE ABYSS
I must whisper my words in the wind, knowing somehow that 
they will reach you who sent me here. Let this misadventure, 
like the first rank scent of autumn, be carried back to you, my good 
people. For it was you who decided where I would go, you who 
wished I come here and to him. And I agreed, because the fear that 
filled your voices and lined your faces was so much greater than 
your words could explain. I feared your fear of him: the one whose 
name we did not know, the one whom we saw but who never 
spoke, the one who lived far from town in that ruined house which 
long ago had seen the passing of the family Van Livenn.
I was chosen to unravel his secrets and find what malice or 
indifference he harbored toward our town. I should be the one, 
you said. Was I not the teacher of the town’s child-citizens, the one 
who had knowledge that you had not and who might therefore see 
deeper into the mystery of our man? That was what you said, in the 
shadows of our church where we met that night; but what you 
thought, whether you knew it or not, was that he has no children of 
his own, no one, and so many of his hours are spent walking 
through those same woods in which lives the stranger. It would 
seem quite natural if I happened to pass the old Van Livenn house, 
if I happened to stop and perhaps beg a glass of water for a thirsty 
walker of the woods. But these simple actions, even then, seemed 
an extraordinary adventure, though none of us confessed to this 
feeling. Nothing to fear, you said. And so I was chosen to go alone.
You have seen the house and how, approaching it from the road 
that leads out of town, it sprouts suddenly into view - a pale flower 
amid the dark summer trees, now a ghostly flower at autumn. At 
first this is how it appeared to my eyes. (Yes, my eyes, think about 
them, good people: dream about them.) But as I neared the house, 
its greyish-white planks, bowed and buckled and oddly spotted, 
turned the pallid lily to a pulpy toadstool. Surely the house has 
played this trick on some of you, and all of you have seen it at one 
time or another: its roof of rippling shingles shaped like scales from 
some great fish, sea-green and sparkling in the autumn sun; its two

FLOW ERS OF TH E ABYSS
241
attic gables with parted windows that come to a point like the tip of 
a tear, but do not gleam like tears; its sepulcher-shaped doorway at 
the top of rotted wooden stairs, where there is barely a place for 
one to stand. And as I stood among the shadows outside that door, 
I heard hundreds of raindrops running up the steps behind me, as 
the air went cold and the skies gained shadows of their own. The 
light rain spotted the empty, ashen plot nearby the house, watering 
the barren ground where a garden might have blossomed in the 
time of the Van Livenns. What better excuse for my imposing upon 
the present owner of this house? Shelter me, stranger, from the icy 
autumn storm, and from a fragrance damp and decayed.
He responded promptly to my rapping, without suspicious 
movements of the ragged curtains, and I entered his dark home. 
There was no need for explanation; he had already seen me 
walking ahead of the clouds. And you, good people, have already 
seen him, at one time or another: his lanky limbs like vaguely 
twisted branches; his lazy expressionless face; the colorless rags 
which are easier to see as tattered wrappings than as parts of even 
the poorest wardrobe. But his voice, that is something none of you 
has ever heard. Although shaken at how gentle and musical it 
sounded, I was even less prepared for the sense of frightening 
distances created by the echo of his hollow words.
“It was just such a day as this when I saw you the first time out 
there in the woods,” he said, looking out at the rain. “But you did 
not come near to the house.”
He had also seen me on other occasions, and our introduction to 
each other appeared to have already been made long before. I 
removed my coat, which he took and placed on a very small 
wooden chair beside the front door. Extending a long crooked arm 
and wide hand toward the interior, he welcomed me into his home.
But somehow he himself did not seem at home there, even then. 
And nothing seemed to belong to him, though there was little 
enough in that house to be possessed by anyone. Apart from the 
two old chairs in which we sat down and the tiny misshapen table 
between them, the few other objects I could see appeared to have 
been brought together only by accident or default, as if a child had 
put all the odd, leftover furnishings of her dollhouse into an odd, 
leftover room. A huge trunk lying in the corner, its great tarnished 
lock sprung open and its heavy straps falling loosely to the floor, 
would have looked much less sullen buried away in an attic or a 
cellar. And that miniature chair by the door, with an identical 
twin fallen on its back near the opposite wall, belonged in a child’s 
room, but a child whom one could not imagine as still living, even

242
THOMAS LIGOTTI
as a dim memory in the most ancient mind. The tall bookcase by 
the shuttered window would have seemed in keeping, if only those 
cracked pots, bent boots, and other paraphernalia foreign to 
bookcases had not been stuffed among its battered volumes. A 
large bedroom bureau stood against one wall, but that would 
have seemed misplaced in any room: the hollows of its absent 
drawers were deeply webbed with disuse. All of these things 
seemed to me wracked by their own history of transformation, 
culminating in the metamorphoses of decay. And there was a 
thick dreamy smell that permeated the room, inspiring the sense 
that invisible gardens of pale growths were even then budding in 
the dust and dirty corners everywhere around me. But not 
everything was visible, to my eyes.
The only light in the house was provided by two lamps that 
burned on either side of a charred mantle over the fireplace. 
Behind each of these lamps was an oval mirror in an ornate 
frame, and the reflected light of their quivering wicks threw our 
shadows onto the wide bare wall at our backs. And while the two of 
us were sitting still and silent, I saw those other two fidgeting upon 
the wall, as if wind-blown or perhaps undergoing some subtle 
torture.
“I have something for you to drink,” he said. “I know how far it 
is to walk from the town.”
And I did not have to feign my thirst, good people, for it was 
such that I wanted to swallow the storm, which I could hear 
beyond the door and the walls but could only see as a brilliance 
occasionally flashing behind the curtains or shining needle-bright 
between the dull slats of the shutters.
In the absence of my host I directed my eyes to the treasures of 
his house and made them my own. There was something I had not 
yet seen, somehow I knew this. But what I was looking for was not 
yet to be seen, which I did not know. I was sent to spy and so 
everything around me appeared suspicious. Can you see it, 
through my eyes? Can you peek into those cobwebbed corners 
or scan the titles of those tilting books? Yes; but can you now, in the 
maddest dream of your lives, peer into places that have no corners 
and bear no names? This is what I tried to do: to see beyond the 
ghoulish remnants of the good Van Livenns, who were now merely 
dead; to see beyond this haunted stage of hysterical actors, who in 
their panics pretend to feel what we, good people, pretend not to 
feel. And so I had to turn corners inside-out with my eyes and to 
read the third side of a book’s page, seeking in futility to gaze at 
what I could then touch with none of my senses. It remained

FLOW ERS OF TH E ABYSS
243
something shapeless and nameless, dampish and submerged, 
something swamplike and abysmal which opposed the pure cold 
of the autumn storm outside.
When he returned he carried with him a dusty green bottle and 
a sparkling glass, both of which he set upon that little table 
between our chairs. I took up the bottle and it felt warm in my 
hand. Expecting some thickish dark liquid to gush from the bottle’s 
neck, I was surprised to see only the clearest water, and strangely 
the coolest, pouring into the glass. I drank and for a few moments 
was removed to a world of frozen light that lived within the cool 
water.
In the meantime he had placed something else upon the table. It 
was a small music box, like a miniature treasure chest, made of 
some dark wood which looked as if it had the hardness of a jewel. 
This object, I felt, was very old. Slowly, he drew back the cover of 
the box and sat back in his chair. I held both hands around that 
cold glass and listened to the still colder music. The crisp little 
notes that arose from the box were like stars of sound coming out in 
the twilight shadows and silence of the house. The storm had 
ended, leaving the world outside muffled by wetness. Within those 
closed rooms, which might now have been transported to the brink 
of a chasm or deep inside the earth, the music glimmered like 
infinitesimal flakes of light in that barren decor of dead days. 
Neither of us appeared to be breathing and even the shadows 
behind our chairs were charmed with enchanted immobility. 
Everything held for a moment to allow the wandering music 
from the box to pass on toward some unspeakably wondrous 
destination. I tried to follow it - through the yellowish haze of 
the room and deep into the darkness that pressed against the walls, 
and then deeper into the darkness between the walls, then through 
the walls and into the unbordered red spaces where those silvery 
tones ascended and settled as true stars. There I could have 
stretched out forever and lost myself in the soothing mirrors of 
infinity. But even then something was stirring, irrupting like a 
disease, poking its horribly colored head through the cool black­
ness . . . and chasing me back to my body.
“Were you able to see the garden out in the yard?” he asked. I 
replied that I had seen nothing except a blank slate of dirt. He 
nodded slowly and then, good people, he softly began.
“Do I look surprised that you will not admit what you saw? But 
I’m not. Of course you did, you saw them in the garden. Please 
don’t go on shaking your head, don’t hide behind a vacant stare. 
You are not the only one who has passed this house. Almost

244
THOMAS LIGOTTI
everyone from the town has gone by, at one time or another, but no 
one will talk about it. Every one of you has seen them and carries 
their image with him. But you are the only one to come and see me 
about it, whether you think you have or not. It’s foolish to be 
amazed, but I am. Because in itself this can only be a small terror, 
among the vastness of all terrible things. And if this small thing 
stops your speech, even within yourself, what would the rest of it do 
to you?
“No, I have no business talking to you this way. Don’t listen to 
me, forget what I said. Be silent, shhhh. Work in silence and think 
only in silence and do all things silently. Be courageous and silent. 
Now go. I am not here, the family who gave this house its name are 
not here, no one is here. But you are here, and the others, I didn’t 
mean—Don’t listen to me! Go now.”
He had sprung forward in his chair. After a few moments - of 
silence - he again fell into a slouch. I stayed; was I not sent, by you, 
to learn everything you could not?
“Your eyes,” he said, “are practicing another kind of silence, a 
hungry silence, the wrong kind. If that is what you want, it makes 
no difference to me. You see how I live: shadows and silence, 
leaving things as I find them because I have no reason to disturb 
them. But there are things that I have known, even though I never 
wished to know them and cannot give them a name. Now I will tell 
you one of them. This is about those things you saw in the garden.
“I did not find them while in this body, that I know. Whenever I 
fall asleep, or sometimes if I’m sitting very still, I may move on to a 
different place. And sometimes I return to where I was and 
sometimes I do not. I have to smile because that could be all 
there is to say about me, about my life or lives, I can’t be sure. But I 
could say something about those other places and about the things 
I have seen there. In one of these places I found the flowers - and 
why should I not call them that, since they now dwell in a garden? 
Almost everything was dark in the place where I found the flowers. 
But it wasn’t dark as a house is sometimes dark or as the woods are 
dark because of thick trees keeping out the light. It was dark only 
because there was nothing to keep out the darkness. How do I know 
this? I know because I could see with more than my eyes - I could 
see with the darkness itself. With the darkness I saw the darkness. 
And it was immensity without end around me, and I believe within 
me. It was unbroken expansion, dark horizon meeting dark 
horizon. But there were also things within the darkness, within 
me and outside of me, so that if I reached out to touch them across 
a universe of darkness, I also reached deep inside of this body. But

FLOW ERS OF TH E ABYSS
2 4 5
all I could feel were the flowers themselves: to touch them was like 
touching light and touching colors and a thousand kinds of 
bristling and growing shapes. It was a horrible feeling, to touch 
them. In all that darkness which gave me breath and let me see 
with itself, these things squirmed and fought against me. I cannot 
explain why they were there, but it sickened me that anything had 
to be there and more so because it was these flowers, which were 
like a great mass of maimed things writhing upon the shore of a 
beautiful dark sea.
“I don’t think I meant to bring any of them back with me. 
When I found that I had, I quickly buried them. They broke 
through the earth that same night, and I thought they would come 
after me. But I don’t think they care about that or about anything. 
I think they like being where they are now, buried and not buried. 
You have seen yourself how they twist and dance, almost happily. 
They are horrible things without reason.”
After these words he recoiled, for a moment, into silence. Now it 
was dark outside, beyond the curtains and the shutters. The lamps 
upon the mantle shone with a piercing light that cut shadows out 
of the cloth of blackness around us. Why, good people, was I so 
astonished that this phantom before me could walk across the 
room and actually lift one of the lamps, and then carry it toward 
the back hallway of the house? He paused, turned, and gestured for 
me to rise from my chair.
“Now you will see them better, even in the darkness.” I rose and 
followed.
We walked quietly from the house, as if we were two children 
sneaking away for a night in the woods. The lamplight skimmed 
across the wet grass behind the house and then paused where the 
yard ended and the woods began, fragrant and wind-blown. The 
light moved to the left and I moved with it, toward that area which 
I - and you, good people - admit only as a great unsodded grave.
“Look at them twisting in the light,” he said when the first rays 
fell on a convulsing tangle of shapes, like the radiant entrails of 
hell. But the shapes quickly disappeared into the darkness and out 
of view, pulling themselves from the rainsoftened soil. “They 
retreat from this light. And you see how they return to their 
places when the light is withdrawn.”
They closed in again like parted waters rushing to remerge. But 
these were corrupt waters whose currents had congealed and 
diversified into creaturely forms no less horrible than if the cool 
air itself were strung with sticky and pumping veins, hung with 
working mouths.

246
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“I want to be in there,” I said. “Move the light as close as you 
can to the garden.”
He stepped to the very edge, as I stepped farther still toward 
that retreating flood of tendriled slime, those aberrations of the 
abyss. When I was deep into their mesh, I whispered behind me: 
“Don’t lose the light, or they will cover again the ground I am 
standing on. I can see them perfectly now. How on earth? The 
spectacle itself. I can see them with the darkness, I can touch their 
light. I don’t need the other, but for heaven’s sake don’t take it 
away.”
He did not, good people, for I heard him say, “It was not I” 
when the light went out. No, it was not you, evil stranger; it was 
only the wind. It came down from the trees and swept across us 
who are in the garden. And the wind now carries my words to you, 
good people. I cannot be there to guide you, but you know now 
what must be done, to me and to this horrible house. Please, one 
last word to stir your sleep. I remember screaming to the stranger:
Bring back the light. They are drawing me into themselves. My eyes can 
see everything in the darkness. Can you hear what they are doing? Can you 
hear?
“What is it?” whispered one of the many awakening voices in the 
dark bedrooms of the town.
“I said, ‘Can you hear them outside’?”
A nightgowned figure rose from the bed and moved as a 
silhouette to the window. Down in the street was a mob carrying 
lights and rapping on doors for those still dreaming to join them. 
Their lamps and lanterns bobbed in the darkness, and the fires of 
their torches flickered madly. Clusters of flame shot up into the 
night.
And though the people of the town said not a word to one 
another, they knew where they were going and what they would 
do to free their fellow citizen from the madman who had taken him 
and from the wickedness they knew would one day come from the 
ruined house of the Van Livenns. And though their eyes saw 
nothing but the wild destruction that lay ahead, buried like a 
forgotten dream within each one of them was a perfect picture of 
other eyes and of the unspeakable shape in which they now lived, 
and which now had to be murdered.

NETHESGURIAL
The Idol and the Island
I have uncovered a rather wonderful manuscript, the letter began. It 
was an entirely fortuitous find, made during my day’s dreary 
labors among some of the older and more decomposed remains 
entombed in the library archives. If I am any judge of antique 
documents, and of course I am, these brittle pages date back to the 
closing decades of the last century. (A more precise estimate of age 
will follow, along with a photocopy which I fear will not do justice 
to the delicate, crinkly script, nor to the greenish black discolora­
tion the ink has taken on over the years.) Unfortunately there is no 
indication of authorship either within the manuscript itself or in 
the numerous and tedious papers whose company it has been 
keeping, none of which seem related to the item under discussion. 
And what an item it is - a real storybook stranger in a crowd of 
documentary types, and probably destined to remain unknown.
I am almost certain that this invention, though at times it seems 
to pose as a letter or journal entry, has never appeared in common 
print. Given the bizarre nature of its content, I would surely have 
known of it before now. Although it is an untitled “statement” of 
sorts, the opening lines were more than enough to cause me to put 
everything else aside and seclude myself in a corner of the library 
stacks for the rest of the afternoon.
So it begins: “In the rooms of houses and beyond their walls - 
beneath dark waters and across moonlit skies -  below earth mound 
and above mountain peak - in northern leaf and southern flower - 
inside each star and the voids between them -  within blood and 
bone, through all souls and spirits -  among the watchful winds of 
this and the several worlds - behind the faces of the living and the 
dead . . . ” And there it trails ofT, a quoted fragment of some more 
ancient text. But this is certainly not the last we will hear of this all- 
encompassing refrain!
As it happens, the above string of phrases is cited by the narrator 
in reference to a certain presence, more properly an omnipresence,

248
THOMAS LIGOTTI
which he encounters on an obscure island located at some 
unspecified northern latitude. Briefly, he has been summoned to 
this island, which appears on a local map under the name of 
Nethescurial, in order to rendezvous with another man, an 
archaeologist who is designated only as Dr. N— and who will 
come to know the narrator of the manuscript by the self-admitted 
alias of “Bartholomew Gray” (they don’t call ’em like that any­
more). Dr. N—, it seems, has been occupying himself upon that 
barren, remote, and otherwise uninhabited isle with some peculiar 
antiquarian rummagings. As Mr. Gray sails toward the island he 
observes the murky skies above him and the murky waters below. 
His prose style is somewhat plain for my taste, but it serves well 
enough once he approaches the island and takes surprisingly 
scrupulous notice of its eerie aspect: contorted rock formations; 
pointed pines and spruces of gigantic stature and uncanny move­
ments; the masklike countenance of sea-facing cliffs; and a sickly, 
stagnant fog clinging to the landscape like a fungus.
From the moment Mr. Gray begins describing the island, a 
sudden enchantment enters into his account. It is that sinister 
enchantment which derives from a profound evil that is kept at just 
the right distance from us so that we may experience both our love 
and our fear of it in one sweeping sensation. Too close and we may 
be reminded of an omnipresent evil in the living world, and 
threatened with having our sleeping sense of doom awakened 
into full vigor. Too far away and we become even more incurious 
and complacent than is our usual state, and ultimately exasperated 
when an imaginary evil is so poorly evoked that it fails to offer the 
faintest echo of its real and all-pervasive counterpart. Of course, 
any number of locales may serve as the setting to reveal ominous 
truths; evil, beloved and menacing evil, may show itself anywhere 
precisely because it is everywhere and is as stunningly set ofT by a 
foil of sunshine and flowers as it is by darkness and dead leaves. A 
purely private quirk, nevertheless, sometimes allows the purest 
essence of life’s malignity to be aroused only by sites such as the 
lonely island of Nethescurial, where the real and the unreal swirl 
freely and madly about in the same fog.
It seems that in this place, this far-flung realm, Dr. N— has 
discovered an ancient and long-sought artifact, a marginal but 
astonishing entry in that unspeakably voluminous journal of 
creation. Soon after landfall, Mr. Gray finds himself verifying 
the truth of the archaeologist’s claims: that the island has been 
strangely molded in all its parts, and within its shores every 
manifestation of plant or mineral or anything whatever appears

N E TH E SC U R IA L
249
to have fallen at the mercy of some shaping force of demonic 
temperament, a genius loci which has sculpted its nightmares out 
of the atoms of the local earth. Closer inspection of this insular spot 
on the map serves to deepen the sense of evil and enchantment that 
had been lightly sketched earlier in the manuscript. But I refrain 
from further quotation (it is getting late and I want to wrap up this 
letter before bedtime) in order to cut straight through the 
epidermis of this tale and penetrate to its very bones and 
viscera. Indeed, the manuscript does seem to have an anatomy 
of its own, its dark green holography rippling over it like veins, and 
I regret that my paraphrase may not deliver it alive. Enough!
Mr. Gray makes his way inland, lugging along with him a fat 
little travelling bag. In a clearing he comes upon a large but 
unadorned, almost primitive house which stands against the 
fantastic backdrop of the island’s wartlike hills and tumorous 
trees. The outside of the house is encrusted with the motley and 
leprous stones so abundant in the surrounding landscape. The 
inside of the house, which the visitor sees upon opening the 
unlocked door, is spacious as a cathedral but far less ornamen­
ted. The walls are white and smoothly surfaced; they also seem to 
taper inward, pyramid-like, as they rise from floor to lofty ceiling. 
There are no windows, and numerous oil lamps scattered about fill 
the interior of the house with a sacral glow. A figure descends a 
long staircase, crosses the great distance of the room, and solemnly 
greets his guest. At first wary of each other, they eventually achieve 
a degree pf mutual ease and finally get down to their true business.
Thus far one can see that the drama enacted is a familiar one: 
the stage is rigidly traditional and the performers upon it are 
caught up in its style. For these actors are not so much people as 
they are puppets from the old shows, the ones that have told the 
same story for centuries, the ones that can still be very strange to 
us. Traipsing through the same old foggy scene, seeking the same 
old isolated house, the puppets in these plays always find every­
thing new and unknown, because they have no memories to speak 
of and can hardly recall making these stilted motions countless 
times in the past. They struggle through the same gestures, repeat 
the same lines, although in rare moments they may feel a dim 
suspicion that this has all happened before. How like they are to 
the human race itself! This is what makes them our perfect 
representatives - this and the fact that they are handcarved in 
the image of maniacal victims who seek to share the secrets of their 
individual torments as their strings are manipulated by the same 
master.

250
THOMAS LIGOTTI
The secrets which these two Punchinellos share are rather 
deviously presented by the author of this confession (for upon 
consideration this is the genre to which it truly belongs). Indeed, 
Mr. Gray, or whatever his name might be, appears to know much 
more than he is telling, especially with respect to his colleague the 
archaeologist. Nevertheless, he records what Dr. N— knows and, 
more importantly, what this avid excavator has found buried on 
the island. The thing is only a fragment of an object dating from 
antiquity. Known to be part of a religious idol, it is difficult to say 
which part. It is a twisted piece of a puzzle, one suggesting that the 
figure as a whole is intensely unbeautiful. The fragment is also 
darkened with the verdigris of centuries, causing its substance to 
resemble something like decomposing jade.
And were the other pieces of this idol also to be found on the 
same island? The answer is no. The idol seems to have been 
shattered ages ago, and each broken part of it buried in some 
remote place so that the whole of it might not easily be joined 
together again. Although it was a mere representation, the effigy 
itself was the focus of a great power. The ancient sect which was 
formed to worship this power seem to have been pantheists of a 
sort, believing that all created things -  appearances to the 
contrary -  are of a single, unified, and transcendent stuff\ an 
emanation of a central creative force. Hence the ritual chant 
which runs “in the rooms of houses”, et cetera, and alludes to the 
all-present nature of this deity - a most primal and pervasive 
type of god, one that falls into the category of “gods who eclipse 
all others”, territorialist divinities whose claim to the creation 
purportedly supersedes that of their rivals. (The words of the 
famous chant, by the way, are the only ones to come down to us 
from the ancient cult and appeared for the first time in an 
ethnographical, quasi-esoteric work entitled Illuminations of the 
Ancient World, which was published in the latter part of the 
nineteenth century, around the same time, I would guess, as 
this manuscript I am rushing to summarize was written.) At 
some point in their career as worshipants of the “Great One 
God”, a shadow fell upon the sect. It appears that one day it was 
revealed to them, in a manner both obscure and hideous, that 
the power to which they bowed was essentially evil in character 
and that their religious mode of pantheism was in truth a kind of 
pandemonism. But this revelation was not a surprise to all of the 
sectarians, since there seems to have been an internecine struggle 
which ended in slaughter. In any case, the anti-demonists 
prevailed, and they immediately rechristened their ex-deity to

NETHESCURIAL
25*
reflect its newly discovered essence in evil. And the name by 
which they henceforth called it was Nethescurial.
A nice turn of aflairs: this obscure island openly advertises itself 
as the home of the idol of Nethescurial. Of course, this island is only 
one of several to which the pieces of the vandalized totem were 
scattered. The original members of the sect who had treacherously 
turned against their god knew that the power concentrated in the 
effigy could not be destroyed, and so they decided to parcel it out 
to isolated corners of the earth where it could do the least harm. 
But would they have brought attention to this fact by allowing 
these widely disseminated burial plots to bear the name of the 
pandemoniacal god? This is doubtful, just as it is equally unlikely 
that it was they who built those crude houses, temples of a fashion, 
to mark the spot where a particular shard of the old idol might be 
located by others.
So Dr. N— is forced to postulate a survival of the demonist 
faction of the sect, a cult that had devoted itself to searching out 
those places which had been transformed by the presence of the 
idol and might thus be known by their gruesome features. This 
quest would require a great deal of time and effort for its 
completion, given the global reaches where those splinters of evil 
might be tucked away. Known as the “seeking”, it also involved 
the enlistment of outsiders, who in latter days were often research­
ers into the ways of bygone cultures, though they remained 
ignorant that the cause they served was still a living one. Dr. 
N— therefore warns his “colleague, Mr. Gray”, that they may be 
in danger from those who carried on the effort to reassemble the 
idol and revive its power. The very presence of that great and 
crude house on the island certainly proved that the cult was 
already aware of the location of this fragment of the idol. In 
fact, the mysterious Mr. Gray, not unexpectedly, is actually a 
member of the cult in its modern incarnation; furthermore, he has 
brought with him to the island - bulky travelling bag, you know - 
all the other pieces of the idol, which have been recovered through 
centuries of seeking. Now he only needs the one piece discovered by 
Dr. N— to make the idol whole again for the first time in a couple 
of millenia.
But he also needs the archaeologist himself as a kind of sacrifice 
to Nethescurial, a ceremony which takes place later the same night 
in the upper part of the house. If I may telescope the ending for 
brevity’s sake, the sacrificial ritual holds some horrific surprises for 
Mr. Gray (these people seem never to realize what they are getting 
themselves into), who soon repents of his evil practices and is

252
THOMAS LIGOTTI
driven to smash the idol to pieces once more. Making his escape 
from that weird island, he throws these pieces overboard, sowing 
the cold gray waters with the scraps of an incredible power. Later, 
fearing an obscure threat to his existence (perhaps the reprisal of 
his fellow cultists), he composes an account of a horror which is 
both his own and that of the whole human race.
End of manuscript.*
Now, despite my penchant for such wild yarns as I have just 
attempted to describe, I am not oblivious to their shortcomings. 
For one thing, whatever emotional impact the narrative may have 
lost in the foregoing precis, it certainly gained in coherence: the 
incidents in the manuscript are clumsily developed, important 
details lack proper emphasis, impossible things are thrown at the 
reader without any real efTort at persuasion of their veracity. I do 
admire the fantastic principle at the core of this piece. The nature 
of that pandemoniac entity is very intriguing. Imagine all of 
creation as a mere mask for the foulest evil, an absolute evil 
whose reality is mitigated only by our blindness to it, an evil at 
the heart of things, existing “inside each star and the voids between 
them - within blood and bone - through all souls and spirits”, and 
so forth. There is even a reference in the manuscript that suggests 
an analogy between Nethescurial and that beautiful myth of the 
Australian aborigines known as the Alchera (the Dream time, or 
Dreaming), a super-reality which is the source of all we see in the 
world around us. (And this reference will be useful in dating the 
manuscript, since it was toward the end of the last century that 
Australian anthropologists made the aboriginal cosmology known 
to the general public.) Imagine the universe as the dream, the 
feverish nightmare of a demonic demiurge. O Supreme Nethes­
curial!
The problem is that such supernatural inventions are indeed 
quite difficult to imagine. So often they fail to materialize in the 
mind, to take on a mental texture, and thus remain unfelt as 
anything but an abstract monster of metaphysics - an elegant or 
awkward schematic that cannot rise from the paper to touch us. Of 
course, we do need to keep a certain distance from such specters as 
Nethescurial, but this is usually provided by the medium of words 
as such, which ensnare all kinds of fantastic creatures before they 
can tear us body and soul. (And yet the words of this particular 
manuscript seem rather weak in this regard, possibly because they
* Except for the concluding lines, which reveal the somewhat extravagant, but not 
entirely uninteresting, conclusion of the narrator himself.

N E TH E SC U R IA L
253
are only the drab green scratchings of a human hand and not the 
heavy mesh of black type.) But we do want to get close enough to 
fee 1 the foul breath of these beasts, or to see them as prehistoric 
leviathans circling about the tiny island on which we have taken 
refuge. Even if we are incapable of a sincere belief in ancient cults 
and their unheard of idols, even if these pseudonymous adven­
turers and archaeologists appear to be mere shadows on a wall, 
and even if strange houses on remote islands are of shaky 
construction, there may still be a power in these things that 
threatens us like a bad dream. And this power emanates not so 
much from within the tale as it does from somewhere behind it, 
someplace of infinite darkness and ubiquitous evil in which we may 
walk unaware.
But never mind these night thoughts; it’s only to bed that I will 
walk after closing this letter.
Postscript
Later the same night.
Several hours have passed since I set down the above description 
and analysis of that manuscript. How naive those words of mine 
now sound to me. And yet they are still true enough, from a certain 
perspective. But that perspective was a privileged one which, at 
least for the moment, I do not enjoy. The distance between me and 
a devastating evil has lessened considerably. I no longer find it so 
difficult to imagine the horrors delineated in that manuscript, for I 
have known them in the most intimate way. What a fool I seem to 
myself for playing with such visions. How easily a simple dream 
can destroy one’s sense of safety, if only for a few turbulent hours. 
Certainly I have experienced all this before, but never as acutely as 
tonight.
I had not been asleep for long but apparently long enough. At 
the start of the dream I was sitting at a desk in a very dark room. It 
also seemed to me that the room was very large, though I could see 
little of it beyond the area of the desktop, at either end of which 
glowed a lamp of some kind. Spread out before me were many 
papers varying in size. These I knew to be maps of one sort or 
another, and I was studying them each in turn. I had become quite 
absorbed in these maps, which now dominated the dream to the 
exclusion of all other images. Each of them focused on some 
concatenation of islands without reference to larger, more familiar 
land masses. A powerful impression of remoteness and seclusion

254
THOMAS LIGOTTI
was conveyed by these irregular daubs of earth fixed in bodies of 
water that were unnamed. But although the location of the islands 
was not specific, somehow I was sure that those for whom the maps 
were meant already had this knowledge. Nevertheless, this secrecy 
was only superficial, for no esoteric key was required to seek out the 
greater geography of which these maps were an exaggerated 
detail: they were all distinguished by some known language in 
which the islands were named, different languages for different 
maps. Yet upon closer view (indeed, I felt as if I were actually 
journeying among those exotic fragments of land, tiny pieces of 
shattered mystery), I saw that every map had one thing in 
common: within each group of islands, whatever language was 
used to name them, there was always one called Nethescurial. It 
was as if all over the world this terrible name had been insinuated 
into diverse locales as the only one suitable for a certain island. Of 
course there were variant cognate forms and spellings, sometimes 
transliterations, of the word. (How precisely I saw them!) Still, 
with the strange conviction that may overcome a dreamer, I knew 
these places had all been claimed in the name of Nethescurial and 
that they bore the unique sign of something which had been buried 
there - the pieces of that dismembered idol.
And with this thought, the dream reshaped itself. The maps 
dissolved into a kind of mist; the desk before me became something 
else, an altar of coarse stone, and the two lamps upon it flared up to 
reveal a strange object now positioned between them. So many 
visions in the dream were piercingly clear, but this dark object was 
not. My impression was that it was conglomerate in form, 
suggesting a monstrous whole. At the same time these outlines 
which alluded to both man and beast, flower and insect, reptiles, 
stones, and countless things I could not even name, all seemed to 
be changing, mingling in a thousand ways that prevented any 
sensible image of the idol.
With the upsurge in illumination offered by the lamps, I could 
see that the room was truly of unusual dimensions. The four 
enormous walls slanted toward one another and joined at a point 
high above the floor, giving the space around me the shape of a 
perfect pyramid. But I now saw things from an oddly remote 
perspective: the altar with its idol stood in the middle of the room 
and I was some distance away, or perhaps not even in the scene. 
Then, from some dark corner or secret door, there emerged a file of 
figures walking slowly toward the altar and finally congregating in 
a half-circle before it. I could see that they were all quite skeletal in 
shape, for they were identically dressed in a black material which

N E TH E SC U R IA L
255
clung tightly to their bodies and made them look like skinny 
shadows. They seemed to be actually bound in blackness from 
head to foot, with only their faces exposed. But they were not, in 
fact, faces - they were pale, expressionless, and identical masks. 
The masks were without openings and bestowed upon their 
wearers a terrible anonymity, an ancient anonymity. Behind 
these smooth and barely contoured faces were spirits beyond all 
hope or consolation except in the evil to which they would 
willingly abandon themselves. Yet this abandonment was a highly 
selective process, a ceremony of the chosen.
One of the white-faced shadows stepped forward from the 
group, seemingly drawn forth into the proximity of the idol. 
The figure stood motionless, while from within its dark body 
something began to drift out like luminous smoke. It floated, 
swirling gently, toward the idol and there was absorbed. And I 
knew - for was this not my own dream? - that the idol and its 
sacrifice were becoming one within each other. This spectacle 
continued until nothing of the glowing, ectoplasmic haze remained 
to be extracted, and the figure - now shrunken to the size of a 
marionette - collapsed. But soon it was being lifted, rather 
tenderly, by another from the group who placed the dwarfish 
form upon the altar and, taking up a knife, carved deep into the 
body, making no sound. Then something oozed upon the altar, 
something thick and oily and strangely colored, darkly colored 
though not with any of the shades of blood. Although the 
strangeness of this color was more an idea than a matter of 
vision, it began to fill the dream and to determine the final stage 
of its development.
Quite abruptly, that closed, cavernous room dissolved into an 
open stretch of land: open yet also cluttered with a bric-a-brac 
topography whose crazed shapes were all of that single and sinister 
color. The ground was as if covered with an ancient, darkened 
mold and the things rising up from it were the same. Surrounding 
me was a landscape that might once have been of stone and earth 
and trees (such was my impression) but had been transformed 
entirely into something like petrified slime. I gazed upon it 
spreading before me, twisting in the way of wrought iron tracery 
or great overgrown gardens of writhing coral, an intricate lattice­
work of hardened mulch whose surface was overrun with a chaos of 
little carvings, scabby designs that suggested a world of demonic 
faces and forms. And it was all composed in that color which 
somehow makes me think of rotted lichen. But before I exited in 
panic from my dream, there was one further occurrence of this

2 5 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
color: the inkish waters washing upon the shores of the island 
around me.
As I wrote a few pages ago, I have been awake for some hours 
now. What I did not mention was the state in which I found myself 
after waking. Throughout the dream, and particularly in those last 
moments when I positively identified that foul place, there was an 
unseen presence, something I could feel was circulating within all 
things and unifying them in an infinitely extensive body of evil. I 
suppose it is nothing unusual that I continued to be under this 
visionary spell even after I left my bed. I tried to invoke the gods of 
the ordinary world -  calling them with the whistle of a coffee pot 
and praying before their icon of the electric light - but they were 
too weak to deliver me from that other whose name I can no longer 
bring myself to write. It seemed to be in possession of my house, of 
every common object inside and the whole of the dark world 
outside. Yes - lurking among the watchful winds of this and the 
several worlds. Everything seemed to be a manifestation of this evil 
and to my eyes was taking on its aspect. I could feel it also 
emerging in myself, growing stronger behind this living face that 
I am afraid to confront in the mirror.
Nevertheless, these dream-induced illusions now seem to be 
abating, perhaps driven off by my writing about them. Like 
someone who has had too much to drink the night before and 
swears off liquor for life, I have forsworn any further indulgence in 
weird reading matter. No doubt this is only a temporary vow, and 
soon enough my old habits will return. But certainly not before 
morning!
The Puppets in the Park
Some days later, and quite late at night.
Well, it seems this letter has mutated into a chronicle of my 
adventures Nethescurialian. See, I can now write that unique 
nomen with ease; furthermore, I feel almost no apprehension in 
stepping up to my mirror. Soon I may even be able to sleep in the 
way I once did, without visionary intrusions of any kind. No 
denying that my experiences of late have tipped the scales of the 
strange. I found myself just walking restlessly about - impossible to 
work, you know - and always carrying with me this heavy dread in 
my solar plexus, as if I had feasted at a banquet of fear and the 
meal would not digest. Most strange, since I have been loath to 
take nourishment during this time. How could I put anything into

N E TH ESC U R IA L
257
my mouth, when everything looked the way it did? Hard enough 
to touch a doorknob or a pair of shoes, even with the protection of 
the gloves. I could feel every damn thing squirming, not excluding 
my own flesh. And I could also see what was squirming beneath 
every surface, my vision penetrating through the usual armor of 
objects and discerning the same gushing stuff inside whatever I 
looked upon. It was that dark color from the dream, I could 
identify it clearly now. Dark and greenish. How could I possibly 
feed myself? How could I even bring myself to settle very long in 
one spot? So I kept on the move. And I tried not to look too closely 
at how everything, everything was crawling within itself and making 
all kinds of shapes inside there, making all kinds of faces at me. (Yet 
it was really all the same face, everything gorged with that same 
creeping stuff) There were also sounds that I heard, voices 
speaking vague words, voices that came not from the mouths of 
the people I passed on the street but from the very bottom of their 
brains, garbled whisperings at first and then so clear, so eloquent.
This rising wave of chaos reached its culmination tonight and 
then came crashing down. But my timely maneuvering, I trust, has 
put everything right again.
Here, now, are the terminal events of this nightmare as they 
occurred. (And how I wish I were not speaking figuratively, that I 
was in fact only in the world of dreams or back in the pages of 
books and old manuscripts.) This conclusion had its beginning in 
the park, a place that is actually some distance from my home, so 
far had I wandered. It was already late at night, but I was still 
walking about, treading the narrow asphalt path that winds 
through that island of grass and trees in the middle of the city. 
(And somehow it seemed I had already walked in this same place 
on this same night, that this had all happened to me before.) The 
path was lit by globes of light balanced upon slim metal poles; 
another glowing orb was set in the great blackness above. Off the 
path the grass was darkened by shadows, and the trees swishing 
overhead were the same color of muddied green.
After walking some indefinite time along some indefinite route, I 
came upon a clearing where an audience had assembled for some 
late-night entertainment. Strings of colored lights had been hung 
around the perimeter of this area and rows of benches had been set 
up. The people seated on these benches were all watching a tall, 
illuminated booth. It was the kind of booth used for puppet shows, 
with wild designs painted across the lower part and a curtained 
opening at the top. The curtains were now drawn back and two 
clownish creatures were twisting about in a glary light which

2 5 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
emanated from inside the booth. They leaned and squawked and 
awkwardly batted each other with soft paddles they were hugging 
in their soft little arms. Suddenly they froze at the height of their 
battle; slowly they turned about and faced the audience. It seemed 
the puppets were looking directly at the place I was standing 
behind the last row of benches. Their misshapen heads tilted, and 
their glassy eyes stared straight into mine.
Then I noticed that the others were doing the same: all of them 
had turned around on the benches and, with expressionless faces 
and dead puppet eyes, held me to the spot. Although their mouths 
did move, they were not silent. But the voices I heard were far 
more numerous than was the gathering before me. These were the 
voices I had been hearing as they chanted confused words in the 
depths of everyone’s thoughts, fathoms below the level of their 
awareness. The words still sounded hushed and slow, monotonous 
phrases mingling like the sequences of a fugue. But now I could 
understand these words, even as more voices picked up the chant 
at different points and overlapped one another, saying, “In the 
rooms of houses . . . across moonlit skies . . . through all souls and 
spirits . . . behind the faces of the living and the dead.”
I find it impossible to say how long it was before I was able to 
move, before I backed up toward the path, all those multitudinous 
voices chanting everywhere around me and all those many-colored 
lights bobbing in the wind-blown trees. Yet it seemed only a single 
voice I heard, and a single color I saw, as I found my way home, 
stumbling through the greenish darkness of the night.
I knew what needed to be done. Gathering up some old boards 
from my basement, I piled them into the fireplace and opened the 
flue. As soon as they were burning brightly, I added one more 
thing to the fire: a manuscript whose ink was of a certain color. 
Blessed with a saving vision, I could now see whose signature was 
on that manuscript, whose hand had really written those pages 
and had been hiding in them for a hundred years. The author of 
that narrative had broken up the idol and drowned it in deep 
waters, but the stain of its ancient patina had stayed upon him. It 
had invaded the author’s crabbed script of blackish green and 
survived there, waiting to crawl into another lost soul who failed to 
see what dark places he was wandering into. How I knew this to be 
true! And has this not been proved by the color of the smoke that 
rose from the burning manuscript, and keeps rising from it?
I am writing these words as I sit before the fireplace. But the 
flames have gone out and still the smoke from the charred paper 
hovers within the hearth, refusing to ascend the chimney and

N E TH E SC U R IA L
259
disperse itself into the night. Perhaps the chimney has become 
blocked. Yes, this must be the case, this must be true. Those other 
things are lies, illusions. That mold-colored smoke has not taken on 
the shape of the idol, the shape that cannot be seen steadily and 
whole but keeps turning out so many arms and heads, so many 
eyes, and then pulling them back in and bringing them out again 
in other configurations. That shape is not drawing something out 
of me and putting something else in its place, something that seems 
to be bleeding into the words as I write. And my pen is not growing 
bigger in my hand, nor is my hand growing smaller, smaller . . .
See, there is no shape in the fireplace. The smoke is gone, gone 
up the chimney and out into the sky. And there is nothing in the 
sky, nothing I can see through the window. There is the moon, of 
course, high and round. But no shadow falls across the moon, no 
churning chaos of smoke that chokes the frail order of the earth, no 
shifting cloud of nightmares enveloping moons and suns and stars. 
It is not a squirming, creeping, smearing shape I see upon the 
moon, not the shape of a great deformed crab scuttling out of the 
black oceans of infinity and invading the island of the moon, 
crawling with its innumerable bodies upon all the spinning islands 
of inky space. That shape is not the cancerous totality of all 
creatures, not the oozing ichor that flows within all things. 
Nethescurial is not the secret name of the creation. It is not in the rooms 
of houses and beyond their walls . . . beneath dark waters and 
across moonlit skies . . . below earth mound and above mountain 
peak ... in northern leaf and southern flower . . . inside each star 
and the voids between them . . . within blood and bone, through 
all souls and spirits . . . among the watchful winds of this and the 
several worlds . . . behind the faces of the living and the dead.
I am not dying in a nightmare.

THE DREAMING IN 
NORTOWN
í.
T
here are those who require witnesses to their doom. Not 
content with a solitary perdition, they seek an audience 
worthy of the spectacle - mind to remember the stages of the
downfall or perhaps only a mirror to multiply their abject glory. Of 
course, other motives may figure in this scheme, ones far too 
tenuous and strange for mortal reminiscence. Yet there exists a 
memoir of dreams in which I may recall an old acquaintance by 
the name of Jack Quinn (an alias that closely echoes nymic truth). 
For it was he who sensed my peculiar powers of sympathy and, 
employing a rather contrary stratagem, engaged them. This all 
began, according to my perspective, late one night in the decaying 
and spacious apartment which Quinn and I shared and which was 
located in that city - or, more precisely, in a certain region within it
- where we attended the same university.
I was asleep. In the darkness a voice was calling me away from 
my ill-mapped world of dreams. Then something heavy weighed 
down the edge of the mattress and a slightly infernal aroma filled 
the room, an acrid combination of tobacco and autumn nights. A 
small red glow wandered in an arc toward the apex of the seated 
figure and there glowed even brighter, faintly lighting the lower 
part of a face. Quinn was smiling, the cigar in his mouth smoking 
in the darkness. He remained silent for a moment and crossed his 
legs beneath his long threadbare overcoat, an ancient thing that 
was wrapped loosely around him like a skin about to be sloughed. 
So many pungent Octobers were collected in that coat. It is the 
events of this month that I am remembering.
I assumed he was drunk, or perhaps still in the remote heights or 
depths of the artificial paradise he had been exploring that night. 
When Quinn finally spoke, it was definitely with the stumbling 
words of a returning explorer, a stuporous and vaguely awed voice. 
But he seemed more than simply drug-entranced.
He had attended a meeting, he said, speaking the word in an

THE DREAMING IN NORTOWN
261
odd way which seemed to expand its significance. Of course there 
were others at this gathering, people who to me remained simply 
“those others”. It was a kind of philosophical society, he told me. 
The group sounded colourful enough: midnight assemblies, the 
probable use of drugs, and participants in the grip of strange 
mystical ecstasies.
I got out of bed and switched on the light. Quinn was a chaotic 
sight, his clothes more crumpled than usual, his face flushed, and 
his long red hair intricately tangled.
“And exactly where did you go tonight?” I asked with the 
measure of true curiosity he seemed to be seeking. I had the distinct 
idea that Quinn’s activities of that evening had occurred in the 
vicinity of Nortown (another pseudonym, of course, as are all the 
names in this narrative), where the apartment we shared was 
located. I asked him if they had.
“And perhaps in other places,” he answered, laughing a little to 
himself as he meditated upon the gray end of his cigar. “But you 
might not understand. Excuse me, I have to go to bed.”
“As you wish,” I replied, leaving aside all complaints about this 
noctural intrusion. He puffed on his cigar and went to his room, 
closing the door behind him.
This, then, was the beginning of Quinn’s ultimate phase of 
esoteric development. And until the final night, I actually saw very 
little of him during that most decisive episode of his life. We were 
pursuing different courses of study in our graduate school days - I 
in anthropology and he in ... it troubles me to say I was never 
entirely sure of his academic program. In any case, our respective 
timetables seldom intersected. Nonetheless, Quinn’s daily move­
ments, at least the few I was aware of, did invite curiosity. There 
was a general tenor of chaos that I perceived in his behavior, a 
quality which may or may not make for good company but which 
always offers promise of the extraordinary.
He continued to come in quite late at night, always entering the 
apartment with what seemed a contrived noisiness. After that first 
night he did not overtly confide his activities to me. The door to his 
room would close, and immediately afterward I would hear him 
collapse on the old springs of his mattress. It seemed he did not 
undress for bed, perhaps never even removed the overcoat which 
was becoming shabbier and more crumpled day by day. My sleep 
temporarily shattered, I passed this wakeful time by eavesdrop­
ping on the noises in the next room. There was a strange catalogue 
of sounds which either I had never noticed before or which were 
somehow different from the usual nightly din: low moans emanat­

262
THOMAS LIGOTTI
ing from the most shadowy chasms of dream; sudden intakes of 
breath like the suction of a startled gasp; and abrupt snarls and 
snorts of a bestial timbre. The whole rhythm of his sleep betrayed 
expressions of unknown turmoil. And sometimes he would violate 
the calm darkness of the night with a series of staccato groans 
followed by a brief vocal siren that made me bolt up suddenly in 
my bed. This alarming sound surely carried the entire audible 
spectrum of nightmare-inspired terror . . . but there were also 
mingling overtones of awe and ecstasy, a willing submission to 
some unknown ordeal.
“Have you finally died and gone to hell?” I shouted one night 
through his bedroom door. The sound was still ringing in my ears.
“Go back to sleep,” he answered, his low-pitched voice still 
speaking from the deeper registers of somnolence. The smell of a 
freshly lit cigar then filtered out of his bedroom.
After these late-night disturbances, I would sometimes sit up to 
watch the dun colors of dawn stirring in the distance outside my 
eastern window. And as the weeks went by that October, the 
carnival of noise going on in the next room began to work its 
strange influence upon my own sleep. Soon Quinn was not the only 
one in the apartment having nightmares, as I was inundated by a 
flood of eidetic horrors that left only a vague residue upon waking.
It was throughout the day that fleeting scenes of nightmare 
would suddenly appear to my mind, brief and vivid, as though I 
had mistakenly opened a strange door somewhere and, after 
inadvertently seeing something I should not have, quickly closed 
it once again with a reverberating slam. Eventually, however, my 
dream-censor himself fell asleep, and I recalled in total the elusive 
materials of one of those night-visions, which returned to me 
painted in scenes of garishly vibrant colors.
The dream took place at a small public library in Nortown 
where I sometimes retreated to study. On the oneiric plane, 
however, I was not a studious patron of the library but one of 
the librarians - the only one, it seemed, keeping vigil in that 
desolate institution. I was just sitting there, complacently survey­
ing the shelves of books and laboring under the illusion that in my 
idleness I was performing some routine but very important 
function. This did not continue very long -  nothing does in 
dreams - though the situation was one that already seemed 
interminable.
What shattered the status quo, initiating a new phase to the 
dream, was my discovery that a note scrawled upon a slip of paper 
had been left on the well-ordered surface of my desk. It was a

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
263
request for a book and had been submitted by a library patron 
whose identity I puzzled over, for I had not seen anyone put it 
there. I fretted about this scrap of paper for many dream- 
moments: had it been there even before I sat down at the desk 
and had I simply overlooked it? I suffered a disproportionate 
anxiety over this possible dereliction. The imagined threat of a 
reprimand of some strange nature terrorized me. Without delay I 
phoned the back room to have the person on duty there bring forth 
the book. But I was truly alone in that dream library and no one 
answered what was to my mind now an emergency appeal. Feeling 
a sense of urgency in the face of some imaginary deadline, and 
filled with a kind of exalted terror, I snatched up the request slip 
and set out to retrieve the book myself.
In the stacks I saw that the telephone line was dead, for it had 
been ripped from the wall and lay upon the floor like the frayed 
end of a disciplinary whip. Trembling, I consulted the piece of 
paper I carried with me for the title of the book and call-number. 
No longer can I remember that title, but it definitely had some­
thing to do with the name of the city, suburb of a sort, where 
Quinn’s and my apartment was located. I proceeded to walk down 
a seemingly endless aisle flanked by innumerable smaller aisles 
between the lofty bookshelves. Indeed, they were so lofty that 
when I finally reached my destination I had to climb a high ladder 
to reach the spot where I could secure the desired book. Mounting 
the ladder until my shaking hands gripped the highest rung, I was 
at eye level with the exact call-number I was seeking, or some 
forgotten dream-glyphs which I took to be these letters and digits. 
And like these symbols, the book I found is now hopelessly 
unmemorable, its shape, color, and dimensions having perished 
on the journey back from the dream. I may have even dropped the 
book, but that was not important.
What was important, however, was the dark little slot created 
when I withdrew the book from its rank on the shelf. I peered in, 
somehow knowing I was supposed to do this as part of the book- 
retrieving ritual. I gazed deeper . . . and the next phase of the 
dream began.
The slot was a window, perhaps more of a crack in some dream- 
wall or a slit in the billowing membrane that protects one world 
against the intrusion of another. Beyond was something of a 
landscape - for lack of a more suitable term - which I viewed 
through a narrow rectangular frame. But this landscape had no 
earth and sky that hinged together in a neat line at the horizon, no 
floating or shining objects above to echo and balance their earth-

264
THOMAS LIGOTTI
bound countershapes below. This landscape was an infinite 
expanse of depth and distance, a never-ending morass deprived 
of all coherence, a state of strange existence rather than a chartable 
locus, having no more geographical extension than a mirage or a 
rainbow. There was definitely something before my vision, ele­
ments that could be distinguished from one another but impossible 
to fix in any kind of relationship. I experienced a prolonged gaze at 
what is usually just a delirious glimpse, the way one might 
suddenly perceive some sidelong illusion which disappears at the 
turn of the head, leaving no memory of what the mind had 
deceptively seen.
The only way I can describe the visions I witnessed with even 
faint approximation is in terms of other scenes which might arouse 
similar impressions of tortuous chaos: perhaps a festival of colors 
twisting in blackness, a tentacled abyss that alternately seems to 
glisten moistly as with some horrendous dew, then suddenly dulls 
into an arid glow, like bone-colored stars shining over an extra­
terrestrial desert. The vista of eerie disorder that I observed was 
further abetted in its strangeness by my own feelings about it. They 
were magnified dream-feelings, those encyclopedic emotions 
which involve complexities of intuition, sensation, and knowledge 
impossible to express. My dream-emotion was indeed a monstrous 
encyclopedia, one that described a universe kept under infinite 
wraps of deception, a dimension of disguise.
It was only at the end of the dream that I saw the colors or 
colored shapes, molten and moving shapes. I cannot remember if I 
felt them to be anything specific or just abstract entities. They 
seemed to be the only things active within the moody immensity I 
stared out upon. Their motion somehow was not pleasant to watch
- a bestial lurching of each color-mass, a legless pacing in a cage 
from which they might escape at any moment. These phantasms 
introduced a degree of panic into the dream sufficient to wake me.
Oddly enough, though the dream had nothing to do with my 
roommate, I woke up calling his name repeatedly in my dream- 
distorted voice. But he did not answer the call, for he was not home 
at the time.
I have reconstructed my nightmare at this point for two reasons. 
First, to show the character of my inner life during this time; 
second, to provide a context in which to appreciate what I found 
the next day in Quinn’s room.
When I returned from classes that afternoon, Quinn was 
nowhere to be seen, and I took this opportunity to research the 
nightmares that had been visiting our apartment in Nortown.

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
265
Actually I did not have to pry very deeply into the near-fossilized 
clutter of Quinn’s room. Almost immediately I spied on his desk 
something that made my investigation easier, this something being 
a spiral notebook with a cover of mock marble. Switching on the 
desklamp in that darkly curtained room, I looked through the first 
few pages of the notebook. It seemed to be concerned with the sect 
Quinn had become associated with some weeks before, serving as a 
kind of spiritual diary. The entries were Quinn’s meditations upon 
his inward evolution and employed an esoteric terminology which 
must remain largely undocumented, since the notebook is no 
longer in existence. Its pages, as I recall them, outlined Quinn’s 
progress along a path of offbeat enlightenment, a tentative peering 
into what might have been merely symbolic realms.
Quinn seemed to have become one of a jaded philosophical 
society, a group of arcane deviates. Their raison d’etre was a kind of 
mystical masochism, forcing initiates toward feats of occult dare- 
devilry -  “glimpsing the inferno with eyes of ice”, to take from the 
notebook a phrase that was repeated often and seemed a sort of 
chant of power. As I suspected, hallucinogenic drugs were used by 
the sect, and there was no doubt that they believed themselves 
communing with strange metaphysical venues. Their chief aim, in 
true mystical fashion, was to transcend common reality in the 
search for higher states of being, but their stratagem was highly 
unorthodox, a strange detour along the usual path toward positive 
illumination. Instead, they maintained a kind of blasphemous 
fatalism, a doomed determinism which brought them face to face 
with realms of obscure horror. Perhaps it was this very obscurity 
that allowed them the excitement of their central purpose, which 
seemed to be a precarious flirting with personal apocalypse, the 
striving for horrific dominion over horror itself.
Such was the subject matter of Quinn’s notebook, all of it quite 
interesting. But the most intriguing entry was the last, which was 
brief and which I can recreate nearly in full. In this entry, like most 
of the others, Quinn addressed himself in the second person with 
various snatches of advice and admonishment. Much of it was 
unintelligible, for it seemed to be obsessed almost entirely with 
regions alien to the conscious mind. However, Quinn’s words did 
have a certain curious meaning when I first read them, and more 
so later on. The following, then, exemplifies the manner of his notes 
to himself:
So far your progress has been faulty but inexorable. Last night
you saw the zone and now know what it is like - wobbling

266
THOMAS LIGOTTI
glitter, a field of colorous venoms, the glistening inner skin of 
deadliest nightshade. Now that you are actually nearing the 
plane of the zone, awake! Forget your dainty fantasies and 
learn to move like the eyeless beast you must become. Listen, 
feel, smell for the zone. Dream your way through its marvelous 
perils. You know what the things from there may do to you 
with their dreaming. Be aware. Do not stay in one place for 
very long these next few nights. This will be the strongest 
time. Get out (perhaps into the great night-light of Nortown)
- wander, tramp, tread, somnambulate if you must. Stop and 
watch but not for very long. Be mindlessly cautious. Catch the 
entrancing fragrance of fear - and prevail.
I read this several times, and each time its substance seemed to 
become less the “fantasies” of an overly imaginative sectarian and 
more a strange reflection of matters by now familiar to me. Thus, I 
seemed to be serving my purpose, for the sensitivity of my psyche 
had allowed a subtle link to Quinn’s spiritual pursuits, even in 
their nuances of mood. And judging from the last entry in Quinn’s 
notebook, the upcoming days were crucial in some way, the exact 
significance of which may have been entirely psychological. 
Nevertheless, other possibilities and hopes had crossed my mind. 
As it happened, the question was settled the following night over 
the course of only a few hours. This post-meridian adventure - 
somehow inevitably - took place amid the dreamy and debased 
nightlife of Nortown.
2.
Of course, Nortown has never really been considered a suburb, for 
its city limits lie not somewhere on the periphery of that larger city 
where Quinn and I attended the university, but entirely within its 
boundaries. For the near-indigent student the sole attraction of 
this area is the inexpensive housing it offers in a variety of forms, 
even if the accommodations are not always the most appealing. 
However, in the case of Quinn and myself, the motives may have 
differed, for both of us were quite capable of appreciating the 
hidden properties and possibilities of the little city. Because of 
Nortown’s peculiar proximity to the downtown area of a large 
urban center it absorbed much of the big city’s lurid glamor, only 
on a smaller scale and in a concentrated way. Of course, there were 
a multitude of restaurants with bogusly exotic cuisines as well as a

THE DREAMING IN NORTOWN
267
variety of nightspots, of bizarre reputation and numerous estab­
lishments that existed in a twilight realm with regard to their 
legality.
But in addition to these second-rate epicurean attractions, 
Nortown also offered less earthly interests, however ludicrous 
the form they happened to take. The area seemed a kind of 
spawning ground for marginal people and movements. (I believe 
that Quinn’s fellow sectarians - whoever they may have been - 
were either residents or habitues of the suburb.) Along Nortown’s 
seven blocks or so of bustling commerce, one may see storefront 
invitations to personalized readings of the future or private lectures 
on the spiritual foci of the body. And if one looks up while walking 
down certain streets, there is a chance of spying second-floor 
windows with odd symbols pasted upon them, cryptic badges 
whose significance is known only to the initiated. In a way difficult 
to analyze, the mood of these streets was reminiscent of that 
remarkable dream I have previously described - the sense of 
dim and disordered landscapes was evoked by every sordid 
streetcorner of that city within a city.
Not the least of Nortown’s inviting qualities is the simple fact 
that many of its businesses are active every hour of the day and 
night. Which was probably one reason why Quinn’s activities 
gravitated to this place. And now I knew of at least a few particular 
nights that he planned to spend treading the sidewalks of Nortown.
Quinn left the apartment just before dark. Through the window 
I watched him walk around to the front of the building and then 
proceed up the street toward Nortown’s business district. I 
followed when he seemed a safe distance ahead of me. I supposed 
that if my plan to chart Quinn’s movements for the evening was 
going to fail, it would do so in the next few minutes. Of course, it 
was reasonable to credit Quinn with an extra sense or two which 
would alert him to my scheme. All the same, I was not wrong to 
believe I was merely conforming to Quinn’s unspoken wish for a 
spectator to his doom, a chronicler of his demonic quest. And 
everything proceeded smoothly as we arrived in the more heavily 
trafficked area of Nortown, approaching Carton, the suburb’s 
main street.
Up ahead, the high buildings of the surrounding metropolis 
towered behind and above Nortown’s lower structures. In the 
distance a pale sun had almost set, highlighting the peaks of the 
larger city’s skyline. The valleyed enclave of Nortown now lay in 
this skyline’s shadows, a dwarfish replica of the enveloping city. 
And this particular dwarf was of the colorfully clothed type

268
THOMAS LIGOTTI
suitable for entertaining jaded royalty; the main street flashed 
comic colors from an electric spectrum, dizzily hopping foot to foot 
in its attempt to conquer the nameless boredom of the crowds 
along the sidewalks. The milling crowds - unusual for a chilly 
autumn evening - made it easier for me to remain inconspicuous, 
though more difficult to shadow Quinn.
I almost lost him for a moment when he left the ranks of some 
sluggish pedestrians and disappeared into a little drugstore on the 
north side of Carton. I stopped farther down the block and 
window-shopped for second-hand clothes until he came out onto 
the street again. Which he did a few minutes later, holding a 
newspaper in one hand and stuffing a flat package of cigars inside 
his overcoat with the other. I saw him do this in the light flooding 
out of the drugstore windows, for by now it was nightfall.
Quinn walked a few more steps and then crossed at midstreet. I 
saw that his destination was only a restaurant with a semi-circle of 
letters from the Greek alphabet painted on the front windows. 
Through the window I could see him take a seat at the counter 
inside and spread out his newspaper, ordering something from the 
waitress who stood with pad in hand. For at least a little while he 
would be easy to keep track of. Not that I simply wanted to observe 
Quinn go in and out of restaurants and drugstores the rest of the 
night. I had hoped that his movements would eventually become 
more revealing. But for the moment I was gaining practice at being 
his shadow.
I watched Quinn at his dinner from inside a Middle-Eastern 
import store located across the street from the restaurant. I could 
observe him easily through the store’s front display window. 
Unfortunately I was the only patron of this musty place, and 
three times a bony, aged woman asked if she could help me. “Just 
looking,” I said, taking my eyes from the window momentarily 
and glancing around at a collection of assorted trinkets and ersatz 
Arabiana. The woman eventually went and stood behind a 
merchandise counter, where she kept her right hand tenaciously 
out of view. For possibly no reason at all I was becoming very 
nervous among the engraved brass and ruggy smells of that store. I 
decided to return to the street, mingling along the crowded but 
strangely quiet sidewalks.
After about a half-hour, at approximately quarter to eight, 
Quinn came out of the restaurant. From down the street and on 
the opposite side I watched him fold up the newspaper he was 
carrying and neatly dispose of it in a nearby mailbox. Then, a 
recently lit cigar alternating between hand and mouth, he started

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
269
north again. I let him walk half a block or so before I crossed the 
street and began tailing him once more. Although nothing 
manifestly unusual had yet occurred, there now seemed to be a 
certain promise of unknown happenings in the air of that autumn 
night.
Quinn continued on his way through the dingy neon of 
Nortown’s streets. But he now seemed to have no specific destina­
tion. His stride was less purposeful than it had been; he no longer 
looked expectantly before him but gawked aimlessly about the 
scene, as if these surroundings were unfamiliar or had altered in 
some way from the condition of previous visits. The overcoated 
and wild-haired figure of my roommate gave me the impression he 
was overwhelmed by something around him. He looked up toward 
the roof-ledges of buildings as though the full weight of the black 
autumn sky were about to descend. Absent-mindedly he nudged 
into a few people and at some point lost hold of his cigar, scattering 
sparks across the sidewalk.
Quinn turned at the next corner, where Carton intersected with 
a minor sidestreet. There were only a few places alive with activity 
in this area, which led into the darker residential regions of 
Nortown. One of these places was a building with a stairway 
leading below the street level. From a safe position of surveillance I 
saw Quinn go down this stairway into what I assumed was a bar or 
coffee house of some sort. Innocent as it may have been, my 
imagination impulsively populated that cellar with patrons of 
fascinating diversity and strangeness. Suppressing my fantasies, 
I confronted the practical decision of whether or not to follow 
Quinn inside and risk shattering his illusion of a lonely mystic 
odyssey. I also speculated that perhaps he was meeting others in 
this place, and possibly I would end up following multiple cultists, 
penetrating their esoteric activities, such as they may have been. 
But after I had cautiously descended the stairway and peered 
through the smeary panes of the window there, I saw Quinn sitting 
in a distant corner . . . and he was alone.
“Like peeping in windows?” asked a voice behind me. “Win­
dows are the eyes of the soulless,” said another. This twosome 
looked very much like professors from the university, though not 
those familiar to me from the anthropology department. I followed 
these distinguished academics into the bar, thereby making a less 
obvious entrance than if I had gone in alone.
The place was dark and crowded and much larger than it looked 
from outside. I sat at a table by the door and at a strategic remove 
from Quinn, who was seated behind a half-wall, some distance

270
THOMAS LIGOTTI
away. The decor around me looked like that of an unfinished 
basement or a storage room. There were a great number of flea- 
market antiquities hanging from the walls, and dangling from the 
ceiling were long objects that resembled razor strops. After a few 
moments a rather vacant-looking girl walked over and stood 
silently near my table. I did not immediately notice that she 
was just a waitress, so unconvivial was her general appearance 
and manner.
At some point during the hour or so that I was allowed to sit 
there nursing my drink, I discovered that if I leaned forward as far 
as possible in my chair, I could catch a glimpse of Quinn on the 
other side of the half-wall. This tactic now revealed to me a Quinn 
in an even greater state of agitated wariness than before. I thought 
he would have settled down to a languid series of drinks, but he did 
not. In fact, there was a cup of coffee, not liquor, sitting at his 
elbow. Quinn seemed to be scrutinizing every inch of the room for 
something. His nervous glances once nearly focused on my own 
face, and from then on I became more discreet.
A little later on, not long before Quinn’s and my exit, a girl with 
a guitar wandered up onto a platform against one wall of the room. 
As she made herself comfortable in a chair on the platform and 
tuned her guitar, someone switched on a single spotlight on the 
floor. I noticed that attached to the front of the spotlight was a 
movable disc divided into four sections: red, blue, green, and 
transparent. It was now adjusted to shine only through the 
transparent section.
The entertainer gave herself no introduction and started singing 
a song after lethargically strumming her guitar for a moment or so. 
I did not recognize the piece, but I think any song would have 
sounded strange as rendered by that girl’s voice. It was the gloomy 
and unstudied voice of a feeble-minded siren locked away some­
where and wailing pitifully to be set free. That the song was 
intended as mournful I could not doubt. It was, however, a very 
foreign and disorienting kind of mournfulness, as if the singer had 
eavesdropped on some exotic and grotesque rituals for her inspira­
tion.She finished the song. After receiving applause from only a 
single person somewhere in the room, she started into another 
number which sounded no difFerent from the first. Then, about a 
minute or so into the weird progress of this second song, something 
happened - a moment of confusion - and seconds later I found 
myself back on the streets.
What happened was actually no more than some petty mischief.

THE DREAMING IN NORTOWN
271
While the singer was calling feline-like to the lost love of the song’s 
verses, someone sneaked up near the platform, grabbed the disc 
attached to the front of the spotlight, and gave it a spin. A wild 
kaleidoscope ensued; the swarming colors attacked the singer and 
those patrons at nearby tables. The singing continued, its lan­
guishing tempo ofT-sync with the speedy reds, blues, and greens. 
There was something menacing about the visual disorder of those 
colors gleefully swimming around. And then, for a brief moment, 
the colorful chaos was eclipsed when a silhouette hurriedly 
stumbled past, moving between my table and the singer on the 
platform. I almost missed seeing who it was, for my eyes were 
averted from the general scene. I let him make it out the door, 
which he seemed to have some trouble opening, before dashing 
from the place myself.
When I emerged from the stairway onto the sidewalk, I saw 
Quinn standing at the corner on Carton. He had paused to light a 
cigar, rather frenetically striking several matches that would not 
stay lit in the autumn wind. I kept my place in the shadows until he 
proceeded on his way up the street.
We walked a few blocks, brief in length but ponderously 
decorated with neon signs streaming across the night. I was 
diverted by the sequentially lit letters spelling out E-S-S-E-N-C- 
E LOUNGE, LOUNGE, LOUNGE; and I wondered what secrets 
were revealed to those anointed by the priestesses of Medea’s 
Massage.
Our next stop was a short one, though it also threatened the 
psychic rapport Quinn and I had been so long in establishing. 
Quinn entered a bar where a sign outside advertised for persons 
who desired work as professional dancers. I let a few moments pass 
before following Quinn into the place. But just as I stepped within 
the temporarily blinding darkness of the bar, someone shouldered 
me to one side in his haste to leave. Fortunately I was standing in a 
crowd of men waiting for seats inside, and Quinn did not seem to 
take note of me. In addition, his right hand - with cigar -  was 
visoring his eyes or perhaps giving his brow a quick massage. In 
any case, he did not stop but charged past me and out the door. As 
I turned to follow him in his brusque exit, I noticed the scene 
within the bar, particularly focusing on a stage where a single 
figure gyred about - clothed in flashing colors. And gazing briefly 
on this chaotic image, I recalled that other flurrying chaos at the 
underground club, wondering if Quinn had been disturbed by this 
second confrontation with a many-hued phantasmagoria, this 
flickering and disorderly rainbow of dreams. Certainly he seemed

272
THOMAS LIGOTTI
to have been repulsed in some way, causing his furious exit. I 
exited more calmly and resumed my chartings of Quinn’s noctur­
nal voyage.
He next visited a number of places into which, for one reason or 
another, I was wary to follow. Included among these stops was a 
bookstore (not an occult one), a record shop with an outdoor 
speaker that blared madness into the street, and a lively amuse­
ment arcade, where Quinn remained for only the briefest moment. 
Between each of these diversions Quinn appeared to be getting 
progressively more, I cannot say frantic, but surely . . . watchful. 
His once steady stride was now interrupted by half-halts to glance 
into store windows, frequent hesitations that betrayed a multitude 
of indecisive thoughts, and impulses, a faltering uncertainty in 
general. His whole manner of movement had changed, its aspects 
of rhythm, pace, and gesture adding up to a character-image 
radically altered from his former self. At times I could even have 
doubted that this was Jack Quinn if it had not been for his 
unmistakable appearance.
Perhaps, I thought, he had become subliminally aware of 
someone being always at his back, and that, at this point in his 
plummet to an isolated hell, he no longer required a companion or 
could not tolerate a voyeur of his destiny. But ultimately I had to 
conclude that the cause of Quinn’s disquiet was something other 
than a pair of footsteps trailing behind him. There was something 
else that he seemed to be seeking, searching out clues in the brick 
and neon landscape, possibly in some signal condition or circum­
stance from which he could derive guidance for his movements 
that frigid and fragrant October night. But I do not think he 
found, or could properly read, whatever sign it was he sought. 
Otherwise the consequences might have been different.
The reason for Quinn’s lack of alertness had much to do with his 
penultimate stop that evening. The time was close to midnight. We 
had worked our way down Carton to the last block of Nortown’s 
commercial area. Here, also, were the northern limits of the 
suburb, beyond which lay a stretch of condemned buildings 
belonging to the surrounding city. This part of the suburb was 
similarly blighted in ways both physical and atmospheric. On 
either side of the street stood a row of attached buildings of 
sometimes dramatically varying height. Many of the businesses 
on this block were equipped with no outside lights or were not 
using the ones they had. But the lack of outward illumination 
seldom signified that these places were not open for business, at 
least judging by the comings and goings on the sidewalks outside

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
273
the darkened shops, bars, small theaters, and other establishments. 
Casual pedestrian traffic at this end of the suburb had seemingly 
diminished to certain determined individuals of specific taste and 
destination. Street traffic too was reduced, and there was some­
thing about those few cars left parked at the curbs that gave them a 
look of abandonment, if not complete immobility.
Of course, I am sure those cars, or most of them, were capable of 
motion, and it was only the most pathetic of fallacies that caused 
one to view them as sentient things somehow debilitated by their 
broken-down surroundings. But I think I may have been dreaming 
on my feet for a few seconds: sounds and images seemed to come to 
me from places outside the immediate environment. I stared at an 
old building across the street - a bar, perhaps, or a nameless club of 
some exclusive membership - and for a moment I received the 
impression that it was sending out strange noises, not from within 
its walls but from a far more distant source, as if it were transmit­
ting from remote dimensions. And these noises had a visible aspect 
too, a kind of vibration in the night air, like static that one could 
see, sparkling in the darkness. But all the while there was just an 
old building and nothing more than that. I stared a little longer 
and the noises faded into confused voicey echoes, the sparkling 
became dull and disappeared, the connection lost, and the place 
fully resumed its decrepit reality.
The building looked much too intimate in size to afford 
concealment, and I perceived a certain privacy in its appearance 
that made me feel a newcomer would have been awkwardly 
noticeable. Quinn, however, had unhesitantly gone inside. I 
suppose it would have been helpful to observe him in there, to 
see what sort of familiarity he had with this establishment and its 
patrons. But all I know is that he remained in there for just less 
than an hour. During part of that time I waited at a counter stool 
in a diner down the street.
When Quinn finally came out he was drunk, observably so. This 
surprised me, because I had assumed that he intended to maintain 
the utmost control of his faculties that evening. The coffee I saw 
him drinking at that underground club seemed to support this 
assumption. But somehow Quinn’s intentions to hold on to his 
sobriety, if he had such intentions to begin with, had been revised 
or forgotten.
I had positioned myself farther down the street by the time he 
reappeared, but there was much less need for caution now. It was 
ridiculously easy to remain unnoticed behind a Quinn who could 
barely see the pavement he walked upon. A police car with flashing

2 74
THOMAS LIGOTTI
lights passed us on Carton, and Quinn exhibited no awareness of it. 
He halted on the sidewalk, but only to light a cigar. And he seemed 
to have a difficult time performing this task in a wind that turned 
his unbuttoned overcoat into a wild-winged cape flapping behind 
him. It was this wind, as much as Quinn himself, that led the way 
to our final stop where a few last lights relieved the darkness on the 
very edge of Nortown.
The lights were those of a theater marquee. And it was also here 
that we caught up with the revolving beacons of the patrol car. 
Behind it was another vehicle, a large luxury affair that had a deep 
gash in its shiny side. Not far away along the curb was a No 
Parking sign that was creased into an L shape. A tall policeman 
was inspecting the damaged city property, while the owner of the 
car that had apparently done the deed was standing by. Quinn 
gave only a passing glance at this tableau as he proceeded into the 
theater. A few moments later I followed him, but not before 
hearing the owner of that disfigured car tell the patrolman that 
something brightly colored had suddenly appeared in his head­
lights, causing him to swerve. And whatever it was had subse­
quently vanished.
Stepping into the theater, I noted that it must have been a place 
of baroque elegance in former days, though now the outlines of the 
enscrolled molding above were blurred by grayish sediment and 
the enormous chandelier was missing some of its parts and all of its 
glitter. The glass counter on my right had been converted, 
probably long ago, from a refreshment bar to a merchandise 
stand, pornographic magazines and other things having replaced 
the snacks.
I walked through one of a long line of doors and stood around 
for a while in the hallway behind the auditorium. Here a group of 
men were talking and smoking, dropping their cigarettes onto the 
floor and stepping them out. Their voices almost drowned out the 
austere soundtrack of the film that was being shown, the sound 
emanating from the aisle entrances and humming unintelligibly in 
the back walls. I looked into the film-lit auditorium and saw only a 
few moviegoers scattered here and there in the worn seats of the 
theater, mostly sitting by themselves. By the light of the film I 
located Quinn within the sparse audience. He was sitting very 
close to the screen in a front-row seat next to some curtains and an 
exit sign.
He seemed to be dozing in his seat rather than watching the film, 
and I found it a simple matter to position myself a few rows behind 
him. By that time, however, I found myself losing some of the

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
275
resolve to remain attentive when Quinn himself appeared to have 
lost much of his earlier intensity, and the momentum of that night 
was running down. In the darkness of the theater I nodded, and 
then slept, much as it seemed Quinn had already done.
I did not sleep for long, no more than a few minutes, but this 
time I definitely dreamed. There was no nightmarish scenery in 
this dream, no threatening scenarios. Only darkness . . . darkness 
and a voice. The voice was that of Quinn. He was calling out to me 
from a great distance, a distance that did not seem a matter of 
physical space but one of immeasurable and alien dimensions. His 
words were distorted, as if passing through some medium that was 
misshaping them, turning human sounds into a beastlike rasping - 
the half-choking and half-shrieking voice of a thing being slowly 
and methodically wounded. First he called my name several times 
in the wild modulations of a coarse scream. Then he said, as well as 
I can remember: “Stopped watching for them . . . fell asleep . . . 
where are you . . . help us . . . they’re dreaming too . . . they’re 
dreaming . . . shaping things with their dreams . . . ”
I awoke and the first thing I saw was what seemed a great 
shapeless mass of color, which was only the giant images of the film. 
My eyes focused and I looked down the rows toward Quinn. He 
seemed to be slumped over very low in his seat or was nodding 
somehow, the top of his head much too near his shoulders. A 
mound of movement struggled on the other side of the seat, 
emerging sideways into the aisle. I could see it easily, its faint 
luminosity at first appearing to my vision as a reflection of the 
colors flickering erratically on the movie screen. But because of the 
diminished size and strange proportions, I could not be sure if it 
was Quinn or someone else. The bottom of his overcoat dragged 
along the floor, its sleeves hanging loose and handless, its collar 
caving in. The thing fought to take each awkward step, as if it did 
not have full control of its motion, like a marionette jerking this 
way and that way as it labors forth. Its glow seemed to be gaining 
in radiance now, a pulsing opalescent aura that crawled or flowed 
all around the lumbering dwarf.
I might still be in a dream, I reminded myself. This might be a 
distorted after-vision, a delirious blend of images derived from 
nightmare, imagination, and that enormous stain of colors at the 
front of the dark auditorium in which I had just awakened. I tried 
to collect myself, to focus upon the thing that was disappearing 
behind that thick curtain beneath the lighted exit sign.
I followed, passing through the opening in the frayed and 
velvety curtain. Beyond the curtain was a cement stairway

276
THOMAS LIGOTTI
leading up to the metal door that was now swinging closed. 
Halfway up the stairs I saw a familiar shoe which must have 
been lost in Quinn’s frantic yet retarded haste. Where was he 
running and from what? These were my only thoughts now, 
without consideration of the pure strangeness of the situation. I 
had abandoned all connections to any guiding set of norms by 
which to judge reality or unreality, and merely accepted every­
thing. However, all that was needed to shatter this acceptance 
waited outside - something of total unacceptability, an ascent 
upon the infinite and rickety scaffold of estrangement. After I 
stepped out the door at the top of the stairs, I discovered that the 
previous events of that night had only served as a springboard into 
other realms, a point of departure from a world now diminishing 
with a furious velocity behind me.
The area outside the theater was unlit but nonetheless was not 
dark. Something was shining in a long narrow passageway 
between the theater and an adjacent building. This was where 
he had gone. Illumination was there, and sounds.
From around the corner’s edge a grotesque light was trickling 
out, the first intimations of an ominous sunrise over a dark horizon. 
I dimly recognized this colored light, though not from my waking 
memory. It grew more intense, now pouring out in weird streams 
from beyond the solid margin of the building. And the more 
intense it grew, the more clearly I could hear the screaming voice 
that had called out to me in a dream. I shouted his name, but the 
swelling colored brightness was a field of fear which kept me from 
making any move toward it. It was no amalgam of colors 
comparable to anything in mortal experience. It was as if all 
natural colors had been mutated into a painfully lush iridescence 
by some prism fantastically corrupted in its form; it was a rainbow 
staining the sky after a poison deluge; it was an aurora painting the 
darkness with a blaze of insanity, a blaze that did not bum 
vigorously but shimmered with an insect-jeweled frailness. And, 
in actuality, it was nothing like these color-filled effusions, which 
are merely a feeble means of partially fixing a reality uncommu- 
nicable to those not initiated to it, a necessary resorting to the 
makeshift gibberish of the mystic isolated by his experience and left 
without a language to describe it.
The entire experience was temporally rather brief, though its 
unreal quality made it seem of an indefinite duration - the blink of 
an eye or an eon. Suddenly the brightness ceased flowing out from 
the other side of the wall, as if some strange spigot had been 
abruptly turned off somewhere. The screaming had also stopped. I

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOWN
277
stood in the silence and moonlit darkness behind the theater. 
Immediately I rushed around the corner of the building, but 
everything was now hopelessly safe, beyond rescue or recovery.
There was, in fact, nothing there. Nothing to relieve my sense of 
doubt as to what exactly had happened. (Though not a mere 
novitiate of the unreal, I have had my moments of dazed aston­
ishment.) But perhaps there was one thing. On the ground was a 
burnt-out patch of earth, a shapeless and bare spot that was 
deprived of the weeds and litter that covered the surrounding 
area. Possibly it was only a place from which some object had 
recently been removed, spirited ofT, leaving the earth beneath it 
vacant and dead. For a moment, when I first looked at the spot, it 
seemed to twinkle with a faint luminosity. Possibly I only imagined 
its outline as being that of a human silhouette, though one 
contorted in such a way that it might also have been mistaken 
for other things, other shapes. In any case, whatever had been 
there was now gone.
And around this barren little swatch of ground was only trash: 
newspapers mutilated by time and the elements; brown bags 
reduced by decay to their primal pulp; thousands of cigarette 
butts; and one item of debris that was almost new and had yet to 
have any transformations worked upon it. It was a thin book-like 
box. I picked it up. There were still two fresh cigars in it.
3.
I do not recall making my way back to the apartment that night, 
but I woke up there the next morning. When I saw the sunlight 
shafting through my bedroom window, the enormous divide 
between night and day seemed comfortingly unbridgeable. Then 
I realized I had fallen asleep with all my clothes on and the 
connection was made once again. I jumped out of bed and 
stumbled over to my roommate’s room, which of course was 
empty. For a moment I had entertained the protective thought 
that I had dreamed the events of the night before. Or perhaps 
dream merely overlapped reality in certain places - props and 
stage sets from one having been deceptively transferred in my 
memory to the other. On another hand, maybe everything I 
recalled was just one dream mingling with its own kind, all of it 
lacking any point of contact with real facts and experiences, 
whatever they might finally be.
One fact, however, was later established: Quinn never re­

278
THOMAS LIGOTTI
turned to the apartment. After a few days I reported him as 
missing to the Nortown police. Before doing this I destroyed the 
notebook in his room, for in a fit of paranoia I thought the police 
would find it in the course of their investigations and then ask 
some rather uncomfortable questions. I did not want to explain 
to them things that they simply would not believe, especially 
activities indulged in that final night. This would only have 
erroneously cast suspicion upon myself. Fortunately, the Nortown 
authorities are notoriously lax in their official functions. As it 
turned out, the police asked very few questions and never came 
around to the apartment.
After Quinn’s disappearance I immediately began looking for 
another apartment. And although my roommate was gone, the 
strange dreams continued during my last days at the old 
residence. But these dreams were different in some particu­
lars. The general backdrop was much the same nightmare 
expanse, but now I viewed it from some mysterious distance 
outside the dream. It was actually more like watching a film 
than dreaming, and they did not seem to be my own dreams at 
all. Perhaps these were Quinn’s leftover visions or terrors still 
haunting the apartment, for he played the dreams’ central role. 
Perhaps it was in these dreams that I continued to follow Quinn 
beyond the point at which I lost him. For at that point I 
imagined him as already starting to change, and in my last 
dreams he changed further.
He no longer bore any resemblance to my former roommate, 
though with dreamlike omniscience I knew it was he. His shape 
kept changing, or rather was deliberately being changed by those 
kaleidoscopic beasts. Playing out a scene from some Boschian hell, 
the tormenting demons encircled their victim and were dreaming 
him. They dreamed him through a hideous series of grotesque 
transfigurations, maliciously altering the screaming mass of the 
damned soul. They were dreaming things out of him and dreaming 
things into him. Finally, the purpose of their transformations 
became apparent. They were torturing their victim through a 
number of stages which would ultimately result in his becoming 
one of them, fulfilling his most fearful and obsessive vision. I no 
longer recognized him but saw that there was now one more 
glittering beast that took its place with the others and frolicked 
among them.
This was the last dream I had before leaving the apartment. 
There have been no others - at least none that have troubled my 
own sleep. I cannot say the same for that of my new roommate,

TH E DREAMING IN NORTOW N
279
who rages in his slumber night after night. Once or twice he has 
attempted to communicate to me his strange visions and the 
company into which they have led him. But he can see that I 
myself am not afflicted with the same disease of dreams. Perhaps he 
will never suspect that I am now its carrier.

THE MYSTICS OF 
MUELENBURG
If things are not what they seem and we are forever reminded 
that this is the case -  then it must also be observed that enough 
of us ignore this truth to keep the world from collapsing. Though 
never exact, always shifting somewhat, the proportion is crucial. For 
a certain number of minds are fated to depart for realms of 
delusion, as if in accordance with some hideous timetable, and 
many will never be returning to us. Even among those who 
remain, how difficult it can be to hold the focus sharp, to keep 
the picture of the world from fading, from blurring in selected 
zones and, on occasion, from sustaining epic deformations over the 
entire visible scene.
I once knew a man who claimed that, overnight, all the solid 
shapes of existence had been replaced by cheap substitutes: trees 
made of flimsy posterboard, houses built of colored foam, whole 
landscapes composed of hair-clippings. His own flesh, he said, was 
now just so much putty. Needless to add, this acquaintance had 
deserted the cause of appearances and could no longer be 
depended on to stick to the common story. Alone he had wan­
dered into a tale of another sort altogether; for him, all things now 
participated in this nightmare of nonsense. But although his 
revelations conflicted with the lesser forms of truth, nonetheless 
he did live in the light of a greater truth: that all is unreal. Within 
him this knowledge was vividly present down to his very bones, 
which had been newly simulated by a compound of mud and dust 
and ashes.
In my own case, I must confess that the myth of a natural 
universe -  that is, one that adheres to certain continuities whether 
we wish them or not - was losing its grip on me and was gradually 
being supplanted by a hallucinatory view of creation. Forms, 
having nothing to offer except a mere suggestion of firmness, 
declined in importance; fantasy, that misty domain of pure 
meaning, gained in power and influence. This was in the days

TH E MYSTICS OF MUELENBURG
2 8 l
when esoteric wisdom seemed to count for something in my mind, 
and I would willingly have sacrificed a great deal in its pursuit. 
Hence, my interest in the man who called himself Klaus Kling- 
man; hence, too, that brief yet profitable association between us, 
which came about through channels too twisted to recall.
Without a doubt, Klingman was one of the illuminati and 
proved this many times over in various psychic experiments, 
particularly those of the seance type. For those outside scientific 
circles, I need only mention the man who was severally known as 
Nemo the Necromancer, Marlowe the Magus, and Master Mar­
inetti, each of whom was none other than Klaus Klingman himself. 
But Klingman’s highest achievement was not a matter of public 
spectacle and consisted entirely of this private triumph: that he 
had attained, by laborious effort, an unwavering acceptance of the 
spectral nature of things, which to him were neither what they 
seemed to be nor were they quite anything at all.
Klingman lived in the enormous upper story of a warehouse that 
had been part of his family’s legacy to him, and there I often found 
him wandering amidst a few pieces of furniture and the cavernous 
wasteland of dim and empty storage space. Collapsing into an 
ancient armchair, reposing far beneath crumbling rafters, he 
would gaze beyond the physical body of his visitor, his eyes 
surveying remote worlds and his facial expression badly disorga­
nized by dreams and large quantities of alcohol. “Fluidity, always 
fluidity,” he shouted out, his voice carrying through the expansive 
haze around us, which muted daylight into dusk. The embodiment 
of his mystic precepts, he appeared at any given moment to be on 
the verge of an amazing disintegration, his particular complex of 
atoms ready to go shooting off into the great void like a burst of 
fireworks.
We discussed the dangers -  for me and for the world -  of 
adopting a visionary program of existence. “The chemistry of 
things is so delicate,” he warned. “And this word chemistry, what 
does it mean but a mingling, a mixing, a gushing together? Things 
that people fear.” Indeed, I had already suspected the hazards of 
his company, and, as the sun was setting over the city beyond the 
great windows of the warehouse, I became afraid. With an 
uncanny perception of my feelings, Klingman pointed at me 
and bellowed:
“The worst fear of the race - yes, the world suddenly trans­
formed into a senseless nightmare, horrible dissolution of things. 
Nothing compares, even oblivion is a sweet dream. You under­
stand why, of course. Why this peculiar threat. These brooding

282
THOMAS L IGOTTI
psyches, all the busy minds everywhere. I hear them buzzing like 
flies in the blackness. I see them as glow worms flitting in the 
blackness. They are struggling, straining every second to keep the 
sky above them, to keep the sun in the sky, to keep the dead in the 
earth - to keep all things, so to speak, where they belong. What an 
undertaking! What a crushing task! Is it any wonder that they are 
all tempted by a universal voice, that in some dark street of the 
mind a single voice whispers to one and all, softly hissing, and says: 
‘Lay down your burden.’ Then thoughts begin to drift, a mystical 
magnetism pulls them this way and that, faces start to change, 
shadows speak . . . sooner or later the sky comes down, melting like 
wax. But as you know, everything has not yet been lost: absolute 
terror has proved its security against this fate. Is it any wonder that 
these beings carry on the struggle at whatever cost?”
“And you?” I asked.
“I?”
“Yes, don’t you shoulder the universe in your own way?”
“Not at all,” he replied, smiling and sitting up in his chair as 
on a throne. “I am a lucky one, parasite of chaos, maggot of 
vice. Where I live is nightmare, thus a certain nonchalance. In 
a previous life, you know, I may actually have been at 
Muelenburg before it was lost in the delirium of history. 
Who can say? Smothered by centuries now. But there was an 
opportunity, a moment of distraction in which so much was 
nearly lost forever, so many lost in that medieval gloom, 
catastrophe of dreams. How their minds wandered in the 
shadows even as their bodies were seemingly bound to narrow 
rutted streets and apparently safeguarded by the spired cathe­
dral which was erected between 1365 and 1399. A rare and 
fortuitous juncture when the burden of the heavens was heaviest
- so much to keep in its place - and the psyche so ill-developed, 
so easily taxed and tempted away from its labors. But they knew 
nothing about that, and never could. They only knew the 
prospect of absolute terror.”
“In Muelenburg”, I said, hoping to draw his conversation 
outward before it twisted further into itself. “You said the 
cathedral.”
“/ see the cathedral, the colossal vault above, the central aisle 
stretching out before us. The woodcarvings leer down from dark 
corners, animals and freaks, men in the mouths of demons. Are you 
taking notes again? Fine, then take notes. Who knows what you 
will remember of all this? Or will memory help you at all? In any 
case we are already there, sitting among the smothered sounds of

THE MYSTICS OF M UELENBURG
2 8 3
the cathedral. Beyond the jeweled windows is the town in twi­
light.”
Twilight, as Klingman explained and I must paraphrase, had 
come upon Muelenburg somewhat prematurely on a certain day 
deep into the autumn season. Early that afternoon, clouds had 
spread themselves evenly above the region surrounding the town, 
withholding heaven’s light and giving a dull appearance to the 
landscape of forests, thatched farmhouses, and windmills standing 
still against the horizon. Within the high stone walls of Muelen­
burg itself, no one seemed particularly troubled that the narrow 
streets - normally so cluttered with the pointed shadows of peaked 
roofs and jutting gables at this time of day - were still immersed in 
a lukewarm dimness which turned merchants’ brightly colored 
signs into faded artifacts of a dead town and which made faces look 
as if they were fashioned in pale clay. And in the central square - 
where the shadow from the clock-tower of the town hall at times 
overlapped those cast by the twin spires of the cathedral on the one 
hand, or the ones from high castle turrets looming at the border of 
the town on the other - there was only grayness undisturbed.
Where were the minds of the townspeople? How had they ceased 
paying homage to the ancient order of things? And when had the 
severing taken place that sent their world drifting on strange 
waters?
For some time they remained innocent of the disaster, going 
about their ways as the ashen twilight lingered far too long, as it 
encroached upon the hours that belonged to evening and sus­
pended the town between day and night. Everywhere windows 
began to glow with the yellow light of lamps, creating the illusion 
that darkness was imminent. Any moment, it seemed, the natural 
cycle would relieve the town of the prolonged dusk it had suffered 
that autumn day. How well received the blackness would have 
been by those who waited silently in sumptuous chambers or 
humble rooms, for no one could bear the sight of Muelenburg’s 
twisting streets in that eerie, overstaying twilight. Even the 
nightwatchman shirked his nocturnal routine. And when the 
bells of the abbey sounded for the monks* midnight prayers, each 
toll spread like an alarm thoughout the town still held in the 
strange luminousness of the gloaming.
Exhausted by fear, many shuttered their windows, extinguished 
lamps, and retired to their beds, hoping that all would be made 
right in the interval. Others sat up with a candle, enjoying the lost 
luxury of shadows. A few, who were not fixed to the life of the town,

2 8 4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
broke through the unwatched gate and took to the roads, all the 
while gazing at the pale sky and wondering where they would go.
But whether they kept the hours in their dreams or in sleepless 
vigils, all were disturbed by something in the spaces around them, 
as if some strangeness had seeped into the atmosphere of their 
town, their homes, and perhaps their souls. The air seemed heavier 
somehow, resisting them slightly, and also seemed to be flowing 
with things that could not be perceived except as swift, shadowlike 
movement escaping all sensible recognition, transparent flight 
which barely caressed one’s vision.
When the clock high in the tower of the town hall proved that a 
nightful of hours had passed, some opened their shutters, even 
ventured into the streets. But the sky still hovered over them like an 
infinite vault of glowing dust. Here and there throughout the town 
the people began to gather in whispering groups. Appeals were 
soon made at the castle and the cathedral, and speculations were 
offered to calm the crowd. There was a struggle in heaven, some 
had reasoned, which had influenced the gross reality of the visible 
world. Others proposed a deception by demons or an ingenious 
punishment from on high. A few, who met secretly in well-hidden 
chambers, spoke in stricken voices of old deities formerly driven 
from the earth who were now monstrously groping their way back. 
And all of these explications of the mystery were true in their own 
way, though none could abate the dread which had settled upon 
the town of Muelenburg.
Submerged in unvarying grayness, distracted and confused by 
phantasmal intrusions about them, the people of the town felt their 
world dissolving. Even the clock in the town hall tower failed to 
keep their moments from wandering strangely. Within such 
disorder were bred curious thoughts and actions. Thus, in the 
garden of the abbey an ancient tree was shunned and rumours 
spread concerning some change in its twisted silhouette, something 
flaccid and rope-like about its branches, until finally the monks 
dowsed it with oil and set it aflame, their circle of squinting faces 
bathing in the glare. Likewise, a fountain standing in one of the 
castle’s most secluded courtyards became notorious when its 
waters appeared to suggest fabulous depths far beyond the natural 
dimensions of its shell-shaped basin. The cathedral itself had 
deteriorated into a hollow sanctuary where prayers were mocked 
by queer movements among the carved figures in cornices and by 
shadows streaming horribly in the twitching light of a thousand 
candles.
Throughout the town, all places and things bore evidence to

THE MYSTICS OF M UELENBURG
2 8 5
striking revisions in the base realm of matter: precisely sculptured 
stone began to loosen and lump, an abandoned cart melded with 
the sucking mud of the street, and objects in desolate rooms lost 
themselves in the surfaces they pressed upon, making metal tongs 
mix with brick hearth, prismatic jewels with lavish velvet, a corpse 
with the wood of its coffin. At last the faces of Muelenburg became 
subject to changing expressions which at first were quite subtle, 
though later these divergences were so exaggerated that it was no 
longer possible to recapture original forms. It followed that the 
townspeople could no more recognize themselves than they could 
one another. All were carried ofT in the great torrent of their 
dreams, all spinning in that grayish whirlpool of indefinite twi­
light, all churning and in the end merging into utter blackness.
It was within this blackness that the souls of Muelenburg 
struggled and labored and ultimately awoke. The stars and high 
moon now lit up the night, and it seemed that their town had been 
returned to them. And so terrible had been their recent ordeal that 
of its beginning, its progress, and its termination, they could 
remember . . . nothing.
“Nothing?” I echoed.
“Of course,” Klingman answered. “All of those terrible mem­
ories were left behind in the blackness. How could they bear to 
bring them back?”
“But your story,” I protested. “These notes I’ve taken tonight.” 
“Privileged information, far off the main roads of historical 
record. You know that sooner or later each of them recollected the 
episode in detail. It was all waiting for them in the place where 
they had left it - the blackness which is the domain of death. Or, if 
you wish, that blackness of the old alchemists’ magic powder.”
I remembered the necromantic learning that Klingman had 
both professed and proven, but still I observed: “Then nothing can 
be verified, nothing established as fact.”
“Nothing at all,” he agreed, “except the fact that I am one with 
the dead of Muelenburg and with all who have known the great 
dream in all its true liquescence. They have spoken to me as I am 
speaking to you. Many reminiscences imparted by those old 
dreamers, many drunken dialogues I have held with them.” 
“Like the drunkenness of this dialogue tonight,” I said, openly 
disdaining his narrative.
“Perhaps, only much more vivid, more real. But the yarn which 
you suppose I alone have spun has served its purpose. To cure you 
of doubt, you first had to be made a doubter. Until now, pardon

286
THOMAS LIG O TTI
my saying so, you have shown no talent in that direction. You 
believed every wild thing that came along, provided it had the 
least evidence whatever. Unparalleled credulity. But tonight you 
have doubted and thus you are ready to be cured of this doubt. 
And didn’t I mention time and again the dangers? Unfortunately, 
you cannot count yourself among those forgetful souls of Muelen- 
burg. You even have your mnemonic notes, as if anyone will credit 
them when this night is over. The time is right again, and it has 
happened more than once, for the grip to go slack and for the 
return of fluidity in the world. And later so much will have to be 
washed away, assuming a renascence of things. Fluidity, always 
fluidity.”
When I left his company that night, abandoning the dead and 
shapeless hours I had spent in that warehouse, Klingman was 
laughing like a madman. I remember him slouched in that 
threadbare throne, his face all flushed and contorted, his twisted 
mouth wailing at some hilarious arcana known only to himself, the 
sardonic laughter reverberating in the great spaces of the night. To 
all appearances, some ultimate phase of dissipation had seized his 
soul.Nevertheless, that I had underrated or misunderstood the 
powers of Klaus Klingman was soon demonstrated to me, and 
to others. But no one else remembers that time when the night 
would not leave and no dawn appeared to be forthcoming. During 
the early part of the crisis there were sensible, rather than 
apocalyptic, explanations proffered everywhere: blackout, bizarre 
meteorological phenomena, an eclipse of sorts. Later, these myths 
became useless and ultimately unnecessary.
For no one else recalls the hysteria that prevailed when the stars 
and the moon seemed to become swollen in the blackness and to 
cast a lurid illumination upon the world. How many horrors await 
in that blackness to be restored to the memories of the dead. For no 
one else living remembers when everything began to change, no 
one else with the possible exception of Klaus Klingman.
In the red dawn following that gruesomely protracted night, I 
went to the warehouse. Unfortunately the place was untenanted, 
save by its spare furnishings and a few empty bottles. Klingman 
had disappeared, perhaps into that same blackness for which he 
seemed to have an incredible nostalgia. I, of course, make no 
appeals for belief. There can be no belief where there is no doubt. 
There cannot be something where there is no nothing. This is far 
from secret knowledge, as if such knowledge could change any­
thing. This is only how it seems, and seeming is everything.

IN THE SHADOW OF 
ANOTHER WORLD
M
any times in my life, and in many different places, I have 
found myself walking at twilight down streets lined with 
gently stirring trees and old silent houses. On such lulling occasi
things seem firmly situated, quietly settled and exceedingly present 
to the natural eye: over distant rooftops the sun abandons the scene 
and casts its last light upon windows, watered lawns, the edges of 
leaves. In this drowsy setting both great things and small achieve 
an intricate union, apparently leaving not the least space for 
anything else to intrude upon their visible domain. But other 
realms are always capable of making their presence felt, hovering 
unseen like strange cities disguised as clouds or hidden like a world 
of pale specters within a fog. One is besieged by orders of entity 
that refuse to articulate their exact nature or proper milieu. And 
soon those well-aligned streets reveal that they are, in fact, situated 
among bizarre landscapes where simple trees and houses are 
marvelously obscured, where everything is settled within the 
depths of a vast, echoing abyss. Even the infinite sky itself, across 
which the sun spreads its expansive light, is merely a blurry little 
window with a crack in it - a jagged fracture beyond which one 
may see, at twilight, what occupies and envelops a vacant street 
lined with gently stirring trees and old silent houses.
On one particular occasion I followed a tree-lined street past all 
the houses and continued until it brought me to a single house a 
short distance from town. As the road before me narrowed into a 
bristling path, and the path ascended in a swerving course up the 
side of a hump in the otherwise even landscape, I stood before my 
day’s destination.
Like other houses of its kind (I have seen so many of them 
outlined against a pale sky at dusk), this one possessed the aspect of 
a mirage, a chimerical quality that led one to doubt its existence. 
Despite its dark and angular mass, its peaks and porches and worn 
wooden steps, there was something improperly tenuous about its

288
THOMAS LIGOTTI
substance, as if it had been constructed of illicit materials - dreams 
and vapor posing as solid matter. And this was not the full extent of 
its resemblance to a true chimera, for the house seemed to have 
acquired its present form through a fabulous conglomeration of 
properties: conceivably, it had not been forever limited to a single 
nature and function. Might it not have been a survival of the 
world’s prehistory, a great beast unearthed by time and the 
elements? There seemed to be the appearance of petrified flesh 
in its rough outer surfaces, and it was very simple to imagine an 
inner framework not of beams and boards, but rather of gigantic 
bones. The chimneys and shingles, windows and doorways were 
thus the embellishments of a later age which had misunderstood 
the real essence of this ancient monstrosity, transforming it into a 
motley and ludicrous thing. Little wonder, then, that in shame it 
would attempt to reject its reality and pass itself as only a shadow 
on the horizon, a thing of nightmarish beauty that aroused 
impossible hopes.
As in the past, I looked to the unseen interior of the house to be 
the focus of unknown . . . celebrations. It was my wishful convic­
tion that the inner world of the house participated, after its own 
style, in a kind of ceremonious desolation -  that translucent 
festivals might be glimpsed in the corners of certain rooms and 
that the faraway sounds of mad carnivals filled certain hallways at 
all hours of the day and night. I am afraid, however, that a 
peculiar feature of the house prevented full indulgence in the usual 
anticipations. This feature was a turret built into one side of the 
house and rising to an unusual height beyond its roof, so that it 
looked out upon the world as a lighthouse, diminishing the aspect 
of introspection that is vital to such structures. And near the cone- 
roofed peak of this turret, a row of large windows appeared to have 
been placed, as a later modification, around its entire circumfer­
ence. But if the house was truly employing its windows to gaze 
outward more than within, what it saw was nothing. For all the 
windows of the three ample stories of the house, as well as those of 
the turret and that small octagonal aperture in the attic, were 
shuttered closed.
This was, in fact, the state in which I expected to find the house, 
since I had already exchanged numerous letters with Raymond 
Spare, the present owner.
“I was expecting you much sooner,” Spare said on opening the 
door. “It’s almost nightfall and I was sure you understood that 
only at certain times . . . ”
“My apologies, but I’m here now. Shall I come in?”

IN TH E SHADOW OF A N O TH ER W ORLD
2 8 9
Spare stepped aside and gestured theatrically toward the 
interior of the house, as if he were presenting one of those dubious 
spectacles that had earned him a substantial livelihood. It was out 
of an instinct for mystification that he had adopted the surname of 
the famed visionary and artist, even claiming some blood or 
spiritual kinship with this great eccentric. But tonight I was 
playing the skeptic, as I had in my correspondence with Spare, 
so that I might force him to earn my credence. There would have 
been no other way to gain his invitation to witness the phenomena 
that, as I understood from sources other than the illusionistic 
Spare, were well worth my attention. And he was so deceptively 
mundane in appearance, which made it difficult to keep in mind 
his reputation for showmanship, his gift for fantasmic histrionics.
“You have left everything as he had it before you?” I asked, 
referring to the deceased former owner whose name Spare never 
disclosed to me, though I knew it all the same. But that was of no 
importance.
“Yes, very much as it was. Excellent housekeeper, all things 
considered.”
Spare’s observation was regrettably true: the interior of the 
house was immaculate to the point of being suspect. The great 
parlor in which we now sat, as well as those other rooms and 
hallways that receded into the house, exuded the atmosphere of a 
plush and well-tended mausoleum where the dead are truly at rest. 
The furnishings were dense and archaic, yet they betrayed no 
oppressive awareness of other times, no secret conspiracies with 
departed spirits, regardless of the unnatural mood of twilight 
created by fastidiously clamped shutters which admitted none of 
nature’s true twilight from the outside world. The clock that I 
heard resonantly ticking in a nearby room caused no sinister 
echoes to sound between dark, polished floors and lofty, uncob- 
webbed ceilings. Absent was all fear or hope of encountering a 
malign presence in the cellar or an insane shadow in the attic. 
Despite a certain odd effect created by thaumaturgic curios 
appearing on a shelf, as well as a hermetic chart of the heavens 
nicely framed and hanging upon a wall, no hint of hauntedness 
was evoked by either the surfaces or obscurities of this house.
“Quite an innocent ambiance,” said Spare, who displayed no 
special prowess in voicing this thought of mine.
“Unexpectedly so. Was that part of his intention?”
Spare laughed. “The truth is that this was his original intention, 
the genesis of what later occupied his genius. In the beginning ...”
“A spiritual wasteland?”

290
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Exactly,” Spare confirmed.
“Sterile but . . . safe.”
“You understand, then. His reputation was for risk not retreat. 
But the notebooks are very clear on the sufTering caused by his 
fantastic gifts, his incredible sensitivity. He required spiritually 
antiseptic surroundings, yet was hopelessly tempted by the vision­
ary. Again and again in his notebooks he describes himself as 
‘overwhelmed’ to the point of madness. You can appreciate the 
irony.”
“I can certainly appreciate the horror,” I replied.
“Of course, well . . . tonight we will have the advantage of his 
unfortunate experience. Before the evening advances much further 
I want to show you where he worked.”
“And the shuttered windows?” I asked.
“They are very much to the point,” he answered.
The workshop of which Spare had spoken was located, as one 
might have surmised, in the uppermost story of the turret in the 
westernmost part of the house. This circular room could only be 
reached by climbing a twisting and tenuous stairway into the attic, 
where a second set of stairs led up into the turret. Spare fumbled 
with the key to the low wooden door, and soon we had gained 
entrance.
The room was definitely what Spare had implied: a workshop, 
or at least the remains of one. “It seems that toward the end he had 
begun to destroy his apparatus, as well as some of his work,” Spare 
explained as I stepped into the room and saw the debris every­
where. Much of the mess consisted of shattered panes of glass that 
had been colored and distorted in strange ways. A number of them 
still existed intact, leaning against the curving wall or lying upon a 
long work table. A few were set up on wooden easels like paintings 
in progress, the bizarre transformations of their surfaces left 
unfinished. These panes of corrupted glass had been cut into a 
variety of shapes, and each had affixed to it - upon a little card - a 
scribbled character resembling an oriental ideograph. Similar 
symbols, although much larger, had been inscribed into the wood 
of the shutters that covered the windows all around the room.
“A symbology that I cannot pretend to understand,” Spare 
admitted, “except in its function. Here, see what happens when I 
remove these labels with the little figures squiggled on them.”
I watched as Spare went about the room stripping the mis­
shapen glyphs from those chromatically deformed panels of glass. 
And it was not long before I noticed a change in the general 
character of the room, a shift in atmospherics as when a clear day is

IN TH E SHADOW OF A N O TH ER W ORLD
2 9 I
suddenly complicated by the shadowy nuances of clouds. Pre­
viously the circular room had been bathed in a twisted kaleido­
scope of colors as the simple lights around the room diffused 
through the strangely tinted windowpanes; but the effect had 
been purely decorative, an experience restricted to the realm of 
aesthetics, with no implications of the spectral. Now, however, a 
new element permeated the round chamber, partially and briefly 
exposing qualities of quite a different order in which the visible 
gave way to the truly visionary. What formerly had appeared as 
an artist’s studio, however eccentric, was gradually inheriting the 
transcendent aura of a stained-glass cathedral, albeit one that 
had suffered some obscure desecration. In certain places upon the 
floor, the ceiling, and the circular wall broken by the shuttered 
windows, in select regions of the room which I perceived through 
those prismatic lenses, vague forms seemed to be struggling 
toward visibility, freakish outlines laboring to gain full embodi­
ment. Whether their nature was that of the dead or the demonic
- or possibly some peculiar progeny generated by their union - I 
could not tell. But whatever class of creation they seemed to 
occupy at the time, it was certain that they were gaining not only 
in clarity and substance, but also in size, swelling and surging 
and expanding their universe toward an eclipse of this world’s 
vision.
“Is it possible,” I said, turning to Spare, “that this effect of 
magnification is solely a property of the medium through 
which . . . ”
But before I could complete my speculation, Spare was rushing 
about the room, frantically replacing the symbols on each sheet of 
glass, dissolving the images into a quivering translucence and then 
obliterating or masking them altogether. The room lapsed once 
again into its former state of iridescent sterility. Then Spare hastily 
ushered me back to the ground floor, the door to the turret room 
standing locked behind us.
Afterward he served as my guide through the other, less crucial 
rooms of the house, each of which was sealed by dark shutters and 
all of which shared in the same barren atmosphere - the aftermath 
of a strange exorcism, a purging of the grounds which left them 
neither hallowed nor unholy, but had simply turned them into a 
pristine laboratory where a fearful genius had practiced his science 
of nightmares.
We passed several hours in the small, lamplit library. The sole 
window of that room was curtained, and I imagined that I saw the 
night’s darkness behind the pattern. But when I put my hand upon

2 9 2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
that symmetrical and velvety design, I felt only a hardness on the 
other side, as if I had touched a coffin beneath its pall. It was this 
barrier that made the world outside seem twice darkened, 
although I knew that when the shutters were opened I would 
be faced with one of the clearest nights ever seen.
For some time Spare read to me passages from the notebooks 
whose simple cryptography he had broken. I sat and listened to a 
voice that was accustomed to speaking of miracles, a well-practiced 
tout of mystical freakshows. Yet I also detected a certain convic­
tion in his words, which is to say that his delivery was flawed by 
dissonant overtones of fear.
“We sleep,” he read, “among the shadows of another world. 
These are the unshapely substance inflicted upon us and the prime 
material to which we give the shapes of our understanding. And 
though we create what is seen, yet we are not the creators of its 
essence. Thus nightmares are born from the impress of ourselves on 
the life of things unknown. How terrible these forms of specter and 
demon when the eyes of the flesh cast light and mold the shadows 
which are forever around us. How much more terrible to witness 
their true forms roaming free upon the land, or in the most homely 
rooms of our houses, or frolicking through that luminous hell 
which in madness we have named the heavens. Then we truly 
waken from our sleep, but only to sleep once more and shun the 
nightmares which must ever return to that part of us which is 
hopelessly dreaming.”
After witnessing some of the phenomena which had inspired this 
hypothesis, I could not escape becoming somewhat entranced with 
its elegance, if not with its originality. Nightmares both within and 
around us had been integrated into a system that seemed to 
warrant admiration. However, the scheme was ultimately no 
more than terror recollected in tranquility, a formula reflecting 
little of the mazy trauma that had initiated these speculations. 
Should it be called revelation or delirium when the mind inter­
poses itself between the sensations of the soul and a monstrous 
mystery? Truth was not an issue in this matter, nor were the 
mechanics of the experiment (which, even if faulty, yielded worthy 
results), and in my mind it was faithfulness to the mystery and its 
terror that was paramount, even sacred. In this the theoretician of 
nightmares had failed, fallen on the lucid blade of theories that, in 
the end, could not save him. On the other hand, those wonderful 
symbols that Spare was at a loss to illuminate, those crude and 
cryptic designs, represented a genuine power against the mystery’s 
madness, yet could not be explained by the most esoteric analysis.

“I have a question,” I said to Spare when he had closed the 
volume he held on his lap. “The shutters elsewhere in the house are 
not painted with the signs that are on those in the turret. Can you 
enlighten me?”
Spare led me to the window and drew back the curtains. Very 
cautiously he pulled out one of the shutters just far enough to 
expose its edge, which revealed that something of a contrasting 
color and texture composed a layer between the two sides of the 
dark wood.
“Engraved upon a panel of glass placed inside each shutter,” he 
explained.
“And the ones in the turret?” I asked.
“The same. Whether the extra set of symbols there are precau­
tionary or merely redundant . . . ”
His voice had faded and then stopped, though the pause did not 
seem to imply any thoughtfulness on Spare’s part.
“Yes,” I prompted, “precautionary or redundant.”
For a moment he revived. “... that is, whether the symbols were 
an added measure against . . . ”
It was at this point that Spare mentally abandoned the scene, 
following within his own mind some controversy or suspicion, a 
witness to a dramatic conflict being enacted upon a remote and 
shadowy stage.
“Spare,” I said in a somewhat normal voice.
“Spare,” he repeated, but in a voice that was not his own, a 
voice that sounded more like the echo of a voice than natural 
speech. And for a moment I asserted my pose of skepticism, placing 
none of my confidence in Spare or in the things he had thus far 
shown me, for I knew that he was an adept of pasteboard visions, a 
medium whose hauntings were of mucilage and gauze. But how 
much more subtle and skilful were the present effects, as though he 
were manipulating the very atmosphere around us, pulling the 
strings of light and shadow.
“The clearest light is now shining,” he said in that hollow, 
tremulous voice. “Now light is flowing in the glass,” he spoke, 
placing his hand upon the shutter before him. “Shadows gathering 
against . . . against . . .”
And it seemed that Spare was not so much pulling the shutter 
away from the window as trying to push the shutter closed while it 
slowly opened further and further, allowing a strange radiance to 
leak gradually into the house. It also appeared that he finally gave 
up the struggle and let another force guide his actions. “Flowing 
together in me,” he repeated several times as he went from window
IN TH E SHADOW OF A N O TH ER W ORLD 
2 9 3

294
THOMAS LIGOTTI
to window, methodically opening the shutters like a sleepwalker 
performing some obscure ritual.
Ransoming all judgment to fascination, I watched him pass 
through each room on the main floor of the house, executing his 
duties like an old servant. Then he ascended a long staircase, and I 
heard his footsteps traversing the floor above, evenly pacing from 
one side of the house to the other. He was now a nightwatchman 
making his rounds in accordance with a strange design. The sound 
of his movements grew fainter as he progressed to the next floor 
and continued to perform the services required of him. I listened 
very closely as he proceeded on his somnambulistic course into the 
attic. And when I heard the echoes of a distant door as it slammed 
shut, I knew he had gone into that room in the turret.
Engrossed in the lesser phenomenon of Spare’s suddenly altered 
behavior, I had momentarily overlooked the greater one of the 
windows. But now I could no longer ignore those phosphorescent 
panes which focused or reflected the incredible brilliance of the sky 
that night. As I reiterated Spare’s circuit about the main floor, I 
saw that each room was glowing with the superlunary light that 
was outlined by each window frame. In the library I paused and 
approached one of the windows, reaching out to touch its wrinkled 
surface. And I felt a lively rippling in the glass, as if there truly was 
some force flowing within it, an uncanny sensation that my 
tingling fingertips will never be able to forget. But it was the 
scene beyond the glass that finally possessed my attention.
For a few moments I looked out only upon the level landscape 
that surrounded the house, its open expanse lying desolate and 
pale beneath the resplendent heavens. Then, almost inconspicu­
ously, different scenes or fragments of scenes began to intrude upon 
the outside vicinity, as if other geographies of the earth were being 
superimposed upon the local one, composing a patchwork of 
images that might seem to have been the hallucinated tableaux 
of some cosmic tapestry.
The windows -  which, for lack of a more accurate term, I must 
call enchanted -  had done their work. For the visions they offered 
were indeed those of a haunted world, a multi-faceted mural 
portraying the marriage of insanity and metaphysics. As the 
images clarified, I witnessed all the intersections which commonly 
remain unseen to earthly sight, the conjoining of planes of entity 
which should exclude each other and should no more be mingled 
than is flesh with the unliving objects that surround it. But this is 
precisely what took place in the scenes before me, and it appeared 
there existed no place on earth that was not the home of a spectral

IN TH E SHADOW OF ANO TH ER W ORLD
295
ontogeny. All the world was a pageant of nightmares. . . .
Sunlit bazaars in exotic cities thronged with faces that were 
transparent masks for insect-like countenances; moonlit streets in 
antique towns harbored a strange-eyed slithering within their very 
stones; dim galleries of empty museums sprouted a ghostly mold 
that mirrored the sullen hues of old paintings; the land at the edge 
of oceans gave birth to a new evolution transcending biology and 
remote islands ofFered themselves as a haven for these fantastic 
forms having no analogy outside of dreams; jungles teemed with 
beast-like shapes that moved beside the sticky luxuriance as well as 
through the depths of its pulpy warmth; deserts were alive with an 
uncanny flux of sounds which might enter and animate the world 
of substance; and subterranean landscapes heaved with cadaver­
ous generations that had sunken and merged into sculptures of 
human coral, bodies heaped and unwhole, limbs projecting with­
out order, eyes scattered and searching the darkness.
My own eyes suddenly closed, shutting out the visions for a 
moment. And during that moment I once again became aware of 
the sterile quality of the house, of its “innocent ambiance”. It was 
then that I realized that this house was possibly the only place on 
earth, perhaps in the entire universe, that had been cured of the 
plague of phantoms that raged everywhere. This achievement, 
however futile or perverse, now elicited from me tremendous 
admiration as a monument to Terror and the stricken ingenuity 
it may inspire.
And my admiration intensified as I pursued the way that Spare 
had laid out for me and ascended a back staircase to the second 
floor. For on this level, where room followed upon room through a 
maze of interconnecting doors which Spare had left open, there 
seemed to be an escalation in the optical power of the windows, 
thus heightening the threat to the house and its inhabitants. What 
had appeared, through the windows of the floor below, as scenes in 
which spectral monstrosities had merely intruded upon orthodox 
reality, were now magnified to the point where that reality 
underwent a further eclipse: the other realm became dominant 
and pushed through the cover of masks, the concealment of stones, 
spread its moldy growths at will, generating apparitions of the 
most feverish properties and intentions, erecting formations that 
enshadowed all familiar order.
By the time I reached the third floor, I was somewhat prepared 
for what I might find, granted the elevating intensity of the visions 
to which the windows were giving increasingly greater force and 
focus. Each window was now a framed phantasmagoria of churn­

2 9 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
ing and forever changing shapes and colors, fabulous depths and 
distances opening to the fascinated eye, grotesque transfigurations 
that suggested a purely supernatural order, a systemless cosmog­
ony reeling with all the caprice of the immaterial. And as I 
wandered through those empty and weirdly lucent rooms at the 
top of the house, it seemed that the house itself had been 
transported to another universe.
I have no idea how long I may have been enthralled by the 
chaotic fantasies imposing themselves upon the unprotected rooms 
of my mind. But this trance was eventually interrupted by a 
commotion emanating from an even higher room - the very 
crown of the turret and, as it were, the cranial chamber of that 
many-eyed beast of a house. Making my way up the narrow, 
spiralling stairs to the attic, I found that there, too, Spare had 
unsealed the octagonal window, which now seemed the gazing eye 
of some god as it cast forth a pyrotechnic craze of colors and gave a 
frenzied life to shadows. Through this maze of illusions I followed 
the voice which was merely a vibrating echo of a voice, the 
counterpart in sound to the swirling sights around me. I climbed 
the last stairway to the door leading into the turret, listening to the 
reverberant words that sounded from the other side.
“Now the shadows are moving in the stars as they are moving 
within me, within all things. And their brilliance must reach 
throughout all things, all the places which are created according 
to the essence of these shadows and of ourselves . . . This house is 
an abomination, a vacuum and a void. Nothing must stand against . . . 
against . . .”
And with each repetition of this last word it seemed that a 
struggle was taking place and that the echoing alien voice was 
fading as the tones of Spare’s natural voice was gaining dom­
inance. Finally, Spare appeared to have resumed full possession of 
himself. Then there was a pause, a brief interim during which I 
considered a number of doubtful strategies, anxious not to misuse 
this moment of unknown and extravagant possibilities. Was it 
merely the end of life that faced one who remained in that room? 
Could the experience that had preceded the disappearance of that 
other visionary, under identical circumstances, perhaps be worth 
the strange price one would be asked to pay? No occult theories, no 
arcane analyses, could be of any use in making my decision, nor 
justly serve the sensations of those few seconds, when I stood 
gripping the handle of that door, waiting for the impulse or 
accident that would decide everything. All that existed for the 
moment was the irreducible certainty of nightmare.

IN THE SHADOW OF ANOTHER W ORLD
297
From the other side of the door there now came a low, echoing 
laughter, a sound which became louder as the laughing one 
approached. But I was not moved by this sound and did nothing 
except grip the door handle more tightly, dreaming of the great 
shadows in the stars, of the strange visions beyond the windows, 
and of an infinite catastrophe. Then I heard a soft scraping noise at 
my feet; looking down, I saw several small rectangles projecting 
from under the door, fanned out like a hand of cards. My only 
action was to stoop and retrieve one of them, to stare in endless 
wonderment at the mysterious symbol which decorated its face. I 
counted the others, realizing that none had been left attached to 
the windows within the room in the turret.
It was the thought of what eflect these windows might have, now 
that they had been stripped of their protective signs and stood in 
the full glare of starlight, that made me call out to Spare, even 
though I could not be sure that he still existed as his former self. But 
by then the hollow laughter had stopped, and I am sure that the 
last voice I heard was that of Raymond Spare. And when the voice 
began screaming -  the windows, it said, pulling me into the stars and 
shadows - I could not help trying to enter the room. But now that 
the impetus for this action had arrived, it proved to be useless for 
both Spare and myself. For the door was securely locked, and 
Spare’s voice was fading into nothingness.
I can only imagine what those last few moments were like 
among all the windows of that turret room and among alien 
orders of existence beyond all definition. That night, it was to 
Spare alone that such secrets were confided; he was the one to 
whom it fell - by some disaster or design - to be among the elect. 
Such privileged arcana, on this occasion at least, were not to be 
mine. Nevertheless, it seemed at the time that some fragment of 
this experience might be salvaged. And to do this, I believed, was a 
simple matter of abandoning the house.
My intuition was correct. For as soon as I had gone out into the 
night and turned back to face the house, I could see that its rooms 
were no longer empty, no longer the pristine apartments I had 
lamented earlier that evening. As I had thought, these windows 
were for looking in as well as out. And from where I stood, the 
sights were now all inside the house, which had become an edifice 
possessed by the festivities of another world. I remained there until 
morning, when a cold sunlight settled the motley phantasms of the 
night before.
Years later I had the opportunity to revisit the house. As 
expected, I found the place bare and abandoned: every one of

298
THOMAS LIGOTTI
its window frames was empty and there was not a sign of glass 
anywhere. In the nearby town I discovered that the house had also 
acquired a bad reputation. For years no one had gone near it. 
Wisely avoiding the enchantments of hell, the citizens of the town 
have kept to their own little streets of gently stirring trees and old 
silent houses. And what more can they do in the way of caution? 
How can they know what it is their houses are truly nestled 
among? They cannot see, nor even wish to see, that world of 
shadows with which they consort every moment of their brief and 
innocent lives. But often, perhaps during the visionary time of 
twilight, I am sure they have sensed it.

THE COCOONS
E
arly one morning, hours before sunrise, I was awakened by Dr. 
Dublanc. He was standing at the foot of my bed, lightly 
tugging on the covers. For a moment I was convinced, in m
quasi-somnolent state, that a small animal was prancing about on 
the mattress, performing some nocturnal ritual unknown to higher 
forms of life. Then I saw a gloved hand twitching in the glow of the 
streetlight outside my window. Finally I identified the silhouette, 
shaped by a hat and overcoat, of Dr. Dublanc.
I switched on the bedside lamp and sat up to face the well- 
known intruder. “What’s wrong?” I asked as if in protest.
“My apologies,” he said in a polite yet unapologetic tone. 
“There is someone I want you to meet. I think it might be 
beneficial for you.”
“If that’s what you say. But can’t it wait? I haven’t been sleeping 
well as it is. Better than anyone you should know that.”
“Of course I know. I also know other things,” he asserted, 
betraying his annoyance. “The gentleman I want to introduce to 
you will be leaving the country very soon, so there is a question of 
timing.”
“All the same . . .”
“Yes, I know -  your nervous condition. Here, take these.”
Dr. Dublanc placed two egg-shaped pills in the palm of my 
hand. I put them to my lips and then swallowed a half-glass of 
water that was on the nightstand. I set down the empty glass next 
to my alarm clock, which emitted a soft grinding noise due to some 
unknown mutations of its internal mechanism. My eyes became 
fixed by the slow even movement of the second hand, but Dr. 
Dublanc, in a quietly urgent voice, brought me out of my trance. 
“We should really be going. I have a taxi waiting outside.”
So I hurried, thinking that I would end up being charged for this 
excursion, cab fare and all.
Dr. Dublanc had left the taxi standing in the alley behind my 
apartment building. Its headlights beamed rather weakly in the 
blackness, scarcely guiding us as we approached the vehicle. Side

300
THOMAS LIGOTTI
by side, the doctor and I proceeded over uneven pavement and 
through blotched vapors emerging from the fumaroles of several 
sewer covers. But I could see the moon shining between the close 
rooftops, and I thought that it subtly shifted phases before my eyes, 
bloating a bit into fullness. The doctor caught me staring.
“It’s not going haywire up there, if that’s what is bothering 
you.”
“But it seemed to be changing.”
With a growl of exasperation, the doctor pulled me after him 
into the cab.
The driver appeared to have been stilled into a state of 
dormancy. Yet Dr. Dublanc was able to evoke a response when 
he called out an address to the hack, who turned his thin rodent 
face toward the back seat and glared briefly. For a time we sat in 
silence as the taxi proceeded through a monotonous passage of 
unpeopled avenues. At that hour the world on the other side of my 
window seemed to be no more than a mass of shadows wavering at 
a great distance. The doctor touched my arm and said, “Don’t 
worry if the pills I gave you seem to have no immediate effect.”
“I trust your judgement,” I said, only to receive a doubtful 
glance from the doctor. In order to revive my credibility, I told 
him what was actually on my mind: the matter of who I would be 
meeting, and why.
“A former patient of mine,” he answered bluntly, for it was 
apparent that at this point he was prepared to assume an open 
manner with me. “Not to say that some unfortunate aspects do not 
still exist in his case. For certain reasons I will be introducing him 
to you as ‘Mr. Catch’, though he’s also a doctor of sorts - a brilliant 
scientist, in fact. But what I want you to see are just some films he 
has made in the course of his work. They are quite remarkable. Not 
to deny those unfortunate aspects I mentioned . . . yet very 
intriguing. And possibly beneficial -  to you, I mean. Possibly 
most beneficial. And that’s all I can say at the moment.”
I nodded as if in comprehension of this disclosure. Then I 
noticed how far we had gone, almost to the opposite end of the 
city, if that was possible in what seemed a relatively short period of 
time. (I had forgotten to wear my watch, and this negligence 
somewhat aggravated my lack of orientation.) The district in 
which we were now traveling was of the lowest order, a landscape 
without pattern or substance, especially as I viewed it by moon­
light.There might be an open field heaped with debris, a devastated 
plain where bits of glass and scraps of metal glittered, though

THE COCOONS
301
perhaps a solitary house remained in this wasteland, an empty 
skeletal structure scraped of its flesh. And then, turning a corner, 
one left behind this lunar spaciousness and entered a densely 
tangled nest of houses, the dwarfish and the great all tightly 
nestled together and all eaten away, disfigured. Even as I watched 
them through the taxi’s windows they appeared to be carrying on 
their corruption, mutating in the dull light of the moon. Roofs and 
chimneys elongated toward the stars, dark bricks multiplied and 
bulged like tumors upon the facades of houses, entire streets twisted 
themselves along some unearthly design. Although a few windows 
were filled with light, however sickly, the only human being I saw 
was a derelict crumpled at the base of a traffic sign.
“Sorry, doctor, but this may be too much.”
“Just hold on to yourself,” he said, “we’re almost there. Driver, 
pull into that alley behind those houses.”
The taxi joggled as we made our way through the narrow 
passage. On either side of us were high wooden fences beyond 
which rose so many houses of such impressive height and bulk, 
though of course they were still monuments to decay. The cab’s 
headlights were barely up to the task of illuminating the cramped 
little alley, which seemed to become ever narrower the further we 
proceeded. Suddenly the driver jerked us to a stop to avoid 
running over an old man slouched against the fence, an empty 
bottle lying at his side.
“This is where we get out,” said Dr. Dublanc. “Wait here for us, 
driver.”
As we emerged from the taxi I pulled at the doctor’s sleeve, 
whispering about the expense of the fare. He replied in a loud 
voice, “You should worry more about getting a taxi to take us back 
home. They keep their distance from this neighborhood and rarely 
answer the calls they receive to come in here. Isn’t that true, 
driver?” But the man had returned to that dormant state in which 
I first saw him. “Come on,” said the doctor. “He’ll wait for us. 
This way.”
Dr. Dublanc pushed back a section of the fence that formed a 
kind of loosely hinged gate, closing it carefully behind us after we 
passed through the opening. On the other side was a small 
backyard, actually a miniature dumping ground where shadows 
bulged with refuse. And before us, I assumed, stood the house of 
Mr. Catch. It seemed very large, with an incredible number of 
bony peaks and dormers outlined against the sky, and even a 
weathervane in some vague animal-shape that stood atop a ruined 
turret grazed by moonlight. But although the moon was as bright

302
THOMAS LIGOTTI
as before, it appeared to be considerably thinner, as if it had been 
worn down just like everything else in that neighborhood.
“It hasn’t altered in the least,” the doctor assured me. He was 
holding open the back door of the house and gesturing for me to 
approach.
“Perhaps no one’s home,” I suggested.
“Not at all - the door’s unlocked. You see how he’s expecting 
us?”“There don’t appear to be any lights in use.”
“Mr. Catch likes to conserve on certain expenses. A minor 
mania of his. But in other ways he’s quite extravagant. And by 
no means is he a poor man. Watch yourself on the porch - some of 
these boards are not what they once were.”
As soon as I was standing by the doctor’s side he removed a 
flashlight from the pocket of his overcoat, shining a path into the 
dark interior of the house. Once inside, that yellowish swatch of 
illumination began flitting around in the blackness. It settled 
briefly in a cobwebbed corner of the ceiling, then ran down a 
blank battered wall and jittered along warped floor moldings. 
For a moment it revealed two suitcases, quite well used, at the 
bottom of a stairway. It slid smoothly up the stairway banister 
and flew straight to the floors above, where we heard some 
scraping sounds, as if an animal with long-nailed paws was 
moving about.
“Does Mr. Catch keep a pet?” I asked in a low voice.
“Why shouldn’t he? But I don’t think we’ll find him up there.” 
We went deeper into the house, passing through many rooms 
which fortunately were unobstructed by furniture. Sometimes we 
crushed bits of broken glass underfoot; once I inadvertently kicked 
an empty bottle and sent it clanging across a bare floor. Reaching 
the far side of the house, we entered a long hallway flanked by 
several doors. All of them were closed and behind some of them we 
heard sounds similar to those being made on the second floor. We 
also heard footsteps slowly ascending a stairway. Then the last 
door at the end of the hallway opened, and a watery light pushed 
back some of the shadows ahead of us. A round-bodied little man 
was standing in the light, lazily beckoning to us.
“You’re late, you’re very late,” he chided while leading us down 
into the cellar. His voice was high-pitched yet also quite raspy. “I 
was just about to leave.”
“My apologies,” said Dr. Dublanc, who sounded entirely 
sincere on this occasion. “Mr. Catch, allow me to introduce —” 
“Never mind that Mr. Catch nonsense. You know well enough

TH E COCOONS
303
what things are like for me, don’t you, doctor? So let’s get started, 
I’m on a schedule now.”
In the cellar we paused amid the quivering light of candles, 
dozens of them positioned high and low, melting upon a shelf or an 
old crate or right on the filth-covered floor. Even so, there was a 
certain lack of definition among the surrounding objects, but I 
could see that an old-fashioned film projector had been set up on a 
table toward the center of the room, and a portable movie screen 
stood by the opposite wall. The projector was plugged into what 
appeared to be a small electrical generator humming on the floor.
“I think there are some stools or whatnot you can sit on,” said 
Mr. Catch as he threaded the film around the spools of the 
projector. Then for the first time he spoke to me directly. “I’m 
not sure how much the doctor has explained about what I’m going 
to show you. Probably very little.”
“Yes, and deliberately so,” interrupted Dr. Dublanc. “If you 
just roll the film I think my purpose will be served, with or without 
explanations. What harm can it do?”
Mr. Catch made no reply. After blowing out some of the candles 
to darken the room sufficiently, he switched on the projector, 
which was a rather noisy mechanism. I worried that whatever 
dialogue or narration the film might contain would be drowned 
out between the whirring of the projector and the humming of the 
generator. But I soon realized that this was a silent film, a 
cinematic document that in every aspect of its production was 
thoroughly primitive, from its harsh light and coarse photographic 
texture to its nearly unintelligible scenario.
It seemed to serve as a visual record of scientific experiment, a 
laboratory demonstration in fact. The setting, nevertheless, was 
anything but clinical - a bare wall in a cellar which in some ways 
resembled, yet was not identical to, the one where I was viewing 
this film. And the subject was human: a shabby, unshaven, and 
unconscious derelict who had been propped up against a crude 
grayish wall. Not too many moments passed before the man began 
to stir. But his movements were not those of awakening from a deep 
stupor; they were only spasmodic twitchings of some energy which 
appeared to inhabit the old tramp. A torn pant leg wiggled for a 
second, then his chest heaved, as if with an incredible sigh. His left 
arm, no his right arm, flew up in the air and immediately 
collapsed. Soon his head began to wobble and it kept on wob­
bling, even though its owner remained in a state of profound 
obliviousness.
Something was making its way through the derelict’s scalp,

304
THOMAS LIGOTTI
rustling among the long greasy locks of an unsightly head. Part of it 
finally poked upwards -  a thin sticklike thing. More of them 
emerged, dark wiry appendages that were bristling and bending 
and reaching for the outer world. At the end of each was a pair of 
slender snapping pincers. What ultimately broke through that 
shattered skull, pulling itself out with a wriggling motion of its 
many newborn arms, was approximately the size and proportions 
of a spider monkey. It had tiny translucent wings which fluttered a 
few times, glistening but useless, and was quite black, as if charred. 
Actually the creature seemed to be in an emaciated condition. 
When it turned its head toward the camera, it stared into the lens 
with malicious eyes and seemed to be chattering with its beaked 
mouth.
I whispered to Dr. Dublanc: “Please, I’m afraid that —”
“Exactly,” he hissed back at me. “You are always afraid of the 
least upset in the order of things. You need to face certain realities 
so that you may free yourself of them.”
Now it was my turn to give the doctor a skeptical glance. Yet I 
certainly realized that he was practicing something other than 
facile therapeutics. And even then our presence in that cellar - that 
cold swamp of shadows in which candles flickered like fireflies - 
seemed to be as much for Dr. Dublanc’s benefit as it was for mine, 
if “benefit” is the proper word in this case.
“Those pills you gave me . . . ”
“Shhh. Watch the film.”
It was almost finished. After the creature had hatched from its 
strange egg, it proceeded very rapidly to consume the grubby 
derelict, leaving only a collection of bones attired in cast-off 
clothes. Picked perfectly clean, the skull leaned wearily to one 
side. And the creature, which earlier had been so emaciated, had 
grown rather plump with its feast, becoming bloated and meaty 
like an overfed dog. In the final sequence, a net was tossed into the 
scene, capturing the gigantic vermin and dragging it off camera. 
Then whiteness filled the screen and the film was flapping on its 
reel.“Apparently Mr. Catch has left us,” said the doctor, noticing 
that I remained under the spell of what I had just seen. Taking 
advantage of the moment, he tried to lend a certain focus or 
coloration to this experience. “You must understand,” he con­
tinued, “that the integrity of material forms is only a prejudice, at 
most a point of view. This is not to mention the substance of those 
forms, which is an even more dubious state of affairs. That the so- 
called anatomy of a human being might burst forth as a fantastic

TH E COCOONS
305
insect should be no cause for consternation. I know that it may 
seem that in the past I’ve attempted to actually bolster your 
prejudices about a clockwork world of sunrise schedules and lunar 
routines. But this insistence has only had a paradoxical effect, just 
like certain drugs that in some people induce a reaction quite the 
opposite of the norm. All of my assurances have made you more 
confirmed in your suspicions that things are not bolted down, so to 
speak. And no more is that thing which we call the mind. We can 
both learn a great deal from Mr. Catch. Of course, I still recognize 
that there remain some unfortunate aspects to his case - there was 
only so much I could do for him - but nonetheless I think that he 
has gained rare and invaluable knowledge, the consequences 
notwithstanding.
“His research had taken him into areas where, how should I say, 
where the shapes and levels of phenomena, the multiple planes of 
natural existence, revealed their ability to establish new relation­
ships with one another ... to become interconnected, as it were, in 
ways that were never apparent. At some point everything became 
a blur for him, a sort of pandemonium of forces, a phantasmagoria 
of possibilities which he eagerly engaged. We can have no idea of 
the tastes and temptations that may emerge or develop in the 
course of such work ... a curious hedonism that could not be 
controlled. Oh, the vagaries of omnipotence, breeder of indul­
gence. Well, Mr. Catch retreated in panic from his own powers, 
yet he could not put the pieces back as they had been: unheard of 
habits and responses had already ingrained themselves into his 
system, seemingly forever. The worst sort of slavery, no doubt, but 
how persuasively he spoke of the euphorias he had known, the 
infinitely diverse sensations beyond all common understanding. It 
was just this understanding that I required in order to free him of a 
life that, in its own fashion, had become as abysmal and proble­
matic as your own -  except he is at the opposite pole. Some middle 
ground must be established, some balance. How well I understand 
that now! This is why I have brought you two together. This is the 
only reason, however it may seem to you.”
“It seems to me,” I replied, “that Mr. Catch is no longer 
available.”
Dr. Dublanc emitted the shadow of a laugh. “Oh, he’s still in the 
house. You can be sure of that. Let’s take a look upstairs.”
He was, in fact, not far at all. Stepping into that hallway of 
closed doors at the top of the cellar stairs, we saw that one of 
those doors was now partially open and the room beyond it was 
faintly aglow. Without announcing us, Dr. Dublanc slowly

3 ° 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
pushed back the door until we could both see what had 
happened inside.
It was a small unfurnished room with a bare wooden floor upon 
which a candle had been fixed with its own drippings. The 
candlelight shone dimly on the full face of Mr. Catch, who seemed 
to have collapsed in a back corner of the room, lying somewhat 
askew. He was sweating, though it was cold in the room, and his 
eyes were half-closed in a kind of languorous exhaustion. But 
something was wrong with his mouth: it seemed to be muddied 
and enlarged, sloppily painted into a clown’s oversized grin. On 
the floor beside him were, to all appearances, the freshly ravaged 
remains of one of those creatures in the film.
“You made me wait too long!” he suddenly shouted, opening his 
eyes fully and straightening himself up for a moment before his 
posture crumbled once again. He then repeated this outburst: 
“You couldn’t help me and now you make me wait too long.” 
“It was in order to help you that I came here,” the doctor said to 
him, yet all the time fixing his eyes on the mutilated carcass on the 
floor. When he saw that I had observed his greedy stare he 
regained himself. “I’m trying to help both of you the only way 
you can be helped. Show him, Mr. Catch, show him how you 
breed those amazing individuals.”
Mr. Catch groped in his pants pocket, pulled out a large 
handkerchief, and wiped off his mouth. He was smiling a little 
idiotically, as if intoxicated, and worked himself to his feet. His 
body now seemed even more swollen and bulbous than before, 
really not quite human in its proportions. After replacing his 
handkerchief in one pocket, he reached down into the other, 
feeling around for some moments. “It’s so simple,” he explained 
in a voice that had become placid. And it was with a kind of giddy 
pride that he finally said, “Oh, here they are,” and held out his 
open hand toward me. In the thick pad of his palm I could see two 
tiny objects that were shaped like eggs.
I turned abruptly to the doctor. “The pills you gave me.”
“It was the only thing that could be done for you. I’ve tried so 
hard to help you both.”
“I had a suspicion,” said Mr. Catch, now reviving himself from 
his stupefaction. “I should never have brought you into this. Don’t 
you realize that it’s difficult enough without involving your own 
patients. The derelicts are one thing, but this is quite another. 
Well, my suitcases are packed. It’s your operation now, doctor. Let 
me by, time to go.”
Mr. Catch maneuvered himself from the room, and a few

THE COCOONS
307
moments later the sound of a door being slammed echoed 
throughout the house. The doctor kept close watch on me, wait­
ing for some reaction, I suppose. Yet he was also listening very 
intently to certain sounds emanating from the rooms around us. 
The noise of restless skittering was everywhere.
“You understand, don’t you?” asked the doctor. “Mr. Catch 
isn’t the only one who has waited too long . .. far too long. I 
thought by now the pills would have had their effect.”
I went into my pocket and removed the two little eggs which I 
had failed to swallow earlier. “I can’t claim that I ever had much 
faith in your methods,” I said. Then I tossed the pills at Dr. 
Dublanc who, speechless, caught them. “You won’t mind if I 
return home by myself.”
Indeed, he was relieved to see me go. As I traced my way back 
through the house I heard him running about and opening door 
after door, saying, “There you are, you beauties. There you are.” 
Although the doctor himself was now hopeless, I think that in 
some manner he had effected a cure in my case, however 
ephemeral it may have been. For during those first few moments 
on that hazy morning, when the taxi edged out of the alley and 
passed through that neighborhood of gnawed houses, I felt myself 
attain the middle ground Dr. Dublanc spoke of -  the balancing 
point between an anxious flight from the abyss and the temptation 
to plunge into it. There was a great sense of escape, as if I could 
exist serenely outside the grotesque ultimatums of creation, an 
entranced spectator casting a clinical gaze at the chaotic tumult 
both around and within him.
But the feeling soon evaporated. “Could you go a little faster?” I 
said to the driver when it began to seem to me that we were making 
no progress in leaving that district behind: things again appeared 
to be changing, ready to burst forth from their sagging cocoons and 
take on uncertain forms. Even the pale morning sun seemed to be 
wavering from its proper proportions.
At the end of the ride, I was content to pay the extraordinary 
fare and return to my bed. The following day I started looking for 
a new doctor.

THE NIGHT SCHOOL
I
nstructor Carniero was holding class once again.
I discovered this fact on my return from a movie theater. It 
was late and I thought, “Why not take a short cut across the 
grounds of the school?” How much trouble this alternate route 
would save me was not precisely clear. Nevertheless, I suddenly felt 
that if I left the street I was walking along, which was lighted well 
enough, and proceeded across the grounds of the school, which 
were vast and dark, I would truly be taking a short cut. Besides, the 
night was actually quite cold, and when I looked down the front of 
my overcoat I saw that the single remaining button holding it 
together had become loose and possibly would not last much 
longer. So a short cut, taken on a very cold night, appeared 
entirely in order. In fact, any other course of action seemed 
unthinkable to me.
I entered the school grounds as if they were only a great park 
located in the midst of surrounding streets. The trees were set close 
and from the edge of the grounds I could not see the school hidden 
within them. Look up here, I almost heard someone say to me. I did 
look and saw that the branches overhead were without leaves; 
through their intertwining mesh the sky was fully visible. How 
bright and dark it was at the same time. Bright with a high, full 
moon shining among the spreading clouds, and dark with the 
shadows mingling within those clouds - a slowly flowing mass of 
mottled shapes, a kind of unclean outpouring from the black 
sewers of space.
I noticed that in one place these clouds were leaking down into 
the trees, trickling in a narrow rivulet across the wall of the night. 
But it was really smoke, dense and dirty, rising up to the sky. A 
short distance ahead, and well into the thickly wooded grounds of 
the school, I saw the spastic flames of a small fire among the trees. 
By the smell, I guessed that someone was burning refuse. Then I 
could see the misshapen metal drum spewing smoke, and the 
figures standing behind the firelight became visible to me, as I 
was to them.

THE NIGHT SCHOOL
3 0 9
“Class has resumed,” one of them called out. “He’s come back 
after all.”
I knew these were others from the school, but their faces would 
not hold steady in the flickering light of the fire that warmed them. 
They seemed to be smudged by the smoke, greased by the odorous 
garbage burning in that dark metal drum, its outer surface almost 
glowing from the heat and flaking off in places.
“Look there,” said another member of the group, pointing 
deeper into the school grounds. The massive outline of a building 
occupied the distance, a few of its windows sending a dim light 
through the trees. From the roof of the building a number of 
smokestacks stood out against the pale sky.
A wind rose up, droning loudly around us and breathing a noisy 
life into the fire in the decaying metal drum. I tried to shout above 
the confusion of sounds. “Was there an assignment?” I cried out. 
When I repeated the question, they only seemed to shrug. I left 
them hunched around the fire, assuming they would be along. The 
wind died and I could hear someone say the word “maniac,” 
which was not spoken, I realized, either to me or about me.
Instructor Carniero, in his person, was rather vague to my mind. 
I had not been in the class very long before some disease - a terribly 
serious affliction, one of my classmates hinted - had caused his 
absence. So what remained, for me, was no more than the image of 
a slender gentleman in a dark suit, a gentleman with a darkish 
complexion and a voice thick with a foreign accent. “He’s a 
Portuguese,” one of the other students told me. “But he’s lived 
almost everywhere.” And I recalled a particular refrain spoken by 
that soft and heavy voice. “Look up here,” he would say, usually 
singling out one of us who had not been attending to those 
diagrams he was incessantly creating on the blackboard. A few 
members of the class never needed to be called to attention in this 
manner, a certain small group who had been longtime students of 
the instructor and without distraction scrutinized the unceasing 
series of diagrams he would design upon the blackboard and then 
erase, only to construct again, with slight variation, a moment 
later.Although I cannot claim that these often complex diagrams 
were not directly related to our studies, there were always extra­
neous elements within them which I never bothered to transcribe 
into my own notes for the class. They were a strange array of 
abstract symbols, frequently geometric figures altered in some way: 
various polygons with asymmetrical sides, trapezoids whose sides 
did not meet, semicircles with double or triple slashes across them,

3i°
THOMAS LIGOTTI
and many other examples of a deformed or corrupted scientific 
notation. These signs appeared to be primitive in essence, more 
relevant to magic than mathematics. The instructor marked them 
in an extremely rapid hand upon the blackboard, as if they were 
the words of his natural language. In most cases they formed a 
border around the perimeter of a strictly technical diagram, 
enclosing it and sometimes, it seemed, transforming its sense. 
Once a student actually questioned him regarding this apparently 
superfluous embellishment of the diagrams. Why did Instructor 
Carniero subject us to these bewildering symbols? “Because,” he 
answered, “a true instructor must share everything.”
As I proceeded across the grounds of the school, I felt certain 
changes had occurred since I was last there. The trees looked 
different somehow, even in the faint moonlight which shone 
through their bare branches. They had become so much thinner 
than I remembered, emaciated and twisted like broken bones that 
had never healed properly. Their bark seemed to be peeling away 
in soft layers, because it was not only fallen leaves I trudged 
through on my way to the school building, but also something like 
dark rags, strips of decomposed material. Even the clouds upon 
which the moon cast its glow were thin or rotted, unraveled by 
some process of degeneration in the highest atmosphere of the 
school grounds. There was also a scent of corruption, an enchant­
ing fragrance really -  like the mulchy rot of autumn or early spring
- that I thought was emerging from the earth as I disturbed the 
strange debris strewn over it. But I noticed that this odor became 
more pungent as I approached the yellowish light of the school, 
and strongest as I finally reached the old building itself.
It was a four-story structure of dark scabby bricks that had been 
patched together in another era, a time so different that it might be 
imagined as belonging to an entirely alien history, one composed 
solely of nights well advanced, an after-hours history. How difficult 
it was to think of this place as if it had been constructed in the usual 
manner. Far easier to credit some fantastic legend that it had been 
erected by a consort of demons during the perpetual night of its 
past, and that its materials were absconded from other architec­
tures, all of them defunct: ruined factories, crumbling prisons, 
abandoned orphanages, mausoleums long out of use. The school 
was indeed a kind of freakish growth in a dumping ground, a 
blossom of the cemetery or the cesspool. Here it was that Instructor 
Carniero, who had been everywhere, held his class.
On the lower floors of the building a number of lights were in 
use, weak as guttering candles. The highest story was blacked out,

TH E NIGHT SCHOOL
311
and I noticed that many of the windows were broken. Never­
theless, there was sufficient light to guide me into the school, even if 
the main hallway could hardly be seen to its end. And its walls 
appeared to be tarred over with something which exuded the same 
smell that filled the night outside the school. Without touching 
these walls, I used them to navigate my way into the school, 
following several of the greater and lesser hallways that burrowed 
throughout the building. Room after room passed on either side of 
me, their doorways filled with darkness or sealed by wide wooden 
doors whose coarse surfaces were pocked and peeling. Eventually I 
found a classroom where a light was on, though it was no brighter 
than the swarthy illumination of the hallway.
When I entered the room I saw that only some of the lamps were 
functioning, leaving certain areas in darkness while others were 
smeared with the kind of greasy glow peculiar to old paintings in 
oil. A few students were seated at desks here and there, isolated 
from one another and silent. By no means was there a full class, and 
no instructor stood at the lectern. The blackboard displayed no 
new diagrams but only the blurred remnants of past lessons.
I took a desk near the door, looking at none of the others as they 
did not look at me. In one of the pockets of my overcoat I turned 
up a little stub of a pencil but could find nothing on which to take 
notes. Without any dramatic gestures, I scanned the room for some 
kind of paper. The visible areas of the room featured various items 
of debris without offering anything that would allow me to 
transcribe the complex instructions and diagrams demanded by 
the class. I was reluctant to make a physical search of the shelves 
set into the wall beside me because they were very deep and from 
them drifted that same heady fragrance of decay.
Two rows to my left sat a man with several thick notebooks 
stacked on his desk. His hands were resting lightly on these 
notebooks, and his spectacled eyes were fixed on the empty 
lectern, or perhaps on the blackboard beyond. The space between 
the rows of desks was very narrow, so I was able to lean across the 
unoccupied desk that separated us and speak to this man who 
seemed to have a surplus of paper on which one could take notes, 
transcribe diagrams, and, in short, do whatever scribbling was 
demanded by the instructor of the class.
“Pardon me,” I whispered to the staring figure. In a single, 
sudden movement, his head turned to face me. I remembered his 
pocked complexion, which had obviously grown worse since our 
class last met, and the eyes that squinted behind heavy lenses. “Do 
you have any paper you could share with me?” I asked, and was

312
THOMAS LIGOTTI
somehow surprised when he shifted his head toward his notebooks 
and began leafing through the pages of the topmost one. As he 
performed this action, I explained that I was unprepared for the 
class, that only a short time before did I learn it had resumed. This 
happened entirely by chance. I was coming home from a movie 
theater and decided to take a short cut across the school grounds.
By the time I was finished illuminating my situation, the other 
student was searching through his last notebook, the pages of 
which were as solidly covered with jottings and diagrams as the 
previous ones. I observed that his notes were different from those I 
had been taking for Instructor Carniero’s course. They were far 
more detailed and scrupulous in their transcriptions of those 
strange geometric figures which I considered only as decorative 
intrusions in the instructor’s diagrams. Some of the other students’ 
notebook pages were wholly given over to rendering these figures 
and symbols to the exclusion of the diagrams themselves.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I don’t seem to have any paper I could 
share with you.”
“Well, could you tell me if there was an assignment?”
“That’s very possible. You can never tell with this instructor. 
He’s a Portuguese, you know. But he’s been all over and knows 
everything. I think he’s out of his mind. The kind of thing he’s been 
teaching should have gotten him into trouble somewhere, and 
probably did. Not that he ever cared what happened to him, or to 
anyone else. That is, those that he could influence, and some more 
than others. The things he said to us. The lessons in measurement 
of cloacal forces. Time as a flow of sewage. The excrement of space, 
scatology of creation. The voiding of the self. The whole filthy 
integration of things and the nocturnal product, as he called it. 
Drowning in the pools of night . . .”
“I’m afraid I don’t recall those concepts,” I interrupted.
“You were new to the class. To tell the truth, it didn’t seem you 
were paying attention. But soon enough he would have gotten 
through to you. Told you to look up there,” he said, pointing to the 
blackboard. “You remember that much, don’t you? He was very 
captivating, the instructor. And always ready for anything.”
“I thought that he recovered from the sickness that caused his 
absence, that he was back teaching.”
“Oh, he’s back. He was always ready. But somewhere he must 
have made some enemies. Did you know that the class is now being 
held in another part of the school? I couldn’t tell you where, since I 
haven’t been with Instructor Carniero as long as some of the 
others. To tell the truth, I don’t care where it’s being held. Isn’t it

TH E NIGHT SCHOOL
313
enough that we’re here, in this room?”
I had little idea how to answer this question and understood 
almost nothing of what the man had been trying to explain to me. 
It did seem clear, or at least very possible, that the class had moved 
to a different part of the school. But I had no reason to think that 
the other students seated elsewhere in the room would be any more 
helpful on this point than the one who had now turned his 
spectacled face away from me. Wherever the class was being 
held, I was still in need of paper on which to take notes, transcribe 
diagrams, and so forth. This could not be accomplished by staying 
in that room where everyone and everything was degenerating 
into the surrounding darkness.
For a time I wandered about the hallways on the main floor of 
the school, keeping clear of the walls which certainly were 
thickening with a dark substance, an odorous sap with the 
intoxicating potency of a thousand molting autumns or the 
melting soil of spring. The stuff was running from top to bottom 
down the wails, leaking from above and dulling the already dim 
light in the hallways.
I began to hear echoing voices coming from a distant part of the 
school I had never visited before. No words were decipherable, but 
it sounded as if the same ones were being repeated in a more or less 
constant succession of cries that rang hollow in the halls. I followed 
them and along the way met up with someone walking slowly from 
the opposite direction. He was dressed in dirty workclothes and 
almost blended in with the shadows which were so abundant in the 
school that night. I stopped him as he was about to shuffle straight 
past me. Turning an indifferent gaze in my direction was a pair of 
yellowish eyes set in a thin face with a coarse, patchy complexion. 
The man scratched at the left side of his forehead and some dry 
flakes of skin fell away. I asked him:
“Could you tell me where Instructor Carniero is holding class 
tonight?”
He looked at me for some moments, and then pointed a finger at 
the ceiling. “Up there,” he said.
“On which floor?”
“The top one,” he answered, as if a little amazed at my 
ignorance.
“There are a lot of rooms on that floor,” I said.
“And every one of them his. Nothing to be done about that. But 
I have to keep the rest of this place in some kind of condition. I 
don’t see how I can do that with him up there.” The man glanced 
around at the stained walls and let out a single, wheezing laugh.

3*4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“It only gets worse. Starts to get to you if you go up any further. 
Listen. Hear the rest of them?” Then he groaned with disgust and 
went on his way. But before he was entirely out of view he looked 
over his shoulder and shouted to me. “There’s another one you 
might see. A new one. Just so you’ll know.”
But by that point I felt that any knowledge I had amassed - 
whether or not it concerned Instructor Carniero and his night 
classes - was being taken away from me piece by piece. The man in 
dirty workclothes had directed me to the top floor of the school. Yet 
I remembered seeing no light on that floor when I first approached 
the building. The only thing that seemed to occupy that floor was 
an undiluted darkness, a darkness far greater than the night itself, a 
consolidated darkness, something clotted with its own density. 
“The nocturnal product,” I could hear the spectacled student 
reminding me in a hollow voice. “Drowning in the pools of night.” 
What could I know about the ways of the school? I had not been 
in attendance very long, not nearly long enough, it seemed. I felt 
myself a stranger to my fellow students, especially since they 
revealed themselves to be divided in their ranks, as though among 
the initiatory degrees of a secret society. I did not know the 
coursework in the way some of the others seemed to know it 
and in the spirit that the instructor intended it to be known. My 
turn had not yet come to be commanded by Instructor Carniero to 
look up at the hieroglyphs of the blackboard and comprehend 
them fully. So I did not understand the doctrines of a truly septic 
curriculum, the science of a spectral pathology, philosophy of 
absolute disease, the metaphysics of things sinking into a common 
disintegration or rising together, flowing together, in their dark 
rottenness. Above all, I did not know the instructor himself: the 
places he had been . . . the things he had seen and done . . . the 
experiences he had embraced . . . the laws he had ignored . . . the 
troubles he had caused . . . the enemies he had made. The fate that 
he had incurred, gladly, upon himself and others. And of course I 
could not know anything of that “new one” about whom the man 
in the dirty workclothes had warned me, the one who may have 
also been an instructor, after a fashion - the instructor’s instructor. . . 
and his accommodating enemy.
I was close to a shaft of stairways leading to the upper floors of 
the school. The voices became louder, though not more distinct, as 
I approached the stairwell. The first flight of stairs seemed very 
long and steep and badly defined in the dim light of the hallway. 
The landing at the top of the stairs was barely visible for the poor 
light and unreflecting effluvia that here moved even more thickly

TH E NIGHT SCHOOL
315
down the walls. But it did not appear to possess any real substance, 
no sticky surface or viscous texture as one might have supposed, 
only a kind of density like heavy smoke, filthy smoke from some 
smoldering source of expansive corruption. It carried the scent of 
corruption as well as the sight, only now it was more potent with 
the nostalgic perfume of autumn decay or the feculent muskiness of 
a spring thaw.
As I reached the first landing of the stairway, I nearly over­
looked the figure standing motionless in a corner. This was 
certainly the newcomer to the school whose presence had been 
foretold to me. He was almost naked and his skin was of a darkness, 
an excremental darkness, that made him blend into the obscurity 
of the stairwell. His face was leathery and deeply lined, incredibly 
old, while the hair surrounding it was stringy and had been hung 
with objects that looked like tiny bones and teeth. They were tied 
up within long strands of hair and jangled in the darkness. Around 
the neck of this figure was a rope or thin strap which was strung 
with little skulls, dismembered claws, and whole withered bodies of 
creatures I could not name. Although I stood for some moments 
quite near to the ancient savage, he took no notice of me. His large, 
fierce eyes stared upwards, fixed upon the heights of the stairwell. 
His thin peeling lips were alive with a silent language, mouthing 
words without sound. But I could not read his speech and so 
turned away from him.
I climbed another flight of stairs, which ascended in the 
opposite direction from the first, and reached the second floor. 
Each of the four stories of the school had two flights of stairs 
going in opposite directions between them, with a narrow 
landing that intervened before one could complete the ascent 
to a new floor. The second floor was not as well-lighted as the 
one below, and the walls there were even worse: their surface had 
been wholly obscured by that smoky blackness which seeped 
down from above, the blackness so richly odorous with the offal 
of worlds in decline or perhaps with the dark compost of those 
about to be born, the great rottenness in which all things are 
founded, the fundament of wild disease.
On the stairs that led up to the third floor I saw the first of them
- a young man who was seated on the lower steps of this flight and 
who had been one of the instructor’s most assiduous students. He 
was absorbed in his own thoughts and did not acknowledge me 
until I spoke to him.
“ The class?” I said, stressing the words into a question.
He gazed at me calmly. “The instructor suffered a terrible

3 i6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
disease, a great disease.” This was all he said. Then he returned 
within himself and would not respond.
There were others, similarly positioned higher on the stairs or 
squatting on the landing. The voices were still echoing in the 
stairwell, chanting a blurred phrase in unison. But the voices did 
not belong to any of these students, who sat silent and entranced 
amid the litter of pages torn from their voluminous notebooks. 
Pieces of paper with strange symbols on them lay scattered 
everywhere like fallen leaves. They rustled as I walked through 
them toward the stairs leading to the highest story of the school.
The walls in the stairwell were now swollen with a blackness that 
was the very face of a plague -  pustulant, scabbed, and stinking 
terribly. It was reaching to the edges of the floor, where it drifted 
and churned like a black fog. Only in the moonlight that shone 
through a hallway window could I see anything of the third floor. I 
stopped there, for the stairs to the fourth were deep in blackness. 
Only a few faces rose above it and were visible in the moonlight. 
One of them was staring at me, and, without prompting, spoke.
“The instructor suffered a terrible disease. But he is holding class 
again. He could suffer anything and did not shun enemies. He had 
been everywhere. Now he is in a new place, somewhere he has not 
been.” The voice paused and the interval was filled by the many 
voices calling and crying from the total blackness that prevailed 
over the heights of the stairwell and buried everything beneath it 
like tightly packed earth in a grave. Then the single voice said: 
“The instructor died in the night. You see? He is with the night. 
You hear the voices? They are with him. All of them are with him 
and he is with the night. The night has spread itself within him, the 
disease of the night has spread its blackness. He who has been 
everywhere may go anywhere with the spreading disease of the 
night. Listen. The Portuguese is calling to us.”
I listened and finally the voices became clear. Look up here, they 
said. Look up here.
The fog of blackness had now unfurled down to me and lay 
about my feet, gathering there and rising. For a time I could not 
move or speak or form any thoughts. Inside me, everything was 
becoming black. The blackness was quivering inside me, quivering 
everywhere and making everything black. It was holding me, and 
the voices were saying to me, “Look up here, look up here.” And I 
began to look. But I was enduring something that I could never 
endure, that I was not prepared to endure. The blackness quiver­
ing inside me could not go on to its end. I could not remain where I 
was or look up to the place where the voices called out to me.

THE NIGHT SCHOOL
3*7
Then the blackness was no longer inside me, and I was no longer 
inside the school but outside of it, almost as if I had suddenly 
awakened there. Without looking back, I retraced my steps across 
the grounds of the school, forgetting about the short cut I had 
meant to take that night. I passed those students who were still 
standing around the fire burning in an old metal drum. They were 
feeding the bright flames with pages from their notebooks, pages 
scribbled to blackness with all those diagrams and freakish signs. 
Some of those among the group called out to me. “Did you see the 
Portuguese?” one of them shouted above the noise of the fire and 
the wind. “Did you hear anything about an assignment?” another 
voice cried out, and then I heard them all laughing among 
themselves as I made my way back to the streets I had left before 
entering the school grounds. I moved with such haste that the loose 
button on my overcoat finally came off by the time I reached the 
street outside the grounds of the school.
As I walked beneath the streetlights, I held the front of my 
overcoat together and tried to keep my eyes on the sidewalk before 
me. But I might have heard a voice bid me: “Look up here,” 
because I did look, if only for a moment. Then I saw the sky was 
clear of all clouds, and the full moon was shining in the black pool 
of space. It was shining bright and blurry, as if coated with a 
luminous mold, floating like a lamp in the great sewers of the night.

THE GLAMOUR
It had long been my practice to wander late at night and often to 
attend movie theaters at this time. But something else was 
involved on the night I went to that theater in a part of town I 
had never visited before. A new tendency, a mood or penchant 
formerly unknown to me, seemed to lead the way. How difficult to 
say anything precise about this mood that overcame me, because it 
seemed to belong to my surroundings as much as to my self. As I 
advanced farther into that part of town I had never visited before, 
my attention was drawn to a certain aspect of things - a fine aura 
of fantasy radiating from the most common sights, places and 
objects that were both bluffed and brightened as they projected 
themselves into my vision.
Despite the lateness of the hour, there was an active glow cast 
through many of the shop windows in that part of town. Along one 
particular avenue, the starless evening was glazed by these lights, 
these diamonds of plate glass set within old buildings of dark brick. 
I paused before the display window of a toy store and was 
entranced by a chaotic tableau of preposterous excitation. My 
eyes followed several things at once: the fated antics of mechanized 
monkeys that clapped tiny cymbals or somersaulted uncontrolla­
bly; the destined pirouettes of a music-box ballerina; the grotesque 
wobbling of a newly sprung jack-in-the-box. The inside of the store 
was a Christmas-tree clutter of merchandise receding into a 
background that looked shadowed and empty. An old man with 
a smooth pate and angular eyebrows stepped forward to the front 
window and began rewinding some of the toys to keep them in 
ceaseless gyration. While performing this task he suddenly looked 
up at me, his face expressionless.
I moved down the street, where other windows framed little 
worlds so strangely picturesque and so dreamily illuminated in the 
shabby darkness of that part of town. One of them was a bakery 
whose window display was a gallery of sculptured frosting, a winter 
landscape of swirling, drifting whiteness, of snowy rosettes and 
layers of icy glitter. At the center of the glacial kingdom was a pair

TH E GLAMOUR
3*9
of miniature people frozen atop a many-tiered wedding cake. But 
beyond the brilliant arctic scene I saw only the deep blackness of 
an establishment that kept short hours. Standing outside another 
window nearby, I was uncertain if the place was open for business 
or not. A few figures were positioned here and there within faded 
lighting reminiscent of an old photograph, though it seemed they 
were beings of the same kind as the window dummies of this store, 
which apparently trafficked in dated styles of clothing. Even the 
faces of the mannikins, as a glossy light fell upon them, wore the 
placidly enigmatic expressions of a different time.
But in fact there actually were several places doing business at 
that hour of the night and in that part of town, however scarce 
potential customers appeared to be on this particular street. I saw 
no one enter or exit the many doors along the sidewalk; a canvas 
awning that some proprietor had neglected to roll up for the night 
was flapping in the wind. Nevertheless, I did sense a certain vitality 
around me and felt the kind of acute anticipation that a child 
might experience at a carnival, where each lurid attraction incites 
fantastic speculations, while unexpected desires arise for something 
which has no specific qualities in the imagination yet seems to be 
only a few steps away. Thus my mood had not abandoned me but 
only grew stronger, a possessing impulse without object.
Then I saw the marquee for a movie theater, something I might 
easily have passed by. For the letters spelling out the name of the 
theater were broken and unreadable, while the title on the 
marquee was similarly damaged, as though stones had been 
thrown at it, a series of attempts made to efface the words that 
I finally deciphered. The feature being advertised that night was 
called The Glamour.
When I reached the front of the theater I found that the row of 
doors forming the entrance had been barricaded by crosswise 
planks with notices posted upon them warning that the building 
had been condemned. This action was apparently taken some time 
ago, judging by the weathered condition of the boards that 
blocked my way and the dated appearance of the notices stuck 
upon them. In any case, the marquee was still illuminated, if 
rather poorly. So I was not surprised to see a double-faced sign 
propped up on the sidewalk, an inconspicuous little board that 
read: ENTRANCE TO THE THEATER. Beneath these words 
was an arrow pointing into an alleyway which separated the 
theater from the remaining buildings on the block. Peeking into 
this dark opening, this aperture in the otherwise solid facade of 
that particular street, I saw only a long, narrow corridor with a

320
THOMAS LIGOTTI
single light set far into its depths. The light shone with a strange 
shade of purple, like that of a freshly exposed heart, and appeared 
to be positioned over a doorway leading into the theater. It had 
long been my practice to attend movie theaters late at night - this 
is what I reminded myself. But whatever reservations I felt at the 
time were easily overcome by a new surge of the mood I was 
experiencing that night in a part of town I had never visited before.
The purple lamp did indeed mark a way into the theater, 
casting a kind of arterial light upon a door that reiterated the 
word “entrance.” Stepping inside, I entered a tight hallway where 
the walls glowed a deep pink, very similar in shade to that little 
beacon in the alley but reminding me more of a richly blooded 
brain than a beating heart. At the end of the hallway I could see 
my reflection in a ticket window, and approaching it I noticed that 
those walls so close to me were veiled from floor to ceiling with 
what appeared to be cobwebs. These cobwebs were also strewn 
upon the carpet leading to the ticket window, wispy shrouds that 
did not scatter as I walked over them, as if they had securely bound 
themselves to the carpet’s worn and shallow fiber, or were growing 
out of it like postmortem hairs on a corpse.
There was no one behind the ticket window, no one I could see 
in that small space of darkness beyond the blur of purple-tinted 
glass in which my reflection was held. Nevertheless, a ticket was 
protruding from a slot beneath the semi-circular cutaway at the 
bottom of the window, sticking out like a paper tongue. A few hairs 
lay beside it.
“Admission is free,” said a man who was now standing in the 
doorway beside the ticket booth. His suit was well-fitted and neat, 
but his face appeared somehow in a mess, bristled over all its 
contours. His tone was polite, even passive, when he said, “The 
theater is under new ownership.”
“Are you the manager?” I asked.
“I was just on my way to the rest room.”
Without further comment he drifted off into the darkness of the 
theater. For a moment something floated in the empty space he left 
in the doorway - a swarm of filaments like dust that scattered or 
settled before I stepped through. And in those first few seconds 
inside, the only thing I could see were the words “rest room” 
glowing above a door as it slowly closed.
I manuevered with caution until my sight became sufficient to 
the dark and allowed me to find a door leading to the auditorium 
of the movie theater. But once inside, as I stood at the summit of a 
sloping aisle, all previous orientation to my surroundings under­

TH E GLAMOUR
321
went a setback. The room was illuminated by an elaborate 
chandelier centered high above the floor, as well as a series of 
light fixtures along either of the side walls. I was not surprised by 
the dimness of the lighting nor by its hue, which made shadows 
appear faintly bloodshot - a sickly, liverish shade that might be 
witnessed in an operating room where a torso lies open on the 
table, its entrails a palette of pinks and reds and purples . . . 
diseased viscera imitating all the shades of sunset.
However, my perception of the theater auditorium remained 
problematic not because of any oddities of illumination but for 
another reason. While I experienced no difficulty in mentally 
registering the elements around me - the separate aisles and rows 
of seats, the curtainflanked movie screen, the well-noted chandelier 
and wall lights -  it seemed impossible to gain a sense of these 
features in simple accord with their appearances. I saw nothing 
that I have not described, yet . . . the roundbacked seats were at 
the same time rows of headstones in a graveyard; the aisles were 
endless filthy alleys, long desolate corridors in an old asylum, or the 
dripping passages of a sewer narrowing into the distance; the pale 
movie screen was a dust-blinded window in a dark unvisited cellar, 
a mirror gone rheumy with age in an abandoned house; the 
chandelier and smaller fixtures were the facets of murky crystals 
embedded in the sticky walls of an unknown cavern. In other 
words, this movie theater was merely a virtual image, a veil upon a 
complex collage of other places, all of which shared certain 
qualities that were projected into my vision, as though the things 
I saw were possessed by something I could not see.
But as I lingered in the theater auditorium, settling in a seat 
toward the back wall, I realized that even on the level of plain 
appearances there was a peculiar phenomenon I had not formerly 
observed, or at least had yet to perceive to its fullest extent. I am 
speaking of the cobwebs.
When I first entered the theater I saw them clinging to the walls 
and carpeting. Now I saw how much they were a part of the 
theater and how I had mistaken the nature of these long pale 
threads. Even in the hazy purple light, I could discern that they 
had penetrated into the fabric of the seats in the theater, altering 
the weave in its depths and giving it a slight quality of movement, 
the slow curling of thin smoke. It seemed the same with the movie 
screen, which might have been a great rectangular web, tightly 
woven and faintly in motion, vibrating at the touch of some unseen 
force. I thought: “Perhaps this subtle and pervasive wriggling 
within the theater may clarify the tendency of its elements to

322
THOMAS LIGOTTI
suggest other things and other places thoroughly unlike a simple 
theater auditorium, a process parallel to the ever-mutating images 
of dense clouds.” All textures in the theater appeared similarly 
affected, without control over their own nature, but I could not 
clearly see as high as the chandelier. Even some of the others in the 
audience, which was small and widely scattered about the audi­
torium, were practically invisible to my eyes.
Furthermore, there may have been something in my mood that 
night, given my sojourn in a part of town I had never visited 
before, that influenced what I was able to see. And this mood had 
become steadily enhanced since I first stepped into the theater, and 
indeed from the moment I looked upon the marquee advertising a 
feature entitled The Glamour. Having at last found a place among 
the quietly expectant audience of the theater, I began to suffer an 
exacerbation of this mood. Specifically, I sensed a greater proxi­
mity to the point of focus for my mood that night, a tingling 
closeness to something quite literally behind the scene. Increasingly I 
became unconcerned with anything except the consummation or 
terminus of this abject and enchanting adventure. Consequences 
were evermore difficult to regard from my tainted perspective.
Therefore I was not hesitant when this focal point for my mood 
suddenly felt so near at hand, as close as the seat directly behind 
my own. I was quite sure this seat had been empty when I selected 
mine, that all the seats for several rows around me were unoccu­
pied. And I would have been aware if someone had arrived to fill 
this seat directly behind me. Nevertheless, like a sudden chill 
announcing bad weather, there was now a definite presence I 
could feel at my back, a force of sorts that pressed itself upon me 
and inspired a surge of dark elation. But when I looked around, 
not quickly yet fully determined, I saw no occupant in the seat 
behind me, nor in any seat between me and the back wall of the 
theater. I continued to stare at the empty seat because my 
sensation of a vibrant presence there was unrelieved. And in my 
staring I perceived that the fabric of the seat, the inner webbing of 
swirling fibers, had composed a pattern in the image of a face - an 
old woman’s face with an expression of avid malignance, floating 
amidst wild shocks of twisting hair. The face itself was a portrait of 
atrocity, a grinning image of lust for sites and ceremonies of 
mayhem. It was formed of those hairs stitching themselves 
together.
All the stringy, writhing cobwebs of that theater, as I now 
discovered, were the reaching tendrils of a vast netting of hairs. 
And in this discovery my mood of the evening, which had delivered

THE GLAMOUR
323
me to a part of town I had never visited before and to that very 
theater, only became more expansive and defined, taking in scenes 
of graveyards and alleyways, reeking sewers and wretched corri­
dors of insanity as well as the immediate vision of an old theater 
that now, as I had been told, was under new ownership. But my 
mood abruptly faded, along with the face in the fabric of the 
theater seat, when a voice spoke to me. It said:
“You must have seen her, by the looks of you.”
A man sat down one seat away from mine. It was not the same 
person I had met earlier; this one’s face was nearly normal, 
although his suit was littered with hair that was not his own.
“So did you see her?” he asked.
“I’m not sure what I saw,” I replied.
He seemed almost to burst out giggling, his voice trembling on 
the edge of a joyous hysteria. “You would be sure enough if there 
had been a private encounter, I can tell you.”
“Something was happening, then you sat down.”
“Sorry,” he said. “Did you know that the theater has just come 
under new ownership?”
“I didn’t notice what the showtimes are.”
“Showtimes?”
“For the feature.”
“Oh, there isn’t any feature. Not as such.”
“But there must be . . . something,” I insisted.
“Yes, there’s something,” he replied excitedly, his fingers 
stroking his cheek.
“What, exactly. And these cobwebs . . .”
But the lights were going down into darkness. “Quiet now,” he 
whispered. “It’s about to begin.”
The screen before us was glowing a pale purple in the blackness, 
although I heard no sounds from the machinery of a movie 
projector. Neither were there any sounds connected with the 
images which were beginning to take form on the screen, as if a 
lens were being focused on a microscopic world. And in some way 
the movie screen might have been a great glass slide that projected 
to gigantic proportions a landscape of organism normally hidden 
from our sight. But as these visions coalesced and clarified, I 
recognized them as something I had already seen, more accu­
rately sensed, in that theater. The images were appearing on the 
screen as if a pair of disembodied eyes was moving within venues of 
profound morbidity and degeneration. Here was the purest essence 
of those places I had felt were superimposing themselves on the 
genuinely tangible aspects of the theater, those graveyards, alleys,

324
THOMAS LIG O TTI
decayed corridors, and subterranean passages whose spirit had 
intruded on another locale and altered it. Yet the places now 
revealed on the movie screen were without an identity I could 
name: they were the fundament of the sinister and seamy regions 
which cast their spectral ambience on the reality of the theater but 
which were themselves merely the shadows, the superficial coun­
terparts of a deeper, more obscure realm. Farther and farther into 
it we were being taken.
The all-pervasive purple coloration could now be seen as 
emanating from the labyrinth of a living anatomy: a compound 
of the reddish, bluish, palest pink structures, all of them morbidly 
inflamed and lesioned to release a purple light. We were being 
guided through a catacomb of putrid chambers and cloisters, the 
most secreted ways and waysides of an infernal land. Whatever 
these spaces may once have been, they were now habitations for 
ceremonies of a private sabbath. The hollows in their fleshy, 
gelatinous integuments streamed with something like moss, a 
fungus in thin strands that were threading themselves into trans­
lucent tissue and quivering beneath it like veins. It was the sabbath 
ground, secret and unconsecrated, but it was also the theater of an 
insane surgery. The hair-like sutures stitched among the yielding 
entrails, unseen hands designing unnatural shapes and systems, 
weaving a nest in which the possession would take place, a web 
wherein the bits and pieces of the anatomy could be consumed at 
leisure. There seemed to be no one in sight, yet everything was 
scrutinized from an intimate perspective, the viewpoint of that 
invisible surgeon, the weaver and webmaker, the old puppet- 
master who was setting the helpless creature with new strings 
and placing him under the control of a new owner. And through 
her eyes, entranced, we witnessed the work being done.
Then those eyes began to withdraw, and the purple world of the 
organism receded into purple shadows. When the eyes finally 
emerged from where they had been, the movie screen was filled 
with the face and naked chest of a man. His posture was rigid, 
betraying a state of paralysis, and his eyes were fixed, yet strikingly 
alive. “She’s showing us,” whispered the man who was sitting 
nearby me. “She has taken him. He cannot feel who he is any 
longer, only her presence within him.”
This statement, at first sight of the possessed, seemed to be the 
case. Certainly such a view of the situation provided a terrific 
stimulus to my own mood of the evening, urging it toward 
culmination in a type of degraded rapture, a seizure of panic 
oblivion. Nonetheless, as I stared at the face of the man on the

THE GLAMOUR
325
screen, he became known to me as the one I encountered in the 
vestibule of the theater. The recognition was difficult, however, 
because his flesh was now even more obscured by the webs of hair 
woven through it, thick as a full beàrd in spots. His eyes were also 
quite changed and glared out at the audience with a ferocity that 
suggested he indeed served as the host of great evil. But all the 
same, there was something in those eyes that belied the fact of a 
complete transformation - an awareness of the bewitchment and 
an appeal for deliverance. Within the next few moments, this 
observation assumed a degree of substance.
For the man on the movie screen regained himself, although 
briefly and in limited measure. His effort of will was evident in the 
subtle contortions of his face, and his ultimate accomplishment was 
modest enough: he managed to open his mouth in order to scream. 
Of course no sound was projected from the movie screen, which 
only played a music of images for eyes that would see what should 
not be seen. Thus, a disorienting effect was created, a sensory 
dissonance which resulted in my being roused from the mood of the 
evening, its spell over me echoing to nothingness. Because the 
scream that resonated in the auditorium had originated in another 
part of the theater, a place beyond the auditorium’s towering back 
wall.Consulting the man who was sitting near me, I found him 
oblivious to my comments about the scream within the theater. He 
seemed neither to hear nor see what was happening around him 
and what was happening to him. Long wiry hairs were sprouting 
from the fabric of the seats, snaking low along their arms and along 
every part of them. The hairs had also penetrated into the cloth of 
the man’s suit, but I could not make him aware of what was 
happening. Finally I rose to leave, because I could feel the hairs 
tugging to keep me in position. As I stood up they ripped away 
from me like stray threads pulled from a sleeve or pocket.
No one else in the auditorium turned away from the man on the 
movie screen, who had lost the ability to cry out and relapsed into 
a paralytic silence. Proceeding up the aisle I glanced above at a 
rectangular opening high in the back wall of the theater, the 
window-like slot from which images of a movie are projected. 
Framed within this aperture was the silhouette of what looked like 
an old woman with long and wildly tangled hair. I could see her 
eyes gazing fierce and malignant at the purple glow of the movie 
screen. And from these eyes were sent forth two shafts of the purest 
purple light that shot through the darkness of the auditorium.
Exiting the theater the way I had come in, it was not possible to

326
THOMAS LIGOTTI
ignore the words “rest room”, so brightly were they now shining. 
But the lamp over the side door in the alley was dead; the sign 
reading ENTRANCE TO THE THEATER was gone. Even the 
letters spelling out the name of the feature that evening had been 
taken down. So this had been the last performance. Henceforth the 
theater would be closed to the public.
Also closed, if only for the night, were all the other businesses 
along that particular street in a part of town I had never visited 
before. The hour was late, the shop windows were dark. But how 
sure I was that in each one of those dark windows I passed was the 
even darker silhouette of an old woman with glowing eyes and a 
great head of monstrous hair.

THE LIBRARY OF 
BYZANTIUM
Father Sevich’s visit
In whatever corner of our old house I happened to find myself, I 
could always sense the arrival of a priest. Even in the most distant 
rooms of the upper floors, those rooms which had been closed up 
and which were forbidden to me, I would suddenly experience a 
very certain feeling. The climate of my surroundings then became 
inexplicably altered in a manner at first vaguely troublesome and 
afterward rather attractive. It was as if a new presence had 
invaded the very echoes of the air and had entered into the 
mellow afternoon sunlight which fell in stripes and squares across 
the dark wooden floors and upon the pale contortions of the 
ancient wallpaper. All around me invisible games had begun. 
My earliest philosophy regarding the great priestly tribe was 
therefore not a simple one by any means; rather, it comprised a 
thick maze of propositions, a labyrinthine layering of systems in 
which abstract dread and a bizarre sort of indebtedness were 
forever confronting each other.
In retrospect, the prelude to Fr. Sevich’s visit seems to me as 
crucial, and as introductory to later events, as the visit itself; so I 
have no qualms about lingering upon these lonely moments. For 
much of that day I had been secluded in my room, intently 
pursuing a typical activity of my early life and in the process 
badly ravaging what previously had been a well-made bed. 
Having sharpened my pencil innumerable times, and having 
worn down a thick gray eraser into a stub, I was ready to give 
myself up as a relentless failure. The paper itself seemed to defy me, 
laying snares within its coarse texture to thwart my every aim. Yet 
this rebellious mood was a quite recent manifestation: I had been 
allowed to fill in nearly the entire scene before this breakdown in 
relations between myself and my materials.
The completed portion of my drawing was an intense impression

328
THOMAS LIGOTTI
of a monastic fantasy, evoking the cloistral tunnels and the vaulted 
penetralia without attempting a guide-book representation of 
them. Nevertheless, the absolute precision of two specific elements 
in the picture was very much on my mind. The first of these was a 
single row of columns receding in sharp perspective, a diminishing 
file of rigid sentinels starkly etched into the surrounding gloom. 
The second element was a figure who had hidden himself behind 
one of these columns and was peering out of the shadows at 
something frightful beyond the immediate scene. Only the figure’s 
face and a single column-clutching hand were to be rendered. The 
hand I executed well enough, but when it came to the necessary 
features of fear which needed to be implanted on that countenance 
- there was simply no way to capture the desired effect. My wish 
was to have every detail of the unseen horror clearly readable in 
the facial expression of the seer himself, a maddening task and, at 
the time, a futile one. Every manipulation of my soft-pointed 
pencil betrayed me, masking my victim with a series of completely 
irrelevant expressions. First it was misty-eyed wonder, and then a 
kind of cretinous bafflement. At one point the gentleman appeared 
to be smiling in an almost amiable way at his imminent doom.
Thus, one may comprehend how easily I succumbed to the 
distraction of Fr. Sevich’s visit. My pencil stopped dead on the 
paper, my eyes began to wander about, checking the curtains, the 
corners, and the open closet for something that had come to play 
hide-and-seek with me. I heard footsteps methodically treading 
down the long hallway and stopping at my bedroom door. My 
father’s voice, muffled by solid wood, instructed me to make an 
appearance downstairs. There was a visitor.
My frustrations of that afternoon must have disadvantaged me 
somewhat, because I completely fell into the trap of expectation: 
that is, I believed our caller was only Fr. Orne, who often dropped 
by and who served as a kind of ecclesiastical familiar of our family. 
But when I descended the stairs and saw that strange black cloak 
drooping down from the many-pegged rack beside the front door, 
and when I saw the wide-brimmed hat of the same color hanging 
beside it like an age-old companion, I realized my error.
From the parlor came the sound of soft conversation, the softest 
part of which was supplied by Fr. Sevich himself, whose speaking 
voice was no more than a sleepy whisper. He was seated, quite 
fairly, in one of our most expansive armchairs, toward which 
destination my mother maneuvered me as soon as I entered the 
room. During the presentation I was silent, and for a few

suspenseful moments afterward continued to remain so. Fr. 
Sevich thought that I was fascinated into muteness by his fancy 
walking stick, and he said as much. At that moment the priest’s 
voice was infiltrated, to my amazement, by a foreign accent I had 
not previously noticed. He handed his cane over to me for 
examination, and I hefted the formidable length of wood a few 
times. However, the real source of my fascination lay not in his 
personal accessories, but in the priest’s own person, specifically in 
the chalky-looking texture of his very round face.
Invited to join the afternoon gathering, I was seated in a chair 
identical to the one supporting Fr. Sevich’s bulk, and angled 
slightly toward it. But my alliance to this group was in body 
only: I contributed not a word to the ensuing conversation, nor did 
I understand those words that now filled the parlor with their 
drowsy music. My concentration on the priest’s face had wholly 
exiled me from the world of good manners and polite talk. It was 
not just the pale and powdery cast of his complexion, but also a 
certain emptiness, a look of incompleteness that made me think of 
some unfinished effigy in a toymaker’s workshop. The priest smiled 
and squinted and performed several other common manipulations, 
none of which resulted in a true facial expression. Something vital 
to expression was missing, some essential spirit in which all 
expressions are born and evolve toward their unique destiny. 
And, to put it graphically, his flesh simply did not have the 
appearance of flesh.
At some point my mother and father found an excuse to leave 
me alone with Fr. Sevich, presumably to allow his influence to 
have a free reign over me, so that his sacerdotal presence might not 
be adulterated by the profanity of theirs. This development was in 
no way surprising, since it was my parents’ secret hope that 
someday my life would take me at least as far as seminary 
school, if not beyond that into the purple-robed mysteries of 
priesthood.
In the first few seconds after my parents had abandoned the 
scene, Fr. Sevich and I looked each other over, almost as if our 
previous introduction had counted for naught. And soon a very 
interesting thing happened: Fr. Sevich’s face underwent a change, 
one in favor of the soul which had formerly been interred within his 
most obscure depths. Now, from out of that chalky tomb emerged 
a face of true expression, a masterly composition of animated eyes, 
living mouth, and newly flushed cheeks. This transformation, 
however, must have been achieved at a certain cost; for what 
his face gained in vitality, the priest’s voice lost in volume. His
THE LIBRARY OF BYZANTIUM 
329

330
THOMAS LIGOTTI
words now sounded like those of a hopeless invalid, withered things 
reeking of medicines and prayers. What their exact topic of 
discourse was Pm not completely sure, but I do recall that my 
drawings were touched upon. Fr. Orne, of course, was already 
familiar with these fledgling works, and it seemed that something 
in their pictorial nature had caused him to mention them to his 
colleague who was visiting us from the old country. Something had 
caused Fr. Orne to single my pictures out, as it were, among the 
sights of his parish.
Fr. Sevich spoke of those scribblings of mine in a highly 
circuitous and rarefied fashion, as if they were a painfully delicate 
subject which threatened a breach in our acquaintanceship. I did 
not grasp what constituted his tortuous and subtle interest in my 
pictures, but this issue was somewhat clarified when he showed me 
something: a little book he was carrying within the intricate folds 
of his clerical frock.
The covering of the book had the appearance of varnished 
wood, all darkish and embellished with undulating grains. At first 
I thought that this object would feel every bit as brittle as it looked, 
until Fr. Sevich actually placed it in my hands and allowed me to 
discover that its deceptive binding was in fact extremely supple, 
even slippery. There were no words on the front of the book, only 
two thin black lines which intersected to create a cross. On closer 
examination, I observed that the horizontal beam of the cross had, 
on either end, squiggly little extensions resembling tiny hands. And 
the vertical beam appeared to widen at its vertex into something 
like a little bulb, so that the black decoration formed a sort of 
stickman.
At Fr. Sevich’s instruction, I randomly opened the book and 
thumbed over several of its incredibly thin pages, which were more 
like layers of living tissue than dead pulp. There seemed to be an 
infinite number of them, with no possibility of ever reaching the 
beginning or the end of the volume merely by turning over the 
pages one by one. The priest warned me to be careful and not to 
harm any of these delicate leaves, for the book was very old, very 
fragile, and unusually precious.
The language in which the book was written resisted all but 
imaginary identifications by one who was as limited in years and 
learning as I was then. Even now, memory will not permit me to 
improve upon my initial speculation that the book was composed 
in some exotic tongue of antiquity. But its profusion of pictures 
alleviated many frustrations and illuminated the darkness of the 
book’s secret symbols. In these examples of the art of the woodcut,

TH E LIBRARY OF BYZANTIUM
331
I could almost read that collection of sermons, of prayers and 
homilies, every one of which devoted itself with a single-minded 
insistence to wearing away at a single theme: salvation through 
suffering.
It was this chamber of sacred horrors that Fr. Sevich believed 
would catch my eye and my interest. How few of us, he explained, 
really understood the holy purpose of such images of torment, the 
divine destiny toward which the paths of anguish have always led. 
The production, and even the mere contemplation, of these missals 
of blessed agony was one of the great lost arts, he openly lamented. 
Then he began to tell me about a certain library in the old country, 
but my attention was already wandering along its own paths, and 
my eye was inextricably caught by the dense landscape of these old 
woodcuts. One scene in particular appeared exemplary of the 
book’s soul.
The central figure in this illustration was bearded and ema­
ciated, with his head bowed, hands folded, and knees bent. 
Contracted in an attitude of prayerful pleading, he seemed to 
be suspended in mid-air. All around this bony ascetic were 
torturing demons, surprisingly effective owing to, or perhaps 
despite, the artist’s brutal technique and the sparseness of precise 
detail. An exception to this general rule of style was a single 
squatting devil whose single eye had clusters of perfect little eyes 
growing out of it; and each of the smaller eyes had its own bristling 
lashes that sprouted like weeds, an explosion of minute grotesque- 
rie. (And now that I reflect on the matter, all of the illustrations 
that I saw contained at least one such exception.) The ascetic’s 
own eyes were the focus of his particular form: stark white openings 
in an otherwise dark face, with two tiny pupils rolling deliriously 
heavenward. But what was it about the transports written on this 
face which inspired in me the sense of things other than fear, or 
pain, or even piety? In any event, I did find inspiration in this 
terrible scene, and tried to make an imprint of it upon the 
photographic plates of my memory.
With a tight grip of my index finger and thumb, I was holding 
the page on which this woodcut was reproduced when Fr. Sevich 
unexpectedly snatched the book out of my hands. I looked up, not 
at the priest but at my mother and father now returning to the 
parlor after their brief and calculated absence. Fr. Sevich was 
gazing in the same direction, while blindly stashing the little book 
back in its place; so he must not have noticed the thin leaf which 
was loosely draped over my fingers and which I immediately 
concealed between my legs. At any rate, he said nothing about

332
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the mishap. And at the time I could not imagine that any power on 
earth could perceive the loss of a single page from the monstrously 
dense and prodigious layers of that book. Certainly I was safe from 
the eyes of Fr. Sevich, which had once again become as dull and 
expressionless as the plaster complexion of his face.
Shortly thereafter the priest had to be on his way. With 
fascination I watched as he assembled himself in our foyer, 
donning his cloak, his huge hat, propping himself with his walking 
stick. Before leaving, he invited us all to visit him in the old 
country, and we promised to do so should our travels ever take us 
to that part of the world. While my mother held me close to her 
side, my father opened the door for the priest. And the sunny 
afternoon, now grown windy and overcast, received him.
Father Sevich’s return
The stolen woodcut from the priest’s prayerbook was not the 
solution I thought it would be. Although I suspected that it 
possessed certain inspirational powers, a modest fund of moral 
energy, I soon found that the macabre icon withheld its blessings 
from outsiders. Perhaps I should have been more deeply ac­
quainted with the secretive nature of sacred objects, but I was 
too infatuated with all the marvelous lessons I believed it could 
teach - above all, how I might provide my faceless man in the 
monastery with a countenance of true terror. However, I learned 
no such lessons and was forced to leave my figure in an unfinished 
state, a ridiculously empty slate which I remained unable to 
embellish with the absolute horror of an off-stage atrocity. But 
the picture, I mean the one in the prayerbook, did have another 
and unsuspected value for me.
Since I had already established a spiritual rapport with Fr. 
Sevich, I could not obstruct a certain awareness of his own 
mysteries. He soon became connected in my mind with unarticu­
lated narratives of a certain kind, stories in the rough, and ones 
potentially epic, even cosmic, in scope. Without a doubt there was 
an aura of legend about him, a cycle of mute, incredible lore; and I 
resolved that his future movements merited my closest possible 
attention. Such a difficult undertaking was made infinitely easier 
due to my possession of that single and very thin page torn from his 
prayerbook.
I kept it with me at all times, protectively enclosed in some 
wrapping tissue I borrowed from my mother. The initial results

THE L IBR ARY OF BYZANTIUM
333
were soon in coming, but at the same time they were not entirely 
successful, considering the expense of this rather prodigal burst of 
psychic effort. Hence, the early scenes were highly imperfect, 
visions easily dispersed, fragmentary, some quite near to non­
sense. Among them was a visit Fr. Sevich paid another family, a 
morose vignette in which the anemic priest seemed to have grown 
pale to the point of translucency.
And the others involved were even worse: some of them had 
barely materialized or were visible only as a sort of anthropo­
morphic mist. There was considerable improvement when Fr. 
Sevich was alone or in the presence of only one other person. A 
lengthy conversation with Fr. Orne, for example, was projected in 
its totality; but, as in an improperly lighted photographic scene, 
the substance of every shape had been watered down into an eerie 
lividity. Also, given the nature of these visionary endeavors, the 
entire meeting transpired in dead silence, as if the two clergymen 
were merely pantomiming their parts.
And in all phases of activity, Fr. Sevich remained the model 
visitor from a foreign diocese, laying no new ground for scandal 
since his brief, though infinitely promising, visit with my parents 
and me. Perhaps the only occasions on which he threatened to live 
up to this promise, this pledge to incarnate some of those abstract 
myths that his character suggested to my imagination, took place 
during his intervals of absolute privacy. In the most unconscious 
hours of darkness, when the rest of the rectory’s population was in 
slumber, Fr. Sevich would leave the austere comforts of his bed 
and, seating himself at a window-facing desk, would pour over the 
contents of a certain book, turning page after page and stopping 
every so often to mouth some of the strange words inscribed upon 
them. Somehow these were the sentences of his own mysterious 
biography, a chronicle of truly unspeakable things. In the forma­
tion of the priest’s lips as he mimed the incantations of a dead 
language, in the darting movements of his tongue between rows of 
immaculate teeth, one could almost chart the convoluted chron­
ology of this foreign man. How alien is the deepest life of another: 
the unbelievable beginnings, the unimaginably elaborate devel­
opments; and the incalculable eons which prepare, which foretell, 
the multiform phenomena of a few score years! Much of what Fr. 
Sevich had endured in his allotted span could already be read on 
his face. But something still remained to be revealed in his features, 
something which the glowing lamp resting upon the desk, joined 
by the light of every constellation in the visible universe, was 
struggling to illuminate.

334
THOMAS LIGOTTI
When Fr. Sevich returned to his homeland, I lost all touch with his 
life’s whereabouts, and soon my own life collapsed back into 
established routine. After that weary and fruitless summer had 
passed, it was time for me to begin another year of school, to 
encounter once again the oppressive mysteries of the autumn 
season. But I had not entirely forgotten my adventure with Fr. 
Sevich. At the height of the fall semester we began to draw 
pumpkins with thick orange crayons whose points were awk­
wardly blunt, and with dull scissors we shaped black cats from 
the formless depths of black paper. Succumbing to a hopeless urge 
for innovation I created a man-shaped silhouette with my paper 
and scissors. The just proportions of my handiwork even received 
compliments from the nun who served as our art instructor. But 
when I trimmed the figure with a tiny white collar and gave it a 
crudely screaming mouth - there was outrage and there was 
punishment. Without arguing a happy sequence of cause and 
effect between this incident and what followed, it was not long 
afterward that the school season, for me, became eventful with 
illness. And it was during this time of shattered routine, as I lay 
three days and nights dripping with fever, that I regained my hold, 
with a visionary grasp that reached across the ocean between us, 
on the curious itinerary of Fr. Sevich.
With hat and cloak and walking stick, the old priest was 
hobbling along rather briskly, and alone, down the narrow, 
nocturnal streets of some very old town in the old country. It 
was a fairy-tale vision to which not even the most loving illustrator 
of medieval legends could do justice. Fortunately, the town itself- 
the serpentine lanes, the distorted glow of streetlamps, the super­
imposed confusion of pointed roofs, the thinnest blade of moon 
which seemed to belong to this town as it belonged to no other 
place on earth -  does not require any protracted emphasis in this 
memoir. Although it did not give away its identity, either in name 
or location, the town still demanded a designation of some kind, 
some official title, however much in error it might be. And of all the 
names that had ever been attached to places of this world, the only 
one which seemed proper, in its delirious way, was an ancient 
name which, after all these years, seems no less fitting and no less 
ludicrous now than it did then. Unmentionably ludicrous, so I will 
not mention it.
Now Fr. Sevich was disappearing into a narrow niche between 
two dark houses, which led him to an unpaved lane bordered by 
low walls, along which he travelled in almost total blackness until 
the pathway opened into a small courtyard surrounded by high

TH E LIBRARY OF BYZANTIUM
335
walls and lit by a single dull lamp at its center. He paused a 
moment to catch his breath, and when he gazed up at the night, as 
if to reconcile his course with the stars above, one could see his face 
sweating and shining in the jaundiced lamplight. Somewhere in 
the shadows that were draped and fluttering upon those high walls 
was an opening; passing through this doubtful gate, the old priest 
continued his incredible rambling about the darkest and most 
remote quarters of the old town.
Now he was descending a stairway of cut stone which led below 
the level of the town’s streets; then a brief tunnel brought him to 
another stairway which burrowed in a spiral down into the earth 
and absolute blackness. Knowing his way, the priest ultimately 
emerged from this nowhere of blackness when he suddenly entered 
a vast circular chamber. The place appeared to be a tower sunken 
beneath the town and soaring to a great and paradoxical height. 
In the upper reaches of the tower, tiny lights glimmered like stars 
and threw down their illumination in a patternless weave of criss­
crossing strands.
The subterranean structure, at whose center Fr. Sevich now 
stood, ascended in a series of terraces, each bordered by a shining 
balustrade made of some golden metal and each travelling the 
circumference of the inner chamber. These terraces multiplied into 
the upward distance, contracting in perspective into smaller and 
thinner circles, blurring together at some point and becoming lost 
in clouds of shadows that hovered far above. Each level was 
furthermore provided with numerous and regularly spaced por­
tals, all of them dark, hinting at nothing of what lay beyond their 
unguarded thresholds. But one might surmise that if this was the 
library of which the priest spoke, if this was a true repository of 
such books as the one he had just removed from under his cloak, 
then those slender openings must have led to the archives of this 
fantastic athenaeum, suggesting nothing less than a bibliographic 
honeycomb of unknown expanse and complexity. Scanning the 
shadows about him, the priest seemed to be anticipating the 
appearance of someone in charge, someone entrusted with care 
of this institution. Then one of the shadows, one of the most 
sizeable shadows and the one closest to the priest, turned around 
. . . and three such caretakers now stood before him.
This triumvirate of figures seemed to share the same face, which 
was almost a caricature of serenity. They were attired very much 
like the priest himself, and their eyes were large and calm. When 
the priest held out the book to the one in the middle, a hand moved 
forward to take it, a hand as white as the whitest glove. The central

336
THOMAS LIGOTTI
figure then rested its other hand flat upon the front of the book, 
and then the figure to the left extended a hand which laid itself 
upon the first; then a third hand, belonging to the third figure, 
covered them both with its soft white palm and long fingers, 
uniting the three. The hands remained thus placed for some 
time, as if an invisible transference of fabulously subtle powers 
was occurring, something being given or received. The heads of the 
three figures slowly turned toward one another, and simulta­
neously there was a change in the atmosphere of the chamber 
streaked with the chaotic rays of underworld starlight. And if 
forced to name this new quality and point to its outward sign, one 
might draw attention to a certain look in the large eyes of the three 
caretakers, a certain expression of rarefied scorn or disgust.
They removed their hands from the book and placed them once 
again out of view. Then the caretakers turned their eyes upon the 
priest, who had already moved a few steps away from these 
indignant shadows. But as the priest began to turn his back on 
them, almost precisely at the mid-point of his pivot, he seemed to 
freeze abruptly in position, like someone who has just heard his 
name called out to him in some strange place far from home. 
However, he did not remain thus transfixed for very long, this 
statue poised to take a step which is forbidden to it, with its face as 
rigid and pale as a monument’s stone. Soon his black, ankle-high 
shoes began to kick about as they left the solid ground. And when 
the priest had risen a little higher, well into the absolute insecurity 
of empty air, he lost hold of his walking stick; and it fell to the great 
empty expanse of the tower’s floor, where it looked as small as a 
twig or a pencil. His wide-brimmed hat soon followed, settling 
crown-up beside the cane, as the priest began tossing and turning 
in the air like a restless sleeper, wrapping himself up in the dark 
cocoon of his cloak. Then the cloak was torn away, but not by the 
thrashing priest. Something else was up there with him, ascending 
the uncountable tiers of the tower, or perhaps many unseen things 
which tore at his clothes, at the sparse locks of his hair, at the 
interlocking fingers of his hands which were now folded and 
pressed to his forehead, as though in desperate prayer. And finally 
at his face.
Now the priest was no more than a dark speck agitating in the 
greater heights of the dark tower. Soon he was nothing at all. 
Below, the three figures had absconded to their refuge of shadows, 
and the vast chamber appeared empty once more. Then every­
thing went black.
* 
* 
*

TH E LIBRARY OF BYZANTIUM
337
My fever grew worse over the course of several more days, and then 
late one night it suddenly, quite unexpectedly, broke. Exhausted 
by the ordeals of my delirium, I lay buried in my bed beneath 
heavy blankets, whose usually numerous layers had been supple­
mented according to the ministrations of my mother. Just a few 
moments before, or a few millennia, she had gone out of my room, 
believing that I was at last asleep. But I had not even come near to 
sleeping, no more than I approached a normal state of wakeful­
ness. The only illumination in my room was the natural nightlight 
of the moon shining through the windows. Through half-closed 
eyes I focused on this light, suspecting strange things about it, until 
I finally noticed that all the curtains in my room had been tightly 
drawn, that the pale glow at the foot of my bed was an unnatural 
phosphorescence, an infernal aura or angelic halo beaming about 
the form of Fr. Sevich himself.
In my confusion I greeted him, trying to lift my head from its 
pillow but falling back in weakness. He showed no awareness of my 
presence, and for a second I thought - in the hellish wanderings of 
my fever - that I was the revenant, not he. Attempting to take a 
clearer account of things, I forced open my leaden eyelids with all 
the strength I could muster. As a reward for this effort, I witnessed 
with all possible acuity of my inward and outward vision the 
incorporeal grandeur of the specter’s face. And in a moment 
unmeasurable by earthly increments of time, I grasped every 
detail, every datum and nuance of this visitor’s life-history, the 
fantastic destiny which had culminated in the creation of this 
infinitely gruesome . . . visage: a visage grown rigid at the sight of 
unimaginable horrors, a visage petrified into spectral stone. And in 
that same moment, I felt that I too could see what this lost soul had 
seen.Now, with all the force of a planet revolving its unspeakable 
tonnage in the blackness of space, the face turned on its terrible 
axis and, while it still appeared to have no apprehension of my 
existence, it spoke, as if to itself alone and to its solitary doom:
Not given back as it had been given, the law of the book is
broken. The law ... of the book ... is broken.
The spectre had barely spoken the last resounding syllables of its 
strange pronouncement, when it underwent a change: before my 
eyes it began to shrivel like something thrown into a fire; without 
the least expression of anguish it crinkled into nothing, as if some 
invisible power had suddenly decided to dispose of its work, to

338
THOMAS LIGOTTI
crumple up an aborted exercise and toss it into oblivion. And it was 
then that I felt my own purposes at an intersection, a fortuitous 
crossroads, with that savage and unseen hand. But / would not 
scorn what I had seen. My health miraculously restored, I 
gathered together my drawing materials and stayed up the rest 
of that night recording the vision. At last I had the face I was 
seeking.
Postscri ptum
Not long after that night, I paid a visit to our parish church. As this 
gesture was entirely self-initiated, my parents were free to interpret 
it as a sign of things to come, and no doubt they did so. The 
purpose of this act, however, was merely to collect a small bottle of 
holy water from the handsome metal cistern which dispensed this 
liquid to the public and which stood in the vestibule of the church. 
With apologies to my mother and father, I did not on this occasion 
actually enter the church itself. Gaining the priest-blessed solution, 
I hurried home, where I immediately unearthed - from the bottom 
of my dresser drawer -  the folio torn from Fr. Sevich’s book. Both 
items, prayerbook page and bottle of holy water, I took into the 
upstairs bathroom. I locked the door and placed the delicate little 
leaf in the bathroom sink, staring for a few moments at that 
wonderful woodcut. I wondered if one day I might make amends 
for my act of vandalism, perhaps by offering something of my own 
to a certain repository for such treasures in the old country. But 
then I recalled the fate of Fr. Sevich, which helped to chase the 
whole matter from my mind. From the uncorked bottle, I 
sprinkled the holy water over the precious page spread out at 
the bottom of the sink. For a few moments it sizzled, exactly as if I 
had poured a powerful acid on it, and gave off a not unpleasant 
vapor, an incense reeking of secret denial and privilege. Finally, it 
dissolved altogether. Then I knew that the game was over, the 
dream at an end. In the mirror above the sink I saw my own face 
smiling a smile of deep contentment.

MISS PLARR
It was spring, though still quite early in the season, when a young 
woman came to live with us. Her purpose was to manage the 
affairs of the household while my mother was suffering some vague 
ailment, lingering but not serious, and my father was away on 
business. She arrived on one of those misty, drizzling days which 
often prevailed during the young months of that particular year 
and which remain in my memory as the signature of this remark­
able time. Since my mother was self-confined to her bed and my 
father absent, it was left for me to answer those sharp urgent 
rappings at the front door. How they echoed throughout the many 
rooms of the house, reverberating in the farthest corners of the 
upper floors.
Pulling on the curved metal door handle, so huge in my child’s 
hand, I found her standing with her back to me and staring deep 
into a world of darkening mist. Her black hair glistened in the light 
from the vestibule. As she turned slowly around, my eyes were 
fixed upon that great ebony turban of hair, folded so elaborately 
into itself again and again yet in some way rebelling against this 
discipline, with many shiny strands escaping their bonds and 
bursting out wildly. Indeed, it was through a straggle of mist- 
covered locks that she first glared down at me, saying: “My name 
is . . .”
“I know,” I said.
But at that moment it was not so much her name that I knew, 
despite my father’s diligent recitations of it to me, as all the 
unexpected correspondences I sensed in her physical presence. 
For even after she stepped into the house, she kept her head slightly 
turned and glanced over her shoulder through the open door, 
watching the elements outside and listening with intense expec­
tancy. By then this stranger had already gained a precise orienta­
tion amid the world’s chaos of faces and other phenomena. Quite 
literally her place was an obscure one, lying somewhere deep 
within the peculiar mood of that spring afternoon when the 
natural gestures of the season had been apparently distanced

34°
THOMAS LIGOTTI
and suppressed by an otherworldly desolation - seething luxur­
iance hidden behind dark battlements of clouds looming above a 
bare, practically hibernal landscape. And the sounds for which she 
listened also seemed remote and stifled, shut out by a mute and 
sullen twilight, smothered in that tower of stonegray sky.
However, while Miss Plarr appeared to reflect with exactitude 
all the signs and mannerisms of those days all shackled in gloom, 
her place in our household was still an uncertainty.
During the early part of her stay with us, Miss Plarr was more 
often heard than seen. Her duties, whether by instruction or her 
own interpretation, had soon engaged her in a routine of wander­
ing throughout the echoing rooms and hallways of the house. 
Rarely was there an interruption in those footsteps as they sounded 
upon aged floorboards; day and night these gentle crepitations 
signaled the whereabouts of our vigilant housekeeper. In the 
morning I awoke to the movements of Miss Plarr on the floors 
above or below my bedroom, while late in the afternoon, when I 
often spent time in the library upon my return from school, I could 
hear the clip-clopping of her heels on the parquet in the adjacent 
room. Even late at night, when the structure of the house expressed 
itself with a fugue of noises, Miss Plarr augmented this decrepit 
music with her own slow pacing upon the stairs or outside my door.
One time I felt myself awakened in the middle of the night, 
though it was not any disturbing sounds that had broken my sleep. 
And I was unsure exactly what made it impossible for me to close 
my eyes again. Finally, I slid out of bed, quietly opened the door of 
my room a few inches, and peeped down the darkened hallway. At 
the end of that long passage was a window filled with the livid 
radiance of moonlight, and within the frame of that window was 
Miss Plarr, her entire form shaded into a silhouette as black as the 
blackness of her hair, which was all piled up into the wild shape of 
some night-blossom. So intently was she staring out the window 
that she did not seem to detect my observance of her. I, on the 
other hand, could no longer ignore the force of her presence.
The following day I began a series of sketches. These works first 
took form as doodles in the margins of my school books, but swiftly 
evolved into projects of greater size and ambition. Given the 
enigmas of any variety of creation, I was not entirely surprised 
that the images I had elaborated did not include the overt 
portrayal of Miss Plarr herself, nor of other persons who might 
serve by way of symbolism or association. Instead, my drawings 
appeared to illustrate scenes from a tale of some strange and cruel 
kingdom. Possessed by curious moods and visions, I depicted a

MISS PL A R R
341
bleak domain that was obscured by a kind of fog or cloud whose 
depths brought forth a plethora of incredible structures, all of them 
somehow twisted into aspects of bizarre savagery. From the matrix 
of this fertile haze was born a litter of towering edifices that 
combined the traits of castle and crypt, many-peaked palace 
and multi-chambered mausoleum. But there were also clusters 
of smaller buildings, warped offshoots of the greater ones, housing 
perhaps no more than a single room, an apartment of ominously 
skewed design, an intimate dungeon cell reserved for the most 
exclusive captivity. Of course, I betrayed no special genius in my 
execution of these fantasmal venues: my technique was as barbar­
ous as my subject. And certainly I was unable to introduce into the 
menacing images any suggestion of certain sounds that seemed 
integral to their proper representation, a kind of aural accompani­
ment to these operatic stage sets. In fact, I was not able even to 
imagine these sounds with any degree of clarity. Yet I knew that 
they belonged in the pictures, and that, like the purely visible 
dimension of these works, their source could be found in the person 
of Miss Plarr.
Although I had not intended to show her the sketches, there was 
evidence that she had indulged in private viewings of them. They 
lay more or less in the open on the desk in my bedroom; I made no 
effort to conceal my work. And I began to suspect that their order 
was being disturbed in my absence, to sense a subtle disarrange­
ment that was vaguely telling but not conclusive. Finally, she gave 
herself away. One gray afternoon, upon returning from school, I 
discovered a sure sign of Miss Plarr’s investigations. For lying 
between two of my drawings, pressed like a memento in an old 
scrapbook, was a long black strand of hair.
I wanted to confront Miss Plarr immediately regarding her 
intrusion, not because I resented it in any way but solely to seize 
the occasion to approach this devious eccentric and perhaps draw 
closer to the strange sights and sounds she had brought into our 
household. However, at that stage of her term of employment she 
was no longer so easily located, having ceased her constant, noisy 
marauding and begun practicing more sedentary, even stealthy 
rituals.
Since there was no sign of her elsewhere in the house, I went 
directly to the room which had been set aside for her, and which I 
had previously respected as her sanctum. But as I slowly stepped 
up to the open doorway I saw that she was not there. After 
entering the room and rummaging about, I realized that she 
was not using it at all and perhaps had never settled in. I turned

342
THOMAS LIGOTTI
around to continue my search for Miss Plarr when I found her 
standing silently in the doorway and gazing into the room without 
fixing her eyes on anything, or any one, within it. I nevertheless 
appeared to be in a position of chastisement, losing all the 
advantage I earlier possessed over this invader of my sanctum. 
Yet there was no mention of either of these transgressions, despite 
what seemed our mutual understanding of them. We were help­
lessly drifting into an abyss of unspoken reproaches and suspicions. 
Finally, Miss Plarr rescued us both by making an announcement 
she had obviously been saving for the right moment.
“I have spoken with your mother,” she declared in a strong 
voice, “and we have concluded that I should begin tutoring you in 
some of your . . . weaker school subjects.”
I believe that I must have nodded, or offered some other gesture 
of assent. “Good,” she said. “We will start tomorrow.”
Then, rather quietly, she walked away, leaving her words to 
resound in the cavity of that unoccupied room - unoccupied, I 
may claim, since my own presence now seemed to have been 
eclipsed by the swelling shadow of Miss Plarr. Nonetheless, this 
extra-scholastic instruction did prove of immense value in illumi­
nating what, at the time, was my weakest subject: Miss Plarr in 
general, with special attention to where she had made accommo­
dations for herself in our household.
My tutorship was conducted in a room which Miss Plarr felt was 
especially suited to the purpose, though her reasoning may not 
have been readily apparent. For the place she had selected as her 
classroom was a small, remote attic located beneath the highest 
and westernmost roof of the house. The slanted ceiling of that room 
exposed to us its rotting beams like the ribbing of some ancient 
seagoing vessel that might carry us to unknown destinations. And 
there were cold drafts that eddied around us, opposing currents 
emanating from the warped frame in which a many-paned 
window softly rattled now and then. The light by which I was 
schooled was provided by overcast afternoons fading in that 
window, assisted by an old oil lamp which Miss Plarr had hung 
upon a nail in one of the attic rafters. (I still wonder where she 
unearthed this antique.) It was this greasy lamplight that enabled 
me to glimpse a heap of old rags which had been piled in a corner 
to form a kind of crude bedding. Nearby stood the suitcase Miss 
Plarr had arrived with.
The only furniture in this room was a low table, which served as 
my desk, and a small frail chair, both articles being relics of my

MISS P L A R R
343
early childhood and no doubt rediscovered in the course of my 
teacher’s many expeditions throughout the house. Seated at the 
center of the room, I submitted to the musty pathos of my 
surroundings. “In a room such as this,” Miss Plarr asserted, 
“one may learn certain things of the greatest importance.” So I 
listened while Miss Plarr clomped noisily about, wielding a long 
wooden pointer which had no blackboard to point to. All 
considered, however, she did deliver a series of quite fascinating 
lectures.
Without attempting to render the exact rhetoric of her dis­
course, I remember that Miss Plarr was especially concerned with 
my development in subjects that often touched upon history or 
geography, occasionally broaching realms of philosophy and 
science. She lectured from memory, never once misstepping in 
her delivery of countless facts that had not reached me by way of 
the conventional avenues of my education. Yet these talks were 
nonetheless as meandering as her footsteps upon the cold floor of 
that attic room, and at first I was breathless trying to follow her 
from one point to the next. Eventually, though, I began to extract 
certain themes from her chaotic syllabus. For instance, she 
returned time and again to the earliest twitchings of human life, 
portraying a world of only the most rudimentary law but one so 
intriguingly advanced in what she called “visceral practices”. She 
allowed that much of what she said in this way was speculative, 
and her discussions of later periods deferred to the restrictions, 
while also enjoying the explicitness, of accepted records. Hence, I 
was made intimate with those ancient atrocities which gained 
renown for a Persian monarch, with a century-old massacre in the 
Brazilian backlands, and with the curious methods of punishment 
employed by various societies often relegated to the margins of 
history. And in other flights of instruction, during which Miss Plarr 
might flourish her pointer in the air like an artist’s paintbrush, I 
was introduced to lands whose chief feature was a kind of brutality 
and an air of exile - coarse and torturous terrains, deliriums of 
earth and sky. These included desolate mist-bound islands in polar 
seas, countries of barren peaks lacerated by unceasing winds, 
wastelands that consumed all sense of reality in their vast 
spaces, shadowed realms littered with dead cities, and sweltering 
hells of jungle where light itself is tinged with a bluish slime.
At some point, however, Miss Plarr’s specialized curriculum, 
once so novel and engrossing, dulled with repetition. I started to 
fidget in my miniature seat; or my head would slump over my 
miniature desk. Then her words suddenly stopped, and she drew

344
THOMAS LIGOTTI
close to me, laying her rubber-tipped pointer across my shoulder. 
When I looked up I saw only those eyes glaring down at me, and 
that black bundle of hair outlined in the dismal light drifting 
through the attic like a glowing vapor.
“In a room such as this,” she whispered, “one may also learn the 
proper way to behave.”
The pointer was then pulled away, grazing my neck, and Miss 
Plarr walked over to the window. Outside were effervescent clouds 
of mist which hung down over trees and houses. The scene was held 
immobile by the mist as if captured within the murky depths of ice; 
everything appeared remote or hallucinatory, shadows bound to a 
misty shore. All was silence, and Miss Plarr gazed out at a world 
suspended in obscurity. But she was also listening to it.
“Do you know the sound of something that stings the air?” she 
asked, swinging her pointer lightly against herself. “You will know 
that sound if you do not act properly. Do you hear me?”
I understood her meaning and nodded my compliance. But at 
the same time I seemed to hear more than a teacher’s switch as it 
came down upon a pupil’s body. Sounds more serious and more 
strange intruded upon the hush of the classroom. They were 
faraway sounds lost in the hissing of rainy afternoons: great blades 
sweeping over great distances, expansive wings cutting through 
cold winds, long whips lashing in darkness. I heard other sounds, 
too, other things that were stinging the air in other places, sounds 
of things I heard but could never give explanation. These sounds 
grew increasingly louder. Finally, Miss Plarr dropped her pointer 
and put her hands over her ears.
“That will be all for today,” she shouted.
And neither did she hold class on the following day, nor ever 
again resume my tutorship.
It seemed, however, that my lessons with Miss Plarr had continued 
their effect in a different form. Those afternoons in that attic must 
have exhausted something within me, and for a brief time I was 
unable to leave my bed. During this period I noticed that Miss 
Plarr was suffering a decline of her own, allowing the intangible 
sympathies which had already existed between us to become so 
much deeper and more entangled. To some extent it might be said 
that my own process of degeneration was following hers, much as 
my faculty of hearing, sensitized by illness, followed her echoing 
footsteps as they moved about the house. For Miss Plarr had 
reverted to her restless wandering, somehow having failed to settle 
herself into any kind of repose.

MISS PLA RR
345
On her visits to my room, which had become frequent and were 
always unexpected, I could observe the phases of her dissolution on 
both the material and the psychic level. Her hair now hung loose 
about her shoulders, twisting itself in the most hideous ways like a 
dark mesh of nightmares, a foul nest in which her own suspicions 
were swarming. Moreover, her links to strictly mundane elements 
had become shockingly decayed, and my relationship with her was 
conducted at the risk of intimacy with spheres of a highly 
questionable order.
One afternoon I awoke from a nap to discover that all the 
drawings she had inspired me to produce had been torn to pieces 
and lay scattered about my room. But this primitive attempt at 
exorcism proved to have no effect, for in the late hours of that same 
night I found her sitting on my bed and leaning close to me, her 
hair brushing against my face. “Tell me about those sounds,” she 
demanded. “You’ve been doing this to frighten me, haven’t you?” 
For a while I felt she had slipped away altogether, severing our 
extraordinary bond and allowing my health to improve. But just as 
I seemed to be approaching a full recovery, Miss Plarr returned.
“I think that you’re much better now,” she said as she entered 
my room with a briskness that seemed to be an effort. “You can get 
dressed today. I have to do some shopping, and I want you to come 
along and assist me.”
I might have protested that to go out on such a day would 
promise a relapse, for outside waited a heavy spring dampness and 
so much fog that I could see nothing beyond my bedroom window. 
But Miss Plarr was already lost to the world of wholesome 
practicalities, while her manner betrayed a hypnotic and fateful 
determination that I could not have resisted.
“As for this fog,” she said, even though I had not mentioned it, 
“I think we shall be able to find our way.”
Having a child’s weakness for miracles, I followed Miss Plarr 
into that fog-smothered landscape. After walking only a few steps 
we lost sight of the house, and even the ground beneath our feet 
was submerged under layers of a pale floating web. But she took 
my hand and marched on as if guided by some peculiar vision.
And it was by her grasp that this vision was conducted into me, 
setting both of us upon a strange path. Yet as we progressed, I 
began to recognize certain shapes gradually emerging around us - 
that brood of dark forms which pushed through the fog, as if their 
growth could no longer be contained by it. When I tightened my 
grip on Miss Plarr’s hand - which seemed to be losing its strength, 
fading in its substance - the vision surged toward clarity. With the

3 4 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
aspect of some leviathan rising into view from the abyss, a 
monstrous world defined itself before our eyes, forcing its way 
through the surface of the fog, which now trailed in wisps about the 
structures of an immense and awful kingdom.
More expansive and intricate than my earlier, purely artistic 
imaginings, these structures sprung forth like a patternless con­
glomerate of crystals, angular and many-faceted monuments 
clustering in a misty graveyard. It was a dead city indeed, and 
all residents were entombed within its walls -  or they were 
nowhere. There were streets of a sort which cut through this 
chaos of architecture, winding among the lopsided buildings, 
and yet it all retained an interlocking unity, much like a mountain 
range of wildly carved peaks and chasms and very much like the 
mountainous and murky thunderheads of a rainy season. Surely 
the very essence of a storm inhered in the jagged dynamism of these 
structures, a pyrotechnics that remained suspended or hidden, its 
violence a matter of suspicion and conjecture, suggesting a realm of 
atrocious potential - that infinite country which hovers beyond 
fogs and mists and gray heaping skies.
But even here something remained obscure, a sense provoked of 
rites or observances being enacted in concealment. And this 
peculiar sense was aroused by certain sounds, as of smothered 
cacophonous echoes lashing out in black cells and scourging the 
lengths of blind passages. Through the silence of the fog they 
gradually disseminated.
“Do you hear them?” asked Miss Plarr, though by then they had 
already risen to a conspicuous stridency. “There are rooms we 
cannot see where those sounds are being made. Sounds of some­
thing that stings the air.”
Her eyes seemed to be possessed by the sight of these rooms she 
spoke of; her hair was mingling with the mist around us. Finally, 
she released her hold on my hand and drifted onward. There was 
no struggle: she had known for some time what loomed in the 
background of her wandering and what waited her approach. 
Perhaps she thought this was something she could pass on to 
others, or in which she might gain their company. But her 
company, her proper company, had all the time been preparing 
for her arrival elsewhere. Nevertheless, she had honored me as the 
heir of her visions.
The fog swept around her and thickened once again until there 
was nothing else that could be seen. After a few moments I 
managed to gain my geographical bearings, finding myself in 
the middle of the street only a few blocks from home.

MISS PL A R R
347
* 
* 
*
Soon after the disappearance of Miss Plarr, our household was 
again established in its routine: my mother made a strong recovery 
from her pseudo-illness and my father returned from his business 
excursion. The hired girl, it seemed, had vacated the house 
without giving notice, a turn of events that caused little surprise 
in my mother. “Such a flighty creature,” she said about our former 
housekeeper.
I supported this characterization of Miss Plarr, but offered 
nothing that might suggest the nature of her flight. In truth, no 
word of mine could possibly have brought the least clarity to the 
situation. Nor did I wish to deepen the mysteries of this episode by 
revealing what Miss Plarr had left behind in that attic room. For 
me this chamber was now invested with a dour mystique, and I 
revisited its drafty spaces on several occasions over the years. 
Especially on afternoons in early spring when I could not close 
my ears to certain sounds that reached me from beyond a gray mist 
or from skies of hissing rain, as if somewhere the tenuous forms of 
spirits were thrashing in a dark and forsaken world.

THE SHADOW AT THE 
BOTTOM OF THE 
WORLD
Before there occurred anything of a truly prodigious nature, the 
season had manifestly erupted with some feverish intent. This, 
at least, was how it appeared to us, whether we happened to live in 
town or somewhere outside its limits. (And traveling between town 
and countryside was Mr. Marble, who had been studying the 
seasonal signs far longer and in greater depth than we, disclosing 
prophecies that no one would credit at the time.) On the calendars 
which hung in so many of our homes, the monthly photograph 
illustrated the spirit of the numbered days below it: sheaves of 
cornstalks standing brownish and brittle in a newly harvested field, 
a narrow house and wide barn in the background, a sky of empty 
light above, and fiery leafage frolicking about the edges of the 
scene. But something dark, something abysmal always finds its way 
into the bland beauty of such pictures, something that usually 
holds itself in abeyance, some entwining presence that we always 
know is there. And it was exactly this presence that had gone into 
crisis, or perhaps had been secretly invoked by small shadowy 
voices calling out in the midst of our dreams. There came a bitter 
scent into the air, as of sweet wine turning to vinegar, and there 
was an hysteric brilliance flourished by the trees in town as well as 
those in the woods beyond, while along the roads between were the 
intemperate displays of thornapple, sumac, and towering sun­
flowers that nodded behind crooked roadside fences. Even the 
stars of chill nights seemed to grow delirious and take on the tints of 
an earthly inflammation. Finally, there was a moonlit field where a 
scarecrow had been left to watch over ground that had long been 
cleared yet would not turn cold.
Adjacent to the edge of town, the field allowed full view of itself 
from so many of our windows. It lay spacious beyond tilting fence- 
posts and under a bright round moon, uncluttered save for the

peaked silhouettes of corn shocks and a manlike shape that stood 
fixed in the nocturnal solitude. The head of the figure was slumped 
forward, as if a groteque slumber had overtaken its straw-stuíTed 
body, and the arms were slackly extended in a way that suggested 
some incredible gesture toward flight. For a moment it seemed to 
be an insistent wind which was flapping those patched-up overalls 
and fluttering the worn flannel of those shirt sleeves; and it would 
seem a forceful wind indeed which caused that stitched-up head to 
nod in its dreams. But nothing else joined in such movements: the 
withered leaves of the cornstalks were stiff and unstirring, the trees 
of the distant woods were in a lull against the clear night. Only one 
thing appeared to be living where the moonlight spread across that 
dead field. And there were some who claimed that the scarecrow 
actually raised its arms and its empty face to the sky, as though 
declaring itself to the heavens, while others thought that its legs 
kicked wildly, like those of a man who is hanged, and that they 
kept on kicking for the longest time before the thing collapsed and 
lay quiet. Many of us, we discovered, had been nudged from our 
beds that night, called as witnesses to this obscure spectacle. 
Afterward, the sight we had seen, whatever we believed its 
reason, would not rest within us but snatched at the edges of 
our sleep until morning.
And during the overcast hours of the following day we could not 
keep ourselves from visiting the place around which various 
rumors had hastily arisen. As pilgrims we wandered into that 
field, scrutinizing the debris of its harvest for augural signs, circling 
that scarecrow as if it were a great idol in shabby disguise, a sacred 
avatar out of season. But everything upon that land seemed 
unwilling to support our hunger for revelation, and our congrega­
tion was lost in fidgeting bemusement. (With the exception, of 
course, of Mr. Marble, whose eyes, we recall, were gleaming with 
illuminations he could not offer us in any words we would 
understand.) The sky had hidden itself behind a leaden vault of 
clouds, depriving us of the crucial element of pure sunlight which 
we needed to fully burn off the misty dreams of the past night. And 
a vine-twisted stone wall along the property line of the farm was 
the same shade as the sky, while the dormant vines themselves were 
as colorless as the stone they enmeshed like a strange network of 
dead veins. But this calculated grayness was merely an aspect of 
the scene, for the colors of the abundant woods along the margins 
of the landscape were undulled, as if those radiant leaves possessed 
some inner source of illumination or stood in contrast to some 
deeper shadow which they served to mask.
TH E  SHADOW AT T H E  BOTTOM OF TH E W ORLD 
3 4 9

35°
THOMAS LIG O TTI
Such conditions no doubt impeded our efforts to come to terms 
with our fears about that particular field. Above all these mani­
festations, however, was the fact that the earth of those harvested 
acres, especially in the area surrounding the scarecrow, was 
unnaturally warm for the season. It seemed, in fact, that a late 
harvest was due. And some insisted that the odd droning noises 
that filled the air could not be blamed on the legions of local 
cicadas but indeed rose up from under the ground.
By the time of twilight, only a few stragglers remained in the 
field, among them the old farmer who owned this suddenly 
notorious acreage. We knew that he shared the same impulse as 
the rest of us when he stepped up to his scarecrow and began to 
tear the impostor to pieces. Others joined in the vandalism, pulling 
out handfuls of straw and stripping away the clothes until they had 
exposed what lay beneath them - the strange and unexpected 
sight.For the skeleton of the thing should have been merely two 
crosswise planks. We verified this common fact with its maker, and 
he swore that no other materials had been used. Yet the shape that 
stood before us was of a wholly different nature. It was something 
black and twisted into the form of a man, something that seemed to 
have come up from the earth and grown over the wooden planks 
like a dark fungus, consuming the structure. There were now black 
legs that hung as if charred and withered; there was a head that 
sagged like a sack of ashes upon a meager body of blackness; and 
there were thin arms stretched out like knobby branches from a 
lightning-scorched tree. All of this was supported by a thick dark 
stalk which rose out of the earth and reached into the effigy like a 
hand into a puppet.
And even as that dull day was dimming into night, our vision 
was distracted by the profounder darkness of the thing which 
dangled so blackly in the dusk. Its composition appeared to be of 
the blackest earth, of earth that had gone stagnant somewhere in 
its depths, where a rich loam had festered into a bog of shadows. 
Soon we realized that each of us had fallen silent, entranced by a 
deep blackness which seemed to absorb our sight but which 
exposed nothing to scrutiny except an abyss in the outline of a 
man. Even when we ventured to lay our hands on that mass of 
darkness, we found only greater mysteries. For there was almost no 
tangible aspect to it, merely a hint of material sensation, barely the 
feel of wind or water. It seemed to possess no more substance than a 
few shifting flames, but flames of only the slightest warmth, black 
flames that have curled together to take on the molten texture of

TH E SHADOW AT T H E BOTTOM OF THE W ORLD 
3 5 I
spoiled fruit. And there was a vague sense of circulation, as though 
a kind of serpentine life swirled gently within. But no one could 
stand to keep his hold upon it for long before stepping suddenly 
away.
“Damn the thing, it’s not going to be rooted to my land,” said 
the old farmer. Then he walked ofT toward the barn. And like the 
rest of us he was trying to rub something from the hand that had 
touched the shrivelled scarecrow, something that could not be 
seen.He returned to us with an armory of axes, shovels, and other 
implements for uprooting what had grown upon his land, this 
eccentricity of the harvest. It would seem to have been a simple 
task: the ground was unusually soft all around the base of that 
black growth and its tenuous substance could hardly resist the 
wide blade of the farmer’s ax. But when the old man swung and 
tried to split the thing like a piece of firewood, the blade would not 
cleave. The ax entered and was closed upon, as if sunk within a 
viscous mire. The farmer pulled at the handle and managed to 
dislodge the ax, but he immediately let it fall from his hands. “It 
was pulling back on me,” he said in a low voice. “And you heard 
that sound.” Indeed, the sound which had haunted the area all 
that day -  like innumerable insects laughing -  did seem to rise in 
pitch and intensity when the thing was struck.
Without a word, we began digging up the earth where that thick 
black stalk was buried. We dug fairly deep before the approaching 
darkness forced us to abandon our efforts. Yet no matter how far 
down we burrowed, it was not far enough to reach the bottom of 
that sprouting blackness. Furthermore, our attempts became 
hindered by a perverse reluctance, as in the instance of someone 
who is hesitant to have a diseased part of his own body cut away in 
order to keep the disease from spreading.
It was nearly pitch dark when we finally walked away from that 
field, for the clouds of that day had lingered to hide the moon. In 
the blackness our voices whispered various strategies, so that we 
might yet accomplish what we had thereto failed in doing. We 
whispered, although none of us would have said why he did so.
The great shadow of a moonless night encompassed the landscape, 
preserving us from seeing the old farmer’s field and what was 
tenanted there. And yet so many of the houses in town were in vigil 
throughout those dark hours. Soft lights shone through curtained 
windows along the length of each street, where our trim wooden 
homes seemed as small as dollhouses beneath the dark rustling

352
THOMAS LIGOTTI
depths of the season. Above the gathered roofs hovered the glass 
globes of streetlamps, like little moons set inside the dense leaves of 
elms and oaks and maples. Even in the night, the light shining 
through those leaves betrayed the festival of colors seething within 
them, blazing auras which had not faded with the passing days, a 
plague of colors that had already begun to infect our dreams. This 
prodigy had by then become connected in our minds with that 
field just outside of town and the strange growth which there had 
taken root.
Thus, a sense of urgency led us back to that place, where we 
found the old farmer waiting for us as the frigid aurora of dawn 
appeared above the distant woods. Our eyes scanned the frost- 
powdered earth and studied every space among shadows and corn 
shocks spread out over the land, searching for what was no longer 
present in the scene. “It’s gone back,” the farmer revealed to us. 
“Gone into the earth like something hiding in its shell. Don’t walk 
there,” he warned, pointing to the mouth of a wide pit.
We gathered about the edge of this opening in the ground, 
gazing into its depths. Even full daybreak did not show us the 
bottom of that dark well. Our speculations were brief and useless. 
Some of us picked up the shovels lying nearby, as if to begin the 
long duty of filling in the great aperture. “No use in that,” said the 
farmer. He then found a large stone and dropped it straight down 
the shaft. We waited and waited; we put our heads close to the hole 
and listened. But all we seemed to hear were remote, droning 
echoes, as of countless voices of insects chattering unseen. Finally, 
we covered the hazardous pit with some boards and buried the 
makeshift enclosure under a mound of soft dirt. “Maybe there’ll be 
some change in the spring,” someone said. But the old farmer only 
chuckled. “You mean when the ground warms up? Why do you 
think those leaves aren’t falling the way they should?”
It was not long after this troubling episode that our dreams, which 
formerly had been the merest shadows and glimpses, swelled into 
full phase. Yet they must not have been dreams entirely, but also 
excavations into the season which had inspired them. In sleep we 
were consumed by the feverish life of the earth, cast among a ripe, 
fairly rotting world of strange growth and transformation. We took 
a place within a darkly flourishing landscape where even the air 
was ripened into ruddy hues and everything wore the wrinkled 
grimace of decay, the mottled complexion of old flesh. The face of 
the land itself was knotted with so many other faces, ones that were 
corrupted by vile impulses. Grotesque expressions were molding

themselves into the darkish grooves of ancient bark and the whorls 
of withered leaf; pulpy, misshapen features peered out of damp 
furrows; and the crisp skin of stalks and dead seeds split into a 
multitude of crooked smiles. All was a freakish mask painted with 
russet, rashy colors - colors that bled with a virulent intensity, so 
rich and vibrant that things trembled with their own ripeness. But 
despite this gross palpability, there remained something spectral at 
the heart of these dreams. It moved in shadow, a presence that was 
in the world of solid forms but not of it. Nor did it belong to any 
other world that could be named, unless it was to that realm which 
is suggested to us by an autumn night when fields lay ragged in 
moonlight and some wild spirit has entered into things, a great 
aberration sprouting forth from a chasm of moist and fertile 
shadows, a hollow-eyed howling malignity rising to present itself 
to the cold emptiness of space and the pale gaze of the moon.
And it was to that moon we were forced to look for comfort when 
we awoke trembling in the night, overcome by the sense that 
another life was taking root within us, seeking its ultimate 
incarnation in the bodies we always dreamed were our own and 
inviting us into the depths of an extraordinary harvest. Certainly 
there was some relief when we began to discover, after many 
insecure hints and delvings, that the dreams were not a sickness 
restricted to solitary individuals or families but in fact were 
epidemic throughout the community. No longer were we required 
to disguise our uneasiness as we met on the streets under the 
luxuriant shadows of trees that would not cast off their gaudy 
foliage, the mocking plumage of a strange season. We had become 
a race of eccentrics and openly declared an array of curious whims 
and suspicions, at least while daylight allowed this audacity.
Honored among us was that one old fellow, well known for his 
oddities, who had anticipated our troubles weeks beforehand. As 
he wandered about town, wheeling the blade-sharpening grind­
stone by which he earned his living, Mr. Marble had spoken of 
what he could “read in the leaves”, as if those fluttering scraps of 
lush color were the pages of a secret book in which he perused gold 
and crimson hieroglyphs. “Just look at them,” he urged passersby, 
“bleeding their colors like that. They should be bled dry, but now 
they’re . . . making pictures. Something inside trying to show itself. 
They’re as dead as rags now, look at them all limp and flapping. 
But something’s still in there. Those pictures, do you see them?”
Yes, we saw them, though somewhat belatedly. And they were 
not seen only in the chromatic designs of those deathless leaves. 
They could show themselves anywhere, if always briefly. Upon a
TH E SHADOW AT TH E BOTTOM OF TH E W ORLD 
3 5 3

354
THOMAS LIGOTTI
cellar wall there might appear an ill-formed visage among the 
damp and fractured stones, a hideous impersonation of a face 
infiltrating the dark corners of our homes. Other faces, leprous 
masks, would arise within the grain of panelled walls or wooden 
floors, spying for a moment before sinking back into the knotty 
shadows, withdrawing below the surface. And there were so many 
nameless patterns that might spread themselves across the boards 
of an old fence or the side of a shed, engravings all tangled and 
wizened like a subterranean craze of roots and tendrils, an 
underworld riot of branching convolutions, gnarled ornamenta­
tions. Yet these designs were not unfamiliar to us . . . for in them 
we recognized the same outlines of autumnal decay that illumi­
nated our dreams.
Like the old visionary who sharpened knives and axes and 
curving scythes, we too could now read the great book of countless 
colored leaves. But still he remained far in advance of what was 
happening deep within us all. For it was he who manifested certain 
idiosyncrasies of manner that would have later appeared in so 
many others, whether they lived in town or somewhere outside its 
limits. Of course, he had always set himself apart from us by his 
waywardness of speech, his willingness to utter pronouncements of 
dire or delightful curiosity. To a child he might say: “The sight of 
the night can fly like a kite,” while someone older would be told: 
“Doesn’t have arms, but it knows how to use them. Doesn’t have a 
face, but it knows where to find one.”
Nevertheless, he plied his trade with every efficiency, pedalling 
the mechanism that turned the grindstone, expertly honing each 
blade and taking his pay like any man of business. Then, we 
noticed, he seemed to become distracted in his work. In a dull 
trance he touched metal implements to his spinning wheel of stone, 
careless of the sparks that flew into his face. Yet there was also a 
wild luminousness in his eyes, as of a diamond-bright fever burning 
within him. Eventually we found ourselves unable to abide his 
company, though we now attributed this merely to some upsurge 
in his perennial strangeness rather than to a wholly unprecedented 
change in his behavior. It was not until he no longer appeared on 
the streets of town, or anywhere else, that we admitted our fears 
about him.
And these fears necessarily became linked to the other disrup­
tions of that season, those extravagant omens which were gaining 
force all around us. The disappearance of Mr. Marble coincided 
with a new phenomenon, one that finally became apparent in the 
twilight of a certain day when all of the clustering and tenacious

foliage seemed to exude a vague phosphorescence. By nightfall this 
prodigy was beyond skepticism. The multicolored leaves were 
softly glowing against the black sky, creating an untimely noctur­
nal rainbow which scattered its spectral tints everywhere and dyed 
the night with a harvest of hues: peach gold and pumpkin orange, 
honey yellow and winy amber, apple red and plum violet. 
Luminous within their leafy shapes, the colors cast themselves 
across the darkness and were splattered upon our streets and our 
fields and our faces. Everything was resplendent with the pyro­
technics of a new autumn.
That night we kept to our houses and watched at our windows. 
It was no marvel, then, that so many of us saw the one who 
wandered that iridescent eve, who joined in its outbursts and 
celebrations. Possessed by the ecstasies of a dark festival, he moved 
in a trance, bearing in his hand that great ceremonial knife whose 
keen edge flashed a thousand glittering dreams. He was seen 
standing alone beneath trees whose colors shined upon him, 
staining his face and his tattered clothes. He was seen standing 
alone in the yards of our houses, a rigid scarecrow concocted from a 
patchwork of colors and shadows. He was seen stalking slow and 
rhythmically beside high wooden fences that were now painted 
with a quivering colored glow. Finally, he was seen at a certain 
intersection of streets at the center of town; but now, as we saw, he 
was no longer alone.
Confronting him in the open night were two figures whom none 
of us knew: a young woman and, held tightly by her side, a small 
boy. We were not unaccustomed to strangers walking the streets of 
our town, or even stopping by one of the surrounding farms - 
people who were passing through, some momentarily lost. And it 
was not too late in the evening for some travellers to appear, not 
really late at all. But they should not have been there, those two. 
Not on that night. Now they stood transfixed before a creature of 
whom they could have no conception, a thing that squeezed the 
knife in its hand the way the woman was now squeezing the small 
boy. We might have taken action but did not; we might have made 
an effort to help them. But the truth is that we wanted something 
to happen to them - we wanted to see them silenced. Such was our 
desire. Only then would we be sure that they could not tell what 
they knew. Our fear was not what those intruders might have 
learned about the trees that glowed so unnaturally in the night; or 
about the chattering noises that now began rising to a pitch of 
vicious laughter; or even about the farmer’s field where a mound of 
dirt covered a bottomless hole. Our fear was what they might have
T H E SHADOW AT TH E BOTTOM OF TH E W ORLD 
3 5 5

356
THOMAS LIGOTTI
known, what they must certainly have discovered, about us.
And we lost all hope when we saw the quaking hand that could 
not raise the knife, the tortured face that could only stare while 
those two terrible victims - the rightful sacrifice! -  ran off to safety, 
never to be seen by us again. After that we turned back to our 
houses, which now reeked of moldering shadows, and succumbed 
to a dreamless sleep.
Yet at daybreak it became evident that something had indeed 
happened during the night. The air was silent, everywhere the 
earth was cold. And the trees now stood bare of leaves, all of which 
lay dark and withered upon the ground, as if their strangely 
deferred dying had finally overtaken them in a sudden rage of 
mortification. Nor was it long before Mr. Marble was discovered 
by an old farmer.
The corpse reposed in a field, stretched face-down across a 
mound of dirt and alongside the remains of a dismantled scare­
crow. When we turned over the body we saw that its staring eyes 
were as dull as that ashen autumn morning. We also saw that its 
left arm had been slashed by the knife held in its right hand.
Blood had flowed over the earth and blackened the flesh of the 
suicide. But those of us who handled that limp, nearly weightless 
body, dipping our fingers into the dark wound, found nothing at 
all that had the feeling of blood. We knew very well, of course, 
what that shadowy blackness did feel like; we knew what had 
found its way into the man before us, dragging him down into its 
savage world. His dreams had always reached much deeper than 
ours. So we buried him deep in a bottomless grave.

PART 3
from Noctuary


THE MEDUSA
i
Before leaving his room Lucian Dregler transcribed a few stray 
thoughts into his notebook.
The sinister, the terrible never deceive: the state in which they 
leave us is always one of enlightenment. And only this 
condition of vicious insight allows us a full grasp of the 
world, all things considered, just as a frigid melancholy 
grants us full possession of ourselves.
We may hide from horror only in the heart of horror.
Could I be so unique among dreamers, having courted the 
Medusa - my first and oldest companion - to the exclusion of 
all others? Would I have her respond to this sweet talk?
Relieved to have these fragments safely on the page rather than 
in some precarious mental notebook, where they were likely to 
become smudged or altogether effaced, Dregler slipped into an old 
overcoat, locked the door of his room behind him, and exited down 
a series of staircases at the back of his apartment building. An 
angular pattern of streets and alleys was his usual route to a certain 
place he now and then visited, though for time’s sake - in order to 
waste it, that is - he chose to stray from his course at several points. 
He was meeting an acquaintance he had not seen in quite a while.
The place was very dark, though no more than in past experience, 
and much more populated than it first appeared to Dregler’s eyes. 
He paused at the doorway, slowly but unsystematically removing 
his gloves, while his vision worked with the faint halos of illumina­
tion offered by lamps of tarnished metal, which were spaced so 
widely along the walls that the light of one lamp seemed barely to 
link up and propagate that of its neighbor. Gradually, then, the 
darkness sifted away, revealing the shapes beneath it: a beaming

360
THOMAS LIGOTTI
forehead with the glitter of wire-rimmed eyeglasses below, cigar­
ette-holding and beringed fingers lying asleep on a table, shoes of 
shining leather which ticked lightly against Dregler’s own as he now 
passed cautiously through the room. At the back stood a column of 
stairs coiling up to another level, which was more an appended 
platform, a little brow of balcony, than a section of the establish­
ment proper. This level was caged in at its brink with a railing 
constructed of the same rather wiry and fragile material as the 
stairway, giving this area the appearance of a makeshift scaffolding. 
Rather slowly, Dregler ascended the stairs.
“Good evening, Joseph,” Dregler said to the man seated at the 
table beside an unusually tall and narrow window. Joseph Gleer 
stared for a moment at the old gloves Dregler had tossed onto the 
table.
“You still have those same old gloves,” he replied to the 
greeting, then lifted his gaze, grinning: “And that overcoat!”
Gleer stood up and the two men shook hands. Then they both 
sat down and Gleer, indicating the empty glass between them on 
the table, asked Dregler if he still drank brandy. Dregler nodded, 
and Gleer said “Coming up” before leaning over the rail a little 
ways and holding out two fingers in view of someone in the 
shadows below.
“Is this just a sentimental symposium, Joseph?” inquired the 
now uncoated Dregler.
“In part. Wait until we’ve got our drinks, so you can properly 
congratulate me.”
Dregler nodded again, scanning Gleer’s face without any 
observable upsurge in curiosity. A former colleague from Dre­
gler’s teaching days, Gleer had always possessed an open zest for 
minor intrigues, academic or otherwise, and an addiction to the 
details of ritual and protocol, anything preformulated and with 
precedent. He also had a liking for petty secrets, as long as he was 
among those privy to them. For instance, in discussions -  no matter 
if the subject was philosophy or old films - Gleer took an obvious 
delight in revealing, usually at some advanced stage of the dispute, 
that he had quite knowingly supported some treacherously absurd 
school of thought. His perversity confessed, he would then assist, 
and even surpass, his opponent in demolishing what was left of his 
old position, supposedly for the greater glory of disinterested 
intellects everywhere. But at the same time, Dregler saw perfectly 
well what Gleer was up to. And though it was not always easy to 
play into Gleer’s hands, it was this secret counter-knowledge that 
provided Dregler’s sole amusement in these mental contests, for

THE MEDUSA
361
Nothing that asks for your arguments is worth arguing, just as 
nothing that solicits your belief is worth believing. The real 
and the unreal lovingly cohabit in our terror, the only “sphere” 
that matters.
Perhaps secretiveness, then, was the basis of the two men’s 
relationship, a flawed secretiveness in Gleer’s case, a consummate 
one in Dregler’s.
Now here he was, Gleer, keeping Dregler in so-called suspense. 
His eyes, Dregler’s, were aimed at the tall narrow window, beyond 
which were the bare upper branches of an elm that twisted with 
spectral movements under the floodlights fixed high upon the 
outside wall. But every few moments Dregler glanced at Gleer, 
whose babylike features were so remarkably unchanged: the 
cupid’s bow lips, the cookie-dough cheeks, the tiny gray eyes 
now almost buried within the flesh of a face too often screwed 
up with laughter.
A woman with two glasses on a cork-bottomed tray was 
standing over the table. While Gleer paid for the drinks, Dregler 
lifted his and held it in the position of a lazy salute. The woman 
who had brought the drinks looked briefly and without expression 
at toastmaster Dregler. Then she went away and Dregler, with 
false ignorance, said: “To your upcoming or recently passed event, 
whatever it may be or have been.”
“I hope it will be for life this time, thank you, Lucian.” 
“What is this, quintus?”
“Quartus, if you don’t mind.”
“Of course, my memory is as bad as my powers of observation. 
Actually I was looking for something shining on your finger, when 
I should have seen the shine of your eyes. No ring, though, from the 
bride?”
Gleer reached into the open neck of his shirt and pulled out a 
length of delicate chainwork, dangling at the end of which was a 
tiny rose-colored diamond in a plain silver setting.
“Modern innovations,” he said neutrally, replacing the chain 
and stone. “The moderns must have them, I suppose, but marriage 
is still marriage.”
“Here’s to the Middle Ages,” Dregler said with unashamed 
weariness.
“And the middle-aged,” refrained Gleer.
The men sat in silence for some moments. Dregler’s eyes moved 
once more around that shadowy loft, where a few tables shared the 
light of a single lamp. Most of its dim glow backfired onto the wall,

362
THOMAS LIGOTTI
revealing the concentric coils of the wood’s knotty surface. Taking 
a calm sip of his drink, Dregler waited.
“Lucian,” Gleer finally began in a voice so quiet that it was 
nearly inaudible.
“I’m listening,” Dregler assured him.
“I didn’t ask you here just to commemorate my marriage. It’s 
been almost a year, you know. Not that that would make any 
difference to you.”
Dregler said nothing, encouraging Gleer with receptive silence.
“Since that time,” Gleer continued, “my wife and I have both 
taken leaves from the university and have been traveling, mostly 
around the Mediterranean. We’ve just returned a few days ago. 
Would you like another drink? You went through that one rather 
quickly.”
“No, thank you. Please go on,” Dregler requested very politely.
After another gulp of brandy, Gleer continued. “Lucian, I’ve 
never understood your fascination with what you call the Medusa. 
I’m not sure I care to, though I’ve never told you that. But through 
no deliberate efforts of my own, let me emphasize, I think I can 
further your, I guess you could say, pursuit. You are still interested 
in the matter, aren’t you?”
“Yes, but I’m too poor to afford Peloponnesian jaunts like the 
one you and your wife have just returned from. Was that what you 
had in mind?”
“Not at all. You needn’t even leave town, which is the strange 
part, the real beauty of it. It’s very complicated how I know what I 
know. Wait a second. Here, take this.”
Gleer now produced an object he had earlier stowed away 
somewhere in the darkness, laying it on the table. Dregler stared 
at the book. It was bound in a rust-colored cloth and the gold 
lettering across its spine was flaking away. From what Dregler 
could make out of the remaining fragments of the letters, the title of 
the book seemed to be: Electro-Dynamics for the Beginner.
“What is this supposed to be?” he asked Gleer.
“Only a kind of passport, meaningless in itself. This is going to 
sound ridiculous -  how I know it! -  but you want to bring the book 
to this establishment,” said Gleer, placing a business card upon the 
book’s front cover, “and ask the owner how much he’ll give you for 
it. I know you go to these shops all the time. Are you familiar with 
it?”“Only vaguely,” replied Dregler.
The establishment in question, as the business card read, was 
Brothers9 Books: Dealers in Rare and Antiquarian Books, Libraries and

TH E MEDUSA
363
Collections Purchased, Large Stock of Esoteric Sciences and Civil War, No 
Appointment Needed, Member of Manhattan Society of Philosophical 
Bookdealers, Benjamin Brothers, Founder and Owner.
“I’m told that the proprietor of this place knows you by your 
writings,” said Gleer, adding in an ambiguous monotone: “He 
thinks you’re a real philosopher.”
Dregler gazed at length at Gleer, his long fingers abstractly 
fiddling with the little card. “Are you telling me that the Medusa is 
supposed to be a book?” he said.
Gleer stared down at the table-top and then looked up. “I’m not 
telling you anything I do not know for certain, which is not a great 
deal. As far as I know, it could still be anything you can imagine, 
and perhaps already have. Of course you can take this imperfect 
information however you like, as I’m sure you will. If you want to 
know more than I do, then pay a visit to this bookstore.”
“Who told you to tell me this?” Dregler calmly asked.
“It seems better if I don’t say anything about that, Lucian. 
Might spoil the show, so to speak.”
“Very well,” said Dregler, pulling out his wallet and inserting 
the business card into it. He stood up and began putting on his 
coat. “Is that all, then? I don’t mean to be rude but
“Why should you be any different from your usual self? But one 
more thing I should tell you. Please sit down. Now listen to me. 
We’ve known each other a long dme, Lucian. And I know how 
much this means to you. So whatever happens, or doesn’t happen, 
I don’t want you to hold me responsible. I’ve only done what I 
thought you yourself would want me to do. Well, tell me if I was 
right.”
Dregler stood up again and tucked the book under his arm. 
“Yes, I suppose. But I’m sure we’ll be seeing each other. Good 
night, Joseph.”
“One more drink,” offered Gleer.
“No, good night,” answered Dregler.
As he started away from the table, Dregler, to his embarrass­
ment, nearly rapped his head against a massive wooden beam 
which hung hazardously low in the darkness. He glanced back to 
see if Gleer had noticed this clumsy mishap. And after merely a 
single drink! But Gleer was looking the other way, gazing out the 
window at the tangled tendrils of the elm and the livid complexion 
cast upon it by the floodlights fixed high upon the outside wall.
For some time Dregler thoughtlessly observed the wind-blown 
trees outside before turning away to stretch out on his bed, which

364
THOMAS LIGOTTI
was a few steps from the window of his room. Beside him now was a 
copy of his first book, Meditations on the Medusa. He picked it up and 
read piecemeal from its pages.
The worshipants of the Medusa, including those who clog 
pages with “insights” and interpretations such as these, are 
the most hideous citizens of this earth - and the most 
numerous. But how many of them know themselves as such? 
Conceivably there may be an inner cult of the Medusa, but 
then again: who could dwell on the existence of such beings 
for the length of time necessary to round them up for 
execution?
It is possible that only the dead are not in league with the 
Medusa. We, on the other hand, are her allies - but always 
against ourselves. How does one become her companion. . . and 
live?
We are never in danger of beholding the Medusa. For that to 
happen she needs our consent. But a far greater disaster 
awaits those who know the Medusa to be gazing at them 
and long to reciprocate in kind. What better definition of a 
marked man: one who “has eyes” for the Medusa, whose eyes 
have a will and a fate of their own.
Ah, to be a thing without eyes. What a break to be bom a 
stone!
Dregler closed the book and then replaced it on one of the shelves 
across the room. On that same overcrowded shelf, leather and 
cloth pressing against cloth and leather, was a fat folder stuffed 
with loose pages. Dregler brought this back to the bed with him 
and began rummaging through it. Over the years the file had 
grown enormously, beginning as a few random memoranda - 
clippings, photographs, miscellaneous references which Dregler 
copied out by hand - and expanding into a storehouse of infernal 
serendipity, a testament of terrible coincidence. And the subject of 
every entry in this inadvertent encyclopaedia was the Medusa 
herself.
Some of the documents fell into a section marked “Facetious,” 
including a comic book (which Dregler picked off a drugstore 
rack) that featured the Medusa as a benevolent superheroine who 
used her hideous powers only on equally hideous foes in a world

TH E MEDUSA
365
without beauty. Others belonged under the heading of “Irrele­
vant,” where was placed a three-inch strip from a decades-old 
sports page lauding the winning season of “Mr (sic) Medusa.” 
There was also a meager division of the file which had no official 
designation, but which Dregler could not help regarding as items 
of “True Horror.” Prominent among these was a feature article 
from a British scandal sheet: a photoless chronicle of a man’s year­
long suspicion that his wife was periodically possessed by the 
serpent-headed demon, a senseless little guignol which terminated 
with the wife’s decapitation while she lay sleeping one night and 
the subsequent incarceration of a madman.
One of the least creditable subclasses of the file consisted of 
pseudo-data taken from the less legitimate propagators of man­
kind’s knowledge: renegade “scientific” journals, occult-anthro- 
pology newsletters, and publications of various centers of sundry 
studies. Contributions to the file from periodicals such as The 
Excentaur, a back issue of which Dregler stumbled across in none 
other than Brothers’ Books, were collectively categorized as 
“Medusa and Medusans: Sightings and Material Explanations.” 
An early number of this publication included an article which 
attributed the birth of the Medusa, and of all life on Earth, to one 
of many extraterrestrial visitors, for whom this planet had been a 
sort of truckstop or comfort station en route to other locales in 
other galactic systems.
All such enlightening finds Dregler relished with a surly joy, 
especially those proclamations from the high priests of the human 
mind and soul, who invariably relegated the Medusa to a psychic 
underworld where she served as the image par excellence of 
romantic panic. But unique among the curiosities he cherished 
was an outburst of prose whose author seemed to follow in 
Dregler’s own footsteps: a man after his own heart. “Can we be 
delivered,” this writer rhetorically queried, “from the ‘life force’ as 
symbolized by Medusa? Can this energy, if such a thing exists, be 
put to death, crushed? Can we, in the arena of our being, come 
stomping out - gladiator-like - net and trident in hand, and, 
poking and swooping, pricking and swishing, torment this soulless 
and hideous demon into an excruciating madness, and, finally, 
annihilate it to the thumbs-down delight of our nerves and to our 
soul’s deafening applause?” Unfortunately, however, these words 
were written in the meanest spirit of sarcasm by a critic who 
parodically reviewed Dregler’s own Meditations on the Medusa when 
it first appeared twenty years earlier.
But Dregler never sought out reviews of his books, and the

366
THOMAS LIGOTTI
curious thing, the amazing thing, was that this item, like all the 
other bulletins and ponderings on the Medusa, had merely fallen 
into his hands unbidden. (In a dentist’s office, of all places.) 
Though he had read widely in the lore of and commentary on 
the Medusa, none of the material in his rather haphazard file was 
attained through the normal channels of research. None of it was 
gained in an official manner, none of it foreseen. In the fewest 
words, it was all a gift of unforeseen circumstances, strictly 
unofficial matter.
But what did this prove, exactly, that he continued to be ofTered 
these pieces to his puzzle? It proved nothing, exactly or otherwise, 
and was merely a side-effect of his preoccupation with a single 
subject. Naturally he would be alert to its intermittent cameos on 
the stage of daily routine. This was normal. But although these 
“finds” proved nothing, rationally, they always did suggest more 
to Dregler’s imagination than to his reason, especially when he 
poured over the collective contents of these archives devoted to his 
oldest companion.
It was, in fact, a reference to this kind of imagination for which 
he was now searching as he lay on his bed. And there it was, a 
paragraph he had once copied in the library from a little yellow 
book entitled Things Near and Far. “There is nothing in the nature 
of things,” the quotation ran, “to prevent a man from seeing a 
dragon or a griffin, a gorgon or a unicorn. Nobody as a matter of 
fact has seen a woman whose hair consisted of snakes, nor a horse 
from whose forehead a horn projected; though very early man 
probably did see dragons -  known to science as pterodactyls -  and 
monsters more improbable than griffins. At any rate, none of these 
zoological fancies violates the fundamental laws of the intellect; the 
monsters of heraldry and mythology do not exist, but there is no 
reason in the nature of things nor in the laws of the mind why they 
should not exist.”
It was therefore in line with the nature of things that Dregler 
suspended all judgements until he could pay a visit to a certain 
bookstore.
n
It was late the following afternoon, after he emerged from daylong 
doubts and procrastinations, that Dregler entered a little shop 
squeezed between a gray building and a brown one. Nearly within 
arm’s reach of each other, the opposing walls of the shop were solid

T H E  MEDUSA
367
with books. The higher shelves were attainable only by means of a 
very tall ladder, and the highest shelves were apparently not 
intended for access. Back numbers of old magazines - Black­
wood's, The Spectator, the London and American Mercurys - were 
stacked in plump, orderless piles by the front window, their pulpy 
covers dying in the sunlight. Missing pages from forgotten novels 
were stuck forever to a patch of floor or curled up in corners. 
Dregler noted page two-hundred-and-two of The Second Staircase at 
his feet, and he could not help feeling a sardonic sympathy for the 
anonymous pair of eyes confronting an unexpected dead end in the 
narrative of that old mystery. Then again, he wondered, how 
many thousands of these volumes had already been browsed for 
the last time. This included, of course, the one he held in his own 
hand and for which he now succumbed to a brief and absurd sense 
of protectiveness. Dregler blamed his friend Gleer for this subtle 
aspect of what he suspected was a farce of far larger and cruder 
design.
Sitting behind a low counter in the telescopic distance of the rear 
of the store, a small and flabby man with wire-rimmed eyeglasses 
was watching him. When Dregler approached the counter and lay 
the book upon it, the man - Benjamin Brothers - hopped alertly to 
his feet.
“Help you?” he asked. The bright tone of his voice was the 
formal and familiar greeting of an old servant.
Dregler nodded, vaguely recognizing the little man from a 
previous visit to his store some years ago. He adjusted the book 
on the counter, simply to draw attention to it, and said: “I don’t 
suppose it was worth my trouble to bring this sort of thing here.”
The man smiled politely. “You’re correct in that, sir. Old texts 
like that, worth practically nothing to no one. Now down there in 
my basement,” he said, gesturing toward a narrow doorway, “I’ve 
got literally thousands of things like that. Other things too, you 
know. The Bookseller’s Trade called it ‘Benny’s Treasurehouse.’ But 
maybe you’re just interested in selling books today.”
“Well, it seems that as long as I’m here . . .”
“Help yourself, Dr Dregler,” the man said warmly as Dregler 
started toward the stairway. Hearing his name, Dregler paused 
and nodded back at the bookdealer; then he proceeded down the 
stairs.
Dregler now recalled this basement repository, along with the 
three lengthy flights of stairs needed to reach its unusual depths. 
The bookstore at street-level was no more than a messy little closet 
in comparison to the expansive disorder down below: a cavern of

3 6 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
clutter, all heaps and mounds, with bulging tiers of bookshelves 
laid out according to no easily observable scheme. It was a 
universe constructed solely of the softly jagged brickwork of 
books. But if the Medusa was a book, how would he ever find it 
in this chaos? And if it was not, what other definite form could he 
expect to encounter of a phenomenon which he had avoided 
precisely defining all these years, one whose most nearly exact 
emblem was a hideous woman with a head of serpents?
For some time he merely wandered around the crooked aisles 
and deep niches of the basement. Every so often he took down some 
book whose appearance caught his interest, unwedging it from an 
indistinct mass of battered spines and rescuing it before years 
rooted to the same spot caused its words to mingle with others 
among the ceaseless volumes of “Benny’s Treasurehouse,” fusing 
them all into a babble of senseless, unseen pages. Opening the 
book, he leaned a threadbare shoulder against the towering, filthy 
stacks. And after spending very little time in the cloistered 
desolation of that basement, Dregler found himself yawning 
openly and unconsciously scratching himself, as if he were 
secluded in some personal sanctum.
But suddenly he became aware of this assumption of privacy 
which had instilled itself in him, and the feeling instantly perished. 
Now his sense of a secure isolation was replaced, at all levels of 
creaturely response, by its opposite. For had he not written that 
“personal well-being serves solely to excavate within your soul a 
chasm which waits to be filled by a landslide of dread, an empty 
mold whose peculiar dimensions will one day manufacture the 
shape of your unique terror?”
Whether or not it was the case, Dregler felt that he was no 
longer, or perhaps never was, alone in the chaotic treasurehouse. 
But he continued acting as if he were, omitting only the yawns and 
the scratchings. Long ago he had discovered that a mild flush of 
panic was a condition capable of seasoning one’s more tedious 
moments. So he did not immediately attempt to discourage this, 
probably delusory, sensation. However, like any state dependent 
upon the play of delicate and unfathomable forces, Dregler’s mood 
or intuition was subject to unexpected metamorphoses.
And when Dregler’s mood or intuition passed into a new phase, 
his surroundings followed close behind: both he and the treasure- 
house simultaneously crossed the boundary which divides playful 
panics from those of a more lethal nature. But this is not to say that 
one kind of apprehension was more excusable than the other; they 
were equally opposed to the likings of logic. (“Regarding dread,

TH E MEDUSA
369
intensity in itself is no assurance of validity.”) So it meant nothing, 
necessarily, that the twisting aisles of books appeared to be 
tightening around the suspicious bibliophile, that the shelves 
now looked more conspicuously swollen with their soft and musty 
stock, that faint shufflings and shadows seemed to be frolicking like 
a fugue through the dust and dimness of the underground 
treasurehouse. Could he, as he turned the next corner, be led to 
see that which should not be seen?
The next corner, as it happened, was the kind one is trapped in 
rather than turns - a cul-de-sac of bookshelves forming three walls 
which nearly reached the rafters of the ceiling. Dregler found 
himself facing the rear wall like a bad schoolboy in punishment. He 
gazed up and down its height as if contemplating whether or not it 
was real, pondering if one could simply pass through it once one 
had conquered the illusion of its solidity. Just as he was about to 
turn and abandon this nook, something lightly brushed against his 
left shoulder. With involuntary suddenness he pivoted in this 
direction, only to feel the same airy caress now squarely across 
his back. Continuing counterclockwise, he executed one full 
revolution until he was standing and staring at someone who 
was standing and staring back at him from the exact spot where he, 
a mere moment before, had been standing.
The woman’s high-heeled boots put her face at the same level as 
his, while her turban-like hat made her appear somewhat taller. It 
was fastened on the right side, Dregler’s left, with a metal clasp 
studded with watery pink stones. From beneath her hat a few 
strands of straw-colored hair sprouted onto an unwrinkled fore­
head. Then a pair of tinted eyeglasses, then a pair of unlipsticked 
lips, and finally a high-collared coat which descended as a dark, 
elegant cylinder down to her boots. She calmly withdrew a pad of 
paper from one of her pockets, tore off the top page, and presented 
it to Dregler.
“Sorry if I startled you,” it said.
After reading the note, Dregler looked up at the woman and saw 
that she was gently chopping her hand against her neck, but only a 
few times and merely to indicate some vocal disability. Laryngitis, 
wondered Dregler, or something chronic? He examined the note 
once again and observed the name, address, and telephone 
number of a company that serviced furnaces and air-condi- 
tioners. This, of course, told him nothing.
The woman then tore ofT a second pre-written message from the 
pad and pressed it into Dregler’s already paper-filled palm, smiling 
at him very deliberately as she did so. (How he wanted to see what

370
THOMAS LIGOTTI
her eyes were doing!) She shook his hand a little before taking 
away hers and making a silent, scentless exit. So what was that reek 
Dregler detected in the air when he stared down at the note, which 
simply read: “Regarding M.”
And below this word-and-a-half message was an address, and 
below that was a specified time on the following day. The hand­
writing was nicely formed, the most attractive Dregler had ever 
seen.In the light of the past few days, Dregler almost expected to find 
still another note waiting for him when he returned home. It was 
folded in half and stuffed underneath the door to his apartment. 
“Dear Lucian,” it began, “just when you think things have 
reached their limit of ridiculousness, they become more ridiculous 
still. In brief- we’ve been had! Both of us. And by my wife, no less, 
along with a friend of hers. (A blond-haired anthropology prof 
whom I think you may know, or know of; at any rate she knows 
you, or at least your writings, maybe both.) I’ll explain the whole 
thing when we meet, which I’m afraid won’t be until my wife and I 
get back from another “jaunt.” (Eyeing some more islands, this 
time in the Pacific.)
“I was thinking that you might be skeptical enough not to go to 
the bookstore, but after finding you not at home I feared the worst. 
Hope you didn’t have your hopes up, which I don’t think has ever 
happened to you anyway. No harm done, in either case. The girls 
explained to me that it was a quasi-scientific hoax they were 
perpetrating, a recondite practical joke. If you think you were 
taken in, you can’t imagine how I was. Unbelievable how real they 
made the whole ruse seem to me. But if you got as far as the 
bookstore, you know by now that the punchline to the joke was a 
pretty weak one. The whole point, as I was told, was merely to stir 
your interest just enough to get you to perform some mildly 
ridiculous act. I’m curious to know how Mr B. Bros, reacted 
when the distinguished author of Meditations on the Medusa and 
other ruminative volumes presented him with a hopelessly worth­
less old textbook.
“Seriously, I hope it caused you no embarrassment, and both of 
us, all three of us, apologize for wasting your time. See you soon, 
tanned and pacified by a South Sea Eden. And we have plans for 
making the whole thing up to you, that’s a promise.”
The note was signed, of course, by Joseph Gleer.
But Gleer’s confession, though it was evident to Dregler that he 
himself believed it, was no more convincing than his “lead” on a 
Bookstore Medusa. Because this lead, which Dregler had not

TH E MEDUSA
37*
credited for a moment, led further than Gleer, who no longer 
credited it, had knowledge of. So it seemed that while his friend 
had now been placated by a false illumination, Dregler was left to 
suffer alone the efTects of a true state of unknowing. And whoever 
was behind this hoax, be it a true one or false, knew the minds of 
both men very well.
Dregler took all the notes he had received that day, paper- 
clipped them together, and put them into a new section of his 
massive file. He tentatively labelled this section: “Personal Con­
frontations with the Medusa, Either Real or Apparent.”
m
The address given to Dregler the day before was not too far for him 
to walk, restive peripatetic that he was. But for some reason he felt 
rather fatigued that morning, so he hired a taxi to speed him across 
a drizzle-darkened city. Settling into the spacious dilapidation of 
the taxi’s back seat, he took note of a few things. Why, he 
wondered, were the driver’s glasses, which every so often filled 
the rear-view mirror, even darker than the day? Did she make a 
practice of thus “admiring” all her passengers? And was this back­
seat debris -  the “L”-shaped cigarette butt on the door’s armrest, 
the black apple core on the floor -  supposed to serve as objects of his 
admiration?
Dregler questioned a dozen other things about that routine ride, 
that drenched day, and the city outside where umbrellas multi­
plied like mushrooms in the grayness, until he grew satisfied with 
his lack of a sense of well-being. Earlier he was concerned that his 
flow of responses that day would not be those of a man who was 
possibly about to confront the Medusa. He was apprehensive that 
he might look on this ride and its destination with lively excitement 
or as an adventure of some kind; in brief, he feared that his attitude 
would prove, to a certain extent, to be one of insanity. To be sane, 
he held, was either to be sedated by melancholy or activated by 
hysteria, two responses which are “always and equally warranted 
for those of sound insight.” All others were irrational, merely 
symptoms of imaginations left idle, of memories out of work. 
And above these mundane responses, the only elevation allow­
able, the only valid transcendence, was a sardonic one: a bliss that 
annihilated the visible universe with jeers of dark joy, a mindful 
ecstasy. Anything else in the way of “mysticism” was a sign of 
deviation or distraction, and a heresy to the obvious.

372
THOMAS LIGOTTI
The taxi turned onto a block of wetted brownstones, stopping 
before a tiny streetside lawn overhung by the skeletal branches of 
two baby birch trees. Dregler paid the driver, who expressed no 
gratitude whatever for the tip, and walked quickly through the 
drizzle toward a golden-bricked building with black numbers - 
two-oh-two - above a black door with a brass knob and knocker. 
Reviewing the information on the crumpled piece of paper he took 
from his pocket, Dregler pressed the glowing bell-button. There 
was no one else in sight along the street, its trees and pavement 
fragrantly damp.
The door opened and Dregler stepped swiftly inside. A shabbily 
dressed man of indefinite age closed the door behind him, then 
asked in a cordially nondescript voice: “Dregler?” The philosopher 
nodded in reply. After a few reactionless moments the man moved 
past Dregler, waving once for him to follow down the ground-floor 
hallway. They stopped at a door that was directly beneath the 
main stairway leading to the upper floors. “In here,” said the man, 
placing his hand upon the doorknob. Dregler noticed the ring, its 
rosewater stone and silver band, and the disjunction between the 
man’s otherwise dour appearance and this comparatively striking 
piece of jewelry. The man pushed open the door and, without 
entering the room, flipped a lightswitch on the inside wall.
To all appearances it was an ordinary storeroom cluttered with 
a variety of objects. “Make yourself comfortable,” the man said as 
he indicated to Dregler the way into the room. “Leave whenever 
you like, just close the door behind you.”
Dregler gave a quick look around the room. “Isn’t there 
anything else?” he asked meekly, as if he were the stupidest 
student of the class. “This is it, then?” he persisted in a quieter, 
more dignified voice.
“This is it,” the man echoed softly. Then he slowly closed the 
door, and from inside Dregler could hear footsteps walking back 
down the hallway.
The room was an average understairs niche, and its ceiling 
tapered downward into a smooth slant where angular steps 
ascended upward on the other side. Elsewhere its outline was 
obscure, confused by bedsheets shaped like lamps or tables or small 
horses; heaps of rocking chairs and baby-chairs and other items of 
disused furniture; bandaged hoses that drooped like dead pythons 
from hooks on the walls; animal cages whose doors hung open on a 
single hinge; old paint cans and pale turps speckled like an egg; 
and a dusty light fixture that cast a gray haze over everything.
Somehow there was not a variety of odors in the room, each

THE MEDUSA
373
telling the tale of its origin, but only a single smell pieced like a 
puzzle out of many: its complete image was dark as the shadows in 
a cave and writhing in a dozen directions over curving walls. 
Dregler gazed around the room, picked up some small object and 
immediately set it down again because his hands were trembling. 
He found himself an old crate to sit on, kept his eyes open, and 
waited.
Afterward he could not remember how long he had stayed in the 
room, though he did manage to store up every nuance of the 
eventless vigil for later use in his voluntary and involuntary dreams. 
(They were compiled into that increasingly useful section marked 
“Personal Confrontations with the Medusa,” a section that was 
fleshing itself out as a zone swirling with red shapes and a hundred 
hissing voices.) Dregler recalled vividly, however, that he left the 
room in a state of panic after catching a glimpse of himself in an old 
mirror that had a hair-line fracture slithering up its center. And on 
his way out he lost his breath when he felt himself being pulled back 
into the room. But it was only a loose thread from his overcoat that 
had gotten caught in the door. It finally snapped cleanly off and he 
was free to go, his heart livened with dread.
Dregler never let on to his friends what a success that afternoon 
had been for him, not that he could have explained it to them in 
any practical way even if he desired to. As promised, they did make 
up for any inconvenience or embarrassment Dregler might have 
suffered as a result of, in Gleer’s words, the “bookstore incident.” 
The three of them held a party in Dregler’s honor, and he finally 
met Gleer’s new wife and her accomplice in the “hoax.” (it became 
apparent to Dregler that no one, least of all himself, would admit it 
had gone further than that.) Dregler was left alone with this 
woman only briefly, and in the corner of a crowded room. While 
each of them knew of the other’s work, this seemed to be the first 
time they had personally met. Nonetheless, they both confessed to 
a feeling of their prior acquaintance without being able, or willing, 
to substantiate its origins. And although plenty of mutually known 
parties were established, they failed to find any direct link between 
the two of them.
“Maybe you were a student of mine,” Dregler suggested.
She smiled and said: “Thank you, Lucian, but I’m not as young 
as you seem to think.”
Then she was jostled from behind (“Whoops,” said a tipsy 
academic), and something she had been fiddling with in her 
hand ended up in Dregler’s drink. It turned the clear bubbling 
beverage into a glassful of liquid rose-light.

374
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“I’m so sorry. Let me get you another,” she said, and then 
disappeared into the crowd.
Dregler fished the earring out of the glass and stole away with it 
before she had a chance to return with a fresh drink. Later in his 
room he placed it in a small box, which he labelled: “Treasures of 
the Medusa.”
But there was nothing he could prove, and he knew it.
IV
It was not many years later that Dregler was out on one of his now 
famous walks around the city. Since the bookstore incident, he had 
added several new titles to his works, and these had somehow 
gained him the faithful and fascinated audience of readers that had 
previously eluded him. Prior to his “discovery” he had been 
accorded only a distant interest in scholarly and popular circles 
alike, but now every little habit of his, not least of all his daily 
meanderings, had been turned by commentators into “typifying 
traits” and “defining quirks.” “Dregler’s walks,” stated one 
article, “are a constitutional of the modern mind, urban journeys 
by a tortured Ulysses sans Ithaca.” Another article offered this 
back-cover superlative: “the most baroque inheritor of Existentia­
lism’s obsessions.”
But whatever fatuosities they may have inspired, his recent 
books - A Bouquet of Worms, Banquet for Spiders, and New Meditations 
on the Medusa -  had enabled him to “grip the minds of a dying 
generation and pass on to them his pain.” These words were 
written, rather uncharacteristically, by Joseph Gleer in a highly 
favorable review of New Meditations for a philosophical quarterly. 
He probably thought that this notice would revive his friendship 
with his old colleague, but Dregler never acknowledged Gleer’s 
effort, nor the repeated invitations to join his wife and him for some 
get-together or other. What else could Dregler do? Whether Gleer 
knew it or not, he was now one of them. And so was Dregler, 
though his saving virtue was an awareness of this disturbing fact. 
And this was part of his pain.
“We can only live by leaving our ‘soul’ in the hands of the 
Medusa,” Dregler wrote in New Meditations. “Whether she is an 
angel or a gargoyle is not the point. Each merely allows us a 
gruesome diversion from some ultimate catastrophe which would 
turn us to stone; each is a mask hiding the worst visage, a medicine 
that numbs the mind. And the Medusa will see to it that we are

TH E MEDUSA
375
protected, sealing our eyelids closed with the gluey spittle of her 
snakes, while their bodies elongate and slither past our lips to 
devour us from the inside. This is what we must never witness, except 
in the imagination, where it is a charming sight. And in the word, 
no less than in the mind, the Medusa fascinates much more than 
she appalls, and haunts us just this side of petrification. On the other 
side is the unthinkable, the unheard-of, that-which-should-not-be: 
hence, the Real. This is what throttles our souls with a hundred 
fingers -  somewhere, perhaps in that dim room which caused us to 
forget ourselves, that place where we left ourselves behind amid 
shadows and strange sounds - while our minds and words toy, like 
playful, stupid pets, with diversions of an immeasurable disaster. 
The tragedy is that we must steer so close in order to avoid this 
hazard. We may hide from horror only in the heart of horror
Now Dregler had reached the outermost point of his daily walk, 
the point at which he usually turned and made his way back to his 
apartment, that other room. He gazed at the black door with the 
brass knob and knocker, then glanced down the street at the row of 
porchlights and bay windows, which were glowing madly in the 
late dusk. Looking skyward, he saw the bluish domes of stree- 
tlamps: inverted halos or open eyes. A light rain began to sprinkle 
down, nothing very troublesome. But in the next moment Dregler 
had already sought shelter in the welcoming brownstone.
He soon came to stand before the door of the room, keeping his 
hands deep in the pockets of his overcoat and away from tempta­
tion. Nothing had changed, he noticed, nothing at all. The door 
had not been opened by anyone since he had last closed it behind 
him on that hectic day years ago. And there was the proof, as he 
knew, somehow, it would be: that long thread from his coat still 
dangled from where it had been caught between door and frame. 
Now there was no question about what he would do.
It was to be a quick peek through a hand-wide crack, but 
enough to risk disillusionment and the dispersal of all the charming 
traumas he had articulated in his brain and books, scattering them 
like those peculiar shadows he supposed lingered in that room. 
And the voices - would he hear that hissing which heralded her 
presence as much as the flitting red shapes? He kept his eyes fixed 
upon his hand on the doorknob, turning it gently to nudge open 
the door. So the first thing he saw was the way it, his hand, took on 
a rosy dawn-like glow, then a deeper twilight crimson as it was 
bathed more directly by the odd illumination within the room.
There was no need to reach in and flick the lightswitch just 
inside. He could see quite enough as his vision, still exceptional,

3 7 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
was further aided by the way a certain cracked mirror was 
positioned, giving his eyes a reflected entrance into the dim depths 
of the room. And in the depths of the mirror? A split-image, 
something fractured by a thread-like chasm that oozed up a 
viscous red glow. There was a man in the mirror; no, not a 
man but a mannikin, or a frozen figure of some kind. It was 
naked and rigid, leaning against a wall of clutter, its arms 
outstretching and reaching behind, as if trying to break a back­
wards fall. Its head was also thrown back, almost broken-necked; 
its eyes were pressed shut into a pair of well-sealed creases, two 
ocular wrinkles which had taken the place of the sockets them­
selves. And its mouth gaped so widely with a soundless scream that 
all wrinkles had been smoothed away from that part of the old face.
He barely recognized this face, this naked and paralyzed form 
which he had all but forgotten, except as a lurid figure of speech he 
once used to describe the uncanny condition of his soul. But it was 
no longer a charming image of the imagination. Reflection had 
given it charm, made it acceptable to sanity, just as reflection had 
made those snakes, and the one who wore them, picturesque and 
not petrifying. But no amount of reflection could have conceived 
seeing the thing itself, nor the state of being stone.
The serpents were moving now, coiling themselves about the 
ankles and wrists, the neck; stealthily entering the screaming man’s 
mouth and prying at his eyes. Deep in the mirror opened another 
pair of eyes the color of wine-mixed water, and through a dark 
tangled mass they glared. The eyes met his, but not in a mirror. 
And the mouth was screaming, but made no sound. Finally, he was 
reunited, in the worst possible way, with the thing within the 
room.
Stiff inside of stone now, he heard himself think. Where is the world, 
my words? No longer any world, any words, there would only be 
that narrow room and its two inseparable occupants. Nothing 
other than that would exist for him, could exist, nor, in fact, had 
ever existed. In its own rose-tinted heart, his horror had at last 
found him.

CONVERSATIONS IN A 
DEAD LANGUAGE
Conveniens vitae mors fuit ista suae.
Ovid
I
After changing out of his uniform, he went downstairs to search the 
kitchen drawers, rattling his way through cutlery and cooking 
utensils. Finally he found what he wanted. A carving knife, a 
holiday knife, the traditional blade he’d used over the years. 
Knifey-wifey.
First he carved out an eye, spearing the triangle with the point of 
his knife and neatly drawing the pulpy thing from its socket. 
Pinching the blade, he slid his two fingers along the blunt edge, 
pushing the eye onto the newspaper he’d carefully placed next to 
the sink. Another eye, a nose, a howling oval mouth. Done. Except 
for manually scooping out the seedy and stringy entrails and 
supplanting them with a squat little candle of the vigil type. 
Guide them, holy lantern, through darkness and disaster. To 
me. To meezy-weezy.
He dumped several bags of candy into a large potato chip bowl, 
fingering pieces here and there: the plump caramels, the tarty sour 
balls, the chocolate kisses for the kids. A few were test-chewed for 
taste and texture. A few more. Not too many, for some of his co­
workers already called him Fatass, almost behind his back. And he 
would spoil the holiday dinner he had struggled to prepare in the 
little time left before dark. Tomorrow he’d start his diet and begin 
making more austere meals for himself.
At dark he brought the pumpkin out to the porch, placing it on 
a small but lofty table over which he’d draped a bedsheet no longer 
in normal use. He scanned the old neighborhood. Beyond the 
railings of other porches and in picture windows up and down the

3 7 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
street glowed a race of new faces in the suburb. Holiday visitors 
come to stay the night, without a hope of surviving till the next 
day. All Souls Day. Father Mickiewicz was saying an early 
morning mass, which there would be just enough time to attend 
before going to work.
No kids yet. Wait. There we go, bobbing down the street: a 
scarecrow, a robot, and - what is it? - oh, a white-faced clown. Not 
the skull-faced thing he’d at first thought it was, pale and hollow- 
eyed as the moon shining frostily on one of the clearest nights he’d 
ever seen. The stars were a frozen eíTervescence.
Better get inside. They’ll be coming soon. Waiting behind the 
glass of the front door with the bowl of candy under his arm, he 
nervously grabbed up palmsful of the sweets and let them fall piece 
by piece back into the bowl, a buccaneer revelling in his loot... a 
grizzled-faced pirate, eye-patch over an empty socket, a jolly roger 
on his cap with “x” marking the spot in bones, running up the 
front walk, charging up the wooden stairs of the porch, rubber 
cutlass stuffed in his pants.
“Trick or treat.”
“Well, well, well,” he said, his voice rising in pitch with each 
successive “well.” “If it isn’t Blackbeard. Or is it Bluebeard, I 
always forget. But you don’t have a beard at all, do you?” The 
pirate shook his head shyly to say no. “Maybe we should call you 
Nobeard, then, at least until you start shaving.”
“I have a moustache. Trick or treat, mister,” the boy said, 
impatiently holding up an empty pillow case.
“You do have a nice moustache at that. Here you go, then,” he 
said, tossing a handful of candy into the sack. “And cut a few 
throats for me,” he shouted as the boy turned and ran ofT.
He didn’t have to say those last words so loudly. Neighbors. No, 
no one heard. The streets are filled with shouters; tonight, one the 
same as another. Listen to the voices all over the neighborhood, 
music against the sounding board of silence and the chill infinity of 
autumn.
Here come some more. Goody.
Trick or treat: an obese skeleton, meat bulging under its 
painted-costume bones. How unfortunate, especially at his age. 
Fatass of the boneyard and the schoolyard. Give him an extra 
handful of candy. “Thanks a lot, mister.” “Here, have more.” 
Then the skeleton waddled down the porch steps, its image 
thinning out into the nullity of the darkness, candy-filled paper 
bag rattling away to a whisper.
Trick or treat: an overgrown baby, bibbed and bootied, with a

complexion problem erupting on its pre-adolescent face. “Well, 
cootchie coo,” he said to the infant as he showered its open bunting 
with candy. Baby sneered as it toddled ofT, pouchy diapers slipping 
down its backside, disappearing once again into the black from 
which it had momentarily emerged.
Trick or treat: midget vampire, couldn’t be more than six years 
old. Wave to Mom waiting on the sidewalk. “Very scary. Your 
parents must be proud. Did you do all that make-up work 
yourself,” he whispered. The little thing mutely gazed up, its 
eyes underlidded with kohl-dark smudges. It then used a tiny 
finger, pointy nail painted black, to indicate the guardian figure 
near the street. “Mom, huh? Does she like sourballs? Sure she does. 
Here’s some for Mom and some more for yourself, nice red ones to 
suck on. That’s what you scary vampires like, eh?” he finished, 
winking. Cautiously descending the stairs, the child of the night 
returned to its parent, and both proceeded to the next house, 
joining the anonymous ranks of their predecessors.
Others came and went. An extraterrestrial with a runny nose, a 
smelly pair of ghosts, an asthmatic tube of toothpaste. The parade 
thickened as the night wore on. The wind picked up and a torn kite 
struggled to free itself from the clutches of an elm across the street. 
Above the trees the October sky remained lucid, as if a glossy 
veneer had been applied across the night. The moon brightened to 
a teary gleam, while voices below waned. Fewer and fewer 
disguises perpetrated deception in the neighborhood. These’ll 
probably be the last ones coming up the porch. Almost out of 
candy anyway.
Trick or treat. Trick or treat.
Remarkable, these two. Obviously brother and sister, maybe 
twins. No, the girl looks older. A winning couple, especially the 
bride. “Well, congratulations to the gride and broom. I know I 
said it backwards. That’s because you’re backwards, aren’t you? 
Whose idea was that?” he asked, tossing candy like rice into the 
bag of the tuxedoed groom. What faces, so clear. Shining stars.
“Hey, you’re the mailman,” said the boy.
“Very observant. You’re marrying a smart one here,” he said to 
the groom.
“I saw you were, too,” she replied.
“Course you did. You’re sharp kids, both of you. Hey, you guys 
must be tired, walking around all night.” The kids shrugged, 
unaware of the meaning of fatigue. “I know I am after delivering 
the mail up and down these streets. And I do that every day, 
except Sunday of course. Then I go to church. You kids go to
CONVERSATIONS IN A DEAD LANGUAGE 
379

3So
THOMAS LIGOTTI
church?” It seemed they did; wrong one, though. “You know, at 
our church we have outings and stuff like that for kids. Hey, I got 
an idea - ”
A car slowed down on the street, its constabulary spotlight 
scanning between houses on the opposite side. Some missing 
Halloweeners maybe. “Never mind my idea, kids. Trick or 
treat,” he said abruptly, lavishing candy on the groom, who 
immediately strode off. Then he turned to the bride, on whom 
he bestowed the entire remaining contents of the large bowl, 
conveying a scrupulously neutral expression as he did so. Was 
the child blushing, or was it just the light from the jack-o-lantern?
“C’mon, Charlie,” his sister called from the sidewalk.
“Happy Halloween, Charlie. See you next year.” Maybe 
around the neighborhood.
His thoughts drifted off for a moment. When he regained control 
the kids were gone, all of them. Except for imaginary ones, ideals of 
their type. Like that boy and his sister.
He left the candle burning in the jack-o-lantern. Let it make the 
most of its brief life. Tomorrow it would be defunct and placed out 
with the other refuse, an extinguished shell pressed affectionately 
against a garbage bag. Tomorrow ... All Souls Day. Pick up 
Mother for church in the morning. Could count it as a weekly visit, 
holy day of obligation. Also have to remember to talk to Father M. 
about taking that kiddie group to the football game.
The kids. Their annual performance was now over, the make-up 
wiped away and all the costumes back in their boxes. After he 
turned off the lights downstairs and upstairs, and was lying in bed, 
he still heard “trick or treat” and saw their faces in the darkness. 
And when they tried to dissolve into the background of his sleepy 
mind ... he brought them back.
n
“Ttrrrick or ttrrreat,” chattered a trio of hacking, sniffing hoboes. 
It was much colder this year, and he was wearing the bluish-gray 
wool overcoat he delivered the mail in. “Some for you, you, and 
you,” he said in a merely efficient tone of voice. The bums were not 
overly grateful for the handouts. They don’t appreciate anything 
the way they used to. Things change so fast. Forget it, close the 
door, icy blasts.
Weeks ago the elms and red maples in the neighborhood had 
been assaulted by unseasonable frigidity and stripped to the bone.

CONVERSATIONS IN A DEAD LANGUAGE
381
Clouds now clotted up the sky, a murky purple ceiling through 
which no star shone. Snow was imminent.
Fewer kids observed the holiday this year, and of the ones who 
did a good number of them evidently took little pride in the 
imagination or lavishness of their disguises. Many were content to 
rub a little burnt cork on their faces and go out begging in their 
everyday clothes.
So much seemed to have changed. The whole world had become 
jaded, an inexorable machine of cynicism. Your mother dies 
unexpectedly, and they give you two days leave from your job. 
When you get back, people want to have even less to do with you 
than before. Strange how you can feel the loss of something that 
never seemed to be there in the first place. A dwarfish, cranky old 
woman dies . . . and all of a sudden there’s a royal absence, as if a 
queen had cruelly vacated her throne. It was the difference 
between a night with a single fibrillating star in it and one 
without anything but smothering darkness.
But remember those times when she used to . . . No, nihil nisi 
bonum. Let the dead, et cetera, et cetera. Father M. had conducted 
an excellent service at the funeral home, and there was little point 
in ruining that perfect sense of finality the priest had managed to 
convey regarding the earthly phase of his mother’s existence. So 
why bring her now into his thoughts? Night of the Dead, he 
remembered.
There were no longer very many emissaries of the deceased 
roaming the streets of the neighborhood. They had gone home, the 
ones who had left it in the first place. Might as well close up till 
next year, he thought. No, wait.
Here they are again, coming late in the evening as they did last 
year. Take off the coat, a sudden flash of warmth. The warming 
stars had returned, shining their true light once more. How they 
beamed, those two little points in the blackness. Their stellar 
intensity went right into him, a bright tightness. He was now 
grateful for the predominant gloom of this year’s Halloween, 
which only exacerbated his present state of delight. That they 
were wearing the same costumes as last year was more than he 
could have hoped.
“Trick or treat,” they said from afar, repeating the invocation 
when the man standing behind the glass door didn’t respond and 
merely stood staring at them. Then he opened the door wide.
“Hello, happy couple. Nice to see you again. You remember me, 
the mailman?”
The children exchanged glances, and the boy said: “Yeah,

3Ö2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
sure.” The girl antiphonied with a giggle, enhancing his delight in 
the situation.
“Well, here we are one year later and you two are still dressed 
and waiting for the wedding to start. Or did it just get over with? 
At this rate you won’t make any progress at all. What about next 
year? And the next? You’ll never get any older, know what I 
mean? Nothing’ll change. Is that okay with you?”
The children tried for comprehending nods but only achieved 
movements and facial expressions of polite bewilderment.
“Well, it’s okay with me too. Confidentially, I wish things had 
stopped changing for me a long time ago. Anyway, how about 
some candy?”
The candy was proffered, the children saying “thaaank yooou” 
in the same way they said it at dozens of other houses. But just 
before they were allowed to continue on their way ... he 
demanded their attention once more.
“Hey, I think I saw you two playing outside your house one day 
when I came by with the mail. It’s that big white house over on 
Pine Court, isn’t it?”
“Nope,” said the boy as he carefully inched his way down the 
porch stairs, trying not to trip over his costume. His sister had 
impatiently made it to the sidewalk already. “It’s red with black 
shutters. On Ash.” Without waiting for a reaction to his answer he 
joined his sister, and side by side the bride and groom walked far 
down the street, for there didn’t seem to be any other houses open 
for business nearby. He watched them become tiny in the distance, 
eventually disappear into the dark.
Cold out here, shut the door. There was nothing more to see; he 
had successfully photographed the encounter for the family album 
of his imagination. If anything, their faces glowed even brighter 
and clearer this year. Perhaps they really hadn’t changed and 
never would. No, he thought in the darkness of his bedroom. 
Everything changes and always for the worst. But they wouldn’t 
make any sudden transformations now, not in his thoughts. Again 
and again he brought them back to make sure they were the same.
He set his alarm clock to wake himself for early mass the next 
day. There was no one who would be accompanying him to church 
this year. He’d have to go alone.
Alone.

CONVERSATIONS IN A DEAD LANGUAGE
383
m
Next Halloween there was a premature appearance of snow, a thin 
foundation of whiteness that clung to the earth and trees, putting a 
pallid face on the suburb. In the moonlight it glittered, a frosty 
spume. This sparkling below was mirrored by the stars positioned 
tenuously in the night above. A monstrous mass of snowclouds to 
the west threatened to intervene, cutting off the reflection from its 
source and turning everything into a dull emptiness. All sounds 
were hollowed by the cold, made into the cries of migrating birds 
in a vacant November dusk.
Not even November yet and look at it, he thought as he stared 
through the glass of his front door. Very few were out tonight, 
and the ones who were found fewer houses open to them, closed 
doors and extinguished porchlights turning them away to roam 
blindly through the streets. He had lost much of the spirit 
himself, had not even set out a jack-o-lantern to signal his 
harbor in the night.
Then again, how would he have carried around such a weighty 
object with his leg the way it was now? One good fall down the 
stairs and he started collecting disability pay from the government, 
laid up for months in the solitude of his home.
He had prayed for punishment and his prayers had been 
answered. Not the leg itself, which only offered physical pain 
and inconvenience, but the other punishment, the solitude. This 
was the way he remembered being corrected as a child: sent into 
the basement, exiled to the cold stone cellar without the relief of 
light, save for that which hazed in through a dusty window-well in 
the corner. In that corner he stood, near as he could to the light. It 
was there that he once saw a fly twitching in a spider web. He 
watched and watched and eventually the spider came out to begin 
feasting on its prey. He watched it all, dazed with horror and 
sickness. When it was over he wanted to do something. He did. 
With a predatory stealth he managed to pinch up the little spider 
and pull it ofT its web. It tasted like nothing at all really, except a 
momentary tickle on his dry tongue.
“Trick or treat,” he heard. And he almost got up to arduously 
cane his way to the door. But the Halloween slogan had been 
spoken somewhere in the distance. Why did it sound so close for a 
moment? Crescendoing echoes of the imagination, where far is 
near, up is down, pain pleasure. Maybe he should close up for the 
night. There seemed to be only a few kids playing the game this

384
THOMAS LIGOTTI
year. Only the most desultory stragglers remained at this point. 
Well, there was one now.
“Trick or treat,” said a mild, failing little voice. Standing on the 
other side of the door was an elaborately garbed witch, complete 
with a warm black shawl and black gloves in addition to her black 
gown. An old broom was held in one hand, a bag in the other.
“You’ll have to wait just a moment,” he called through the door 
as he struggled to get up from the sofa with the aid of his cane. 
Pain. Good, good. He picked up a full bag of candy from the cofíee 
table and was quite prepared to bestow its entire contents on the 
little lady in black. But then he recognized who it was behind the 
cadaver-yellow make-up. Watch it. Wouldn’t want to do anything 
unusual. Play you don’t know who it is. And do not say anything 
concerning red houses with black shutters. Nothing about Ash 
Street.
To make matters worse, there was the outline of a parent 
standing on the sidewalk. Insure the safety of the last living 
child, he thought. But maybe there were others, though he’d 
only seen the brother and sister. Careful. Pretend she’s unfami­
liar; after all, she’s wearing a different get-up from the one she wore 
the past two years. Above all don’t say a word about you know 
who.And what if he should innocently ask where was her little 
brother this year? Would she say: “He was killed,” or maybe, 
“He’s dead,” or perhaps just, “He’s gone,” depending on how the 
parents handled the whole affair. With any luck, he would not 
have to find out.
He opened the door just far enough to hand out the candy and 
in a bland voice said: “Here you go, my little witch.” That last part 
just slipped out somehow.
“Thank you,” she said under her breath, under a thousand 
breaths of fear and experience. So did it seem.
She turned away, and as she descended the porch steps her 
broom clunked along one step behind her. An old, frayed, throw­
away broom. Perfect for witches. And the kind perfect for keeping 
a child in line. An ugly old thing kept in a corner, an instrument of 
discipline always within easy reach, always within a child’s sight 
until the thing became a dream-haunting image. Mother’s broom.
After the girl and her mother were out of sight, he closed the 
door on the world and, having survived a tense episode, was 
actually grateful for the solitude that only minutes ago was the 
object of his dread.
Darkness. Bed.

CONVERSATIONS IN A DEAD LANGUAGE
385
But he could not sleep, not to say he did not dream. Hypnagogic 
horrors settled into his mind, a grotesque succession of images 
resembling lurid frames from old comic strips. Impossibly distorted 
faces painted in garish colors frolicked before his mental eye, all 
entirely beyond his control. These were accompanied by a series of 
funhouse noises which seemed to emanate from some zone located 
between his brain and the moonlit bedroom around him. A drone 
of half-thrilled, half-horrified voices filled the background of his 
imagination, punctuated by super-distinct shouts which used his 
name as an excuse for sound. It was an abstract version of his 
mother’s voice, now robbed of any sensual quality to identify it as 
such, remaining only a pure idea. The voice called out his name 
from a distant room in his memory. Samuel, it shouted with a 
terrible urgency of obscure origin. Then suddenly -  trick or treat. 
The words echoed, changing in sense as they faded into silence: 
trick or treat - down the street -  we will meet - ashes, ashes. No, not ashes 
but other trees. The boy walked behind some big maples, was 
eclipsed by them. Did he know a car was following him that night? 
Panic. Don’t lose him now. Don’t lose him. Ah, there he was on the 
other side. Nice trees. Good old trees. The boy turned around, and 
in his hand was a tangled web of strings whose ends extended up to 
the stars which he began working like kites or toy airplanes or 
flying puppets, staring up at the night and screaming for the help 
that never came. Mother’s voice started shouting again; then the 
other voices mixed in, becoming a foul babbling unity of dead 
voices chattering away. Night of the Dead. All the dead conversed 
with him in a single voicey-woicey.
Trick or treat, it said.
But this didn’t sound as if it were part of his delirium. The words 
seemed to originate from outside him, for their utterance served to 
disturb his half-sleep and free him of its terrible weight. Instinc­
tively cautious of his lame leg, he managed to wrest himself from 
sweaty bedcovers and place both feet on the solid floor. This felt 
reassuring. But then:
Trick or treat.
It was outside. Someone on the front porch. “I’m coming,” he 
called into the darkness, the sound of his own voice awakening him 
to the absurdity of what it had said. Had the months of solitude 
finally exacted their strange price from his sanity? Listen closely. 
Maybe it won’t happen again.
Trick or treat. Trick or treat.
Trick, he thought. But he’d have to go downstairs to be sure. He 
imagined seeing a playfully laughing shape or shapes scurrying off

3 8 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
into the darkness the moment he opened the door. He’d have to 
hurry, though, if he was to catch them at it. Damn leg, where’s that 
cane. He next found his bathrobe in the darkness and draped it 
over his underclothed body. Now to negotiate those wicked stairs. 
Turn on the hallway light. No, that would alert them to his 
coming. Smart.
He was making it down the stairs in good time, considering the 
gloomy conditions he was working under. Neither this nor that nor 
gloom of night. Gloom of night. Dead of night. Night of the Dead.
With that odd sprightliness of cripples he ambled his way down 
the stairs, his cane always remaining a step ahead for support. 
Concentrate, he told his mind, which was starting to wander into 
strange places in the darkness. Watch out! Almost took a tumble 
that time. Finally he made it to the very bottom. A sound came 
through the wall from out on the front porch, a soft explosion it 
seemed. Good, they were still there. He could catch them and 
reassure his mind regarding the source of its fancies. The labor of 
walking down the stairs had left him rather hyperventilated and 
unsure about everything.
Trying to effect the shortest possible interval between the two 
operations, he turned the lock above the handle and pulled back 
the door as suddenly as he was able. A cold wind seeped in around 
the edges of the outer door, prowling its way past him and into the 
house. Out on the porch there was no sign of a boyish trickster. 
Wait, yes there was.
He had to turn on the porchlight to see it. Directly in front of 
the door a jack-o-lantern had been heaved forcefully down onto 
the cement, caving in its pulpy shell which had exploded into 
fragments lying here and there on the porch. He opened the 
outer door for a closer look, and a swift wind invaded the house, 
flying past his head on frigid wings. What a blast, close the door. 
Close the door!
“Little buggers,” he said very clearly, an attempt to relieve his 
sense of disorder and delirium.
“Who, meezy-weezy?” said the voice behind him.
At the top of the stairs. A dwarfish silhouette, seemingly with 
something in its hand. A weapon. Well, he had his cane at least.
“How did you get in here, child?” he asked without being sure it 
really was a child, considering its strangely hybrid voice.
“Child yourself, sonny. No such things where I come from. No 
Sammy-Wammies either. I’m just in disguise.”
“How did you get in?” he repeated, still hoping to establish a 
rational manner of entry.

CONVERSATIONS IN A DEAD LANGUAGE
3 8 7
“In? I was already in.”
“Here?” he asked.
“No, not here. There-dee-dare.” The figure was pointing out 
the window at the top of the stairs, out at the kaleidoscopic sky. 
“Isn’t it a beauty? No children, no anything.”
“What do you mean?” he inquired with oneiric inspiration, the 
normalcy of dream being the only thing that kept his mind 
together at this stage.
“Mean? I don’t mean nothing, you meany.”
Double negative, he thought, relieved to have retained contact 
with a real world of grammatical propriety. Double negative: two 
empty mirrors reflecting each other’s emptiness to infinite powers, 
nothing cancelling out nothing.
“Nothing?” he echoed with an interrogative inflection.
“Yup, that’s where you’re going.”
“How am I supposed to do that?” he asked, gripping his cane 
tightly, sensing a climax to this confrontation.
“How? Don’t worry. You already made sure of how-wow- 
wow . . . TRICK OR TREAT!”
And suddenly the thing came gliding down through the dark­
ness.
rv
He was found the next day by Father Mickiewicz, who had 
telephoned earlier after failing to see this clockwork parishioner 
appear as usual for early mass on All Souls Day. The door was wide 
open, and the priest discovered his body at the bottom of the stairs, 
its bathrobe and underclothes grotesquely disarranged. The poor 
man seemed to have taken another fall, a fatal one this time. 
Aimless life, aimless death: Thus was his death in keeping with his life, 
as Ovid wrote. So ran the priest’s ad hoc eulogy, though not the 
one he would deliver at the deceased’s funeral.
But why was the door open if he fell down the stairs? Father M. 
came to ask himself. The police answered this question with 
theories about an intruder or intruders unknown. Given the 
nature of the crime, they speculated on a revenge motive, which 
the priest’s informal testimony was quick to contradict. The idea of 
revenge against such a man was far-fetched, if not totally mean­
ingless. Yes, meaningless. Nevertheless, the motive was not robbery 
and the man seemed to have been beaten to death, possibly with 
his own cane. Later evidence showed that the corpse had been

violated, but with an object much longer and more coarse than the 
cane originally supposed. They were now looking for something 
with the dimensions of a broomstick, probably a very old thing, 
splintered and decayed. But they would never find it in the places 
they were searching.
388 
THOMAS LIGOTTI

THE PRODIGY OF
DREAMS
I conceived my ideal leavetaking from this earth - a drama prepared 
by strange portents, swiftly developed by dreams and visions nur­
tured in an atmosphere of sublime dread, growing overnight like 
some gaudy fungus in a forgotten cellar. . .
The Travel Diaries of Arthur Emerson
I
t seemed to Arthur Emerson that the swans, those perennial 
guests of the estate, had somehow become strange. Yet his 
knowledge of their natural behavior was vague, providing him
with little idea of precisely how they had departed from habit or 
instinct. But he strongly sensed that there had indeed been such a 
departure, an imperceptible drifting into the peculiar. Suddenly 
these creatures, which had become as tedious to him as everything 
else, filled him with an astonishment he had not known in many 
years.
That morning they were gathered at the center of the lake, 
barely visible within a milky haze which hovered above still 
waters. For as long as he observed them, they did not allow 
themselves the slightest motion toward the grassy shores circling 
the lake. Each of them -  there were four -  faced a separate 
direction, as though some antagonism existed within their order. 
Then their sleek, ghostly forms revolved with a mechanical ease 
and came to huddle around an imaginary point of focus. For a 
moment their heads nodded slightly toward one another, bowing 
in wordless prayer; but soon they stretched their snaking necks in 
unison, elevated their orange and black bills toward the thick mist 
above, and gazed into its depths. There followed a series of 
haunting cries unlike anything ever heard on the vast grounds 
of that isolated estate.

3 9 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Arthur Emerson now wondered if something he could not see 
was disturbing the swans. As he stood at the tall windows which 
faced the lake, he made a mental note to have GrafTgo down there 
and find out what he could. Possibly some unwelcome animal was 
now living in the dense woods nearby. And as he further con­
sidered the matter, it appeared that the numerous wild ducks, 
those brownish goblins that were always either visible or audible 
somewhere in the vicinity of the lake, had already vacated the 
area. Or perhaps they were only obscured by the unusually heavy 
mist of that singular morning.
Arthur Emerson spent the rest of the day in the library. At 
intervals he was visited by a very black cat, an aloof and somewhat 
phantasmal member of the small Emerson household. Eventually 
it fell asleep on a sunny window ledge, while its master wandered 
among the countless uncatalogued volumes he had accumulated 
over the past fifty years or so.
During his childhood, the collection which filled the library’s 
dark shelves was a common one, and much of it he had given away 
or destroyed in order to provide room for other works. He was the 
only scholar in a lengthy succession of businessmen of one kind or 
another, the last living member of the old family; at his death, the 
estate would probably pass into the hands of a distant relative 
whose name and face he did not know. But this was not of any 
great concern to Arthur Emerson: resignation to his own incon­
sequence, along with that of all things of the earth, was a 
philosophy he had nurtured for some time, and with considerable 
success.
In his younger years he had travelled a great deal, these 
excursions often relating to his studies, which could be approxi­
mately described as ethnological bordering on the esoteric. 
Throughout various quarters of what now seemed to him a 
shrunken, almost claustrophobic world, he had attempted to 
satisfy an inborn craving to comprehend what then seemed to 
him an astonishing, even shocking existence. Arthur Emerson 
recalled that while still a child the world around him suggested 
strange expanses not subject to common view. This sense of the 
invisible often exerted itself in moments when he witnessed nothing 
more than a patch of pink sky above leafless trees in twilight or an 
abandoned room where dust settled on portraits and old furniture. 
To him, however, these appearances disguised realms oF an 
entirely different nature. For within these imagined or divined 
spheres there existed a certain . . . confusion, a swirling, fluttering 
motion that was belied by the relative order of the seen.

TH E PRODIGY OF DREAMS
391
Only on rare occasions could he enter these unseen spaces, and 
always unexpectedly. A striking experience of this kind took place 
in his childhood years and involved a previous generation of swans 
which he had paused one summer afternoon to contemplate from a 
knoll by the lake. Perhaps their smooth drifting and gliding upon 
the water had induced in him something like a hypnotic state. The 
ultimate effect, however, was not the serene catatonia of hypnosis, 
but a whirling flight through a glittering threshold which opened 
within the air itself, propelling him into a kaleidoscopic universe 
where space consisted only of multi-colored and ever-changing 
currents, as of wind or water, and where time did not exist.
Later he became a student of the imaginary lands hypothesized 
by legends and theologies, and he had sojourned in places which 
concealed or suggested unknown orders of existence. Among the 
volumes in his library were several of his own authorship, biblio­
graphical shadows of his lifetime obsessions. His body of works 
included such titles as: In the Margins of Paradise, The Forgotten 
Universe of the Vicoli, and The Secret Gods and Other Studies. For many 
feverish years he was burdened with the sensation, an ancient one 
to be sure, that the incredible sprawl of human history was no more 
than a pathetically partial record of an infinitely vast and 
shadowed chronicle of universal metamorphoses. How much 
greater, then, was the feeling that his own pathetic history formed 
a practically invisible fragment of what itself was merely an 
obscure splinter of the infinite. Somehow he needed to excarcerate 
himself from the claustral dungeon cell of his life. In the end, 
however, he broke beneath the weight of his aspiration. And as the 
years passed, the only mystery which seemed worthy of his interest, 
and his amazement, was that unknown day which would inaugu­
rate his personal eternity, that incredible day on which the sun 
simply would not rise, and forever would begin.
Arthur Emerson pulled a rather large book down from its high 
shelf and ambled toward a cluttered desk to make some notes for a 
work which would very likely be his last. Its tentative title: 
Dynasties of Dust.
Toward nightfall he suspended his labors. With much stiffness, 
he walked to the window ledge where the cat lay sleeping in the 
fading light of dusk. But its body seemed to rise and fall a little too 
vigorously for sleep, and it made a strange whistling sound rather 
than the usual murmuring purr. The cat opened its eyes and rolled 
sideways, as it often did when inviting a hand to stroke its glossy 
black fur. But as soon as Arthur Emerson laid his palm upon that 
smooth coat, his fingers were rapidly gnawed. The animal then

392
THOMAS LIGOTTI
leaped to the floor and ran out of the room, while Arthur Emerson 
watched his own blood trickling over his hand in a shapeless stain.
Ail that evening he felt restless, profoundly at odds with the 
atmosphere of each room he entered and then soon abandoned. 
He wandered the house, telling himself that he was in search of his 
ebony pet, in order to establish the terms of their misunderstand­
ing. But this pretext would every so often dissolve, and it then 
became clear to Arthur Emerson that he searched for something 
less tangible than a runaway cat. These rooms, however high their 
ceilings, suffocated him with shadowy questions; his footsteps, 
echoing sharply down long gleaming corridors, sounded like 
clacking bones. The house had become a museum of mystery.
He finally gave up the search and allowed fatigue to guide him 
to his bedroom, where immediately he opened a window in the 
hope that something without a name would fly from the house. But 
he now discovered that it was not only the house which was swollen 
with mysteries; it was the very night itself. A nocturnal breeze 
began lifting the curtains, mingling with the air inside the room. 
Shapeless clumps of clouds floated with mechanical complacency 
across a stone gray sky, a sky which itself seemed shapeless rather 
than evenly infinite. To his left he saw that the inner surface of the 
open window reflected a strange face, his face, and he pushed the 
fear-stricken thing out into the darkness.
Arthur Emerson eventually slept that night, but he also 
dreamed. His dreams were without definite form, a realm of mist 
where twisted shadows glided, their dark mass shifting fluently. 
Then, through the queerly gathered and drifting clouds of mist, he 
saw a shadow whose dark monstrosity made the others seem 
shapely and radiant. It was a deformed colossus, a disfigured 
monument carved from the absolute density of the blackest 
abyss. And now the lesser shadows, the pale and meager sha­
dows, seemed to join in a squealing chorus of praise to the greater 
one. He gazed at the cyclopean thing in a trance of horror, until its 
mountainous mass began to move, slowly stretching out some part 
of itself, flexing what might have been a misshapen arm. And when 
he awoke, scattering the bedcovers, he felt a warm breeze wafting 
in through a window which he could not remember having left 
open.
The next morning it became apparent that there would be no relief 
from the uncanny influences which still seemed to be lingering 
from the day before. All about the Emerson estate a terrific fog had

TH E PRODIGY OF DREAMS
393
formed, blinding the inhabitants of the house to most of the world 
beyond it. What few shapes remained visible - the closest and 
darkest trees, some rose bushes pressing against the windows - 
seemed drained of all earthly substance, creating a landscape both 
infinite and imprisoning, an estate of dream. Unseen in the fog, the 
swans were calling out like banshees down by the lake. And even 
GraíT, when he appeared in the library attired in a bulky 
groundskeeper’s jacket and soiled trousers, looked less like a 
man than like a specter of ill prophecy.
“Are you certain,” said Arthur Emerson, who was seated at his 
desk, “that you have nothing to report afbout those creatures?”
“No sir,” replied GraíT. “Nothing.”
There was, however, something else GraíT had discovered, 
something which he thought the master of the house should see 
for himself. Together they travelled down several stairways leading 
fo the various cellars and storage chambers beneath the house. On 
the way GraíT explained that, as also ordered, he had searched for 
the cat, which had not been seen since last evening. Arthur 
Emerson only gazed at his man and nodded in silence, while 
inwardly muttering to himself about some strangeness he per­
ceived in the old retainer. Between every few phrases the man 
would begin humming, or rather singing at the back of his throat 
in an entirely peculiar manner.
After making their way far into the dark catacombs of the 
Emerson house, they arrived at a remote room which seemed to 
have been left unfinished when the house had been erected so long 
ago. There were no lighting fixtures (except the one recently 
improvised by Graff), the stone walls were unplastered and 
unpainted, and the floor was of hard, bare earth. GraíT pointed 
downward, and his crooked finger wandered in an arc through the 
sepulchral dimness of the room. Arthur Emerson now saw that the 
place had been turned into a charnel house for the remains of small 
animals: mice, rats, birds, squirrels, even a few young possums and 
raccoons. He already knew the cat to be an obsessive hunter, but it 
seemed strange that these carcasses had all been brought to this 
room, as if it were a kind of sanctum of mutilation and death.
While contemplating this macabre chamber, Arthur Emerson 
noticed peripherally that GraíT was fidgeting with some object 
concealed in his pocket. How strange indeed the old servant had 
become.
“What have you got there?” Arthur Emerson asked.
“Sir?” GraíT replied, as though his manual gyrations had 
proceeded without his awareness. “Oh, this,” he said, revealing

394
THOMAS LIGOTTI
a metal gardening implement with four clawlike prongs. “I was 
doing some work outdoors; that is, I was intending to do so, if there 
was time.”
“Time? On a day like this?”
Obviously embarrassed and at a loss to explain himself, GrafT 
pointed the taloned tool at the decomposing carcasses. “None of 
the animals actually seem to have been eaten,” he quietly 
observed, and that curious piping in his throat sounded almost 
louder than his words.
“No,” Arthur Emerson agreed with some bewilderment. He 
then reached up to grasp a thick black extension cord which GrafT 
had slung over the rafters; at the end of the cord was a light bulb 
which he tried to maneuver to more fully illuminate the room. 
Incautiously, perhaps, Arthur Emerson was thinking that there 
existed some method to the way the bodies of the slaughtered 
creatures were positioned across the entire floor. Graffs next 
remark approximated the unformed perception of his employer: 
“Like a trail of dominos winding round and round. But no true 
sense to it.”
Arthur Emerson readily granted the apt analogy to a maze of 
dominos, but concerning the second of GrafFs statements there 
suddenly appeared to be some doubt. For at that moment Arthur 
Emerson looked up and saw a queerly shaped stain, as if made by 
mold or moisture, upon the far wall.
“Shall I clean the place out?” asked GrafT, raising the metal 
claw.“What? No,” decided Arthur Emerson as he gazed at the 
shapeless, groping horror that appeared to have crawled from 
his own dream and stained itself into the stone before him. “Leave 
everything exactly as it is,” he ordered the old whistling servant.
Arthur Emerson returned to the library, and there he began to 
explore a certain shelf of books. This shelf comprised his private 
archives of handsomely bound travel diaries he had kept over the 
years. He withdrew one after another, paged through each 
volume, and then replaced it. Finally he found the one he 
wanted, which was the record of a visit to central and southern 
Italy made when he was a young man. Settling down at his desk, 
he leaned into the words before him. After reading only a few 
sentences he began to wonder who this strange lyrical creature, this 
ghost, might be. No doubt himself, but in some previous incarna­
tion, some bizarre anterior life.

THE PRODIGY OF DREAMS
395
Spoleto (Ides of October)
What wonders dwell within the vicoli! How often can I 
celebrate those fabulous little thoroughfares which form a 
maze of magic and dreams, and how often can I praise the 
medieval hill towns of Umbria which are woven of such 
streets? Guiding one into courtyards, they are snug roads 
invented for the meanderings of sleepwalkers. One is em­
braced by the gray walls of high houses, one is nestled beneath 
their wood-beamed roofs and beneath innumerable arches 
which cut the monotonous day into a wealth of shadows and 
frame the stars at night within random curves and angles. 
Nightfall in the vicoli! Pale yellow lanterns awake like 
apparitions in the last moments of twilight, claiming the 
dark narrow lanes for their own, granting an enchanted 
but somewhat uneasy passage to those who would walk 
there. And last evening I found myself among these spirits.
Intoxicated as much by the Via Porta Fuga as by the wine I 
had drunk at dinner, I wandered across bridges, beneath 
arches and overhanging roofs, up and down battered stair­
ways, past ivy-hung walls and black windows masked with 
iron grillwork. I turned a corner and glimpsed a small open 
doorway ahead. Without thinking, I looked inside as I passed, 
seeing only a tiny niche, not even a room, which must have 
been constructed in the space between two buildings. All I 
could clearly discern were two small candles which were the 
source and focus of a confusion of shadows. From inside a 
man’s voice spoke to me in English: “A survival of the ancient 
world,” said the voice, which carried the accent of a culti­
vated Englishman, sounding very bored and mechanical and 
very out of place in the circumstances. And I also must note a 
strange whistling quality in his words, as if his naturally low 
speaking voice were resonating with faintly high-pitched 
overtones. “Yes, sir, I am speaking to you,” he continued. 
“A fragment of antiquity, a survival of the ancient world. 
Nothing to fear, there is no fee demanded.”
He now appeared in the doorway, a balding and flabby 
middle-aged gentleman in a tattered, tieless suit - the image 
of his own weary voice, the voice of an exhausted fairgrounds 
huckster. His face, as it reflected the pale yellow light of the 
lantern beside the open doorway, was a calm face; but its 
calmness seemed to derive from a total despair of soul rather 
than from a serenity of mind. “I am referring to the altar of

3 9 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the god,” he said. “However extensive your learning and your 
travels, that one is not among those deities you will have heard 
about; that one is not among those divinities you may have 
laughed about. It could be distantly related, perhaps, to those 
numina of Roman cesspools and sewage systems. But it is not a 
mere Cloacina, not a Mephitis or Robigo. In name, the god is 
known as Cynothoglys: the god without shape, the god of 
changes and confusion, the god of decompositions, the mor­
tician god of both gods and men, the metamortician of all 
things. There is no fee demanded.”
I remained where I stood, and then the man stepped out 
into the little vicolo in order to allow me a better view through 
the open doorway, into the candlelit room beyond. I could 
now see that the candles were shining on either side of a low 
slab, cheap candles that sent out a quivering haze of smoke. 
Between these tapers was an object which I could not define, 
some poor shapeless thing, perhaps the molten relic of a 
volcanic eruption at some distant time, but certainly not 
the image of an ancient deity. There seemed to be nothing 
and no one else inhabiting that sinister little nook.
I may now contend that, given the unusual circumstances 
described above, the wisest course of action would have been 
to mumble a few polite excuses and move on. But I have also 
described the spell which is cast by the vicoli, by their dimly 
glowing and twisted depths. Entranced by these dreamlike 
surroundings, I was thus prepared to accept the strange 
gentleman’s offer, if only to enhance my feeling of intoxica­
tion with all the formless mysteries whose name was now 
Cynothoglys.
“But be solemn, sir. I warn you to be solemn.” I stared at 
the man for a brief moment, and in that moment this urging of 
my solemnity seemed connected in some way to his own 
slavish and impoverished state, which I found it difficult to 
believe had always been his condition. “The god will not 
mock your devotions, your prayers,” he whispered and 
whistled. “Nor will it be mocked.”
Then, stepping through the little doorway, I approached 
the primitive altar. Occupying its center was a dark, mono­
lithic object whose twisting shapelessness has placed it beyond 
simple analogies in my imagination. Yet there was something 
in its contours - a certain dynamism, like that of great 
crablike roots springing forth from the ground - which 
suggested more than mere chaos or random creation. Per­

TH E PRODIGY OF DREAMS
397
haps the following statement could be more sensibly attrib­
uted to the mood of the moment, but there seemed a definite 
power somehow linked to this gnarled effigy, a gloomy force 
which was disguised by its monumentally static appearance. 
Toward the summit of the mutilated sculpture, a crooked 
armlike appendage extended outward in a frozen grasp, as if it 
had held this position for unknown eons and at any time 
might resume, and conclude, its movement.
I drew closer to the contorted idol, remaining in its 
presence far longer than I intended. That I actually found 
myself mentally composing a kind of supplication tells more 
than I am presently able about my psychological and spiritual 
state last evening. Was it this beast of writhing stone or the 
spell of the vicoli which inspired my prayer and determined its 
form? It was, I think, something which they shared, a 
suggestion of great things: great secrets and great sorrows, 
great wonders and catastrophes, great destinies, great doom, 
and a single great death. My own. Drugged by this inspira­
tion, I conceived my ideal leavetaking from this earth - a 
drama prepared by strange portents, swiftly developed by 
dreams and visions nurtured in an atmosphere of sublime 
dread, growing overnight like some gaudy fungus in a 
forgotten cellar, and always with the awful hand of the 
mortician god working the machinery behind the scenes. 
Beasts and men would form an alliance with great Cy- 
nothoglys, the elements themselves would enter into the 
conspiracy, a muted vortex of strange forces all culminating 
in a spectral denouement, all converging to deliver me to the 
inevitable, but deliver me in a manner worthy of the most 
expansive and unearthly sensations of my life. I conceived the 
primal salvation of tearing flesh, of seizure by the god and the 
ecstatic rending of the frail envelope of skin and sinew. And as 
others only sink into their deaths - into mine I would soar.
But how could I have desired this to be? I now wonder, 
fully sober following my debauch of dreams. Perhaps I am too 
repentant of my prayer and try to reassure myself by my very 
inability to give it a rational place in the history of the world. 
The mere memory of my adventure and my delirium, I 
expect, will serve to carry me through many of the barren 
days ahead, though only to abandon me in the end to a 
pathetic demise of meaningless pain. By then I may have 
forgotten the god I encountered, along with the one who 
served him like a slave. Both seem to have disappeared from

3 9 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
the vicoli, their temple standing empty and abandoned. And 
now I am free to imagine that it was not I who came to the 
vicoli to meet the god, but the god who came to meet me.
After reading these old words, Arthur Emerson sat silent and 
solemn at his desk. Was it over for him, then? All the portents had 
appeared and all the functionaries of his doom were now 
assembled, both outside the library door - where the footfall of 
man and beast sounded -  and beyond the library windows, where 
a horrible thing without shape had begun to loom out of the fog, 
reaching through the walls and windows as if they too were merely 
mist. Were a thousand thoughts of outrage and dread now 
supposed to rise within him at the prospect of this occult extermi­
nation? After all, he was about to have forced upon him that 
dream of death, that whim of some young adventurer who could 
not resist being granted a wish or two by a tourist attraction.
And now the crying of the swans had begun to sound from the 
lake and through the fog and into the house. Their shrieks were 
echoing everywhere, and he might have predicted as much. Would 
he soon be required to add his own shrieks to theirs, was it now 
time to be overcome by the wonder of the unknown and the 
majesty of fate; was this how it was done in the world of doom?
Risking an accusation of bad manners, Arthur Emerson failed to 
rise from his chair to greet the guest he had invited so long ago. 
“You are too late,” he said in a dry voice. “But since you have 
taken the trouble. . .” And the god, like some obedient slave, 
descended upon its victim.
It was only at the very end that Arthur Emerson’s attitude of 
incuriosity abandoned him. As he had guessed, perhaps even 
wished, his voice indeed became confused with the screaming of 
the swans, soaring high into the muffling fog.

MRS RINALDI’S ANGEL
From time to time during my childhood, the striking dreams 
that I nightly experienced would become brutally vivid, 
causing me to awake screaming.
The shouting done, I sank back into my bed in a state of super- 
enervation resulting from the bodiless adventures imposed upon 
my slumbering self. Yet my body was surely affected by this 
nocturnal regimen, exercised harshly by visions both crystalline 
and confused. This activity, however immaterial, only served to 
drain my reserves of strength and in a few moments stole from me 
the benefits of a full night’s sleep. Nevertheless, while I was 
deprived of the privilege of a natural rest, there may also have 
been some profit gained: the awful opulence of the dream, a rich 
and swollen world nourished by the exhaustion of the flesh. The 
world, in fact, as such. Any other realm seemed an absence by 
comparison, at best a chasm in the fertile graveyard of life.
Of course my parents did not share my feelings on this subject. 
“What is wrong with him,” I heard my father bellow from far down 
the hallway, his voice full of reproach. Shortly afterward my 
mother was by my side. “They seem to be getting worse,” she 
would say. Then on one occasion she whispered, “I think it’s time 
we did something about this problem.”
The tone of her voice told me that what she had in mind was not 
the doctor’s appointment so often urged by my father. Hers was a 
more dubious quest for a curative, though one which no doubt also 
seemed more appropriate to my “suffering.” My mother was 
always prone to the enticements of superstition, and my troubled 
dreams appeared to justify an indulgence in unorthodox measures. 
Her shining and solemn gaze betrayed her own dreams of 
trafficking with esoteric forces, of being on familiar terms with 
specialists in a secret universe, entrepreneurs of the intangible.
“Tomorrow your father is leaving early on business. You stay 
home from school, and then we’ll go and visit a woman I know.” 
Late the following morning, my mother and I went to a house in 
one of the outlying neighborhoods of town and were graciously

400
THOMAS LIGOTTI
invited to be seated in the parlor of the long-widowed Mrs Rinaldi. 
Perhaps it was only the fatigue my dreams had inflicted on me that 
made it so difficult to consolidate any lucid thoughts or feelings 
about the old woman and her remote house. Although the well- 
ordered room we occupied was flush with sunlight, this illumina­
tion somehow acted in the way of a wash over a watercolor 
painting, blurring the outline of things and subduing the clarity 
of surfaces. This obscurity was not dispersed even by the large and 
thickly shaded lamp Mrs Rinaldi kept lighted beside the small 
divan on which she and my mother sat. I was close to them in an 
old but respectably upholstered armchair, and yet their forms 
refused to come into focus, just as everything else in that room 
resisted definition. How well I knew such surroundings, those deep 
interiors of dream where everything is saturated with unreality 
and more or less dissolves under a direct gaze. I could tell how 
neatly this particular interior was arranged -  pictures perfectly 
straight and tight against the walls, well-dusted figurines arranged 
along open shelves, lace-fringed tablecovers set precisely in place, 
and delicate silk flowers in slim vases of colored glass. Yet there was 
something so fragile about the balance of these things, as if they 
were all susceptible to sudden derangement should there be some 
upset, no matter how subtle, in the secret system which held them 
together. This volatility seemed to extend to Mrs Rinaldi herself, 
though in fact she may have been its source.
Casually examined, she appeared to present only the usual 
mysteries of old women who might be expected to speak with a 
heavy accent, whether or not they actually did so. She wore the 
carnal bulk and simple attire of a peasant race, and her calm 
manner indeed epitomized the peasant quietude of popular 
conception: her hands folded without tremor upon a wide lap 
and her eyes mildly attentive. But those eyes were so pale, as was 
her complexion and gauzy hair. It was as if some great strain had 
depleted her, and was continually depleting her, of the strong 
coloring she once possessed, draining her powers and leaving her 
vulnerable to some tenuous onslaught. At any moment during the 
time my mother was explaining the reason why we sought her 
help, Mrs Rinaldi might have degenerated before our eyes, might 
have finally succumbed to spectral afflictions she had spent so 
many years fending off, both for her own sake and for the sake of 
others. And still she might have easily been mistaken for just 
another old woman whose tidy parlor displayed no object or image 
that would betray her most questionable and perilous occupation.
“Missus,” she said to my mother, though her eyes were on me,

m r s  R i n a l d i ’s a n g e l
401
“I would like to take your son into another room in this house. 
There I believe I may begin to help him.”
My mother assented and Mrs Rinaldi escorted me down a 
hallway to a room at the back of the house. The room reminded 
me of a little shop of some kind, one that kept its merchandise 
hidden in dark cabinets along the walls, in great chests upon the 
floor, boxes and cases of every sort piled here and there. Nothing 
except these receptacles, this array of multiform exteriors, was 
exposed to view. The only window was tightly shuttered and a 
bare light bulb hanging overhead served as the only illumination.
There was nowhere to sit, only empty floor space; Mrs Rinaldi 
took my hand and stood me at the center of the room. After gazing 
rather sternly down at me for some moments, she proceeded to 
pace slowly around me.
“Do you know what dreams are?” she asked quietly, and then 
immediately began to answer her own question. “They are 
parasites - maggots of the mind and soul, feeding on the mind 
and soul as ordinary maggots feed on the body. And their feeding 
on the mind and soul in turn gnaws away at the body, which in 
turn again affects the mind and the soul, and so on until death. 
These things cannot be separated, nor can anything else. Because 
everything is terribly inseparable and affects every other thing. 
Even the most alien things are connected together with every other 
thing. And so if these dreams have no world of their own to nourish 
them, they may come into yours and possess it, exhaust it little by 
little each night. They use your world and use it up. They wear 
your face and the faces of things you know: things that are yours 
they use in ways that are theirs. And some persons are so easy for 
them to use, and they use them so hard. But they use everyone and 
have always used everyone, because they are from the old time, the 
time before all the worlds awoke from a long and helpless night. 
And these dreams, these things that are called dreams, are still 
working to throw us back into that great mad darkness, to exhaust 
each one of us in our lonely sleep and to use up everyone until 
death. Little by little, night after night, they take us away from 
ourselves and from the truth of things. I myself know very well 
what this can be like and what the dreams can do to us. They make 
us dance to their strange illusions until we are too exhausted to live. 
And they have found in you, child, an easy partner for their 
horrible dancing.”
With these words Mrs Rinaldi not only revealed a side of herself 
quite different from the serene wise woman my mother had seen, 
but she also took me much deeper into things I had merely

402
THOMAS LIGOTTI
suspected until that day in the room where chests and strange 
boxes were piled up everywhere and great cabinets loomed along 
the walls, so many tightly closed doors and drawers and locked-up 
lids with so many things on the other side of them.
“Of course,” she went on, “these dreams of yours cannot be 
wholly exorcised from your life, but only driven back so that they 
may do no extraordinary harm. They will still triumph in the end, 
denying us not just the restoration of nightly sleep. For ultimately 
they steal away the time which might have measured into 
immortality. They corrupt us in every way, abducting us from 
the ranks of angels we might have been or become, pure and 
calm and everlasting. It is because of them that we endure such a 
meager allotment of years, with all their foulness. This is all I can 
offer you, child, even if you may not understand what it means. For 
it is surely not meant that you should fall into the fullest corruption 
before your time.”
Her speech concluded, Mrs Rinaldi stood before me, massive 
and motionless, her breathing now a bit labored. I confess that her 
theories intrigued me as far as I could comprehend them, for at the 
time her statements regarding the meaning and mechanisms of 
dream appeared to be founded on somewhat questionable assump­
tions, unnecessarily outlandish in their departures from the oldest 
orthodoxies of creation. Nonetheless, I decided not to resist 
whatever applications she chose to make of her ideas. On her 
side, she was scrutinizing my small form with some intensity, 
engaged in what seemed a psychic sizing up of my presence, as 
if she was seriously unsure whether or not it was safe to move on to 
the next step with me.
Apparently resolving her doubts, she shuffled over to a tall 
cabinet, unlocked its door with a key she had taken from a sagging 
pocket in her dress, and from within removed two items: a slim 
decanter half-filled with a dark red liquid, presumably wine, and a 
shallow wide-mouthed drinking glass. Carrying these objects back 
to me, she put out her right hand, in which she held the glass, and 
said: “Take this and spit into it.” After I had done this, she poured 
some of the wine into the glass and then replaced the decanter in its 
cabinet, which she locked once again. “Now kneel down on the 
floor,” she ordered. “Don’t let anything spill out of the glass, and 
don’t get up until I tell you to do so. I’m going to turn out the 
light.”
Even in total darkness, Mrs Rinaldi maneuvered well about the 
room, her footsteps again moving away from me. I heard her 
opening another cabinet, or perhaps it was a large chest whose

m r s  r i n a l d i ’s a n g e l
403
heavy lid she struggled to push back, its hinges grinding in the 
darkness. A slight draft crossed the room, a brief drifting current of 
air without scent and neither warm nor cold. Mrs Rinaldi then 
approached me, moving more slowly than she had before, as if 
bearing some weighty object. With a groan, she set it down, and I 
heard it scrape the floor inches from where I knelt, though I could 
not see what it was.
Suddenly a thin line of light scored the blackness, and I could see 
Mrs Rinaldi’s old finger slowly lifting the lid of a long low box from 
which the luminousness emanated. The glowing slit widened as the 
lid was drawn back farther, revealing a pale brilliance that seemed 
confined wholly within the box itself, casting not the least glimmer 
into the room. The source of this light was a kind of incandescent 
vapor that curled about in a way that seemed to draw the room’s 
darkness into its lustrous realm, which appeared to extend beyond 
the boundaries of the visible and made the box before me look 
bottomless. But I felt the bottom for myself when the whispering 
voice of Mrs Rinaldi instructed me to place the glass I was holding 
down into the box. So I offered the glass to that fluorescent mist, 
that churning vapor which was electrical in some way, scintillating 
with infinitesimal flashes of sharp light, sprinkled with shattered 
diamonds.
I expected to feel something as I put my hand in the shining box, 
easily setting the glass upon its shallow and quite solid bottom. But 
there was nothing at all to be felt, no sensation whatever - not even 
that of my own hand. There seemed to be a power to this prodigy, 
but it was a terribly quiescent power, a cataract of the purest light 
plummetting silently in the blackness of space. If it could have 
spoken it might have told, in a soft and reverberant voice, of the 
lonely peace of the planets, the uninhabited paradise of clouds, and 
an antiseptic infinity.
After I placed the glass of wine and spittle into the box, the light 
from within took on a rosy hue for just a moment, then resumed its 
glittering whiteness once again. It had taken the offering. Mrs 
Rinaldi whispered “amen,” then carefully closed the lid upon the 
box, returning the room to blackness. I heard her replace the 
object in its tabernacle of storage, wherever that may have been. 
At last the lights came on.
“You can get up now,” Mrs Rinaldi said. “And wipe off your 
knees, they’re a little dirty.”
When I finished brushing ofT my pants I found that Mrs Rinaldi 
was again scrutinizing me for tell-tale signs of some possible 
misunderstanding or perhaps misconduct that I might disclose

4 0 4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
to her. I imagined that she was about to say, “Do not ask what it 
was you saw in this room.” But in actuality she said, “You will feel 
better now, but never try to guess what is in that box. Never seek to 
know more about it.” She did not pause to hear any response I 
might have had to her command, for she was indeed a wise woman 
and knew that in matters such as these no casual oath of abstention 
can be trusted, all fine intentions notwithstanding.
As soon as we left Mrs Rinaldi’s house, my mother asked me 
what had happened, and I described the ceremony in detail. 
Nevertheless, she remained at a loss for any simple estimate of 
what I had told her: while she expected that Mrs Rinaldi’s 
methods might be highly unusual, she also knew her own son’s 
imagination. Still, she was obliged to keep faith with the arcane 
processes that she herself had set in motion. So after I recounted 
the incidents that took place in that room, my mother only nodded 
silently, perhaps bewilderedly.
I should document that, for a certain period of time, my mother’s 
faith in Mrs Rinaldi did not appear to have been misplaced. The 
very day of our visit to the old woman was for me the beginning of 
a unique phase of experience. Even my father noted the change in 
my nighttime habits, as well as a newfound characterology I 
exhibited throughout the day. “The boy does seem quieter 
now,” he commented to my mother.
Indeed, I could feel myself approaching a serenity almost 
shameful in its expansiveness, one that submerged me in a placid 
routine of the most violent contrast to my former life. I slept 
straight through each night and barely ruffled my bedcovers. This 
is not to claim that my sleep was left completely untouched by 
dreams. But these were no more than ripples on great becalmed 
waters, pathetic gestures of something that was trying to bestir the 
immobility of a vast and colorless world. A few figures might 
appear, tremulous as smoke, but they were the merest invalids of 
hallucination, lacking the strength to speak or raise a hand against 
my terrible peace.
My daydreams were actually more interesting, while still being 
incredibly vague and without tension. Sitting quietly in the 
classroom at school, I often gazed out the window at clouds and 
sunlight, watching the way the sunlight penetrated the clouds and 
the way the clouds were filled with both sunlight and shadows. Yet 
no images or ideas were aroused by this sight, as they had been 
before. Only a vacant meditation took place, a musing without 
subject matter. I could feel something trying to emerge in my

m r s  r i n a l d T s a n g e l
4 0 5
imagination, some wild and colorful drama that was being kept far 
away from me, as far away as those clouds, remaining entirely 
vaporous and empty of either sense or sensation. And if I tried to 
draw any pictures in my notebook, allowing my hand all possible 
freedom (in order to find out if it could feel and remember what I 
could not), I found myself sketching over and over the same thing: 
boxes, boxes, boxes.
Nonetheless, I cannot say that I was unhappy during this time. 
My nightmares and everything associated with them had been 
bled from my system, drained away as I slept. I had been purified 
of tainted substances, sponged clean of strangely tinted stains on 
my mind and soul. I felt the vapid joy of a lightened being, a kind 
of clarity which seemed in a way true and even virtuous. But this 
moratorium on every form of darkness could only last so long 
before the old impulses asserted themselves within me, moving out 
like a pack of famished wolves in search of the stuff that once fed 
them and would feed them again.
For a number of nights my dreams remained somewhat anemic 
and continued to present only the palest characters and scenes. 
Thus, they had been rendered too weak to use me as they had 
before, seizing, as they did, the contents of my life - my memories 
and emotions, all the paraphernalia of a private history -  and 
working them in their way, giving form to things that had none of 
their own and thereby exhausting my body and soul. Mrs Rinaldi’s 
theory of these parasites that have been called dreams was there­
fore accurate ... as far as it went. But she had failed to consider, or 
perhaps refused to acknowledge, that the dreamer on his part 
draws something from the dream, gaining a store of experience 
otherwise impossible to obtain, hoarding the grotesque or banal 
enigmas of the night to try and fill out the great empty spaces of the 
day. And my dreams had ceased to perform this function, or at 
least were no longer adequate to my needs - that appetite I had 
discovered in myself for banqueting on the absurd and horrible, 
even the perfectly evil. It was this deprivation, I believe, which 
brought about the change in the nature of my dreaming.
Having such paltry sustenance on which to nourish my tastes - 
frail demons and insipid decors - I must have been thrown back 
upon my own consciousness . . . until finally I became fully aware 
of my dreaming state, an intensely lucid spelunker in the caves of 
sleep. Over the course of several nights, then, I noticed a new or 
formerly obscure phenomenon, something that existed in the 
distance of those bankrupt landscapes that I had started to 
explore. It was a kind of sickly mist that lingered about the

406
THOMAS LIG O TTI
horizon of each dream, exerting a definite magnetism, a tugging 
upon the austere scenes that it enveloped from all sides, even 
hovering high above like an animate sky, a celestial vault that 
glistened softly. Yet the dreams themselves were cast in the dullest 
tones and contained the most spare and dilapidated furnishings.
In the very last dream I had of this type, I was wandering amid 
a few widely scattered ruins that seemed to have arisen from some 
undersea abyss, all soft and pallid from their dark confinement. 
Like the settings of the other dreams, this one seemed familiar, 
though incomplete, as if I was seeing the decayed remnants of 
something I might have known in waking life. For those were not 
time-eaten towers rising around me, and at my feet there were not 
sunken strongboxes crumbling like rotten flesh. Instead, these 
objects were the cabinets and cases I remembered from that room 
in Mrs Rinaldi’s house, except now this memory was degenerating, 
being dragged away little by little, digested by that mist which 
surrounded everything and nibbled at it. And the more closely I 
approached this mist, the more decomposed the scenery of the 
dream became, until it was consumed altogether and I could see 
nothing but that sparkling, swirling vapor.
It was only when I had entered this foggy void that the true 
sense of dream, the inherent dread of my visions, was restored to 
me. Here was a sort of reservoir into which the depths of my 
dreams were being directed, leaving only a shallow spillover that 
barely trickled through my nights. Here, I say, without knowing 
really what place or plane of being it was: some spectral venue, a 
vacant lot situated along the backstreet of sleep, an outpost of the 
universe itself. .. or perhaps merely the inside of a box hidden 
away in the house of an old woman, a box in which something 
existed in all its insensible purity, a cloudy ether free of tainted 
forms and knowledge, freely cleansing others with its sterile grace.
In any event, I sensed that the usual boundaries of my world of 
sleep had extended into another realm. And it was here, I found, 
that the lost dreams were fully alive in their essence. Consumed 
within that barren vapor which I had seen imbibe a mixture of my 
own saliva and the reddest wine, they lived in exile from the 
multitude of unwitting hosts whose experiences they had once used 
like a wardrobe for those eerie performances behind the curtain of 
sleep. These were the parasites which forced the sleeper into the 
dual role of both player and witness in the manipulations of his 
memories and his emotions, the ungranted abduction of his private 
history for those reckless revels called dreams. But here, in that 
prison of glittering purity, they had been reduced to their

m r s R i n a l d i ’s a n g e l
407
primordial state - dreams in abstraction, faceless and formless 
things from the old time that a very old woman had revealed to 
me. And although they had neither face nor form, none of the 
multitudinous disguises in which I had always known them, their 
presence was still quite palpable all around me, bearing down 
upon the richly laden lucidity I had brought with me into a place 
where I did not belong.
A struggle evolved as that angelic mist - agent of my salvation - 
held at bay the things that craved my mind and soul, my very 
consciousness. But rather than join in that struggle, I gave myself 
up to this ravenous siege, oíTering my awareness to what had none 
of its own, bestowing all the treasures of my life on this wasteland of 
abstractions.
Then the infinite whiteness itself was flooded with the colors of 
countless faces and forms, a blank sky suddenly dense with rain­
bows, until everything was so saturated with revels and thick with 
frenzy that it took on the utter blackness of the old time. And in the 
blackness I awoke, screaming for all the world.
The next day I was standing on Mrs Rinaldi’s porch, watching as 
my mother repeatedly slammed the doorknocker without being 
able to summon the old woman. But something told us she was 
nevertheless at home, a shadow that we saw pass nervously behind 
the front window. At last the door opened for us, but whoever 
opened it stayed on the other side, saying: “Missus, take your child 
home. There is nothing more that can be done. I made a mistake 
with him.”
My mother protested the recurrence of my “sickness,” taking a 
step inside the house and pulling me along with her. But Mrs 
Rinaldi only said: “Do not come in here. It is not a fit place to visit, 
and I am not fit to be looked upon.” From what I could observe of 
the parlor, it did seem that an essential change had occurred, as if 
the room’s fragile balance had failed and the ever-threatening 
derangement of its order had finally been consummated. Every­
thing in this interior seemed askew, distorted by some process of 
decay and twisted out of natural proportion. It was a room seen 
through a warped and strangely colored window.
And how much stranger this color appeared when Mrs Rinaldi 
suddenly showed herself, and I saw that her once-pale eyes and 
sallow face had taken on the same tint, a greenish glaze as of 
something both rotten and reptilian. My mother was immediately 
silenced by this sight. “Now will you leave me?” she said. “Even for 
myself there is nothing I can do any longer. You know what I am

408
THOMAS L IGOTTI
saying, child. All those years the dreams had been kept away. But 
you have consorted with them, I know you did. I have made a 
mistake with you. You let my angel be poisoned by the dreams 
which you could not deny. It was an angel, did you know that? It 
was pure of all thinking and pure of all dreaming. And you are the 
one who made it think and dream and now it is dying. And it is 
dying not as an angel, but as a demon. Do you want to see what it 
is like now?” she said, gesturing toward a door that led into the 
cellar of her house. “Yes, it is down there because it is not the way 
it was and could not remain where it was. It crawled away with its 
own body, the body of a demon. And it has its own dreams, the 
dreams of a demon. It is dreaming and dying of its dreams. And I 
am dying too, because all the dreams have come back.”
Mrs Rinaldi then began to approach me, and the color of her 
eyes and her face seemed to deepen. That was when my mother 
grasped my arm to pull me quickly from the house. As we ran ofTI 
looked over my shoulder and saw the old woman raving in the 
open doorway, cursing me for a demon.
It was not long afterward that we learned of Mrs Rinaldi’s 
death. True to her own diagnosis, the parasites were upon her, 
although local gossip told that she had been suffering for years 
from a cancer of some kind. There was also evidence that another 
inhabitant of the house survived the old woman for a short time. As 
it happened, several of my schoolmates reported to me their 
investigations after dark at the house of the “old witch,” a place 
where I myself was forbidden by my parents to go. So I cannot 
claim that I observed with my own eyes what crept along the floor 
of that moonlit house, “like a pile of filthy rags,” said one boy.
But I did dream about this prodigy; I even dreamed about its 
dreams as they dragged every shining angelic particle of this being 
into the blackness of the old time. Then all my bad dreams abated 
after a while, just as they always had and always would, using my 
world only at intervals and gradually dissolving my life into theirs.

THE TSALAL
1 
Moxton’s leavetakìng
None of them could say how it was they had returned to the 
skeleton town. Some had reached the central cross streets, where a 
single traffic light, long dead, hung down like a dark lantern. 
There they paused and stood dumbstruck, scarecrows standing out 
of place, their clothes lying loose and worn about scrawny bodies. 
Others slowly joined them, drifting in from the outskirts or 
disembarking from vehicles weighted down with transportable 
possessions. Then all of them gathered silently together on that 
vast, gray afternoon.
They seemed too exhausted to speak and for some time 
appeared not to recognize their location among the surrounding 
forms and spaces. Their eyes were fixed with an insomniac’s stare, 
the stigma of both monumental fatigue and painful attentiveness 
to everything in sight. Their faces were narrow and ashen, a few 
specks mingling with the dusty surface of that day and seeking to 
hide themselves within its pale hours. Opposing them was the 
place they had abandoned and to which they had somehow 
returned. Only one had not gone with them. He had stayed in 
the skeleton town, and now they had come back to it, though none 
of them could say how or why this had happened.
A tall, bearded man who wore a flat-brimmed hat looked up at 
the sky. Within the clouds was a great seeping darkness, the 
overflow of the coming night and of a blackness no one had ever 
seen. After a moment the man said, “It will be dark soon.” His 
words were almost whispered and the effort of speaking appeared 
to take the last of his strength. But it was not simply a depleted 
vigor that kept him and the others from turning about and making 
a second exodus from the town.
No one could say how far they had gone before they reversed 
their course and turned back toward the place which they believed 
themselves to have abandoned forever. They could not remember 
what juncture or dead end they had reached that aborted the

4 io
THOMAS LIGOTTI
evacuation. Part of that day was lost to them, certain images and 
experiences hidden away. They could feel these things closeted 
somewhere in their minds, even if they could not call them to 
memory. They were sure they had seen something they should not 
remember. And so no one suggested that they set out again on the 
road that would take them from the town. Yet they could not 
accept staying in that place.
A paralysis had seized them, that state of soul known to those 
who dwell on the highest plane of madness, aristocrats of insanity 
whose nightmares confront them on either side of sleep. Soon 
enough the wrenching efTect of this psychic immobility became far 
less tolerable than the prospect of simply giving up and staying in 
the town. Such was the case with at least one of these cataleptic 
puppets, a sticklike woman who said, “We have no choice. He has 
stayed in his house.” Then another voice among them shouted, 
“He has stayed too long.”
A sudden wind moved through the streets, flapping the gar­
ments of the weary homecomers and swinging the traffic light that 
hung over their heads. For a moment all the signals lit up in every 
direction, disturbing the deep gray twilight. The colors drenched 
the bricks of buildings and reflected in windows with a strange 
intensity. Then the traffic light was dark once more, its fit of 
transformation done.
The man wearing a flat-brimmed hat spoke again, straining his 
whispery voice. “We must meet together after we have rested.” 
As the crowd of thin bodies sluggishly dispersed there was almost 
nothing spoken among them. An old woman shuffling along the 
sidewalk did not address anyone in particular when she said, 
“Blessed is the seed that is planted forever in darkness.”
Someone who had heard these words looked at the old woman 
and asked, “Missus, what did you say?” But the old woman 
appeared genuinely confused to learn she had said anything at all.
2 
The one who stayed behind
In the house where a man named Ray Starns and a succession of 
others before him once resided, Andrew Maness ascended the 
stairway leading to the uppermost floor, and there entered a small 
room that he had converted to a study and a chamber of 
meditation. The window in this room looked out over the rooftops 
in the neighborhood to ofler a fair view of Moxton’s main street. 
He watched as everyone abandoned the town, and he watched

TH E  TSALAL
411
them when they returned. Now far into the night, he was still 
watching after they had all retreated to their homes. And every 
one of these homes was brightly illuminated throughout the night, 
while Main Street was in darkness. Even the traffic light was 
extinguished.
He looked away from the window and fixed his eyes on a large 
book that lay open on his desk a few steps across the room. The 
pages of the book were brown and brittle as fallen leaves. “Your 
wild words were true,” he said to the book. “My friends did not go 
far before they were sent trudging back. You know what made 
them come home, but I can only guess. So many things you have 
devoutly embellished, yet you ofTer nothing on this point. As you 
say, ‘The last vision dies with him who beholds it. Blessed is the 
seed that is planted forever in darkness.’ But the seed that has been 
planted still grows.”
Andrew Maness closed the book. Written in dark ink upon its 
cover was the word TSALAL.
3 
The power of a place
Before long everyone in Moxton had shut themselves in their 
houses, and the streets at the center of town were deserted. A 
few streetlights shone on the dull facades of buildings: small shops, 
a modest restaurant, a church of indefinite denomination, and 
even a movie theater, which no one had patronized for some 
weeks. Surrounding this area were clusters of houses that in the 
usual manner collect about the periphery of skeleton towns. These 
were structures of serene desolation that had settled into the orbit 
of a dead star. They were simple pinewood coffins, full of stillness, 
leaning upright against a silent sky. Yet it was this silence that 
allowed sounds from a fantastic distance to be carried into it. And 
the stillness of these houses and their narrow streets led the eye to 
places astonishingly remote. There were even moments when the 
entire veil of desolate serenity began to tremble with the tumbling 
colors of chaos.
Everything seems so unusual in the plainness of these neighbor­
hoods that clutter the margins of a skeleton town. Often no 
mention is made of the peculiar virtues of such places by their 
residents. Even so, there may be a house that does not stand along 
one of those narrow streets but at its end. This house may even be 
somewhat different from the others in the neighborhood. Possibly 
it is taller than the other houses or displays a weathervane that

412
THOMAS LIGOTTI
spins in the wind of storms. Perhaps its sole distinguishing quality is 
that it has been long unoccupied, making it available as an empty 
vessel in which much of that magical desolation of narrow streets 
and coffin-shaped houses comes to settle and distill like an essence 
of the old alchemists. It seems part of a design -  some great 
inevitability -  that this house should exist among the other houses 
that clutch at the edges of a skeleton town. And the sense of this 
vast, all-encompassing design in fact arises within the spindly 
residents of the area when one day, unexpectedly, there arrives 
a red-headed man with the key to this particular house.
4 
Memories of a Moxton childhood
Andrew Maness closed the book named TSALAL. His eyes then 
looked around the room, which had not seemed so small to him in 
the days when he and his father occupied the house, days too long 
ago for anyone else to recall with clarity. He alone was able to 
review those times with a sure memory, and he summoned the 
image of a small bed in the far corner of the room.
As a child he would lie awake deep into the night, his eyes 
wandering about the moonlit room that seemed so great to his doll- 
like self. How the shadows enlarged that room, opening certain 
sections of it to the black abyss beyond the house and beyond the 
blackness of night, reaching into a blackness no one had ever seen. 
During these moments things seemed to be changing all around 
him, and it felt as if he had something to do with this changing. 
The shadows on the pale walls began to curl about like smoke, 
creating a swirling murkiness that at times approached sensible 
shapes -  the imperfect zoology of cloud-forms -  but soon drifted 
into hazy nonsense. Smoky shadows gathered everywhere in the 
room.
It appeared to him that he could see what was making these 
shadows which moved so slowly and smoothly. He could see that 
simple objects around him were changing their shapes and making 
strange shadows. In the moonlight he could see the candle in its 
tarnished holder resting on the bedstand. The candle had burned 
quite low when he blew out its flame hours before. Now it was 
shooting upwards like a flower growing too fast, and it sprouted 
outward with tallowy vines and blossoms, waxy wings and limbs, 
pale hands with wriggling fingers and other parts he could not 
name. When he looked across the room he saw that something was 
moving back and forth upon the windowsill with a staggered

TH E TSALAL
413
motion. This was a wooden soldier which suddenly stretched out 
the claws of a crab and began clicking them against the window- 
panes. Other things that he could barely see were also changing in 
the room; he saw shadows twisting about in strange ways. Every­
thing was changing, and he knew that he was doing something to 
make things change. But this time he could not stop the changes. It 
seemed the end of everything, the infernal apocalypse . . .
Only when he felt his father shaking him did he become aware 
that he had been screaming. Soon he grew quiet. The candle on his 
bedstand now burned brightly and was not as it had been a few 
moments before. He quickly surveyed the room to verify that 
nothing else remained changed. The wooden soldier was lying on 
the floor, and its two arms were fixed by its sides.
He looked at his father, who was sitting on the bed and still had 
on the same dark clothes he had worn when he held church services 
earlier that day. Sometimes he would see his father asleep in one of 
the chairs in the parlor or nodding at his desk where he was 
working on his next sermon. But he had never known his father to 
sleep during the night.
The Reverend Maness spoke his son’s name, and the younger 
Andrew Maness focused on his father’s narrow face, recognizing 
the crown of white hair, which yet retained a hint of red, and the 
oval-shaped spectacles reflecting the candle flame. The old man 
whispered to the boy, as if they were not alone in the house or were 
engaged in some conspiracy.
“Has it happened again, Andrew?” he asked.
“I did not want to make it happen,” Andrew protested. “I was 
not by myself.”
The Reverend Maness held up an open hand of silence and 
understanding. The glare of the candlelight on his spectacles 
concealed his eyes, which now turned toward the window beside 
his son’s bed. “The mystery of lawlessness doth already work,” he 
said.“The Epistles,” Andrew swiftly responded, as if the quote had 
been a question.
“Can you finish the passage?”
“Yes, I think I can,” answered Andrew, who then assumed a 
solemn voice and recited: “Now there is one that restraineth, until 
he be taken out of the way; and then shall be revealed the lawless 
one, whom the Lord will slay and bring to nought.”
“You know it well, that book.”
“The Holy Bible,” said Andrew, for it sounded strange to him 
not to name the book in the proper way.

414
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Yes, the Holy Bible. You should know its words better than you 
know anything else on earth. You should always have its words in 
mind like a magical formula.”
“I do, Father. You have always told me that I should.”
The Reverend Maness suddenly stood up from the bed and 
towering over his son shouted: “Liar! You did not have the words 
in your mind on this night. You could not have. You allowed the 
lawless one to do its work. You are the lawless one, but you must not 
be. You must become the other one, the katechon, the one who 
restrains.”
“I’m sorry, Father,” Andrew cried out. “Please don’t be angry 
with me.”
The Reverend Maness recovered his temper and again held up 
his open hand, the fingers of which interlocked and separated 
several times in what appeared to be a deliberate sequence of 
subtle gesticulations. He turned away from his son and slowly 
walked the length of the room. When he reached the window on 
the opposite side he stared out at the blackness that covered the 
town of Moxton, where he and his son had first arrived some years 
before. On the main street of the town the reverend had built a 
church; nearby, he had built a house. The silhouette of the church 
bell-tower was outlined against moonlit clouds. From across the 
room the Reverend Maness said to his son, “I built the church in 
town so that it would be seen. I made the church of brick so that it 
would endure.”
Now he paced the floor in an attitude of meditation while his son 
looked on in silence. After some time he stood at the foot of his son’s 
bed, glaring down as though he stood at the pulpit of his church. 
“In the Bible there is a beast,” he said. “You know this, Andrew. 
But did you know that the beast is also within you? It lives in a 
place that can never see light. Yes, it is housed here, inside the 
skull, the habitation of the Great Beast. It is a thing so wonderful in 
form that its existence might be attributed to the fantastic con- 
jurings of a sorcerer or to a visitation from a far, dark place which 
no one has ever seen. It is a nightmare that would stop our hearts 
should we ever behold it gleaming in some shadowy corner of our 
home, or should we ever -  by terrible mischance -  lay our hands 
upon the slime of its flesh. This must never happen, the beast must 
be kept within its lair. But the beast is a great power that reaches 
out into the world, a great maker of worlds that are as nothing we 
can know. And it may work changes on this world. Darkness and 
light, shape and color, the heavens and the earth -  all may be 
changed by the beast, the great reviser of things seen and unseen,

TH E TSALAL
415
known and unknown. For ail that we see and know are but empty 
vessels in which the beast shall pour a new tincture, therewith 
changing the aspect of the land, altering the shadows themselves, 
giving a strange color to our days and our nights, making the day 
into night, so that we dream while awake and can never sleep 
again. There is nothing more awful and nothing more sinful than 
such changes in things. Nothing is more grotesque than these 
changes. All changes in things are grotesque. The very possibility 
of changes in things is grotesque. And the beast is the author of all 
changes. You must never again consort with the beast!”
“Don’t say that, Father!” Andrew screamed, the palms of his 
hands pressed to his ears in order to obstruct further words of 
judgment. Yet he heard them all the same.
“You are repentant, but still you do not read the book.”
“I do read the book.”
“But you do not have the words of the book always in your 
mind, because you are always reading other books that are 
forbidden to you. I have seen you looking at my books, and I 
know that you take them from my shelves like a thief. Those are 
books that should not be read.”
“Then why do you keep them?” Andrew shouted back, knowing 
that it was evil to question his father and feeling a great joy in 
having done so. The Reverend Maness stepped around to the side 
of the bed, his spectacles flashing in the candlelight.
“I keep them,” he said, “so that you may learn by your own will 
to renounce what is forbidden in whatever shape it may appear.”
But how wonderful he found those books that were forbidden to 
him. He remembered seeing them for the first time cloistered on 
high shelves in his father’s library, that small and windowless room 
at the very heart of the house the Reverend Maness had built. 
Andrew knew these books on sight, not only by the titles which had 
such words in them as Mystery, Haunted, Secret, and Shadow, but 
also by the characters that formed these words - a jagged script 
closely resembling the letters of his own Bible - and by the shades 
of their cloth bindings, the faded vestments of autumn twilights. 
He somehow knew these books were forbidden to him, even before 
the reverend had made this fact explicit to his son and caused the 
boy to feel ashamed of his desire to hold these books and to know 
their matter. He became bound to the worlds he imagined were 
revealed in the books, obsessed with what he conceived to be a 
cosmology of nightmares. And after he had wrongfully admitted 
himself to his father’s library, he began to plot in detail the map of

416
THOMAS LIGOTTI
a mysterious universe -  a place where the sun had passed from 
view, where towns were cold and dark, where mountains trembled 
with the monstrosities they concealed, woods rattled with secret 
winds, and all the seas were horribly calm. In his dreams of this 
universe, which far surpassed the darkest visions of any of the books 
he had read, a neverending night had fallen upon every imagin­
able landscape.
In sleep he might thus find himself standing at the rim of a great 
gorge filled with pointed evergreens, and in the distance were the 
peaks of hills appearing in black silhouette under a sky chaotic 
with stars. Sublime scenery of this type often recurred in those 
books forbidden to him, sometimes providing the subject for one of 
the engraved illustrations accompanying a narrative. But he had 
never read in any book what his dream showed him in the sky 
above the gorge and above the hills. For each of the bright, 
bristling stars would begin to loosen in the places where the 
blackness held them. They wobbled at first, and then they rolled 
over in their bed of night. Now it was the other side of the stars that 
he saw, which was unlike anything ever displayed to the eyes of the 
earth. What he could see resembled not stars but something more 
like the underside of large stones one might overturn deep in damp 
woods. They had changed in the strangest way, changed because 
everything in the universe was changing and could no longer be 
protected from the changes being worked upon them by something 
that had been awakened in the blackness, something that desired 
to remold everything it could see . . . and had the power to see all 
things. Now the faces of the stars were crawling with things that 
made them gleam in a way that stars had never gleamed before. 
And then these things he saw in his dream began to drip from the 
stars toward the earth, streaking the night with their gleaming 
trails.
In those nights of dreaming, all things were subject to forces that 
knew nothing of law or reason, and nothing possessed its own 
nature or essence but was only a mask upon the face of absolute 
darkness, a blackness no one had ever seen.
Even as a child he realized that his dreams did not follow the 
creation taught to him by his father and by that book. It was another 
creation he pursued, a counter-creation, and the books on the 
shelves of his father’s library could not reveal to him what he 
desired to know of this other genesis. While denying it to his father, 
and often to himself, he dreamed of reading the book that was truly 
forbidden, the scripture of a deadly creation, one that would tell 
the tale of the universe in its purest sense.

TH E TSALAL
417
But where could he find such a book? On what shelf of what 
library would it appear before his eyes? Would he recognize it 
when fortune allowed it to fall into his hands? Over time he 
became certain he would know the book, so often did he dream 
of it. For in the most unlikely visions he found himself in possession 
of the book, as though it belonged to him as a legacy. But while he 
held the book in dreams, and even saw its words with miraculous 
clarity, he could not comprehend the substance of a script whose 
meaning seemed to dissolve into nonsense. Never was he granted in 
these dreams an understanding of what the book had to tell him. 
Only as the most obscure and strangest sensations did it commu­
nicate with his mind, only as a kind of presence that invaded and 
possessed his sleep. On waking, all that remained was a euphoric 
terror. And it was then that objects around him would begin their 
transformations, for his soul had been made lawless by dreams and 
his mind was filled with the words of the wrong book.
5 
The author of the book
“You knew it was hopeless,” said Andrew Maness as he stood over 
the book that lay on the desk, glaring at the pages of old hand­
writing in black ink. “You told me to always read the right words 
and to always have them in my mind, but you knew I would read 
the wrong words. You knew what I was. You knew that such a 
being existed only to read the wrong words and to want to see those 
words written across the sky in a black script. Because you yourself 
were the author of the book. And you brought your son to the 
place where he would read your words. This town was the wrong 
place, and you knew it was the wrong place. But you told yourself 
it was the only place where what you had done . . . might be 
undone. Because you became afraid of what you and those others 
had done. For years you were intrigued by the greatest madness, 
the most atrocious secrets and schemes, and then you became 
afraid. What did you discover that could make you so afraid, you 
and the others who were always intrigued by the monstrous things 
you told of, that you sang of, in the book? You preached to me that 
all change is grotesque, that the very possibility of change is evil. 
Yet in the book you declare ‘transformation as the only truth* -  the 
only truth of the Tsalal, that one who is without law or reason. 
‘There is no nature to things,’ you wrote in the book. ‘There are no 
faces except masks held tight against the pitching chaos behind 
them.’ You wrote that there is not true growth or evolution in the

418
THOMAS LIGOTTI
life of this world but only transformations of appearance, an 
incessant melting and molding of surfaces without underlying 
essence. Above all you pronounced that there is no salvation of 
any being because no beings exist as such, nothing exists to be 
saved -  everything, everyone exists only to be drawn into the slow 
and endless swirling of mutations that we may see every second of 
our lives if we simply gaze through the eyes of the Tsalal.
“Yet these truths of yours that you kept writing in your book 
cannot be the reason you became afraid, for even while your 
voice is somber or trembling to speak of these things, your 
phrases are burdened with fascination and you are always 
marvelling at the grand mockery of the universal masquerade, 
the ‘hallucination of lies that obscures the vision of all but the 
elect of the Tsalal.’ It is something of which you will not speak or 
cannot speak that caused you to become afraid. What did you 
discover that you could not face without renouncing what you 
and those others had done, without running to this town to hide 
yourself in the doctrines of a church that you did not truly 
uphold? Did this knowledge, this discovery remain within you, at 
once alive and annihilated to your memory? Was it this that 
allowed you to prophesy that the people of Moxton would return 
to their town, yet prevented you from telling what phenomenon 
could be more terrible than the nightmare they had fled, those 
grotesque changes which had overtaken the streets and houses of 
this place?
“You knew this was the wrong place when you brought me here 
as a child. And I knew that this was the wrong place when I came 
home to this town and stayed here until everyone knew that I had 
stayed too long in this place.”
6 
The white-haired woman
Not long after Andrew Maness moved back to the town of Moxton, 
an old woman came up to him late one afternoon on the street. He 
was staring into the window of a repair shop that closed early. 
Corroded pieces of machinery were strewn before him, as if on 
display: the guts and bones of a defunct motor of some kind. His 
reverie was disturbed when the old woman said, “I’ve seen you 
before.”
“That is possible, ma’am,” he replied. “I moved into a house on 
Oakman a few weeks ago.”
“No, I mean that I’ve seen you before that.” He smiled very

TH E  TSALAL
419
slightly at the old woman and said, “I lived here for a time, but I 
didn’t think anyone would remember.”
“I remember the hair. It’s red but kind of greenish too, yellow 
maybe.”
“Discolored through the years,” he explained.
“I remember it the way it was. And it’s not much different now. 
My hair’s white as salt.”
“Yes, ma’am,” he said.
“I told those damn fools I remembered. No one listens to me. 
What’s your name?”
“My name, Mrs . . . ”
“Spikes,” she snapped.
“My name, Mrs Spikes, is Andrew Maness.”
“Maness, Maness,” she chanted to herself. “No, I don’t think I 
know Maness. You’re in the Starns house.”
“It was in fact purchased from one of Mr Starns’ family who 
inherited the house after he died.”
“Used to be the Waterses lived there. Before them the Wellses. 
And before them the McQuisters. But that’s getting to be before 
my time. Before the McQuisters is just too damn long to remem­
ber. Too damn long.” She was repeating these words as she 
charged off down the street. Andrew Maness watched her thin 
form and salt-white hair recede and lose all color in the drab 
surroundings of the skeleton town.
7 
Revelations of a unique being
For Andrew Maness, the world had always been divided into two 
separate realms defined by what he could only describe as a 
prejudice of soul. Accordingly he was provided with a dual set of 
responses that he would have to a given locale, so that he would 
know if it was a place that was right for him, or one that was 
wrong. In places of the former type there was a separation between 
his self and the world around him, an enveloping absence. These 
were the great empty spaces which comprised nearly the whole of 
the world. There was no threat presented by such places. But there 
were other places where it seemed a presence of some dreadful kind 
was allowed to enter, a force that did not belong to these places yet 
moved freely within them . . . and within him. It was precisely 
such places as this, and the presence within them, which came to 
preside over his life and determine its course. He had no choice, for 
this was the scheme of the elect persons who had generated him, and

420
THOMAS LIGOTTI
he was compelled to fall in with their design. He was in fact the 
very substance of their design.
His father knew that there were certain places in the world to 
which he must respond, even in his childhood, and which would 
cause him to undergo a second birth under the sign of the Tsalal. 
The Reverend Maness knew that the town of Moxton was 
among such places - outposts on the desolate borderlands of 
the real. He said that he had brought his son to this town so that 
the boy would learn to resist the presence he would feel here and 
elsewhere in the world. He said that he had brought his son to 
the right place, but he had in fact brought him to a place that 
was entirely wrong for the being that he was. And he said that 
his son should always fill his mind with the words of that book. 
But these words were easily silenced and usurped by those other 
words in those other books. His father seemed to entice him into 
reading the very books he should not have read. Soon these 
books provoked in Andrew Maness the sense of that power and 
that presence which may manifest itself in a place such as the 
town of Moxton. And there were other places where he felt that 
same presence. Following intuitions that grew stronger as he 
grew older, Andrew Maness would find such places by hazard or 
design.
Perhaps he would come upon an abandoned house standing 
shattered and bent in an isolated landscape - a raw skeleton in a 
boneyard. But this dilapidated structure would seem to him a 
temple, a wayside shrine to that dark presence with which he 
sought union, and also a doorway to the dark world in which it 
dwelled. Nothing can convey those sensations, the countless 
nuances of trembling excitement, as he approached such a 
decomposed edifice whose skewed and ragged outline suggested 
another order of existence, the truest order of existence, as though 
such places as this house were only wavering shadows cast down to 
earth by a distant, unseen realm of entity. There he would 
experience the touch of something outside himself, something 
whose will was confused with his own, as in a dream wherein 
one feels possessed of a fantastic power to determine what events 
will transpire and yet also feels helpless to control that power, 
which, through oneself, may produce the chaos of nightmare. This 
mingling of mastery and helplessness overwhelmed him with a 
black intoxication and suggested his life’s goal: to work the great 
wheel that turns in darkness, and to be broken upon it.
Yet Andrew Maness had always known that his ambition was an 
echo of that conceived by his father many years before, and that

TH E TSALAL
421
the pursuit of this ambition had been consummated in his own 
birth.
8 
Not much more than a century ago
“As a young man,” the Reverend Maness explained to his son, 
who was now a young man himself, “I thought myself an adept in 
the magic of the old gods, a communicant of entities both demonic 
and divine. I did not comprehend for years that I was merely a 
curator in the museum where the old gods were on display, their 
replicas and corpses set up in the countless galleries of the invisible. . . 
and now the extinct. I knew that in past millennia these beings had 
always replaced one another as each of them passed away along 
with the worlds that worshipped them. This mirror-like succession 
of supreme monarchs may still seem eternal to those who have not 
sensed the great shadow which has always been positioned behind 
every deity or pantheon. Yet I was able to sense this shadow and 
see that it had eclipsed the old gods without in any way being one 
of their kind. For it was even older than they, the dark background 
against which they had forever carried on their escapades as best 
they could. But its emergence into the foreground of things was 
something new, an advent occurring not much more than a 
century ago. Perhaps this great blackness, this shadow, has always 
prevailed on worlds other than our own, places that have never 
known the gods of order, the gods of design. Even this world had long 
prepared for it, creating certain places where the illusion of a 
reality was worn quite thin and where the gods of order and design 
could barely breathe. Such places as this town of Moxton became 
fertile ground for this blackness no one had ever seen.
“Yes, it was not much more than a century ago that the people 
of this world betrayed their awareness of a new god that was not a 
god. Such an awareness may never be complete, never reach a true 
agony of illumination, except among an elect. I myself was slow in 
coming to it. The authenticity of my enlightenment may seem 
questionable and arbitrary, considering its source. Nonetheless, 
there is a tradition of revelation, an ancient protocol, by which 
knowledge of the unseen is delivered to us through inspired texts. 
And it is by means of these scriptures dictated from beyond that we 
of this world may discover what we have not and cannot experi­
ence in a direct confrontation. So it was with the Tsalal. But the 
book that I have written, and which I have named Tsalal, is not 
the revealed codex of which I am speaking. It is only a reflection,

422
THOMAS LIGOTTI
or rather a distillation, of those other writings in which I first 
detected the existence, the emergence, of the Tsalal itself.
“Of course, there have always been writings of a certain kind, a 
primeval lore which provided allusions to the darkness of creation 
and to monstrosities of every type, human and inhuman, as if there 
were a difference. Something profoundly dark and grotesque has 
always had a life in every language of this world, appearing at 
intervals and throwing its shadow for a moment upon stories that 
try to make sense of things, often confounding the most happy tale. 
And this shadow is never banished in any of these stories, however 
we may pretend otherwise. The darkness of the grotesque is an 
immortal enigma: in all the legends of the dead, in all the tales of 
creatures of the night, in all the mythologies of mad gods and lucid 
demons, there remains a kind of mocking nonsense to the end, a 
thick and resonant voice which calls out from the heart of these 
stories and declares: ‘Still I am here.’ And the idiot laughter of that 
voice -  how it sounds through the ages! This laughter often reaches 
our ears through certain stories wherein this grotesque spirit itself 
has had a hand. However we have tried to ignore the laughter of 
this voice, however we have tried to overwhelm its words and 
protect ourselves by always keeping other words in our minds, it 
still sounds throughout the world.
“But it was not much more than a century ago that this 
laughter began to rise to a pitch. You have heard it yourself, 
Andrew, as you furtively made incursions into my library during 
your younger days, revelling in a Gothic feast of the grotesque. 
These books do not hold an arcane knowledge intended for the 
select few but were written for a world which had begun to slight 
the gods of order and design, to question their very existence and 
to exalt in the disorders of the grotesque. Both of us have now 
studied the books in which the Tsalal was being gradually 
revealed as the very nucleus of our universe, even if their authors 
remained innocent of the revelations they were perpetrating. It 
was from one of the most enlightened of this sect of Gothic 
storytellers that I took the name of that one. You recall, Andrew, 
the adventures of an Arthur Pym in a fantastic land where 
everything, people and landscape alike, is of a perfect blackness 
- the Antarctic country of Tsalal. This was among the finest 
evocations I had discovered of that blackness no one had ever 
seen, a literary unveiling of being without soul or substance, 
without meaning or necessity - not a universe of design and order 
but one whose sole principle was that of senseless transmutation. 
A universe of the grotesque. And from that moment it became

THE TSALAL
4 2 3
my ambition to invoke what I now called the Tsalal, and 
ultimately to effect a worldly incarnation of the thing itself.
“Through the years I found there were others who had become 
entranced with an ambition so near to my own that we formed a 
league . . . the elect of the Tsalal. They too had been adepts of the 
old gods who had been made impotent or extinct by the emergence 
of that one, an inevitable advent which we were avid to hasten and 
lose ourselves in. For we had recognized the mask of our identities, 
and our only consolation for what we had lost, a perverse salvation, 
was to embrace the fatality of the Tsalal. Vital to this end was a 
woman upon whom was performed a ceremony of conception. 
And it was during these rites that we first came into the most 
intimate communion with that one, which moved within us all and 
worked the most wonderful changes upon so many things.
“None of us suspected how it would be when we gathered that 
last night. This all happened in another country, an older country. 
But it was nevertheless a place like this town of Moxton, a place 
where the appearances of this world seem to waver at times, 
hovering before one’s eyes as a mere fog. This place was known 
among our circle as the Street of Lamps, which was the very heart 
of a district under the sign of the Tsalal. In recollection, the lamps 
seem only a quirk of scene, an accident of atmosphere, but at the 
time they were to us the eyes of the Tsalal itself. These sidewalk 
fixtures of radiant glass upheld by dark metal stems formed a 
dreamlike procession up and down the street, a spectacle of infinite 
pathos and mystery. One poet of the era called them ‘iron lilies,’ 
and another compared their jewel-like illumination to the yellow 
topaz. In a different language, and a different city, these devices - 
les réverbères, les bees de gaz - were also celebrated, an enigmatic sign 
of a century, a world, that was guttering out.
“It was in this street that we prepared a room for your birth and 
your nurturing under the sign of the Tsalal. There were few other 
residents in this ramshackle area, and they abandoned it some time 
before you were born, frightened off by changes that all of us could 
see taking place in the Street of Lamps. At first the changes were 
slight: spiders had begun laying webs upon the stones of the street 
and thin strands of smoke spun out from chimney stacks, tangling 
together in the sky. When the night of your birth arrived the 
changes became more intense. They were focused on the room in 
which we gathered to chant the invocation to the Tsalal. We 
incanted throughout the night, standing in a circle around the 
woman who had been the object of the ceremony of conception. 
Did I mention that she was not one of us? No, she was a gaunt

424
THOMAS LIGOTTI
denizen of the Street of Lamps whose body we appropriated some 
months before, an honorary member of our sect whom we treated 
very well during her term of captivity. As the moment of your birth 
drew closer she lay upon the floor of the ceremonial room and 
began screaming in many different voices. We did not expect her to 
survive the ordeal. Neither did we expect the immediate conse­
quences of the incarnation we attempted to effect, the consumma­
tion of a bond between this woman and the Tsalal.
“We were inviting chaos into the world, we knew this. We had 
been intoxicated by the prospect of an absolute disorder. With a 
sense of grim exaltation we greeted the intimations of a universal 
nightmare -  the ultimate point of things. But on that night, even as 
we invoked the Tsalal within that room, we came to experience a 
realm of the unreal hitherto unknown to us. And we discovered 
that it had never been our desire to lose ourselves in the unreal, not 
in the manner which threatened us in the Street of Lamps. For as 
you, Andrew, began to enter the world through this woman, so was 
the Tsalal also entering the world through this woman. She was 
now the seed of that one, her flesh radiant and swelling in the fertile 
ground of the unreal which was the Street of Lamps. We looked 
beyond the windows of that room, already contemplating our 
escape. But then we saw that there was no longer any street, nor 
any buildings along that street. All that remained were the 
streetlamps with their harsh yellow glow like rotten stars, endless 
rows of streetlamps that ascended into the all-encompassing 
blackness. Can you imagine: endless rows of streetlamps ascend­
ing into the blackness. Everything that sustained the reality of the 
world around us had been drained away. We noticed how our own 
bodies had become suddenly drawn and meager, while the body of 
that woman, the seed of the coming apocalypse, was becoming 
ever more swollen with the power and magic of the Tsalal. And we 
knew at that moment what needed to be done if we were ever to 
escape the unreality that had been sown in that place called the 
Street of Lamps.”
9 
A skeleton town
Even in the time of the McQuisters, which almost no one could 
remember very well, Moxton was a skeleton town. No building 
there had ever seemed new. Every crudded brick or faded board, 
every crusted shingle or frayed awning appeared to be handed 
down from the demise of another structure in another town, cast­

TH E TSALAL
425
offs of a thriving center that had no use for worn out materials. The 
front windows of stores were cloudy with a confusion of reflected 
images from someplace else. Entire establishments might have 
been dumped off in Moxton, where buildings stood along the 
street like odd objects forgotten on a cellar shelf.
It was less a real town than the semblance of a town, a 
pasteboard backdrop to an old stage show, its outlines crudely 
stroked with an antique paintbrush unconcerned with the details 
of character and identity, lettering the names of streets and shops 
with senseless scribbles no one was ever meant to read. Everything 
that might have been real about the town had somehow become 
thwarted. Nothing flourished there, nothing made a difference by 
its presence or absence.
No business could do more than anonymously survive in 
Moxton. Even larger enterprises such as a dimestore or a comfor­
table hotel could not assert themselves but were forced to assume 
the same air of unreality possessed by lesser establishments: the 
shoe store whose tiny front window displayed merchandise long 
out of style, the clothes store where dust collected in the folds of 
garments worn by headless mannikins, the repair shop at which a 
good number of the items brought in were left unclaimed and lay 
corroding in every cranny of the place.
Many years ago a movie theater opened on the prominent 
corner of Webster and Main, decades before a traffic light had 
been hung over the intersection of these streets. A large neon sign 
with letters stacked in a vertical file spelled out the word RIV­
IERA. For a moment this word appeared in searing magenta 
against the Moxton twilight, calling up and down the street to 
everyone in the town. But by nightfall the glowing letters had been 
subdued, their glamor suffocating in a rarefied atmosphere where 
sights and sounds were drained of reality. The new movie theater 
now burned no more brightly than McQuister’s Pharmacy across 
the street. Both of them were allotted a steady and modest 
patronage in a skeleton town that was no more enchanted with 
the one than the other.
Thus was the extent of Moxton*s compromise with any mani­
festation of the real. For there are certain places that exist on the 
wayside of the real: a house, a street, even entire towns which have 
claims upon them by virtue of some nameless affinity with the most 
remote orders of being. They are, these places, fertile ground for 
the unreal and retain the minimum of immunity against exotic 
disorders and aberrations. Their concessions to a given fashion of 
reality are only placating gestures, a way of stifling it through

426
THOMAS LIGOTTI
limited acceptance. It was unnecessary, even perverse, to resist 
construction of the movie theater or the new church (founded in 
1893 by the Rev. Andrew Maness). Such an action might imbue 
these things with an unwarranted measure of substance or power, 
and in a skeleton town there is little substance, while all power 
resides only in the unreal. The citizens of such a place are 
custodians of a rare property, a precious estate whose true owners 
are momentarily absent. All that remains before full proprietorship 
of the land may be assumed is the planting of a single seed and its 
nurturing over a sufficient period of time, an interval that has 
nothing to do with the hours and days of the world.
10 
Á plea in the past
As Andrew Maness grew older in the town of Moxton he watched 
his father submit to the despair and the wonder that he could not 
unmake the thing that he and those others had incarnated. On 
several occasions the reverend entered his son’s room as the boy 
slept. With knife and ax and long-handled scythe he attempted to 
break the growing bond between his son and the Tsalal. In the 
morning young Andrew’s bedroom would reek like a slaughter- 
house. But his limbs and organs were again made whole and a new 
blood flowed within them proving the reality of what had been 
brought into the world by his father and those other enthusiasts of 
that one.
There were times when the Reverend Maness, in a state of awe 
and desperation, awoke his son from dreams and made his appeal 
to the boy, informing him that he was reaching a perilous juncture 
in his development and begging him to submit to a peculiar ritual 
that would be consummated by Andrew’s ruin.
“What ritual is this?” Andrew asked with a novitiate’s excita­
tion. But the reverend’s powers of speech became paralyzed at this 
question and many nights would pass before he again broached the 
subject.
At last the Reverend Maness came into his son’s room carrying a 
book. He opened the book to its final pages and began to read. And 
the words he read laid out a scheme for his son’s destruction. These 
words were his own, the ultimate chapter in a great work he had 
composed documenting a wealth of revelations concerning the 
force or entity called the Tsalal.
Andrew could not take his eyes off the book and strained to hear 
every resonance of his father’s reading from it, even if the ritual the

TH E TSALAL
427
old man spelled out dictated the atrocious manner of Andrew’s 
death - the obliteration of the seed of the apocalypse which was 
called the Tsalal.
“Your formula for cancelling my existence calls for the partici­
pation of others,” Andrew observed. “The elect of. . . that one.” 
“Tsalal,” the Reverend Maness intoned, still captivated by an 
occult nomenclature.
“Tsalal,” Andrew echoed. “My protector, my guardian of the 
black void.”
“You are not yet wholly the creature of that one. I have tried to 
change what I could not. But you have stayed too long in this 
place, which was the wrong place for a being such as you. You are 
undergoing a second birth under the sign of the Tsalal. But there is 
still enough time if you will submit yourself to the ritual.”
“I must ask you, Father: who will carry it out? Will there be a 
convocation of strangers in this town?”
After a painfully reflective pause, the reverend said: “There are 
none remaining who will come. They would be required to relive 
the events following your birth, the first time you were born.” 
“And my mother?” Andrew asked.
“She did not survive.”
“But how did she die?”
“By the ritual,” the Reverend Maness confessed. “At the ritual 
of your birth it became necessary to perform the ritual of death.” 
“Her death.”
“As I told you before. This ritual had never been performed, or 
even conceived, prior to that night on which you were born. We 
did not know what to expect. But after a certain point, after seeing 
certain things, we acted in the correct manner, as if we had always 
known what needed to be done.”
“And what needed to be done, Father?”
“It is all in this book.”
“You have the book, but you’re still lacking for those others. A 
congregation, so to speak.”
“I have my congregation in this very town. They will do what 
needs to be done. To this you must submit yourself. To the end of 
your existence you must consent.”
“And if I don’t?”
“Soon,” the Reverend Maness began, “the bond will be sealed 
between you and the other, that one which is all nightmare of 
grotesque metamorphoses behind the dream of earthly forms, that 
one which is the center of so-called entity and so-called essence. To 
the living illusions of the world of light will come a blackness no one

428
THOMAS LIGOTTI
has ever seen, a dawn of darkness. What you yourself have known 
of these things is only a passing glimpse, a flickering candleflame 
beside the conflagration which is to come. You have found yourself 
fascinated by those moments after you have been asleep, and 
awake to see how the things around you are affected in their 
form. You look on as they change in every freakish manner, 
feeling the power that changes them to be connected to your own 
being, conveying to you its magic through a delicate cord. Then 
the cord grows too thin to hold, your mind returns to you, and 
the little performance you were watching comes to an end. But 
you have already stayed long enough in this place to have begun 
a second birth under the sign of the Tsalal. The cord between 
you and that one is strong. Wherever you go, you will be found. 
Wherever you stay, there the changes will begin. For you are the 
seed of that one. You are just as the luz, the bone-seed of rabbinic 
prophecy: that sliver of every mortal self from which the whole 
body may be reconstructed and stand for judgement at the end of 
time. Wherever you stay, there the resurrection will begin. You 
are a fragment of the one that is without law or reason. The body 
that will grow out of you is the true body of all things. The 
changes themselves are the body of the Tsalal. The changes are 
the truth of all bodies, which we believe have a face and a 
substance only because we cannot see that they are always 
changing, that they are only fragile forms which are forever 
being shattered in the violent whirlpool of truth.
“This is how it will be for all your days: you will be drawn to a 
place that reveals the sign of the Tsalal - an aspect of the unreal, a 
forlorn glamor in things - and with your coming the changes will 
begin. These may go unnoticed for a time, affecting only very small 
things or greater things in subtle ways, a disruption of forms that 
you very well know. But other people will sense that something is 
wrong in that place, which may be a certain house or street or even 
an entire town. They will go about with uneasy eyes and become 
emaciated in their flesh, their very bones growing thin with worry, 
becoming worn down and warped just as the world around them is 
slowly stripped of whatever seemed real, leaving them famished for 
the sustenance of old illusions. Rumors will begin to pass among 
them about unpleasant things they believe they have seen or felt 
and yet cannot explain -  a confusion among the lower creatures, 
perhaps, or a stone that seems to throb with a faint life. For these 
are the modest beginnings of the chaos that will ultimately 
consume the stars themselves, which may be left to crawl within 
that great blackness no one has ever seen. And by their proximity

TH E  TSALAL
429
to your being they will know that you are the source of these 
changes, that through your being these changes radiate into the 
world. The longer you stay in a place, the worse it will become. 
If you leave such a place in time, then the changes can have no 
lasting power - the ultimate point will not have been reached, and 
it will be as the little performances of grotesquerie you have 
witnessed in your own room.”
“And if I do stay in such a place?” asked Andrew.
“Then the changes will proceed toward the ultimate point. So 
long as you can bear to watch the appearances of things become 
degraded and confused, so long as you can bear to watch the 
people in that place wither in their bodies and minds, the changes 
will proceed toward their ultimate point - the disintegration of all 
apparent order, the birth of the Tsalal. Before that happens you 
must submit to the ritual of the ultimate point.”
But Andrew Maness only laughed at his father’s scheme, and the 
sound of this laughter almost shattered the reverend entirely. In a 
deliberately serious voice, Andrew said: “Do you really believe you 
will gain the participation of others?”
“The people of this town will do the work of the ritual,” his 
father replied. “When they have seen certain things, they will do 
what must be done. Their hunger to preserve the illusions of their 
world will surpass their horror at what must be done to save it. But 
it will be your decision whether or not you will submit to the ritual 
which will determine the course of so many things in this world.”
11 
A meeting in Moxton
Everyone in the town gathered in the church that the Reverend 
Maness had built so many years ago. No others had succeeded the 
reverend, and no services had been held since the time of his 
pastorate. The structure had never been outfitted with electricity, 
but the illumination of numerous candles and oil lamps the 
congregation had brought supplemented the light of a grayish 
afternoon that penetrated the two rows of plain, peaked windows 
along either side of the church. In the corner of one of those 
windows a spider fumbled about in its web, struggling awkwardly 
with appendages that resembled less the nimble legs of the 
arachnid than they did an octet of limp tentacles. After several 
thrusts the creature reached the surface of a window pane and 
passed into the glass itself, where it began to move about freely in 
its new element.

4 3 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
The people of Moxton had tried to rest themselves before this 
meeting, but their haggard look spoke of a failure to do so. The 
entire population of the town barely filled a half dozen pews at the 
front of the church, although some were collapsed upon the floor 
and others shuffled restlessly along the center aisle. All of them 
appeared even more emaciated than the day before, when they 
had attempted to escape the town and unaccountably found 
themselves driven back to it.
“Everything has gotten worse since we returned,” said one man, 
as if to initiate the meeting which had no obvious hope or purpose 
beyond collecting in a single place the nightmares of the people of 
Moxton. A murmur of voices rose up and echoed throughout the 
church. Several people spoke of what they had witnessed the night 
before, reciting a litany of grotesque phenomena that had pro­
hibited sleep.
There was a bedroom wall which changed colors, turning from 
its normal rosy tint that was calm and pale in the moonlight to a 
quivering and luminescent green that rippled like the flesh of a 
great reptile. There was a little doll whose neck began to 
elongate until it was writhing through the air like a serpent, 
while its tiny doll’s head whispered words that had no sense in 
them yet conveyed a profoundly hideous meaning. There were 
things no one had seen that made noises of a deeply troubling 
nature in the darkness of cellars or behind the doors of closets 
and cupboards. And then there was something that people saw 
when they looked through the windows of their houses toward 
the house where a man named Andrew Maness now lived. But 
when anyone began to describe what it was they saw in the 
vicinity of that house, which they called the McQuister house, 
their words became confused. They did see something and yet 
they saw nothing.
“I also saw what you speak of,” whispered the tall, bearded man 
who wore a flat-brimmed hat. “It was a blackness, but it was not 
the blackness of the night or of shadows. It was hovering over the 
old McQuister place, or around it. This was something I had not 
seen in Moxton even since the changes.”
“No, not in Moxton, not in the town. But you have seen it before. 
We have all seen it,” said a man’s voice that sounded as if it came 
from elsewhere in the church.
“Yes,” answered the tall man, as if confessing a thing that had 
formerly been denied. “But we are not seeing it the way it might be 
seen, the way we had seen it when we were outside the town, when 
we tried to leave and could not.”

T HE  TSALAL
431
“That was not blackness we saw then,” said one of the younger 
women who seemed to be wresting an image from her memory. “It 
was something . . . something that wasn’t blackness at all.” 
“There were different things,” shouted an old man who sud­
denly stood up from one of the pews, his eyes fixed in a gaze of 
revelation. A moment later this vision appeared to dissolve, and he 
sat down again. But the eyes of others followed this vision, 
surveying the empty spaces of the church and watching the 
flickering lights of the many lamps and candles.
“There were different things,” someone started to say, and then 
someone else completed the thought: “But they were all spinning 
and confused, all swirling together.”
“Until all we could see was a great blackness,” said the tall man, 
gaining his voice again.
A silence now overcame the congregation, and the words they 
had spoken seemed to be disappearing into this silence, once more 
drawing the people of Moxton back to the refuge of their former 
amnesia. But before their minds lost all clarity of recollection a 
woman named Mrs Spikes rose to her feet and from the last row of 
the church, where she sat alone, cried out, “Everything started 
with him, the one in the McQuister house.”
“How long has it been?” one voice asked.
“Too long,’ answered Mrs Spikes. “I remember him. He’s older 
than I am, but he doesn’t look older. His hair is a strange color.” 
“Reddish like pale blood,” said one.
“Green like mold,” said another. “Or yellow and orange like a 
candleflame.”
“He lived in that house, that same house, a long time ago,” 
continued Mrs Spikes. “Before the McQuisters. He lived with his 
father. But I can only remember the stories. I didn’t see anything 
myself. Something happened one night. Something happened to 
the whole town. Their name was Maness.”
“That is the name of the man who built this church,” said the 
tall man. “He was the first clergyman this town had seen. And 
there were no others after him. What happened, Mrs Spikes?” 
“It was too long ago for anyone to remember. I only know the 
stories. The reverend said things about his son, said the boy was 
going to do something and how people had to keep it from 
happening.”
“What happened, Mrs Spikes? Try to remember.”
“I’m trying. It was only yesterday that I started to remember. It 
was when we got back to town. I remembered something that the 
reverend said in the stories about that night.”

4 3 2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“I heard you,” said another woman. “You said, ‘Blessed is the 
seed that is planted forever in darkness.’ ”
Mrs Spikes stared straight ahead and lightly pounded the top of 
the pew with her right hand, as though she were calling up 
memories in this manner. Then she said: “That’s what he was 
supposed to have been saying that night, ‘Blessed is the seed that is 
planted forever in darkness.’ And he said that people had to do 
something, but the stories I heard when I was growing up don’t say 
what he wanted people to do. It was about his son. It was 
something queer, something no one understood. But no one did 
anything that he wanted them to do. When they took him home, 
his son wasn’t there, and no one saw that young man again. The 
stories say that the ones who brought the reverend to his house saw 
things there, but no one could explain what they saw. What 
everyone did remember was that late the same night the bells 
started ringing up in the tower of this church. That’s where they 
found the reverend. He’d hung himself. It wasn’t until the 
McQuisters moved into town that anyone would go near the 
reverend’s house. Then it seemed no one could remember any­
thing about the place.”
“Just as we could not remember what happened only yester­
day,” said the tall man. “Why we came back to this place when it 
was the last place we wanted to be. The blackness we saw that was 
a blackness no one had ever seen. That blackness which was not a 
blackness but was all the colors and shapes of things darkening the 
sky.”“A vision!” said one old man who for many years had been the 
proprietor of McQuister’s Pharmacy.
“Perhaps only that,” replied the tall man.
“No,” said Mrs Spikes. “It was something he did. It was like 
everything else that’s been happening since he came here and 
stayed so long. All the little changes in things that kept getting 
worse. It’s something that’s been moving in like a storm. People 
have seen that it’s in the town now, hanging over that house of his. 
And the changes in things are worse than ever. Pretty soon it’s us 
that’ll be changing.”
Then there arose a chorus of voices among the congregation, all 
of them composing a conflict between “we must do something” 
and “what can be done?”
While the people of Moxton murmured and fretted in the light 
of lamps and candles, there was a gradual darkening outside the 
windows of the church. An unnatural blackness was overtaking the 
gray afternoon. And the words of these people also began to

TH E TSALAL
433
change, just as so many things had changed in that town. Within 
the same voices there mingled both keening outcries of fear and a 
low, muttering invocation. Soon the higher pitched notes in these 
voices diminished and then wholly disappeared as the deeper tones 
of incantation prevailed. Now they were all chanting a single word 
in hypnotic harmony: Tsalal, Tsalal, Tsalal. And standing at the 
pulpit was the one who was leading the chant, the man whose 
strangely shaded hair shone in the light of candles and oil lamps. 
At last he had come from his house where he had stayed too long. 
The bell in the tower began to ring, sounding in shattered echoes. 
The resonant cacophony of voices swelled within the church. For 
these were the voices of people who had lived so long in the wrong 
place. These were people of a skeleton town.
The figure at the pulpit lifted up his hands before his congrega­
tion, and they grew quiet. When he focused his eyes on an old 
woman sitting alone in the last row, she rose from her seat and 
walked to the double doors at the rear of the church. The man at 
the pulpit spread his arms wider, and the old woman pushed back 
each of the doors.
Through the open doorway was the main street of Moxton, but 
it was not as it had been. An encompassing blackness had 
descended and only the lights of the town could be seen. But 
these lights were now as endless as the blackness itself. The rows of 
yellowish streedamps extended to infinity along an avenue of the 
abyss. Fragments of neon signs were visible, the vibrant magenta 
letters of the movie theater recurring again and again, as though 
reflected in a multitude of black mirrors. In the midst of the other 
lights hovered an endless succession of traffic signals that filled the 
blackness like multi-colored stars. All these bright remnants of the 
town, its broken pieces in transformation, were becoming increas­
ingly dim and distorted, bleeding their radiance into the blackness 
that was consuming them, even as it freakishly multiplied the 
shattered images of the world, collecting them within its kaleido­
scope of colors so dense and so varied that they lost themselves 
within a black unity.
The man who had built the church in which the people of 
Moxton were gathered had spoken of the ultimate point. This was 
now imminent. And as the moment approached, the gathering 
within the church moved toward the figure at the pulpit, who 
descended to meet them. They were far beyond their old fears, 
these skeleton people. They had attained the stripped bone of 
being, the last layer of an existence without name or description, 
without nature or essence: the nothingness of the blackness no one

434
THOMAS LIGOTTI
had ever seen . .. or would ever see. For no one had ever lived 
except as a shadow of the blackness of the Tsalal.
And their eyes looked to the one who was the incarnation of the 
blackness, and who had come to them to seal his bond with that 
other one. They looked to him for some word or gesture in order to 
bring to fulfilment that day which had turned into night. They 
looked to him for the thing that would bind them to the blackness 
and join them within the apocalypse of the unreal.
Finally, as if guided by some whim of the moment, he told them 
how to do what must be done.
12 
What is remembered
The story that circulated in later years among the people of 
Moxton told how everyone had gathered in the church one 
afternoon during a big storm that lasted into the night. Unused 
for decades before this event, the church was strongly constructed 
and proved a suitable shelter. There were some who recalled that 
for weeks prior to this cataclysm a variety of uncommon efFects had 
resulted from what they described as a season of strange weather in 
the vicinity of the town.
The details of this period remain unclear, as do memories of a 
man who briefly occupied the old McQuister place around the 
time of the storm. No one had ever spoken with him except Mrs 
Spikes, who barely recollected their conversation and who died of 
cancer not long after the biggest storm of the year. The house in 
which the man had lived was previously owned by relatives of Ray 
Starns, but the Starns people were no longer residents of Moxton. 
In any case, the old McQuister place was not the only untenanted 
house in the skeleton town, and there was no reason for people to 
concern themselves with it. Nor did anyone in Moxton give serious 
thought to the church once the storm had passed. The doors were 
once again secured against intruders, but no one ever tested these 
old locks which had been first put in place after the Reverend 
Maness hung himself in the church tower.
Had the people of the town of Moxton ventured beyond the 
doors of the church they might have found what they left behind 
following the abatement of the storm. Lying twisted at the foot of 
the pulpit was the skeleton of a man whose name no one would 
have been able to remember. The bones were clean. No bit of their 
flesh could be discovered either in the church or anywhere else in 
the town. Because the flesh was that of one who had stayed in a

THE TSALAL
435
certain place too long. It was the seed, and now it had been 
planted in a dark place where it would not grow. They had buried 
his flesh deep in the barren ground of their meager bodies. Only a 
few strands of hair of an unusual color lay scattered upon the floor, 
mingling with the dust of the church.

MAD NIGHT OF 
ATONEMENT
A Future Tale
Once more from the beginning; once more until the end. You 
know who Dr Francis Haxhausen was and how his disappearance 
affected the scientific world. There was dismay and confusion 
when one of the leading scientists on earth withdrew from an 
active life of research. And there was doubt, even anxiety, when he 
could no longer be reached for consultation on this or that question 
of urgent relevance to his former colleagues, if not to the vast body 
of the human race. Ah, the human race. Pacing the floors of 
gleaming labs, the geniuses in their long white smocks fretted 
about the missing man of science: they bore the stigmata of worry 
upon their faces and their voices grew quiet, like voices heard in 
the shadows of a lonely church. Rumors multiplied, panicky 
speculations were the order of the day. But however troubled 
certain people had become in the absence of Dr Haxhausen, they 
were no less bothered by his sudden return from a strange 
retirement.
He was now quite a different man, shaking the hands of old 
friends and smiling with a warmth that was entirely out of 
character. “I’ve been travelling here and there,” he explained, 
though he avoided elaborating on this statement. For a time 
everyone kept an eye on Dr Haxhausen, eager to witness a 
revelation of some kind, or at least some clue to suggest what 
had happened to him. And how nerve-wracking vigilance can be. 
It was not long, however, before the inevitable conclusion had to 
be drawn: the unfortunate man had lost his reason, gone mad from 
years of overwork in the service of his calling. But perhaps there 
still remained some pretext for hoping that the scientist would 
recover. After all, he managed to avoid the constraints which 
some, including members of his own family, attempted to place 
upon his movements. And certainly this was an achievement that

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
437
hinted at the survival of some measure of his old genius. Indeed, Dr 
Haxhausen fought to preserve his freedom with very good reason, 
for he required a great deal of it - freedom, not reason - to pursue 
his plans for the future.
For almost a year he worked secretly, and alone, in an old, 
empty factory building located in an open field many miles from 
the nearest city. And into this building he brought a motley array 
of equipment - objects, devices, and machinery that belonged to 
quite different times and places, diverse worlds of human creation. 
There were of course the most modern machines and instruments 
of science, some of which had only come into being since Dr 
Haxhausen’s disappearance. But there were also items of far earlier 
historical periods and a few imported from cultures that would not 
be considered very far along the path of technological progress. 
Thus, Dr Haxhausen unpacked several oddly shaped vessels 
decorated with strange glyphs and primitive images. And these 
clumsy vessels he rested upon a table among elegant containers of 
nearly invisible glass. Then he pieced together something that 
resembled a dirty drainspout or an old stovepipe. And he placed it, 
for the moment, upon the immaculate metal surface of a computer, 
which was the color and texture of an eggshell.
More exotic or antiquated paraphernalia were revealed slum­
bering in crates and boxes: cauldrons, retorts, masks with wide- 
open mouths, alembics, bellows of different sizes, crusted bells that 
rang with dead voices, and rusted tongs that squeaked when 
manipulated; a large hourglass, a small telescope, shining swords 
and dull knives, a long wooden pitchfork with two hornlike prongs 
and a tall stafT with marvelously embellished headpiece; miniature 
bottles of very thick glass plugged with stoppers in the shape of 
human or animal heads, candles in ivory holders with curious 
carvings, bright beads, beautiful convex mirrors of perfect silver, 
golden chalices engraved with intricate designs and powerful 
phrases; huge books with brittle pages, a skull and some bones; 
doll-like figures made of dried vegetables, puppet-like figures made 
of wax and wood, and various little dummies composed of obscure 
materials. Finally, there was a shallow crate from which Dr 
Haxhausen removed a vaguely circular object that seemed to be 
a flat stone, but a stone that was translucent and mottled like an 
opal with a spectrum of soft hues. And all these things the scientist 
brought together within his dim and drafty laboratory: each, in his 
mind, would play its part in his design. Clearly his ideas about the 
practice of science had taken an incredible leap, though whether 
the direction was forward or backward remained to be seen.

4 3 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
For months he worked with a mechanical industriousness and 
without worry or doubt, as though following some foreordained 
plan of assured success. Slowly his invention began to take form out 
of the chaos of materials he had united in his experiment, a 
miscegenation that would give birth to a revolutionary artifact, 
a cross-bred assemblage of freakish novelty. And the result of his 
labors at last stood before him upon the cold and dusty floor of that 
factory, and he was pleased by the sight of it.
To the average eye, granted, Dr Haxhausen’s invention might 
have appeared as no more than a bizarre scrapheap, a hybrid of 
some inscrutable fancy. Dense and unbeautiful, it branched out 
wildly in every direction, a mad foliage of ragged metal. And it 
seemed just barely, or not all, integrated into a whole. Through 
dark hollows within the chaotic tangle of the apparatus, the faces 
of dolls and puppets peeked out like malicious children in hiding. 
Incorporated into the body of the invention, their dwarfish forms 
mingled with its circuitry; these figures alone, by their very 
presence, might have bred doubts as to the validity of the 
scientist’s creation. And, as must already be apparent, the eccen­
tricities of the machine did not end with a few idiotic faces.
Nevertheless, there was a certain feature of the invention that 
did appear to suggest some definite purpose. This was the long 
black tube projecting from the midst of the debris, rising from it in 
the manner of a cobra set for the attack. But in place of the cobra’s 
pair of fascinating eyes, this artificial serpent was equipped with a 
single cyclopean socket in which was fixed a smooth disc of 
beautifully blended colors. When Dr Haxhausen turned a dial 
on the remote control unit resting in his palm, the dark metallic 
beast reared back its head and, with a sinister grinding sound, 
directed its gaze up toward a grimy skylight. For years this window 
on the heavens had remained sealed. But that night, through the 
efforts of the inexhaustible scientist, it was opened. And the 
spectral light of a full moon shone down into the old factory, 
pouring its beams into the opalescent eye of Dr Haxhausen’s 
machine. Later, when it seemed the beast was sated with its lunar 
nourishment, Dr Haxhausen confidently flicked a switch on the 
remote control unit. And the moonlight, which had been digested 
and transmuted in the bowels of the beast, was now given back to 
its source, spewing forth as a stream of lurid colors into the 
blackness, a harsh spectrum which one witness later described 
to authorities as an “awful rainbow quivering across the night.” In 
the doctor’s own description, this was called his Sacred Ray.
With the first stage of his project successfully completed, Dr

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
439
Haxhausen moved out of his secluded laboratory. His machine, 
along with other things, was loaded on a truck by some hired 
laborers. Thus, it could easily be transported from one place to 
another, to be exhibited before the eyes of any who would come to 
see it. And this is exactly what the scientist had in mind. 
Abandoning obscurity and breaking his silence, he once again 
allowed himself to be known to the world. Naturally there was a 
great deal of publicity, none of which was complimentary to the 
worth of the scientist’s revelations, though some of which paid sad 
homage to the former glory of his delicate mind. But public 
reaction was of no concern to him. His task would in any case 
be carried out: the world was to be given notice, the annunciation 
made. So he continued to travel here and there: in rented halls and 
auditoriums of many cities, he demonstrated the powers of his 
machine and spread the word to those who would hear it.
“Good evening, ladies and gentlemen,” he began a typical 
performance in a typically out-of-date movie theater in a typical 
town. Standing alone on stage, Dr Haxhausen was wearing an old 
dark suit; as if to simulate formal attire, he added a new bow tie. 
His hair was greased and combed but had been allowed to grow far 
too long to convey a well-groomed image. And his black-framed 
eyeglasses now seemed far too large on the face of a man who had 
lost so much weight in the past year or so. Their thick lenses glinted 
in the glare of the footlights, which cast Dr Haxhausen’s gigantic 
and twisted shadow upon the threadbare curtain behind him.
“Some of you,” he continued, “are perhaps aware of who I am 
and may have an idea of why I am here tonight. Others of you may 
be curious to discover the meaning of those handbills which have 
lately appeared around your town or possibly were intrigued by 
the marquee outside this theater which touts the ‘World Famous 
Dr Haxhausen.’ Like many important events in human history, 
my exhibition has been somewhat accurately reported as far as its 
superficial aspects are concerned, yet remains sadly misrepresented 
in its substance. Allow me at this point to disabuse you of a few 
false conceptions which may have affected your powers of judg­
ment.
“First, I do not claim to be either the Almighty Himself or His 
incarnation come down to earth; nor, in fact, am I one or the other 
of these things. Second, I nevertheless do claim that in the course of 
my recent travels, what the world has called my ‘disappearance,’ I 
was granted certain revelations directly from the Creator and in no 
uncertain terms received an itinerary of action from this same 
source. Third, and last, I am indeed the scientist known as Francis

4 4 0
THOMAS L IGOTTI
Henry Haxhausen and not, as can be conclusively proved, an 
imposter. As an appendix to my previous statements, I should say 
that my exhibition is not the absurd extravaganza of scientific farce 
some have portrayed it to be, but a simple agenda consisting of a 
brief lecture followed by a practical demonstration of a device I 
have recently constructed. At no point do I attempt, either as an 
illusion or in fact, to work permanent damage on the body or soul 
of any member of my audience. That would be contrary to the 
Creator’s law and the truth of His nature. And that is all I have to 
state in the way of a preamble to what I hope you will find an 
entertaining and enlightening attraction.
“I would like to open my lecture with the following anecdote. 
There is a legend, and I hasten to underline the word legend, that I 
learned while I was travelling here and there. It seems there was a 
sorcerer, or an alchemist or something along those lines, who 
dreamed of transforming the world through the creation of an 
artificial man. This man, the sorcerer dreamed, would not be 
subject to the flaws and limitations of the former type, but would 
instead live through many lifetimes, accumulating the knowledge 
and wisdom it would one day use to serve and improve the human 
race. The sorcerer, like all dreamers of this kind, was intent upon 
his vision and not particularly concerned with its ramifications in a 
larger scheme of things. Thus, he set about employing all his 
thaumaturgical arts in the creation of his ‘new man.’ First, a 
physical form was made out of the simple materials of wood and 
wax, resulting in a grotesque thing rather like a gigantic ventri­
loquist’s dummy. Next, the sorcerer practiced a secret chemistry 
and a hermetic linguistics to elevate this lifeless effigy into a rather 
admirable semblance of human life -  fatefully admirable, I might 
add. Without wasting a moment glorying in his own achievement, 
uttering not a single word of self-praise, the sorcerer engaged his 
creature in a course of learning that would enable it to function 
and evolve toward its destiny after the sorcerer’s death. However, 
it was not long after this regimen had begun that the Omnipotent 
One realized what the sorcerer was intending to do. And so it 
happened that the creature, strong and well-coordinated but still a 
child in its mind, was awakened in the dead of night by a voice that 
cursed it as a blasphemy and an abomination. The voice bid the 
creature to go to its foul maker in the attic where he had 
sequestered himself among evil books and impure devices. Con­
fused and terrified, the creature ascended several stairways and 
entered the attic. And there he found the sorcerer, motionless and 
hung upon the wall like something in a puppet-maker’s workshop,

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
441
his dark robe grazing the dusty floor and his head drooping down. 
Acting on a mechanical impulse beyond dread or despair, the 
creature raised up his master’s head and saw that it was now no 
more than wood and wax. The sight was a maddening one, and it 
did not take long for the creature to find the rope with which it 
hung itself from the rafters of the attic. Thus was concluded the 
judgment passed upon the house of the sorcerer.”
There was a pause in the scientist’s flow of words. Calmly, he 
pulled a handkerchief from the inner pocket of his coat and wiped 
his face, which was perspiring in the heat of the footlights. Then he 
briefly scanned the faces of his audience, many of which bore 
dumbfounded expressions, before resuming his lecture.
“Who can know the intentions of the Creator? That which is 
suited to human designs may not suit His. With these rather 
unquestionable premises in mind, what conclusions might be 
drawn from the example of the sorcerer? By way of exegesis, I 
would say that the sorcerer, in conceiving a creature of limitless 
promise for good and none for evil, had violated a mysterious law, 
transgressed against a secret truth. And how had he strayed from 
this law and this truth? Simply in this manner: he had failed to 
provide for the corruption of his creation, not merely as a 
possibility but as a fate. And it was precisely by this oversight 
that the sorcerer fell out of step with the Creator’s own design. It is 
the vision of this Great Design that I have been privileged to see, 
and that is why I am here tonight. As a footnote, however, I should 
state that even before I was granted certain divine insights, I had 
already been travelling toward them, approaching their truth in 
the unconscious or accidental manner of great scientific discov­
eries. And I thus found myself somewhat in readiness to receive 
and accept the proffered vision.
“Let me explain that I have spent nearly all my life as a scientist 
in a methodically frantic pursuit of perfection, driven by the dream 
of utopia, by the idea that I indeed contributed to an earthly 
paradise in the making. But slowly, very slowly, I began to notice 
certain things. I noticed that there were mechanisms built into the 
system of reality that nullified all our advancements in this world, 
that rerouted them into a hidden laboratory where these so-called 
blessings were cancelled out altogether, if not converted into 
formulas for our collapse. I noticed that there were higher forces 
working against us and working through us at the same time. On 
the one hand, our vision has always been of creating a world of 
perpetual vitality, despite our grudging recognition of death’s 
‘necessity.’ On the other hand, all we have constructed is an

442
THOMAS LIGOTTI
elaborate facade to conceal our immortal traumas, a false front 
that hides the perennial ordeals of the human race. Oh, the human 
race. And I began to see that perfection has never been the point, 
that both the lost paradise of the past and the one sought in the 
future were merely convenient pretexts for our true destiny of. . . 
disintegration.
“As a scientist I have had the opportunity to observe the 
workings of the world at close quarters and over a relatively 
extended stretch of time, not to mention space. And after careful 
observation and painstaking verification I was forced to this 
conclusion: the world thrives on its faults and strives, by every 
possible means, to aggravate them, while at the same time to mask 
them like a congenital deformity. The signs are everywhere, 
though I could not always read them.
“But if vitality and perfection are not the aim of this world, what 
in heaven’s name is? That, my dear ladies and gentlemen, is the 
thrust of the second part of my exhibition, consisting of more 
comments by myself, a demonstration of my machine, and an 
entertaining display of what I might describe as a tableau mort. 
While I prepare things backstage, there will be a brief intermission. 
Thank you.”
Dr Haxhausen walked ofT the stage with sluggish dignity and, as 
soon as he was out of sight, the audience began chattering all at 
once, as if they had been simultaneously revived from a hypnotic 
trance. Most of them, in outrage, left the theater; some, however, 
stayed for the finale. And both reactions, as well as these relative 
proportions, were typical at each exhibition that Dr Haxhausen 
held. Those who prematurely left the performance were content to 
believe they had been witnesses to nothing more than the interior 
theater of a madman. The others, intellectuals or neurotic voyeurs, 
had convinced themselves that the former genius deserved a full 
hearing before the inevitable condemnation, while secretly dread­
ing that something he had to show them would reverberate, 
however faintly, with truth.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” said Dr Haxhausen, who seemed to 
reappear on stage out of nowhere. “Ladies and gentlemen,” he 
repeated more quietly, and then fell silent for a rather extended 
moment. And no one was whispering in the audience; no one said a 
word.
“There are holy places in this world, and I have been to some of 
them. Places where the presence of something sacred can be felt 
like an invisible meteorology. Always these places are quiet, and 
often they are in ruins. The ones that are not already at some stage

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
443
of dilapidation nonetheless display the signs and symptoms, the 
promise of coming decay. We feel a sense of divinity in ruined places, 
abandoned places - shattered temples on mountaintops, crum­
bling catacombs, islands where a stone idol stands almost faceless. 
We never have such feelings in our cities or even in natural settings 
where the flora and fauna are overly evident. This is why so much 
is atoned for in wintertime, when a numinous death descends on 
those chosen lands of our globe. Indeed, winter is not so much the 
holiest time as it is the holiest place, the visible locus of the divine. 
And after winter, spring; thus turns the carousel of our planet, and 
all the others. But need it turn forever? I think not. For the 
ultimate winter draws near, ladies and gentlemen: the cycle of 
seasons, so the Creator has told me, is about to stop.
“He first spoke to me on a night which I had spent wandering 
the tattered fringes of a city. It might have been a city like this one, 
or any city. What matters is the mute decrepitude I found there 
among a few condemned buildings and vacant lots gone wild. I 
had all but forgotten my own name, who I was and what world I 
belonged to. And they are not wrong who say that my reason 
perished in the radiant face of unattainable dreams for the future. 
False dreams, nightmares! And then, in that same place where I 
had travelled to hang myself, I heard a voice among the shadows 
and moonlight. It was not a peaceful voice or a consoling voice, but 
something like an articulate sigh, a fabulously eloquent moan. 
There was also a man-like shape slumped down in a corner of that 
sad room which I had chosen for my ultimate refuge. The legs of 
the figure lay bent like a cripple’s upon the broken floor, the 
moonlight cutting across them and leaving the rest of the body in 
darkness - all except two eyes that shone like colored glass in the 
moonlight. And although the voice seemed to emanate from 
everything around me, I knew that it was the voice of that sad 
thing before me, which was the Creator’s earthly form: a simple 
department store mannikin.
“I was the chosen one, It said. I would carry the message which, 
like every annunciation from on high, would be despised or 
ignored by mankind. Because I, at that moment, could clearly 
read the signs which had been present everywhere in the world 
since the beginning. I had already noted many of the hints and 
foreshadowings, the prophecies, and knew them as inspired clues 
the Creator had planted, prematurely revealing the nature of His 
world and its true destiny. And I felt the sacred aura radiated by 
the crumpled figure in the corner, and I understood the scripture 
of the Great Design.

444
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“It was written in the hieroglyphics of humble things, things 
humble to the point of mockery. All the lonesome pathetic things, 
all the desolate dusty things, all the misbegotten things, ruined 
things, failed things, all the imperfect semblances and deteriorat­
ing remnants of what we arrogantly deign to call the Real, to 
call. . . Life. In brief, the entire realm of the unreal - wherein He 
abides - is what He loves like nothing in this world. And haven’t 
we ourselves at some time come face to face with this blessed realm? 
Can you recall ever having travelled down a deserted road and 
coming upon something like an old fairground: a desolate assem­
blage of broken booths and sagging tents, all of which you 
glimpsed through a high arcing entranceway with colors like a 
rusted rainbow? Didn’t it seem as if some great catastrophe had 
struck, leaving only lifeless matter to molder in silent anonymity? 
And were you sad to see a place of former gaiety lying in its grave? 
Did you attempt to revive it in your imagination, start up the dead 
machinery, and fill the midway once again with fresh colors and 
laughing faces? We have all done this, all attempted to resurrect 
the defunct. And this is precisely where we have separated 
ourselves from the law and the truth of the Creator. Were we in 
harmony with Him, our gaze would fall upon a thriving scene and 
perceive nothing there but ruins and the ghosts of puppets. These, 
ladies and gentlemen, are what delight His heart. This much He 
has confided to me.
“But the Creator’s taste for the unreal has required something to 
be real in the first place, and then to wither into ruins, to fail 
gloriously. Hence -  the World. Extend this premise to its logical 
conclusion and you have -  curtain! - the Creator’s Great Design.” 
And as the curtain slowly began to rise, the scientist backed away 
and said in a giddy voice: “But please don’t think that when 
everything caves in there won’t still be muuusic.”
The auditorium went black, and in the blackness arose a hollow 
and tuneless melody which wandered to the wheezing accompani­
ment of a concertina, a pathetic duet belonging to a world of low 
cabarets or second-rate carnivals. Then, on either side of the stage, 
a tall glass case lit up to reveal that the two atrocious musicians 
were in fact life-size automatons, one of which pumped and pulled 
the snaking bellows of a concertina with a rigid motion of his arms, 
while the other scraped back and forth across the strings of a violin. 
The concertina player had his head thrown back in a wooden howl 
of merriment; the violin player stared down in empty-eyed 
concentration at his instrument. And both appeared lost in a 
kind of mechanical rapture.

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
445
The rest of the stage area, both above and below, also seemed to 
be occupied entirely by imitations of the human image: puppets 
and marionettes were strung up at various elevations, relieved of 
their weight by fragile glistening threads; mannikins posed in a 
paralyzed leisure which looked at once grotesque and idyllic; other 
dummies and an odd assortment of dolls sat in miniature chairs 
here and there, or simply sprawled about the floorboards, some­
times propping each other back to back. But among these mock- 
people, as became evident the longer one gazed at the stage, were 
hidden real ones who, rather ably, imitated the imitations. (These 
were persons whom Dr Haxhausen recruited, at fair recompense, 
whenever he entered a new town.) And forming the only scenery 
beyond both the artificial and the genuine figures of life was a 
gigantic luminescent mural in shades of black and white. With 
photographic accuracy, the mural portrayed a desolate room 
which might have been an attic or an old studio, and which 
contained some pieces of nondescript debris strewn about. A single, 
frameless window set into the torn wall at the rear of the room 
looked out upon a landscape that was still more desolate than the 
room itself: earth and sky had merged into a gray and jagged 
scene.
“You see how things are, ladies and gentlemen. Whereas we 
have been dreaming so long of creating perfect life in the 
laboratory, the Creator holds sacred only the crude facsimile, 
which best echoes or expresses His own will. He has always been 
far ahead of us, envisioning a completed work at the end of history. 
And He has no more time to linger over the vital stage of universal 
evolution. Because no truth or life can exist in us as we are, for 
truth and life can only exist in the mind, the will of the Creator - 
and we have stubbornly made it our business to do nothing but 
oppose that mind, that will. We are simply the raw material for His 
beloved puppets, which reflect to perfection the truth of the 
Creator and are the ideal dwellers in His paradise of ruins. And 
after His chosen ones are triumphantly installed in that good place, 
the Creator has some wonderful stories to tell as a way to pass the 
hours of eternity.
“And we may be among those in paradise, this is the great news 
I bring to you tonight. We may take our place among the puppets, 
as the tableau you see before you will serve to demonstrate. For at 
the moment there are certain faces insinuated within this elect 
company that do not . . . belong, that stand out in an unpleasant 
way. How to bring them into the fold is the question. And the 
answer, if you will turn for a moment and direct your eyes toward

446
THOMAS LIG O TTI
the balcony, the answer -  spotlight! - is the puppet machine.”
Turning their heads as instructed, the audience saw the object 
which, under the sharp spotlight, seemed to be resting on nothing, 
as if secured to the darkness itself. Some of the more observant 
members of the audience noticed the shining waxen faces whose 
eyes looked back at them from within the bizarre contraption. Set 
in motion by the remote control device in Dr Haxhausen’s coat 
pocket, the machine noisily elevated its stovepipe neck and pointed 
its single, iridescent eye at the figures upon the stage.
“Ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned earlier that winter is the 
sacred state of things, the season of the soul. But that is not to say 
that the definitive winter we are approaching will be without all 
the colors of the rainbow. For it is the frigid aurora of the Sacred 
Ray, the very eye of the Creator, that will bring about the 
wondrous conversion of all things. As you can see, the design is 
His own. And, by means of modern assembly techniques, a 
sufficient quantity may be produced to serve the world, bathing 
every one of us in the garish radiance of our destiny. The effects? If 
you just keep watching your fellows upon this stage.
“There. See how the shafts of color pour down upon this stark 
scene, overlaying surfaces with an uncanny kaleidoscopic tint. It is 
the old surfaces that must be stripped away and disposed of. Time 
to leap from that summit of illusion our world has achieved, a 
glorious plummet after so many centuries in which we erred on the 
side of excellence. When all the Creator had in mind was a third-rate 
sideshow of beatific puppetry. But our strainings for progress were 
not useless; they were simply mistaken as to their ultimate aim. For 
it is modern science itself which will enable us to realize the 
Creator’s dream, and to unrealize all the rest. See for your­
selves. Look what is happening to the flesh of these future 
puppets, and to their eyes: wax and wood and shining glass to 
replace the sad and cumbersome structures of biology.”
In the audience a few low sounds propagated into a network of 
obscure whispers and murmurings. Faces leaned toward the 
spectacle of crazy puppets painted with light, Dr Haxhausen’s 
tableau mort. Some persons betrayed their cautious temperaments 
by dropping down in their seats, expanding the distance between 
themselves and the stream of colors that flowed over their heads on 
its way to the stage. Dr Haxhausen continued to preach above the 
shapeless, droning music.
“Please do not concern yourselves that any lasting conversion is 
being worked upon the people in this exhibition. I told you earlier 
that I would do no such thing. In the absence of a willing heart, the

MAD NIGHT OF ATONEMENT
447
conversion you have witnessed would be the greatest sin in the 
universe, the unpardonable sin. There. The Sacred Ray has been 
extinguished. Your friends are again as they once were. And I 
thank you for coming to see me. Good night.”
When the curtain descended and the house lights came on, an 
elderly woman in the audience stood up and called out to Dr 
Haxhausen: “The Lord saith, ‘And if the prophet be deceived 
when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that 
prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will 
destroy him from the midst of my people Israel’.” Others simply 
laughed or shook their heads in disgust. But Dr Haxhausen 
remained silent, smiling placidly as the congregation filed out of 
the theater.
The scientist, it seemed, was truly mad.
A few remarks by way of an epilogue. Although certain people will 
attach themselves to virtually any innovation of a mystical nature, 
the prophecies of Dr Haxhausen never found a following. Soon the 
scientist himself lapsed in notoriety, save for an occasional blurb in 
some newspaper, a passing mention which often implied that Dr 
Haxhausen’s later role as a crank doomsayer had, in the public 
mind, entirely eclipsed his former renown as a man of science. 
Finally, on a particular evening in December, as a sparse audience 
populated for the most part by boozy derelicts and noisy adoles­
cents awaited the notorious exhibition in a dreary banquet hall, it 
seemed that another visionary’s career was destined for oblivion. 
When the world famous hallucinator did not appear at the 
publicized time, someone took it upon himself to pull back the 
makeshift curtain of a makeshift stage. And there, gently swinging 
from the long sooty gibbet of his fantastic machine, hung Dr 
Haxhausen. Whether the cause of death should have been deemed 
murder or the more apparent one of suicide was never discovered. 
For something else happened that same winter night that threw all 
other events into the background.
But of course you know, ladies and gentlemen, what it was that 
happened. I can see by the glitter in your eyes, the flush on your 
waxen faces, that you remember well how the colors appeared in 
the sky that night, a fabulous aurora sent by the sun and reflected 
by the moon, so that all the world would be baptized at once by the 
spectral light of truth. Willing or not, your hearts had heard the 
voice of the creature you thought mad. But they would not listen; 
they never have. Why did you force this transgression of divine 
law? And why do you still gaze with your wooden hate from the

448
THOMAS LIGOTTI
ends of the earth? It was for you that I committed this last and 
greatest sin, all for you. When have you ever appreciated these 
gestures from on high! And for this act I must now exist in eternal 
banishment from the paradise in which you exalt. How beautiful is 
your everlasting ruin.
Oh, blessed puppets, receive My prayer, and teach Me to make 
Myself in thy image.

THE STRANGE DESIGN 
OF MASTER RIGNOLO
I
t was well into evening and for some time Nolon had been seated 
at a small table in a kind of park. This was a long, thin stretch of 
land - vaguely triangular in shape, like a piece of broken glass -
bordered by three streets of varying breadth, varying evenness of 
surface, and of varying stages of disintegration as each thorough­
fare succumbed in its own way and in its own time to the subtle but 
continuous movements of the slumbering earth below. From the 
far end of the park a figure in a dark overcoat was approaching 
Nolon’s table, and it appeared there was going to be a meeting of 
some sort.
There were other tables here and there, all of them unoccupied, 
but most of the park was unused ground covered with a plush, 
fuzzy kind of turf. In the moonlight this densely woven pile of 
vegetation turned a soft shade of aquamarine, almost radiant. 
Beyond the thinning trees, stars were bright but without luster, as 
if they were made of luminous paper. Around the park, a jagged 
line of high roofs, black and featureless, crossed the sky like the 
uneven teeth of an old saw.
Nolon was resting his hands at the edge of the small, nearly 
circular table. In the middle of the table a piece of candle flickered 
inside a misshapen bubble of green glass, and Nolon’s face was 
bathed in a restless green glare. He too was wearing a dark 
overcoat, unbuttoned at the top to reveal a scarf of lighter shade 
stuffed inside it. The scarf was wrapped about Nolon’s neck right 
to the base of his chin. Every so often Nolon glanced up, not to look 
at Grissul as he proceeded across the park, but to try and catch 
sight of something in that lighted window across the street: a 
silhouette which at irregular intervals slipped in and out of view. 
Above the window was a long, low roof surmounted by a board 
which appeared to be a sign or marquee. The lettering on this 
board was entirely unreadable, perhaps corroded by the elements 
or even deliberately effaced. But the image of two tall, thin bottles

450
THOMAS LIG O TTI
could still be seen, their slender necks angled festively this way and 
that.Grissul sat down, facing Nolon at eye level.
“Have you been here long?” he asked.
Nolon calmly pulled out a watch from deep inside his coat. He 
stared at it for a few moments, tapped the glass once or twice, then 
gently pushed it back inside his coat.
“Someone must have known I was thinking about seeing you,” 
Grissul continued, “because I’ve got a little story I could tell.” 
Nolon again glanced toward the lighted window across the 
street. Grissul noticed this and twisted his head around, saying, 
“Well, someone’s there after all. Do you think tonight we could 
get, you know, a little service of some kind?”
“Maybe you could go over there yourself and see what our 
chances are,” Nolon replied.
“All the same to me,” Grissul insisted, twisting his head back to 
face Nolon. “I’ve still got my news.”
“Is that specifically why this meeting is taking place?”
To this query Grissul returned a blank expression. “Not that I 
know of,” he asserted. “As far as I’m concerned, we just met by 
chance.”
“Of course,” Nolon agreed, smiling a little. Grissul smiled back 
but with much less subtlety.
“So I was going to tell you,” Grissul began, “that I was out in 
that field, the one behind those empty buildings at the edge of town 
where everything just slides away and goes ofT in all directions. 
And there’s a marsh by there, makes the ground a little, I don’t 
know, stringy or something. No trees, though, only a lot of wild 
grass, reeds, you know where I mean?”
“I now have a good idea,” Nolon replied, a trifle bored or at 
least pretending to be.
“This was a little before dark that I was there. A little before the 
stars began to come out. I really wasn’t planning to do anything, 
let me say that. I just walked some ways out onto the field, changed 
direction a few times, walked a ways more. Then I saw something 
through a blind of huge stalks of some kind, skinny as your finger 
but with these great spiky heads on top. And really very stiff, not 
bending at all, just sort of wobbling in the breeze. They might well 
have creaked, I don’t know, when I pushed my way through to see 
beyond them. Then I knelt down to get a better look at what was 
there on the ground. I’m telling you, Mr Nolon, it was right in the 
ground. It appeared to be a part of it, like—”
“Mr Grissul, what appeared?”

TH E  STRANGE DESIGN OF MASTER RIGNOLO 
451
Grissul remembered himself and found a tone of voice not so 
exhausting of his own strength, nor so wearing on his listener’s 
patience.
“The face,” he said, leaning back in his chair. “It was right 
there, about the size of, I don’t know, a window or a picture 
hanging on a wall, except that it was in the ground and it was a big 
oval, not rectangular in any way. Just as if someone had partly 
buried a giant, or better yet, a giant’s mask. Only the edges of the 
face seemed not so much buried as, well, woven I guess you would 
say, right into the ground. The eyes were closed, not shut closed - it 
didn’t seem to be dead - but relaxed. The same with the lips, very 
heavy lips rubbing up against each other. Even complexion, ashy 
gray, and soft cheeks. They looked soft, I mean, because I didn’t 
actually touch them in any way. I think it was asleep.”
Nolon shifted slightly in his chair and looked straight into 
Grissul’s eyes.
“Then come and see for yourself,” Grissul insisted. “The moon’s 
bright enough.”
“That’s not the problem. I’m perfectly willing to go along with 
you, whatever might be there. But for once I have other plans.” 
“Oh, other plans,” repeated Grissul as if some deeply hidden 
secret had been revealed. “And what other plans would those be, 
Mr Nolon?”
“Plans of relatively long standing and not altered since made, if 
you can conceive of such a thing these days. Are you listening? Oh, 
I thought you nodded off Well, Rignolo, that mysterious little 
creature, has made a rare move. He’s asked if I would like to have a 
look around his studio. No one’s ever been there that I know of. 
And no one’s actually seen what he paints.”
“No one that you know of,” added Grissul.
“Of course. Until tonight, that is, a little while from now unless a 
change of plans is necessary. Otherwise I shall be the first to see 
what all that talk of his is about. It should really be worth the 
trouble, and I could invite you to come along.”
GrissuPs lower lip pushed forward a little. “Thank you, Mr 
Nolon,” he said, “but that’s more in your line. I thought when I 
told you about my observation this evening— ”
“Of course, your observation is very interesting, extraordinary, 
Mr Grissul. But I think that that sort of thing can wait, don’t you? 
Besides, I haven’t told you anything of Rignolo’s work.”
“You can tell me.”
“Landscapes, Mr Grissul. Nothing but landscapes. Exclusively 
his subject, a point he even brags about.”

452
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“That’s very interesting, too.”
“I thought you would say something like that. And you might 
be even more interested if you had ever heard Rignolo discourse on 
his canvasses. But. . . well, you can see and hear for yourself. What 
do you say, then? First Rignolo’s studio and then straight out to see 
if we can find that old field again?”
They agreed that these activities, in this sequence, would not be 
the worst way to fill an evening.
As they got up from the table, Nolon had a last look at the 
window across the street. The light that once brightened it must 
have been put out during his conversation with Grissul. So there 
was no way of knowing whether or not someone was now observing 
them. Buttoning their overcoats as far as their scarfed necks, the 
two men walked in silence across the park upon which countless 
stars stared down like the dead eyes of sculptured faces.
“Don’t just walk stepping everywhere,” Rignolo told his visitors as 
they all entered the studio. He was a little out of breath from the 
climb up the stairs, wheezing his words, quietly muttering to 
himself, “This place, oh, this place.” There was hardly a patch 
of floor that was not in some way cluttered over, so he need not 
have warned Nolon, or even Grissul. Rignolo was of lesser stature 
than his guests, virtually a dwarf, and so moved with greater 
freedom through that cramped space. “You see,” he said, “how 
this isn’t really a room up here, just a little closet that tried to grow 
into one, bulging out every which way and making all these odd 
niches and alcoves surrounding us, this shapeless gallery of nooks. 
There’s a window around here, I suppose, under some of these 
canvasses. But those are what you’re here for, not to look out some 
window that who knows where it is. Nothing to see out there, even 
so.”Rignolo then ushered his visitors through the shrunken maze 
composed of recesses of one sort or another, indicating to them a 
canvass here or there. Each somehow held itself to a wall or was 
leaning against one, as if with exhaustion. Having brought their 
attention to this or that picture, he would step a little to the side 
and allow them to admire his work, standing there like a polite but 
slightly bored curator of some seldom-visited museum, a pathetic 
figure attired in over-sized clothes of woven . . . dust. His small 
ovoid face was as lifeless as a mask: his skin had the same faded 
complexion as his clothes and was just as slack, flabby; his lips were 
the same color as his skin but more full and taut; his hair shot out in 
tufts from his head, uncontrolled, weedy; and his eyes showed too

T H E STRANGE DESIGN OF MASTER RIGNOLO 
4 5 3
much white, having to all appearances rolled up halfway into his 
forehead, as if they were trying to peek under it.
While Nolon was gazing at one of Rignolo’s landscapes, Grissul 
seemed unable to shake off a preoccupation with the artist himself, 
though he was obviously making the effort. But the more he tried 
to turn his attention away from Rignolo, the more easily it was 
drawn back to the flabby skin, the faded complexion, the un­
disciplined shocks of hair. Finally, Grissul gave a little nudge to 
Nolon and began to whisper something. Nolon looked at Grissul in 
a way that might have said, “Yes, I know, but have some sense of 
decorum in any case,” then resumed his contemplation of Rigno­
lo’s excellent landscapes.
They were all very similar to one another. Given such titles as 
“Glistening Marsh,” “The Tract of Three Shadows” and “The Stars, 
the Hills,” they were not intended to resemble as much as suggest the 
promised scenes. A vague hint of material forms might emerge here 
and there, some familiar effect of color or outline, but for the most 
part they could be described as extremely remote in their per­
spective on tangible reality. Grissul, who was no stranger to some 
of the locales purportedly depicted in these canvasses, could very 
well have expressed the objection that these conglomerations of 
fractured mass, these whirlpools of distorted light, simply did not 
achieve their purpose, did not in fact deserve connection with the 
geographical subjects from which they took their titles. Perhaps it 
was Rignolo’s intuition that just such a protest might be forth­
coming that inspired - in the rapid, frantic voice of a startled 
sleeper - the following outburst.
“Think anything you like about these scenes, it’s all the same to 
me. Whisper to each other, my hearing is wonderfully bad. Say 
that my landscapes do not invite one’s eyes to pass into them and 
wander, let alone linger for the briefest moment. Nevertheless, that 
is exactly their purpose, and as far as I am concerned they are quite 
adequate to it, meticulously efficient. I have spent extraordinary 
lengths of time within the borders of each canvass, both as maker 
and as casual inhabitant, until the borders no longer exist for me 
and neither does . . . that other thing. Understand that when I say 
inhabitant, I do not in any way mean that I take my clumsy feet 
tromping up and down staircases of color, or that I stand this 
stunted body of mine upon some lofty ledge where I can play the 
master of all I see. There are no masters of these scenes and no 
seers, because bodies and their organs cannot function there - no 
place for them to go, nothing to survey with ordinary eyes, no 
thoughts to think for the mighty brain. And my thoroughfares will

454
THOMAS L IGOTTI
not take you from the doorstep of one weariness to the backdoor of 
another, and they cannot crumble, because they are burdened 
with nothing to convey - their travelers are already there, 
continuously arriving at infinite sites of the perpetually astonish­
ing. Yet these sites are also a homeland, and nothing there will ever 
threaten to become strange. What I mean to say is that to inhabit 
my landscapes one must, in no figurative sense, grow into them. At 
best they are a paradise for sleepwalkers, but only those sleepwalk­
ers who never rise to their feet, who forget their destination, and 
who may thus never reach that ultimate darkness beyond dreams, 
but may loiter in perpetuity in these lands of mine, which neighbor 
on nothingness and stand next door to endlessness. So you see, my 
critics, what we have in these little pictures is a living communion 
with the void, a vital annihilation and a thoroughly decorative 
eternity of—”
“All the same,” Grissul interjected, “it does sound unpleasant.”
“You’re interfering,” Nolon said under his breath.
“The old bag of wind,” Grissul said under his.
“And just where do you see the unpleasantness? Where, show 
me. Nowhere, in my view. One cannot be unpleasant to one’s 
self, one cannot be strange to oneself. I claim that all will be 
different when one is joined with the landscape. We need not go 
the way of doom when such a hideaway is so near at hand - a 
land of escape. For the initiated, each of those little swirls is a 
cove which one may enter into and become; each line - jagged or 
merely jittery - is a cartographer’s shoreline which may be 
explored at all points at once; each crinkled wad of radiance 
is a star basking in its own light, and in yours. This, gentlemen, is 
a case of making the most of one’s talent for pro-jec-tion. There 
indeed exist actual locales on which my pictures are based, I 
admit that. But these places keep their distance from the 
spectator: whereas my new landscapes make you feel at home, 
those old ones put you off, hold you at arm’s length, and in the 
end throw you right out of the picture. That’s the way it is out 
there -  everything looks at you with strange eyes. But you can get 
around this intolerable situation, jump the fence, so to speak, and 
trespass into a world where you belong for a change. If my 
landscapes look unfamiliar to you, it is only because everything 
looks different from the other side. All this will be understood 
much more clearly when you have seen my masterwork. Step this 
way, please.”
Nolon and Grissul glanced blankly at each other and then 
followed the artist up to a narrow door. Opening the door with

TH E STRANGE DESIGN OF MASTER RIGNOLO 
4 5 5
a tiny key, Rignolo ushered his guests inside. It was a tight squeeze 
through the doorway.
“Now this place really is a closet,” Grissul whispered to Nolon. “I 
don’t think I can turn around.”
“Then we’ll just have to walk out of here backwards, as if there 
were something wrong with that.”
The door slammed closed and for a moment there was no place 
on earth darker than that little room.
“Watch the walls,” Rignolo called through the door.
“Walls?” someone whispered.
The first images to appear in the darkness were those crinkled 
wads of radiance Rignolo spoke of, except these were much larger, 
more numerous, and became more radiant than the others bound 
within their cramped little canvasses. And they emerged on all 
sides of the spectator, above and below as well, so that an 
irresistible conviction was instilled that the tiny gravelike room 
had expanded into a star-strewn corridor of night, the certainty 
created that one was suspended in space without practical means 
of remaining there. Reaching out for the solid walls, crouching on 
the floor, only brought confusion rather than relief from the sense 
of impossibility. The irregular daubs of brightness grew into great 
silver blotches, each of them ragged at its rim and glowing wildly. 
Then they stopped growing in the blackness, attaining some 
predesigned composition, and another kind of growing began: 
thin filaments of bluish light started sprouting in the spaces 
between those bulbous thistles of brilliance, running everywhere 
like cracks up and down a wall. And these threadlike, hairlike 
tendrils eventually spread across the blackness in an erratic fury of 
propagation, until all was webbed and stringy in the universal 
landscape. Then the webbing began to fray and grow shaggy, 
cosmic moss hanging in luminous clumps, beards. But the scene 
was not muddled, no more so, that is, than the most natural marsh 
or fen-like field. Finally, enormous stalks shot out of nowhere, 
quickly crisscrossed to form interesting and well-balanced pat­
terns, and suddenly froze. They were a strange shade of green and 
wore burry crowns of a pinkish color, like prickly brains.
The scene, it appeared, was now complete. All the actual effects 
were displayed: actual because the one further effect was most likely 
an illusion. For it seemed that deep within the shredded tapestry of 
webs and hairs and stalks, something else had been woven, 
something buried beneath the marshy morass but slowly rising 
to the surface.
“Is that a face?” someone said.

4 5 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“I can begin to see one too,” said the other, “but I don’t know if 
I want to see it. I don’t think I can feel where I am now. Let’s try 
not to look at those faces.”
A series of cries from within the little room finally induced 
Rignolo to open the door, which sent Nolon and Grissul tumbling 
backwards into the artist’s studio. They lay among the debris on 
the floor for some time. Rignolo swiftly secured the door, and then 
stood absolutely still beside it, his upturned eyes taking no interest 
in his visitors’ predicament. As they regained their feet, a few 
things were quickly settled in low voices.
“Mr Nolon, I recognized the place that that room is supposed to 
be.”“I’m sure you did.”
“And I’m also sure I know whose face it was that I saw tonight 
in that field.”
“I think we should be going.”
“What are you saying?” demanded Rignolo.
Nolon gestured toward a large clock high upon the wall and 
asked if that was the time.
“Always,” replied Rignolo, “since I’ve never yet seen its hands 
move.”
“Well, then, thank you for everything,” said Nolon.
“We have to be leaving,” added Grissul.
“Just one moment,” Rignolo shouted as they were making their 
way out. “I know where you’re going now. Someone, I won’t say 
who, told me what you found in that field. I’ve done it, haven’t I? 
You can tell me all about it. No, it’s not necessary. I’ve put myself 
into the scene at last. The abyss with a decor, the ultimate flight! In 
short -  survival in the very maw of oblivion. Oh, perhaps there’s 
still some work to be done. But I’ve made a good start, haven’t I? 
I’ve got my foot in the door, my face looking in the window. Little 
by little, then . . . forever. True? No, don’t say anything. Show me 
where it is, I need to go there. I have a right to go.”
Having no idea what sort of behavior a refusal might inspire in 
the maniacal Rignolo, not to mention possible reprisals from 
unknown parts, Nolon and Grissul respected the artist’s request.
* 
* 
*
Into a scene which makes no sound, three figures arrive. Their silhouettes 
move with distinct, cautious steps across an open field, progressing slowly, 
almost without noticeable motion. Around them, crisscrossing shafts of tall 
grasses are entirely motionless, their pointed tips sharply outlined in the

TH E STRANGE DESIGN OF MASTER RIGNOLO 
4 5 7
moonlight. Above them, the moon is round and bright; but its brightness is of 
a dull sort, like the flat whiteness that appears in the spaces of complex 
designs embellishing the page of a book.
The three figures, one of which is much shorter than the other two, have 
stopped and are standing completely still before a particularly dense clump of 
oddly shaped stalks. Now one of the taller figures has raised his arm and is 
pointing toward this clump of stalks, while the shorter figure has taken a step 
in the direction indicated. The two tall figures are standing together as the 
short one has all but disappeared into the dark, dense overgrowth. Only a 
single shoe, its toe angled groundward, remains visible. Then nothing at all.
The two remaining figures continue to stand in their places, making no 
gestures, their hands in the pockets of their long overcoats. They are staring 
into the blackness where the other one has disappeared. Around them, criss­
crossing shafts of tall grasses; above them, the moon is round and bright.
Now the two figures have turned themselves away from the place where the 
other one disappeared. They are each slightly bent over and are holding their 
hands over their ears, as though to deafen themselves to something they could 
not bear. Then, slowly, almost without noticeable motion, they move out of the 
scene.The field is empty once again. And now everything awakes with movement 
and sound
* 
* 
*
After their adventure, Nolon and Grissul returned to the same 
table in that place they had met earlier that evening. But where 
they had left a bare table-top behind them, not considering the 
candleflame within its unshapely green bubble, there were at the 
moment two shallow glasses set out, along with a tall, if somewhat 
thin bottle placed between them. They looked at the bottle, the 
glasses, and each other methodically, as if they did not want to 
rush into anything.
“Is there still, you know, someone in the window across the 
street?” Grissul asked.
“Do you think I should look?” Nolon asked back.
Grissul stared at the table, allowing moments to accumulate, 
then said, “I don’t care, Mr Nolon, I have to say that what 
happened tonight was very unpleasant.”
“Something like that would have happened sooner or later,” 
Nolon replied. “He was too much the dreamer, let’s be honest. 
Nothing he said made any sense to speak of, and he was always 
saying more than he should. Who knows who heard what.”
“I’ve never heard screaming like that.”

458
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“It’s over,” said Nolon quietly.
“But what could have happened to him?” asked Grissul, 
gripping the shallow glass before him, apparently without aware­
ness of the move.
“Only he could know that for certain,” answered Nolon, who 
mirrored GrissuPs move and seemingly with the same absence of 
conscious intent.
“And why did he scream that way, why did he say it was all a 
trick, a mockery of his dreams, that ‘filthy thing in the earth’? Why 
did he scream not to be ‘buried forever in that strange, horrible 
mask’?”
“Maybe he became confused,” said Nolon. Nervously, he began 
pouring from the thin bottle into each of their glasses.
“And then he cried out for someone to kill him. But that’s not 
what he wanted at all, just the opposite. He was afraid to you- 
know-what. So why would he— ”
“Do I really have to explain it all, Mr Grissul?”
“I suppose not,” Grissul said very softly, looking ashamed. “He 
was trying to get away, to get away with something.”
“That’s right,” said Nolon just as softly, looking around. 
“Because he wanted to escape from here without having to you- 
know-what. How would that look?”
“Set an example.”
“Exactly. Now let’s just take advantage of the situation and 
drink our drinks before moving on.”
“I’m not sure I want to,” said Grissul.
“I’m not sure we have any say in the matter,” replied Nolon.
“Yes, but—”
“Shhh. Tonight’s our night.”
Across the street a shadow fidgeted in the frame of a lighted 
window. An evening breeze moved through the little park, and the 
green glow of a candleflame flickered upon two silent faces.

THE VOICE IN THE 
BONES
T
he blackness above was deep and unbroken. Rising toward it 
was a tower with a single opening which framed a pale, 
quivering light. The narrow aperture was fixed high within th
darkness and was engulfed by its dense and voiceless unity. Below 
the tower was a scattering of other structures, while other lights 
emerged here and there in the lower darkness. One of these was a 
lamp set into a wall at the border of a fractured street. The lamp 
spread its glow upon the gray wall and upon two figures who stood 
motionless before it. No color in their tight, unblemished faces, no 
sign of breath under the dark covering of their forms: simple beings 
with long fingers and empty eyes. Yet their gaze was clearly 
focused on a building across that vacant street, rigidly directed 
toward a certain window there. Every so often someone would peer 
out along the very edge of that window, though he never looked for 
more than a moment before retreating out of sight. And he 
occupied a room where everything seemed to tremble with 
shadows.
The shadows moved slowly, obscuring so many of the objects 
within the room and appearing to change the outlines of the 
simplest furnishings. The room itself became altered in its dimen­
sions. Over the course of slow transformations it pushed outward 
into a great abyss and squeezed inward to create a maze of strange 
black turnings. Every shape was imposing itself on another shape, 
breeding a chaos of overlapping patterns.
The occupant of the room remained on his guard in these 
surroundings. Now he saw something hiding inside a shadow 
moving along the woodwork by the window, using the shadow 
as a mask. He nudged his foot against the wall, which felt as if it 
softly gave way to his touch. But there was nothing in the shadow, 
or nothing any longer. And when he reached out slowly and pulled 
the dangling cord of a light, it was not illumination that filled the 
room but a voice.

460
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Mister Ha-ha!” it shrieked, echoing into many voices around 
him.“Ha-ha,” repeated a similar voice.
With lethargic caution he slid toward the window and peeked 
around the casement. He could not imagine that those keen and 
jagged voices belonged to the two figures across the street. He had 
never seen them open their mouths when they called out to him 
with some improvised name. They only stood firm and watchful by 
the high rough wall. He looked away.
“Mister Tick-tock!”
“Tick-tock, tick-tock.”
He took another step, an intensely sluggish effort, and stood 
centered in the window frame. Now they would see him, now they 
would know. But the ones who had been so patient in their vigil 
had abandoned the scene. And shadows merged with fading 
echoes in the room.
Then there were new echoes for him to hear. Yet they did not 
lack definition or intent, as did so many of the sounds produced by 
the large building that contained him: a dull drawn-out crash or a 
brief crackling might come from anywhere without giving up its 
origin or identity. But these new sounds, these particular echoes, 
did not seek anonymity. And there was a focus, a center upon 
which they converged. Footsteps, the creak of a closing window or 
a slowly opening door, a fumbling among the objects of another 
room, all these noises spoke a strange language among the 
surrounding shadows and joined with them in a greater scheme.
He began moving from room to room in a laborious expedition 
and became a fugitive in a realm of twisted suppositions. A window 
might allow some glaze of illumination, a glassy luminescence, but 
he was often confused by certain deviations in the design of these 
rooms. Forced to turn an unseen corner, he was faced with a small 
door, and around its edges some thin lines of light alternately 
appeared and disappeared in the darkness. He opened the door. 
On the other side was a long low corridor with a row of small lamps 
that together blinked on and off along either wall. He stood and 
stared. For it seemed that something came into being during the 
intervals of darkness in the corridor, a swarm of obscure shapes 
that were but imperfectly dispersed by the returning light, gnarled 
specters that somehow belonged to the very walls and reached out 
with their shapeless limbs. He crouched and then crossed his arms 
upon his chest, so that his body would not touch anything which 
need not be touched. When the light next filled the corridor he ran 
across the floor and felt himself being thrust forward, strangely

TH E  VOICE IN TH E BONES
461
propelled by a power which was not his own and which he could 
not control. A railing caught him before he plunged down a 
stairwell reaching into the blackness below.
Yet these flights of stairs, which from above described a perfect 
vertical shaft, soon began to wander. They led him into unfamiliar 
regions of the building without offering a means of escape, only of 
retreat. And when he paused a moment to survey the dark and 
doorless world around him, he heard the echoing voices.
“Mister Fizzle,” they shouted at him in unison.
He proceeded to descend the stairway and resigned himself to 
whatever destination it would lead him, always moving with that 
irresistible rapidity which had possessed his body and confused his 
thoughts. The echoes of other footsteps were now in pursuit. They 
appeared to catch up to him as small and barely visible objects, soft 
and irregular spheres that tumbled past him on the stairs and then 
faded before his eyes. Soon the others would be able to see him, 
soon they would reach him.
At last there came an end to the prodigious stairs, and he arrived 
at the abysmal fundament of the building. The ground upon which 
he now stood seemed to be of raw clay, cold and tallowy. Ahead of 
him was a crude passage, nearly a tunnel, which dripped with 
something that gave off a grayish glow. And there were other 
passages and also doors within the damp walls. It seemed he had 
no choice but to hide within one of these rooms. For upon that 
slippery ground he could no longer move with the same speed that 
had brought him there.
He turned down one passageway after another. By then the 
others were with him in those dim catacombs. It was time to take 
refuge behind one of the doors, each of which perfectly withheld 
the secret of whatever lay behind it.
The room in which he closed himself was lit by a dimmer light 
than that of the passages outside. It was an oily and erratic 
illumination which seemed to emerge from thick pools and 
patches of corruption that mottled the greasy clay of the floor. 
An atmosphere of filth and decay occupied the room, a rank 
presence that was the soul of slaughter. Indefinite in its dimensions, 
the chamber seemed to be a place of disposal for a kind of fleshy 
refuse. He was about to seek a more tolerable sanctuary when two 
figures stepped out of some dark recess within the room.
“Mister Thump,” one of them said without the slightest move­
ment of his thin mouth. So it was not they who spoke, but 
something else which spoke through them, something which 
practiced a strange ventriloquism.

4 6 2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
When he turned to try and escape through the door, he found 
that it was stuck, jammed within its frame by shadows clogging its 
edges, oozing out like black suet.
“Thump, thump, thump,” whispered the voices approaching 
him.
An interval of oblivion passed, and it was ah entirely different 
room in which he awoke. This was a small, bare cubicle lit only by 
a peculiar radiance which shone through a narrow slot in the large, 
locked door. There were no windows in the room. The floor felt 
gritty and vaguely shifting, as if he were being supported by very 
loose sand. He lay against a wall in darkness, with only his thin legs 
projecting into the strip of light cast upon the floor.
A voice was whispering to him from somewhere. Slowly the 
words gained force, yet somehow they remained an abstract sound 
which merely flirted with messages, never really cohering. The 
voice seemed to be reaching him through the wall, for he was alone 
in that room. And still the tones were emphatic, even piercing, as if 
unaffected by the dulling interference of a barrier.
“Listen,” the voice said. “Are you listening now? I am also a 
prisoner, but it is not the same for me. Things have changed in this 
place. I know that you wonder about those ones who brought you 
here, and about other things. Are you listening? Someone made 
them, you know. He is the one who made them, he could do such 
things. And he did something else, something that he is still doing. 
For he could never truly perish. Things have changed since he 
came to this place. He came here with strange dreams, and things 
began to change. He hid himself here and practiced his dreams. 
Bones and shadows, are you listening? Pale bones and black 
shadows. And now he is gone but he is not gone. I know my 
voice is not the same, if you are listening. It is only an echo now. I 
have heard so many voices, and how could I not become their 
echo? The echo of dreams, dreams of bones and shadows together. 
Do you know the shadows I mean? They draw you toward them, 
they take you into their blackness. But that is where you would go. 
Something in the very bones reaches out to the shadows and their 
blackness. He dreamed about this, and he practiced this dream. 
The bones themselves are only pale shadows, the dust of shadows. 
Where they are gathered, so are shadows gathered there. And they 
are dreamed together. These dreams have not gone from this 
place. Everything is the subject of shadows, everything serves them 
and their blackness. The bones are silent because the shadows have 
taken their voices. He dreamed about this. Now we are all servants

TH E  VOICE IN TH E BONES
463
of shadows, and they have taken voices from the bones to join with 
their blackness. The shadows have taken these voices now. And 
they are using them, listen to my words. Things have changed but 
everything continues as he dreamed it would be. Everything 
continues but is not the same. And are you . . .”
But the words were interrupted when the door groaned and 
swung slowly toward him, flooding his cell with a confusing 
radiance. In the open doorway were two figures which stood 
lean and dark and without features against the flaring incandes­
cence. Yet they were not hindered by the brilliance and moved 
toward him with a mechanical efficiency. They positioned them­
selves on either side of his slouching form, then lifted him easily ofF 
the floor. He struggled awkwardly, at last gripping one of their 
pale hands and pulling on it. The skin slipped back from the wrist 
and bunched up like a glove; underneath was revealed a kind of 
stuffing composed of pale chips and slivers that cohered within a 
thick black paste.
They brought him out into the narrow circular corridor, where 
the brightness of a multitude of hanging lamps eliminated any 
suggestion of shadows. He noticed, as he hung in the grasp of the 
two servants, that the neighboring cell had its door wide open and 
was without an occupant. But when they began to proceed down 
the corridor there appeared to be something that moved upon the 
wall of that vacant cell, evading the light. They passed other cells, 
all of whose doors were open and all of which betrayed a stirring 
along the walls within that told him they were not wholly 
unoccupied.
His wordless escorts now pushed him through a peaked doorway 
cut into the gray inner wall of the corridor. On the other side was a 
stone stairway which twisted through the heart of the prison. He 
climbed the stairs slowly and stiffly with long-fingered hands 
guiding him. And now shadows appeared upon the bending 
wall, joining themselves into an unshapely creature, a chimerical 
guide that knew its way and led him to a place high above. There 
was no variation in the light around him, yet a sense of gradual 
darkening imposed itself on him with every ascending step. Now he 
was approaching some vast and massive source of the obscure, a 
great nexus of shadows, a birthplace and perhaps also a graveyard 
where things without substance waited, a realm of first and final 
dreams.
The stairs ended as they emerged through the floor at the center 
of a great room. And here a new species of illumination -  a pale 
and grainy phosphorescence - could be seen spreading throughout

464
THOMAS LIO O TTI
the open space around them. This strange light appeared to 
emanate from several transparent vessels which were shaped like 
urns and had been randomly positioned upon the floor or atop 
objects various in size. Each of these containers seemed to be filled 
with a colorless, powdery substance from which a cold and gritty 
glow was sent forth. But this glow, this scintillating gloss, did not 
reveal the surfaces of the room as much as it coated them with 
another surface, transfiguring what lay beneath.
For in that troubled glare everything lost the density and 
presence it might have possessed. Wide and lofty cabinets seemed 
to waver, barely settled upon the uneven floor. The straight lines of 
tall shelves took on a slight tilt and threatened to disgorge the 
countless books so tenuously supported there. So many books were 
already scattered across the floor, their pages torn out and 
gathered in ragged heaps that might take themselves into the 
air at any moment. Located in a far section of the chamber was an 
armory of curious devices mounted upon the wall or suspended by 
wires, devices which could have been hallucinations, phantoms 
through which one’s hand would pass on attempting to use them as 
they were designed to be used. And they seemed to have been 
designed for projects that involved rending and ripping, flaying 
and grinding. Yet all of these instruments apparently had lain idle 
for ages, displaying a corrosion which further removed them from 
their former substance and placed them in a category of phantas­
mal curiosities. Even the long low table about which these 
atrocious implements were congregated was dissolving with ne­
glect.Nevertheless, he was forced by his guardians to lie upon this 
coarse slab and be fettered by straps so decayed that he could easily 
tear them off. But the stern auxiliaries did not seem to be aware of 
the true condition of things: they continued to perform routine 
tasks that once may have had a purpose before being eclipsed by 
changes unknown to them.
Through the brittle haze of that room he watched his keepers as 
they went about some dutiful business, picking up obscure debris 
lying about the table, remnants of an undertaking long aban­
doned, or one no longer practiced in the same manner. This 
material they deposited in a large chest and locked it within. 
Then, with the studied automatism of pallbearers, they lifted the 
chest by its handles and carried it away, descending the stairs at 
the center of the room, their heavy feet scuffing the steps of that 
great prison tower. And echoes diminished in the depths below.
With the labored movements of a sleeper prematurely awa­

THE VOICE IN TH E BONES
4 6 5
kened, he turned himself from the table. And it was then he saw 
that the room was provided with a window, a single opening 
without glass. But so filled was this aperture with the blackness 
beyond that it seemed to be only a shadow painted upon the wall. 
He stepped slowly about the mounds of paper and other waste 
lying about the floor, careful of the deceptions of the room’s 
fractured light, and leaned over the window’s ledge. Far below 
he could see two tiny figures with a miniature box bobbing 
between them. They shrank farther into the quiet distance and 
finally disappeared into one of those dark hulking structures which 
were crowded together along narrow streets. So alike were these 
buildings that he could not keep his fix on the one they had 
entered, though he had his suspicions. Remaining at the window, 
he gazed into the great blackness above, which seemed to exert a 
strange magnetism, a tugging at the tower that rose so near to this 
mute and lightless firmament. After a few moments he turned 
away from the window. Now he was alone, with nothing to hold 
him to that place.
But as he moved toward the stairs to leave, he paused and 
scrutinized the piles of disjecta about him. Among this scattering of 
odds and ends there appeared to be something like bones or pieces 
of bones, broken leavings of some enterprise that had taken place 
here. And there was also such an abundance of jettisoned paper, 
pages dark with scribbling and sloughed off in the chaos of 
composition. Yet as he studied with greater intentness this mass 
of wild marks, he began to receive a few splinters of its theme, to 
read the wreckage of an unknown adventure. He seemed to see 
phrases, incantations, formulae, and almost to hear them spoken 
by a shattered voice. The pact of bones and blackness, the voice 
declaimed to him. The collection of shadows. . . shadows binding bones. . . 
skeletons becoming shadows. And he came to understand other things: 
the land stripped of flesh . .. the reeking earth ripped clean and rising into the 
great blackness. This reverberant discourse had made him its 
student, imparting theories and practice: bones pummeled into purity. . . 
parts turned to brilliant particles . .. the shadows seeded with the voice of 
skulls ... the many voices within eternal blackness ... the tenebrous 
harmony.
At last he turned his eyes from these words that were not words. 
Trying to draw away from them, he stumbled toward the stairs. 
But the voice which spoke these things continued to speak to him. 
It then became many voices speaking. Things had already begun 
to change. And now the stairs descended only into blackness, a 
blackness that was rising into the room as a great shadow around

4 6 6
THOMAS LIG O TTI
him. Shadows and their blackness and the voices they possessed. 
The one who had dreamed of bones and shadows - bones and 
shadows together - spoke in these voices and knew the name to 
speak, the name that would flay the flesh, the true name that called 
its bearer into the shadows as folds of blackness fell upon him and 
wrapped him in their shroud.
Now they had summoned him, now he was with them. Things 
had changed yet everything continued as before. And he cried out 
as the shadow sought his bones and as he felt his bones reaching 
into the blackness. Yet it was no longer his own voice that sounded 
in the tower, but the echoing clamor of strange shrieking multi­
tudes.

PART 4
Teatro Grottesco and Other Tales


TEATRO GROTTESCO
T
he first thing I learned was that no one anticipates the arrival of 
the Teatro. One would not say, or even think, “The Teatro 
has never come to this city - it seems we’re due for a visit,” o
perhaps, “Don’t be surprised when you-know-what turns up, it’s 
been years since the last time.” Even if the city in which one lives is 
exactly the kind of place favored by the Teatro, there can be no 
basis for predicting its appearance. No warnings are given, no 
fanfare to announce that a Teatro season is about to begin, or that 
another season of that sort will soon be upon us. But if a particular 
city possesses what is sometimes called an “artistic underworld,” 
and if one is in close touch with this society of artists, the chances 
are optimal for being among those who discover that things have 
already started. This is the most one can expect.
For a time it was all rumors and lore, hearsay and dreams. 
Anyone who failed to show up for a few days at the usual club or 
bookstore or special artistic event was the subject of speculation. 
But most of the crowd I am referring to lead highly unstable, even 
precarious lives. Any of them might pack up and disappear 
without notifying a single soul. And almost all of the supposedly 
“missing ones” were, at some point, seen again. One such person 
was a filmmaker whose short movie Private Hell served as the 
featured subject of a local one-night festival. But he was nowhere to 
be seen either during the exhibition or at the party afterwards. 
“Gone with the Teatro,” someone said with a blasé knowingness, 
while others smiled and clinked glasses in a sardonic farewell toast.
But only a week later the filmmaker was spotted in one of the 
back rows of a pornographic theater. He later explained his 
absence by insisting he had been in the hospital following a 
thorough beating at the hands of some people he had been filming 
but who did not consent or desire to be filmed. This sounded 
plausible, given the subject matter of the man’s work. Yet for some 
reason no one believed his hospital story, despite the evidence of 
bandages he was still required to wear. “It has to be the Teatro,” 
argued a woman who always dressed in shades of purple and who

THOMAS LIGOTTI
was a good friend of the filmmaker. “His stufT and Teatro stufF,” she 
said, holding up two crossed fingers for everyone to see.
But what was meant by “Teatro stufl?” This was a phrase I 
heard spoken by a number of persons, not all of them artists of a 
pretentious or self-dramatizing type. Certainly there is no shortage 
of anecdotes that have been passed around which purport to 
illuminate the nature and workings of this “cruel troupe,” an 
epithet used by those who are too superstitious to invoke the 
Teatro Grottesco by name. But sorting out these accounts into a 
coherent profile, never mind their truth value, is another thing 
altogether.
For instance, the purple woman I mentioned earlier held us all 
spellbound one evening with a story about her cousin’s roommate, 
a self-styled “visceral artist” who worked the night shift as a stock 
clerk for a supermarket chain in the suburbs. On a December 
morning, about an hour before sun-up, the artist was released from 
work and began his walk home through a narrow alley that ran 
behind several blocks of various stores and businesses along the 
suburb’s main avenue. A light snow had fallen during the night, 
settling evenly upon the pavement of the alley and glowing in the 
light of a full moon which seemed to hover just at the alley’s end. 
The artist saw a figure in the distance, and something about this 
figure, this winter-morning vision, made him pause for a moment 
and stare. Although he had a trained eye for sizing and perspec­
tive, the artist found this silhouette of a person in the distance of the 
alley intensely problematic. He could not tell if it was short or tall, 
or even if it was moving - either toward him or away from him -  or 
was standing still. Then, in a moment of hallucinated wonder, the 
figure stood before him in the middle of the alley.
The moonlight illuminated a little man who was entirely 
unclothed and who held out both of his hands as if he were 
grasping at a desired object just out of his reach. But the artist 
saw that something was wrong with these hands. While the little 
man’s body was pale, his hands were dark and were too large for 
the tiny arms on which they hung. At first the artist believed the 
little man to be wearing oversized mittens. His hands seemed to be 
covered by some kind of fuzz, just as the alley in which he stood was 
layered with the fuzziness of the snow that had fallen during the 
night. His hands looked soft and fuzzy like the snow, except that 
the snow was white and his hands were black.
In the moonlight the artist came to see that the mittens worn by 
this little man were actually something like the paws of an animal. 
It almost made sense to the artist to have thought that the little

TEATRO GROTTESCO
471
man’s hands were actually paws which had only appeared to be 
two black mittens. Then each of the paws separated into long thin 
fingers that wriggled wildly in the moonlight. But they could not 
have been the fingers of a hand, because there were too many of 
them. And the hands were not paws, nor were the paws really 
mittens. And all of this time the little man was becoming smaller 
and smaller in the moonlight of that alley, as if he were moving 
into the distance far away from the artist who was hypnotized by 
this vision. Finally a little voice spoke which the artist could barely 
hear, and it said to him: “I cannot keep them away from me 
anymore, I am becoming so small and weak.” These words 
suddenly made this whole winter-morning scenario into some­
thing that was too much even for the self-styled “visceral artist.”
In the pocket of his coat the artist had a tool which he used for 
cutting open boxes at the supermarket. He had cut into flesh in the 
past, and, with the moonlight glaring upon the snow of that alley, 
the artist made a few strokes which turned that white world red. 
Under the circumstances what he had done seemed perfectly 
justified to the artist, even an act of mercy. The man was 
becoming so small.
Afterward the artist ran through the alley without stopping until 
he reached the rented house where he lived with his roommate. It 
was she who telephoned the police, saying there was a body lying 
in the snow at such and such a place and then hanging up without 
giving her name. For days, weeks, the artist and his roommate 
searched the local newspapers for some word of the extraordinary 
thing the police must have found in that alley. But nothing ever 
appeared.
“You see how these incidents are hushed up,” the purple woman 
whispered to us. “The police know what is going on. There are 
even special police for dealing with such matters. But nothing is 
made public, no one is questioned. And yet, after that morning in 
the alley, my cousin and her roommate came under surveillance 
and were followed everywhere by unmarked cars. Because these 
special policemen know that it is artists, or highly artistic persons, 
who are approached by the Teatro. And they know whom to watch 
after something has happened. It is said that these police may be 
party to the deeds of that ‘company of nightmares’.”
But none of us believed a word of this Teatro anecdote told by 
the purple woman, just as none of us believed the purple woman’s 
friend, the filmmaker, when he denied all innuendos that con­
nected him to the Teatro. On the one hand, our imaginations had 
sided with this woman when she asserted that her friend, the

472
THOMAS LIGOTTI
creator of the short movie Private Hell, was somehow in league with 
the Teatro; on the other hand, we were mockingly dubious of the 
story about her cousin’s roommate, the self-styled visceral artist, 
and his encounter in the snow-covered alley.
This divided reaction was not as natural as it seemed. Never mind 
that the case of the filmmaker was more credible than that of the 
visceral artist, if only because the first story was lacking the extra­
vagant details which burdened the second. Until then we had 
uncritically relished all we had heard about the Teatro, no matter 
how bizarre these accounts may have been and no matter how much 
they opposed a verifiable truth or even a coherent portrayal of this 
phenomenon. As artists we suspected that it was in our interest to 
have our heads filled with all kinds of Teatro craziness. Even I, a 
writer of nihilistic prose works, savored the inconsistency and the 
flamboyant absurdity of what was told to me across a table in a quiet 
library or a noisy club. In a word, I delighted in the unreality of the 
Teatro stories. The truth they carried, if any, was immaterial. And 
we never questioned any of them until the purple woman related the 
episode of the visceral artist and the small man in the alley.
But this new disbelief was not in the least inspired by our sense of 
reason or reality. It was in fact based solely on fear; it was driven 
by the will to negate what one fears. No one gives up on something 
until it turns on them, whether or not that thing is real or unreal. 
In some way all of this Teatro business had finally worn upon our 
nerves; the balance had been tipped between a madness that 
intoxicated us and one that began to menace our minds. As for 
the woman who always dressed herself in shades of purple . . .  we 
avoided her. It would have been typical of the Teatro, someone 
said, to use a person like that for their purposes.
Perhaps our judgement of the purple woman was unfair. No 
doubt her theories concerning the “approach of the Teatro” made 
us all uneasy. But was this reason enough to cast her out from that 
artistic underworld which was the only society available to her? 
Like many societies, of course, ours was founded on fearful super­
stition, and this is always reason enough for any kind of behavior. 
She had been permanently stigmatized by too closely associating 
herself with something unclean in its essence. Because even after 
her theories were discredited by a newly circulated Teatro tale, her 
status did not improve.
I am now referring to a story that was going around in which 
an artist was not approached by the Teatro but rather took the first 
step toward the Teatro, as if acting under the impulse of a 
sovereign will.

TEATRO GROTTESCO
473
The artist in this case was a photographer of the I-am-a-camera 
type. He was a studiedly bloodless specimen who quite often, and 
for no apparent reason, would begin to stare at someone and to 
continue staring until that person reacted in some manner, usually 
by fleeing the scene but on occasion by assaulting the photogra­
pher, who invariably pressed charges. It was therefore not entirely 
surprising to learn that he tried to engage the services of the Teatro 
in the way he did, for it was his belief that this cruel troupe could 
be hired to, in the photographer’s words, “utterly destroy some­
one.” And the person he wished to destroy was his landlord, a 
small balding man with a mustache who, after the photographer 
had moved out of his apartment, refused to remit his security 
deposit, perhaps with good reason but perhaps not.
In any case, the photographer, whose name incidentally was 
Spence, made inquiries about the Teatro over a period of some 
months. Following up every scrap of information, no matter how 
obscure or suspect, the tenacious Spence ultimately arrived in the 
shopping district of an old suburb where there was a two-story 
building that rented space to various persons and businesses, 
including a small video store, a dentist, and, as it was spelled 
out on the building’s directory, the Theatre Grottesco. At the back 
of the first floor, directly below a studio for dancing instruction, 
was a small suite of offices whose glass door displayed some 
stencilled lettering that read: t  g ventures. Seated at a desk in 
the reception area behind the glass door was a young woman with 
long black hair and black-rimmed eyeglasses. She was thoroughly 
engrossed in writing something on a small blank card, several more 
of which were spread across her desk. The way Spence told it, he 
was undeterred by all appearances that seemed to suggest the 
Teatro, or Theatre, was not what he assumed it was. He entered 
the reception area of the office, stood before the desk of the young 
woman, and introduced himself by name and occupation, believ­
ing it important to communicate as soon as possible his identity as 
an artist, or at least imply as best he could that he was a highly 
artistic photographer, which undoubtedly he was. When the 
young woman adjusted her eyeglasses and asked, “How can I 
help you?” the photographer Spence leaned toward her and 
whispered, “I would like to enlist the services of the Teatro, or 
Theatre if you like.” When the receptionist asked what he was 
planning, the photographer answered, “To utterly destroy some­
one.” The young woman was absolutely unflustered, according to 
Spence, by this declaration. She began calmly gathering the small 
blank cards that were spread across her desk and, while doing this,

474
THOMAS LIGOTTI
explained that T G Ventures was, in her words, an “entertainment 
service.” After placing the small blank cards to one side, she 
removed from her desk a folded brochure which outlined the 
nature of the business, which provided clowns, magicians, and 
novelty performances for a variety of occasions, their specialty 
being children’s parties.
As Spence studied the brochure, the receptionist placidly sat 
with her hands folded and gazed at him from within the black 
frames of her eyeglasses. The light in that suburban office suite was 
bright but not harsh; the pale walls were incredibly clean and the 
carpeting, in Spence’s description, was conspicuously new and 
displayed the exact shade of purple found in turnips. The photo­
grapher said that he felt as if he were standing in a mirage. “This is 
all a front,” Spence finally said, throwing the brochure on the 
receptionist’s desk. But the young woman only picked up the 
brochure and placed it back in the same drawer from which it 
had come. “What’s behind that door?” Spence demanded, point­
ing across the room. And just as he pointed at that door there was a 
sound on the other side of it, a brief rumbling as if something heavy 
had just fallen to the floor. “The dancing classes,” said the 
receptionist, her right index finger pointing up at the floor 
above. “Perhaps,” Spence allowed, but he claimed that this 
sound that he heard, which he described as having an “abysmal 
resonance,” caused a sudden rise of panic within him. He tried not 
to move from the place he was standing, but his body was 
overwhelmed by the impulse to leave that suite of offices. The 
photographer turned away from the receptionist and saw his 
reflection in the glass door. She was watching him from behind 
the lenses of black-framed eyeglasses, and the stencilled lettering 
on the glass door read backwards, as if in a mirror. A few seconds 
later Spence was outside the building in the old suburb. All the 
way home, he asserted, his heart was pounding.
The following day Spence paid a visit to his landlord’s place of 
business, which was a tiny office in a seedy downtown building. 
Having given up on the Teatro, he would have to deal in his own 
way with this man who would not return his security deposit. 
Spence’s strategy was to plant himself in his landlord’s office and 
stare him into submission with a photographer’s unnerving gaze. 
After he arrived at his landlord’s rented office on the sixth floor of 
what was a thoroughly depressing downtown building, Spence 
seated himself in a chair looking across a filthy desk at a small 
balding man with a mustache. But the man merely looked back at 
the photographer. To make things worse, the landlord (whose

TEATRO OROTTESCO
475
name was Herman Zick), would lean towards Spence every so 
often and in a quiet voice say, “It’s all perfecdy legal, you know.” 
Then Spence would continue his staring, which he was frustrated 
to find ineffective against this man Zick, who of course was not an 
artist, or even a highly artistic person, as were the usual victims of 
the photographer. Thus the battle kept up for almost an hour, the 
landlord saying, “It’s all perfectly legal,” and Spence trying to 
hold a fixed gaze upon the man he wished to utterly destroy.
Ultimately Spence was the first to lose control. He jumped out of 
the chair in which he was sitting and began to shout incoherently 
at the landlord. Once Spence was on his feet, Zick swiftly 
maneuvered around the desk and physically evicted the photo­
grapher from the tiny office, locking him out in the hallway. 
Spence said that he was in the hallway for only a second or two 
when the doors opened to the elevator that was directly across from 
Zick’s sixth-floor office. Out of the elevator compartment stepped a 
middle-aged man in a dark suit and black-framed eyeglasses. He 
wore a full, well-groomed beard which, Spence observed, was 
slightly streaked with gray. In his left hand the gentleman was 
clutching a crumpled brown bag, holding it a few inches in front of 
him. He walked up to the door of the landlord’s office and with his 
right hand grasped the round black doorknob, jiggling it back and 
forth several times. There was a loud click that echoed down the 
hallway of that old downtown building. The gentleman turned his 
head and looked at Spence for the first time, smiling briefly before 
admitting himself to the office of Herman Zick.
Again the photographer experienced that surge of panic he had 
felt the day before when he visited the suburban offices of T G 
Ventures. He pushed the down button for the elevator, and while 
waiting he listened at the door of the landlord’s office. What he 
heard, Spence claimed, was that terrible sound that had sent him 
running out in the street from T G Ventures, that “abysmal 
resonance,” as he defined it. Suddenly the gentleman with the 
well-groomed beard and black-rimmed glasses emerged from the 
tiny office. The door to the elevator had just opened, and the man 
walked straight past Spence to board the empty compartment. 
Spence himself did not get on the elevator but stood outside, 
helplessly staring at the bearded gentleman, who was still holding 
that small crumpled bag. A split second before the elevator doors 
slid closed, the gentleman looked directly at Spence and winked at 
him. It was the assertion of the photographer that this wink, 
executed from behind a pair of black-framed eyeglasses, made a 
mechanical clicking sound which echoed down the dim hallway.

476
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Prior to his exit from the old downtown building, leaving by way of 
the stairs rather than the elevator, Spence tried the door to his 
landlord’s office. He found it unlocked and cautiously stepped 
inside. But there was no one on the other side of the door.
The conclusion to the photographer’s adventure took place a 
full week later. Delivered by regular post to his mail box was a 
small square envelope with no return address. Inside was a 
photograph. He brought this item to Des Esseintes’ Library, a 
bookstore where several of us were giving a late-night reading of 
our latest literary efforts. A number of persons belonging to the 
local artistic underworld, including myself, saw the photograph 
and heard Spence’s rather frantic account of the events surround­
ing it. The photo was of Spence himself staring stark-eyed into the 
camera, which apparently had taken the shot from inside an 
elevator, a panel of numbered buttons being partially visible 
along the righthand border of the picture. “I could see no 
camera,” Spence kept repeating. “But that wink he gave me 
. . . and what’s written on the reverse side of this thing.” Turning 
over the photo Spence read aloud the following handwritten 
inscription: “The litde man is so much littler these days. Soon he 
will know about the soft black stars. And your payment is past due.” 
Someone then asked Spence what they had to say about all this at the 
offices of TG Ventures. The photographer’s head swivelled slowly in 
exasperated negation. “Not there anymore,” he said over and over. 
With the single exception of myself, that night at Des Esseintes’ 
Library was the last time anyone saw Mr. Spence.
After the photographer ceased to show up at the usual meeting 
places and special artistic events, there were no cute remarks about 
his having “gone with the Teatro.” We were all of us beyond that 
stage. I was perversely proud to note that a degree of philosophical 
maturity had now developed among those in the artistic under­
world of which I was a part. There is nothing like fear to 
complicate one’s consciousness, inducing previously unknown 
levels of reflection. Under such mental stress I began to organize 
my own thoughts and observations about the Teatro, specifically 
as this phenomenon related to the artists who seemed to be its sole 
objects of attention.
Whether or not an artist was approached by the Teatro or took 
the initiative to approach the Teatro himself, it seemed the effect 
was the same: the end of an artist’s work. I myself verified this fact 
as thoroughly as I could. The filmmaker whose short movie Private 
Hell so many of us admired had, by all accounts, become a full­
time dealer in pornographic videos, none of them his own

TEATRO GROTTESCO
477
productions. The self-named visceral artist had publicly called 
an end to those stunts of his which had gained him a modest 
underground reputation. According to his roommate, the purple 
woman’s cousin, he was now managing the supermarket where he 
had formerly labored as a stock clerk. As for the purple woman 
herself, who was never much praised as an artist and whose renown 
effectively began and ended with the “cigar box assemblage” 
phase of her career, she had gone into selling real estate, an 
occupation in which she became quite a success. This roster of 
ex-artists could be extended considerably, I am sure of that. But for 
the purposes of this report or confession (or whatever else you 
would like to call it) I must end my list of no-longer-artistic persons 
with myself, while attempting to offer some insights into the 
manner in which the Teatro Grottesco could transform a writer 
of nihilistic prose works into a non-artistic, more specifically a post- 
artistic being.
It was after the disappearance of the photographer Spence that 
my intuitions concerning the Teatro began to crystalize and 
become explicit thoughts, a dubious process but one to which I 
am inescapably subject as a prose writer. Until that point in time, 
everyone tacitly assumed that there was an intimacy of kind 
between the Teatro and the artists who were either approached 
by the Teatro or who themselves approached this cruel troupe by 
means of some overture, as in the case of Spence, or perhaps by 
gestures more subtle, even purely noetic (I retreat from writing 
unconscious, although others might argue with my intellectual 
reserve). Many of us even spoke of the Teatro as a manifestation 
of super-art, a term which we always left conveniently nebulous. 
However, following the disappearance of the photographer, all 
knowledge I had acquired about the Teatro, fragmentary as it 
was, became configured in a completely new pattern. I mean to 
say that I no longer considered it possible that the Teatro was in 
any way related to a super-art, or to an art of any kind, quite the 
opposite in fact. To my mind the Teatro was, and is, a phenom­
enon intensely destructive of everything that I conceived of as art. 
Therefore, the Teatro was, and is, intensely destructive of all 
artists and even of highly artistic persons. Whether this destruc­
tive force is a matter of intention or is an epiphenomenon of some 
unrelated, perhaps greater design, or even if there exists anything 
like an intention or design on the part of the Teatro, I have no 
idea (at least none I can elaborate in comprehensible terms). 
Nonetheless, I feel certain that for an artist to encounter the 
Teatro there can be only one consequence: the end of that artist’s

478
THOMAS LIGOTTI
work. Strange, then, that knowing this fact I still acted as I did.
I cannot say if it was I who approached the Teatro or vice versa, 
as if any of that stupidness made a difference. The important thing 
is that from the moment I perceived the Teatro to be a profoundly 
anti-artistic phenomenon I conceived the ambition to make my 
form of art, by which I mean my nihilistic prose writings, into an 
anti-7Vû/ro phenomenon. In order to do this, of course, I required a 
penetrating knowledge of the Teatro Grottesco, or of some 
significant aspect of that cruel troupe, an insight of a deeply 
subtle, even dreamlike variety into its nature and workings.
The photographer Spence had made a great visionary advance 
when he intuited that it was in the nature of the Teatro to act on 
his request to utterly destroy someone (although the exact mean­
ing of the statement “he will know about the soft black stars,” in 
reference to Spence’s landlord, became known to both of us only 
sometime later). I realized that I would need to make a similar 
leap of insight in my own mind. While I had already perceived the 
Teatro to be a profoundly anti-artistic phenomenon, I was not yet 
sure what in the world would constitute an anti-Taz/ro phenom­
enon, as well as how in the world I could turn my own prose 
writings to such a purpose.
Thus, for several days I meditated on these questions. As usual, 
the psychic demands of this meditation severely taxed my bodily 
processes, and in my weakened state I contracted a virus, speci­
fically an intestinal virus, which confined me to my small apartment 
for a period of one week. Nonetheless, it was during this time that 
things fell into place regarding the Teatro and the insights I 
required to oppose this company of nightmares in a more or less 
efficacious manner.
Suffering through the days and nights of an illness, especially an 
intestinal virus, one becomes highly conscious of certain realities, 
as well as highly sensitive to the functions of these realities, which 
otherwise are not generally subject to prolonged attention or 
meditation. Upon recovery from such a virus, the consciousness 
of these realities and their functions necessarily fades, so that the 
once-stricken person may resume his life’s activities and not be 
driven to insanity or suicide by the acute awareness of these most 
unpleasant facts of existence. Through the illumination of analogy, 
I came to understand that the Teatro operated in much the same 
manner as the illness from which I recently suffered, with the 
consequence that the person exposed to the Teatro-disease be­
comes highly conscious of certain realities and their functions, ones 
quite different of course from the realities and functions of an

TEATRO GROTTESCO
479
intestinal virus. However, an intestinal virus ultimately succumbs, 
in a reasonably healthy individual, to the formation of antibodies 
(or something of that sort). But the disease of the Teatro, I now 
understood, was a disease for which no counteracting agents, or 
antibodies, had ever been created by the systems of the individuals 
- that is, the artists -  it attacked. An encounter with any disease, 
including an intestinal virus, serves to alter a person’s mind, 
making it intensely aware of certain realities, but this mind cannot 
remain altered once this encounter has ended or else that person 
will never be able to go on living in the same way as before. In 
contrast, an encounter with the Teatro appears to remain within 
one’s system and to alter a person’s mind permanently. For the 
artist the result is not to be driven into insanity or suicide (as might 
be the case if one assumed a permanent mindfulness of an intestinal 
virus) but the absolute termination of that artist’s work. The 
simple reason for this effect is that there are no antibodies for 
the disease of the Teatro, and therefore no relief from the 
consciousness of the realities which an encounter with the Teatro 
has forced upon an artist.
Having progressed this far in my contemplation of the Teatro - 
so that I might discover its nature or essence and thereby make my 
prose writings into an anti-Teatro phenomenon -  I found that I 
could go no further. No matter how much thought and meditation 
I devoted to the subject I did not gain a definite sense of having 
revealed to myself the true realities and functions that the Teatro 
communicated to an artist and how this communication put an 
end to that artist’s work. Of course I could vaguely imagine the 
species of awareness that might render an artist thenceforth 
incapable of producing any type of artistic efforts. I actually 
arrived at a fairly detailed and disturbing idea of such an 
awareness -  a world-awareness, as I conceived it. Yet I did not 
feel I had penetrated the mystery of “Teatro-stufF.” And the only 
way to know about the Teatro, it seemed, was to have an 
encounter with it. Such an encounter between myself and the 
Teatro would have occurred in any event as a result of the 
discovery that my prose writings had been turned into an anti- 
Teatro phenomenon: this would constitute an approach of the most 
outrageous sort to that company of nightmares, forcing an 
encounter with all its realities and functions. Thus it was not 
necessary, at this point in my plan, to have actually succeeded in 
making my prose writings into an anti-Teatro phenomenon. I 
simply had to make it known, falsely, that I had done so.
As soon as I had sufficiently recovered from my intestinal virus I

480
THOMAS LIGOTTI
began to spread the word. Every time I found myself among others 
who belonged to the so-called artistic underworld of this city I 
bragged that I had gained the most intense awareness of the 
Teatro’s realities and functions, and that, far from finishing me 
ofT as an artist, I had actually used this awareness as inspiration for 
a series of short prose works. I explained to my colleagues that 
merely to exist -  let alone create artistic works -  we had to keep 
certain things from overwhelming our minds. However, I contin­
ued, in order to keep these things, such as the realities of an 
intestinal virus, from overwhelming our minds we attempted to 
deny them any voice whatever, neither a voice in our minds and 
certainly not a precise and clear voice in works of art. The voice of 
madness, for instance, is barely a whisper in the babbling history of 
art because its realities are themselves too maddening to speak of 
for very long . . . and those of the Teatro have no voice at all, given 
their imponderably grotesque nature. Furthermore, I said, the 
Teatro not only propagated an intense awareness of these things, 
these realities and functionings of realities, it was identical with 
them. And I, I boasted, had allowed my mind to be overwhelmed 
by all manner of Teatro stuff, while also managing to use this 
experience as material for my prose writings. “This,” I practically 
shouted one day at Des Esseintes’ Library, “is the super-art.” Then 
I promised that in two days time I would give a reading of my 
series of short prose pieces.
Nevertheless, as we sat around on some old furniture in a corner 
of Des Esseintes’ Library, several of the others challenged my 
statements and assertions regarding the Teatro. One fellow writer, 
a poet, spoke hoarsely through a cloud of cigarette smoke, saying to 
me: “No one knows what this Teatro stuff is all about. I’m not sure 
I believe it myself.” But I answered that Spence knew what it was 
all about, thinking that very soon I too would know what he knew. 
“Spenceì” said a woman in a tone of exaggerated disgust (she once 
lived with the photographer and was a photographer herself). 
“He’s not telling us about anything these days, never mind the 
Teatro.” But I answered that, like the purple woman and the 
others, Spence had been overwhelmed by his encounter with the 
Teatro, and his artistic impulse had been thereby utterly de­
stroyed. “And your artistic impulse is still intact,” she said sni- 
dely. I answered that, yes, it was, and in two days I would prove it 
by reading a series of prose works that exhibited an intimacy with 
the most overwhelmingly grotesque experiences and gave voice to 
them. “That’s because you have no idea what you’re talking 
about,” said someone else, and almost everyone supported this

TEATRO GROTTESCO
481
remark. I told them to be patient, wait and see what my prose 
writings revealed to them. “Reveal?” asked the poet. “Hell, no one 
even knows why it’s called the Teatro Grottesco.” I did not have 
an answer for that, but I repeated that they would understand 
much more about the Teatro in a few days, thinking to myself that 
within this period of time I would have either succeeded or failed in 
my attempt to provoke an encounter with the Teatro and the 
matter of my nonexistent anti-Teatro prose writing would be 
immaterial.
On the very next day, however, I collapsed in Des Esseintes’ 
Library during a conversation with a difFerent congregation of 
artists and highly artistic persons. Although the symptoms of my 
intestinal virus had never entirely disappeared I had not ex­
pected to collapse the way I did and ultimately to discover that 
what I thought was an intestinal virus was in fact something far 
more serious. As a consequence of my collapse, my unconscious 
body ended up in the emergency room of a nearby hospital, the 
kind of place where borderline indigents like myself always end 
up - a backstreet hospital with dated fixtures and a staff of 
sleepwalkers.
When I next opened my eyes it was night. The bed in which they 
had put my body was beside a tall paned window that reflected the 
dim fluorescent light fixed to the wall above my bed, creating a 
black glare in the windowpanes that allowed no view of anything 
beyond them but only a broken image of myself and the room 
around me. There was a long row of these tall paned windows and 
several other beds in the ward, each of them supporting a sleeping 
body that, like mine, was damaged in some way and therefore had 
been committed to that backstreet hospital.
I felt none of the extraordinary pain that had caused me to 
collapse in Des Esseintes’ Library. At that moment, in fact, I could 
feel nothing of the experiences of my past life: it seemed I had 
always been an occupant of that dark hospital ward and always 
would be. This sense of estrangement from both myself and 
everything else made it terribly difficult to remain in the hospital 
bed where I had been placed. At the same time I felt uneasy about 
any movement away from that bed, especially any movement that 
would cause me to approach the open doorway which led into a 
half-lighted backstreet hospital corridor. Compromising between 
my impulse to get out of my bed and my fear of moving away from 
the bed and approaching that corridor, I positioned myself so that 
I was sitting on the edge of the mattress with my bare feet grazing 
the cold linoleum floor. I had been sitting on the edge of that

482
THOMAS LIGOTTI
mattress for quite a while before I heard the voice out in the 
corridor.
The voice came over the public address system, but it was not a 
particularly loud voice. In fact I had to strain my attention for 
several minutes simply to discern the peculiar qualities of the voice 
and to decipher what it said. It sounded like a child’s voice, a sing- 
songy voice full of taunts and mischief. Over and over it repeated 
the same phrase - paging Dr. Groddeck, paging Dr. Groddeck. The 
voice sounded incredibly hollow and distant, garbled by all kinds 
of interference. Paging Dr. Groddeck, it giggled from the other side of 
the world.
I stood up and slowly approached the doorway leading out into 
the corridor. But even after I had crossed the room in my bare feet 
and was standing in the open doorway, that child’s voice did not 
become any louder or any clearer. Even when I actually moved 
out into that long dim corridor with its dated lighting fixtures, the 
voice that was calling Dr. Groddeck sounded just as hollow and 
distant. And now it was as if I were in a dream in which I was 
walking in my bare feet down a backstreet hospital corridor, 
hearing a crazy voice that seemed to be eluding me as I moved 
past the open doorways of innumerable wards full of damaged 
bodies. But then the voice died away, calling to Dr. Groddeck one 
last time before fading like the final echo in a deep well. At the 
same moment that the voice ended its hollow outcrying, I paused 
somewhere toward the end of that shadowy corridor. In the 
absence of the mischievous voice I was able to hear something 
else, a sound like quiet, wheezing laughter. It was coming from the 
room just ahead of me along the right hand side of the corridor. As 
I approached this room I saw a metal plaque mounted at eye-level 
on the wall, and the words displayed on this plaque were these: 
Dr. T. Groddeck.
A strangely glowing light emanated from the room where I 
heard that quiet and continuous wheezing laughter. I peered 
around the edge of the doorway and saw that the laughter was 
coming from an old gentleman seated behind a desk, while the 
strangely glowing light was coming from a large globular object 
positioned on top of the desk directly in front of him. The light 
from this object - a globe of solid glass, it seemed - shone on the old 
gentleman’s face, which was a crazy-looking face with a neatly 
clipped beard that was pure white and a pair of spectacles with 
slim rectangular lenses resting on the bridge of a slender nose. 
When I stood in the doorway of that office, the eyes of 
Dr. Groddeck did not gaze up at me but continued to stare into

TEATRO GROTTESCO
483
the strange, shining globe and at the things that were inside it.
What were these things inside the globe that Dr. Groddeck was 
looking at? To me they appeared to be tiny star-shaped flowers 
evenly scattered throughout the glass, just the thing to lend a 
mock-artistic appearance to a common paperweight. Except that 
these flowers, these spidery chrysanthemums, were pure black. 
And they did not seem to be firmly fixed within the shining sphere, 
as one would expect, but looked as if they were floating in position, 
their starburst of petals wavering slightly like tentacles. 
Dr. Groddeck appeared to delight in the subtle movements of 
those black appendages. Behind rectangular spectacles his eyes 
rolled about as they tried to take in each of the hovering shapes 
inside the radiant globe on the desk before him.
Then the doctor slowly reached down into one of the deep 
pockets of the lab coat he was wearing, and his wheezing laughter 
grew more intense. From the open doorway I watched as he 
carefully removed a small paper bag from his pocket, but he 
never even glanced at me. With one hand he was now holding 
the crumpled bag directly over the globe. When he gave the bag a 
little shake, the things inside the globe responded with an increased 
agitation of their thin black arms. He used both hands to open the 
top of the bag and quickly turned it upside down.
From out of the bag something tumbled onto the globe, where it 
seemed to stick to the surface. It was not actually adhering to the 
surface of the globe, however, but was sinking into the interior of 
the glass. It squirmed as those soft black stars inside the globe 
gathered to pull it down to themselves. Before I could see what it 
was that they had captured and surrounded, the show was over. 
Afterward they returned to their places, floating slightly once 
again within the glowing sphere.
I looked at Dr. Groddeck and saw that he was finally looking 
back at me. He had stopped his asthmatic laughter, and his eyes 
were staring frigidly into mine, completely devoid of any readable 
meaning. Yet somehow these eyes provoked me. Even as I stood in 
the open doorway of that hideous office in a backstreet hospital, 
Dr. Groddeck’s eyes provoked in me an intense outrage, an 
astronomical resentment of the position I had been placed in. 
Even as I had consummated my plan to encounter the Teatro and 
experience its most devastating realities and functions (in order to 
turn my prose works into an anti-Teatro phenomenon) I was 
outraged to be standing where I was standing and resentful of the 
staring eyes of Dr. Groddeck. No matter if I had approached the 
Teatro, the Teatro had approached me, or we both approached

484
THOMAS LIGOTTI
each other. I realized that there is such a thing as being 
approached in order to force one’s hand into making what only 
appears to be an approach, which is actually a non-approach that 
negates the whole concept of approaching. It was all a fix from the 
start, because I belonged to an artistic underworld, because I was 
an artist whose work would be brought to an end by an encounter 
with the Teatro Grottesco. And so I was outraged by the eyes of 
Dr. Groddeck, which were the eyes of the Teatro, and I was 
resentful of all insane realities and the excruciating functions of the 
Teatro. Although I knew that the persecutions of the Teatro were 
not exclusively focused on the artists and highly artistic persons of 
the world, I was nevertheless outraged and resentful to be singled 
out for special treatment. I wanted to punish those persons in this 
world who are not the object of such special treatment. Thus, at 
the top of my voice, I called out in the dim corridor, I cried out the 
summons for others to join me before the stage of the Teatro. 
Strange that I should think it necessary to compound the night­
mare of all those damaged bodies in that backstreet hospital, as 
well as its staff of sleepwalkers who moved within a world of 
outdated fixtures. But by the time anyone arrived Dr. Groddeck 
was gone, and his office became nothing more than a room full of 
dirty laundry.
My escapade that night notwithstanding, I was soon released 
from the hospital pending the results of several tests I had been 
administered. I was feeling as well as ever, and the hospital, like 
any hospital, always needed the bedspace for more damaged 
bodies. They said I would be contacted in the next few days.
It was in fact the following day that I was informed of the 
outcome of my stay in the hospital. “Hello again,” began the 
letter, which was typed on a plain, though waterstained sheet of 
paper. “I was so pleased to finally meet you in person. I thought 
your performance in our interview at the hospital was really first 
rate, and I am authorized to offer you a position with us. There is 
an opening in our organization for someone with your resourceful­
ness and imagination. I’m afraid things didn’t work out with 
Mr. Spence. But he certainly did have a camera’s eye, and we 
have gotten some wonderful pictures from him. I would especially 
like to share with you his last shots of the soft black stars, or S.B.S., 
as we sometimes refer to them. Veritable super-art, if there ever 
was such a thing!
“By the way, the results of your tests - some of which you have 
yet to be subjected to - are going to come back positive. If you 
think an intestinal virus is misery, just wait a few more months. So

TEATRO GROTTESCO
485
think fast, sir. We will arrange another meeting with you in any 
case. And remember - you approached us. Or was it the other way 
around?
“As you might have noticed by now, all this artistic business can 
only keep you going so long before you’re left speechlessly gaping 
at the realities and functions of. . . well, I think you know what 
I’m trying to say. I was forced into this realization myself, and I’m 
quite mindful of what a blow this can be. Indeed, it was I who 
invented the appellative for our organization as it is currently 
known. Not that I put any stock in names, nor should you. Our 
company is so much older than its own name, or any other name 
for that matter. (And how many it’s had over the years - The Ten 
Thousand Things, Anima Mundi, Nethescurial.) You should be 
proud that we have a special part for you to play, such a talented 
artist. In time you will forget yourself entirely in your work, as we 
all do eventually. Myself, I go around with a trunkful of aliases, 
but do you think I can say who I once was really? A man of the 
theater, that seems plausible. Possibly I was the father of Faust or 
Hamlet . . .  or merely Peter Pan.
“In closing, I do hope you will seriously consider our ofTer to join 
us. We can do something about your medical predicament. We 
can do just about anything. Otherwise, I’m afraid that all I can do 
is welcome you to your own private hell, which will be as 
unspeakable as any on earth.”
The letter was signed Dr. Theodore Groddeck, and its prog­
nostication of my physical health was accurate: I have taken more 
tests at the backstreet hospital and the results are somewhat grim. 
For several days and sleepless nights I have considered the 
alternatives the doctor proposed to me, as well as others of my 
own devising, and have yet to reach a decision on what course to 
follow. The one conclusion that keeps forcing itself upon me is that 
it makes no difference what choice I make, or do not make. You 
can never anticipate the Teatro ... or anything else. You can 
never know what you are approaching, or what is approaching 
you. Soon enough my thoughts will lose all clarity, and I will no 
longer be aware that there was ever a decision to be made. The soft 
black stars have already begun to fill the sky.

SEVERINI
I was the only one among a local body of acquaintances and 
associates who had never met Severini. Unlike the rest of them I 
was not in the least moved to visit him along with the others at that 
isolated residence which had become known as “Severini’s Shack.” 
There was a question of my deliberately avoiding an encounter with 
this extraordinary individual, but even I myself had no idea 
whether or not this was true. My curiosity was just as developed 
as that of anyone else, more so in fact. Yet some kind of scruple or 
special anxiety kept me away from what the others celebrated as 
the “spectacle of Severini.”
Of course I could not escape a second-hand knowledge of their 
Severini visits. Each of these trips to that lonesome hovel some 
distance outside the city where I used to live was a great adventure, 
they reported, an excursion into the most obscure and idiosyn­
cratic nightmares. The figure that presided over these salon-like 
gatherings was extremely unstable and inspired in his visitors a 
sense of lurid anticipation, an unfocused expectation that some­
times reached the pitch of lunacy. Afterward I would hear detailed 
accounts from one person or another of what occurred during a 
particular evening within the confines of the notorious shack, 
which was situated at the edge of a wildly overgrown and swampy 
tract of land known as St. Alban’s Marsh, a place that some 
claimed had a sinister pertinence to Severini himself. Occasionally 
I would make notes of these accounts when later I returned to my 
apartment, indulging myself in a type of imaginative and also 
highly analytical record-keeping. For the most part, however, I 
simply absorbed all of these Severini anecdotes in a wholly natural 
and organic fashion, much as I assimilated so many things in the 
world around me, without any awareness -  or even a possibility of 
awareness -  that these things might be nourishing or noxious or 
purely neutral. From the beginning, I admit, it was my tendency 
to be highly receptive to whatever someone might have to say 
regarding Severini, his shack-like home, and the marshy landscape 
in which he had ensconced himself. Then, during private mo­

SEVERINI
487
ments, I would recreate in my imagination the phenomena that 
had been related to me in conversations held at diverse places and 
times. It was rare that I actively urged the others to elaborate on 
any specific aspect of their adventures with Severini, but several 
times I did betray myself when the subject arose of his past life 
before he set himself up in a marshland shack.
According to first-hand witnesses (that is, persons who had 
actually made the pilgrimage to that isolated and crumbling 
shack), Severini could be quite talkative about his personal 
history, particularly the motives and events that most directly 
culminated in his present life. Nevertheless, these persons also 
admitted that the “marvelous hermit” (Severini) displayed a 
conspicuous disregard for common facts and for truths of a literal 
sort. Thus he was often given to speaking about himself by way of 
ambiguous parables and metaphors, not to mention outrageous 
anecdotes the facts of which always seemed to cancel out one 
another, as well as outright lies which afterward he himself would 
sometimes expose as such. But much of the time -  and in the 
opinion of some, all of the time -  Severini’s speech took the form of 
total nonsense, as though he were talking in his sleep. Despite these 
difficulties in communication, all of the individuals who spoke to 
me on the subject somehow conveyed to my mind a remarkably 
focused portrait of the hermit Severini, an amalgam of hearsay 
that attained the status of a potent legend.
This impression of a legendary Severini was no doubt bolstered 
by what certain persons were describing as “Exhibits from the 
Imaginary Museum.” The entourage of visitors to the hermit’s 
dilapidated shack was a crowd of more or less artistic persons, or at 
least individuals with artistic leanings, and their exposure to 
Severini proved a powerful inspiration that resulted in numerous 
artworks in a variety of media and genres. There were sculptures, 
paintings and drawings, poems and short prose pieces, musical 
compositions sometimes accompanied by lyrics, conceptual works 
that existed only in schematic or anecdotal form, and even an 
architectural plan for a “ruined temple on a jungle island some­
where in the region of the Philippines.” While on the surface these 
productions appeared to have their basis in a multitude of dubious 
sources, each of them claimed the most literalistic origins in 
Severini’s own words, his sleeptalking, as they called it. Indeed, I 
myself could perceive the underlying coherence of these artworks 
and their integral relationship to the same unique figure of 
inspiration that was Severini himself, although I had never met 
this fantastical person and had no desire to do so. Nevertheless,

4 8 8
THOMAS LIG O TTI
these so-called “exhibits” helped me to recreate in my imagination 
not only those much discussed visits to that shack in the marsh 
country but also the personal history of its lone inhabitant.
As I now think about them -  that is, recreate them in my 
imagination - these Severini-based artworks, however varied in 
their genres and techniques, brought to the surface a few features 
that were always the same and were always treated in the same 
way. I was startled when I first began to recognize these common 
features, because somehow they closely replicated a number of 
peculiar images and concepts that I myself had already experi­
enced in moments of imaginative daydreaming and especially 
during episodes of delirium brought on by physical disease or 
excessive psychic turmoil.
A central element of such episodes was the sense of a place 
possessing qualities that were redolent, on the one hand, of a 
tropical landscape, and, on the other hand, of a common sewer. 
The aspect of a common sewer emerged in the feeling of an 
enclosed but also vastly extensive space, a network of coiling 
passages that spanned incredible distances in an underworld of 
misty darkness. As for the quality of a tropical landscape, this 
shared much of the same kind of darkly oozing ferment as the 
sewer-aspect, with the added impression of the most exotic forms of 
life spawning on every side, things multiplying and also incessantly 
mutating like a time-lapse film of spreading fungus or multi-colored 
slime molds totally unrestricted in their form and expansion. While 
I experienced the most intense visions of this tropical sewer, as it 
recreated itself in my delirious imagination year after year, I was 
always outside it at some great remove, not caught within as if I 
were having a nightmare. But still I maintained an awareness (as 
in a nightmare) that something had happened in this place, some 
unknown event had transpired that left these images behind it like 
a trail of slime. And then a certain feeling came over me and a 
certain concept came to my mind.
It was this feeling and its companion concept that so vividly 
occurred to me when the others began telling me about their 
strange visits to the Severini place and showing me the various 
artworks that this strange individual had inspired them to create. 
One by one I viewed paintings or sculptures in some artist’s studio, 
or heard music being performed in a club that was frequented by 
the Severini crowd, or read literary works that were being passed 
around - and each time the sense of that tropical sewer was revived 
in me, although not with the same intensity as the delirious 
episodes I experienced while suffering from a physical disease or

SEVERINI
489
during periods of excessive psychic turmoil. The titles of these 
works alone might have been enough to provoke the particular 
feeling and the concept that were produced by my delirious 
episodes. The concept to which I have been referring may be 
stated in various ways, but it usually occurred to my mind as a 
simple phrase (or fragment), almost a chant that overwhelmed me 
with vile and haunting suggestions far beyond its mere words, 
which are as follows: the nightmare of the organism. The vile and 
haunting suggestions underlying (or inspired by) this conceptual 
phrase were, as I have said, called up by the titles of those Severini- 
based artworks, those Exhibits from the Imaginary Museum. 
While I have difficulty recalling the type of work to which each 
title was attached - whether a painting or a sculpture, a poem or a 
performance piece - I am still able to cite a number of the titles 
themselves. One of them that easily emerges in recollection was No 
Face among Us. Another such title was Defiled and Delivered. And 
now many more of them are coming to my mind: The Way of the 
Lost, On Viscous and Sacred Ground (a. k. a. The Tantric Doctors), In 
Earth and Excreta, The Black Spume of Existence, Integuments in Eruption, 
and The Descent into the Fungal. All of these titles, as my artistic 
acquaintances and associates informed me, were taken from 
selected phrases (or fragments) spoken by Severini during his 
numerous episodes of sleeptalking.
Every time I heard one of these titles and saw the particular 
artwork that it named, I was always reminded of that tropical 
sewer of my delirious episodes. I would also feel myself on the verge 
of realizing what it was that happened in this place, what 
wonderful or disastrous event that was so intimately related to 
the conceptual phrase which I have given as the nightmare of the 
organism. But I never attained more than a remote sense of some 
vile and haunting revelation. And it was simply not possible for the 
others to illuminate this matter fully, given that their knowledge of 
Severini’s past history was exclusively derived from his own 
nonsensical or questionable assertions. As nearly as they were 
willing to speculate, it appeared that this incoherent and all- 
but-incognito person known as Severini was the willing subject 
of what was variously referred to as an “esoteric procedure” or an 
“illicit practice.” At this point in my discoveries about the strange 
Severini I found it difficult to inquire about the exact nature of this 
procedure, or practice, while at the same time pretending a lack of 
interest in actually meeting the resident of that ruined shack stuck 
out in the marshland backroads some distance outside the city 
where I used to live. It did seem, however, that this practice or

4 9 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
procedure, as nearly as anyone could speculate, was not a medical 
treatment of any known variety. Rather, they thought that the 
procedure (or practice) in question involved some type of mysti­
cism, possibly even occultist or quasi-magical traditions that, in 
their most potent form, are able to exist - inconspicuously - in only 
a few remaining parts of the world. Of course, all of this specula­
tion could have been a cover-up orchestrated by Severini or by his 
disciples -  for that is what they had become -  or by all of them 
together. In fact, for some time I had suspected that Severini’s 
disciples, despite their parade of artworks and outlandish accounts 
of their visits to the marshland shack, were nevertheless concealing 
from me some vital element of their new experiences. There 
seemed to be some truth of which they had knowledge and I 
had not. Yet they also seemed to desire that I might, in due course, 
share with them this truth.
My suspicions of the others’ deception -  perhaps it might be 
called a tentative deception -  derived from a source that was 
admittedly subjective. This was my imaginative recreation, as I 
sat in my apartment, of the spectacle of Severini as it was related to 
me by those who had participated in the visits to his residence in 
the marsh. In my mind I pictured them seated upon the floor of 
that small, unfurnished shack, the only illumination being the 
hectic light of candles that they brought with them and placed in a 
circle, at the center of which was the figure of Severini. This figure 
always spoke to them in his uniquely cryptic way, his sleeptalking 
voice fluctuating in its qualities and even seeming to emanate from 
places other than his own body, as though he were practicing á 
hyper-ventriloquism. Similarly, his body itself, as I was told and as 
I later imagined to myself in my apartment, appeared to react in 
concert with the fluctuations in his voice. These bodily changes, 
the others said, were sometimes subtle and sometimes dramatic, 
but they were consistently ill-defined -  not a matter of clear 
transformation as much as a breakdown of anatomical features 
and structures, the result being something twisted and tumorous 
like a living mound of diseased clay or mud, a heap of cancerous 
matter that slowly thrashed about in the candlelight which 
illuminated the old shack. These fluctuations in both Severini’s 
voice and his body, the others explained to me, were not in any 
way under his own guidance but were a totally spontaneous 
phenomenon to which he submitted as the result of the esoteric 
procedure or illicit practice worked upon him in some unknown 
place (possibly “in the region of the Philippines”). It was now his 
destiny, the others elaborated, to comply with whatever was

S E V E R INI
491
demanded of his flesh by what could only be seen as utterly 
mindless and chaotic forces, and even his consciousness itself - 
they asserted - was as deranged and mutable as his bodily form. Yet 
as they spoke to me about these particulars of Severìni’s condition, 
none of them conveyed any real sense of the nightmarish quality of 
the images and processes they were describing. Awestruck, yes; 
passionate, yes; somewhat demented, yes. But nightmarish - no. 
Even as I listened to their account of a given Severini meeting, I too 
failed to grasp fully their nightmarish qualities and aspects. They 
would say to me, referring to one of Severini’s metamorphoses, 
“The naked contours of his form twisted about like a pool of snakes, 
or twitched like a mass of newly hatched spiderlings.” Never­
theless, upon hearing statement after statement of this kind I sat 
relatively undisturbed, accepting without revulsion or outrage 
these revolting and outrageous remarks. Perhaps, I thought at 
the time, I was simply under the powerful spell of social decorum, 
which so often may explain otherwise incomprehensible feelings (or 
lack of feelings) and behaviors (or lack of behaviors). But once I was 
alone in my apartment, and began to imaginatively recreate what I 
had heard about the spectacle of Severini, I was overwhelmed by its 
nightmarish essence and several times lapsed into one of my 
delirious episodes with all of its terrible sensations of a tropical 
sewer, and all the nightmares of exotic lifeforms breaking out 
everywhere like rampant pustules and suppurations. And then I 
suspected that there was a deception involved in this whole Severini 
business, although even then I thought the deception might be 
tentative, a period of surreptitious initiation until that perfect 
moment when I could be accepted into their ranks.
Finally, on a rainy afternoon, as I was working alone in my 
apartment (making Severini notes), the buzzer signaled that 
someone was downstairs. The voice over the intercom belonged 
to a woman named Carla, who was a sculptress and whom I barely 
knew. When I let her in my apartment she was wet from walking in 
the rain without a coat or umbrella, although her straight black 
hair and all-black clothes looked very much the same whether wet 
or dry. I offered her a towel but she refused, saying she “kind of 
liked feeling soggy and sickish,” and we went on from there. The 
reason for her visit to my apartment, she revealed, was to invite me 
to the first “collective showing” of the Exhibits from the Imaginary 
Museum. When I asked why I should be receiving this personal 
invitation in my apartment on a rainy afternoon, she said: 
“Because the showing is going to be at his place, and you’ve never 
wanted to go there.” I said that I would think seriously about

492
THOMAS LIGOTTI
attending the showing and asked her if that was all she had to say. 
“No,” she said as she dug into one of the pockets of her tight damp 
slacks. “He was really the one who wanted me to invite you to the 
exhibit. We never told him about you, but he said that he always 
felt someone was missing, and for some reason we assumed it was 
you.” After extracting a piece of paper that had been folded several 
times, she opened it up and held it before her eyes. “I wrote down 
what he said,” she said while holding the limp and wrinkled note 
close to her face with both hands. Her eyes glanced up at me for a 
moment over the top edge of the unfolded page (her heavy 
mascara was running down her cheeks in black rivulets), and 
then she looked down to read the words Severini had told her to 
write. “He says, ‘You and Severini’ -  he always calls himself 
Severini, as if that were someone else - ‘you and Severini are 
sympathetic . . .’ something - I can hardly read this; it was dark 
when I wrote it down. Here we go: ‘You and Severini are 
sympathetic organisms’.” She paused to push away a few strands of 
black, rain-soaked hair that had fallen across her face. She was 
smiling somewhat idiotically.
“Is that it?” I asked.
“Hold on, he wanted me to get it right. Just one more thing. He 
said, ‘Tell him that the way into the nightmare is the way out’.” 
She folded the paper once again and crammed it back into the 
pocket of her black slacks. “Does any of that mean anything to 
you?” she asked.
I said that it meant nothing at all to me. After promising that I 
would most seriously consider attending the exhibit at Severini’s 
place, I let Carla out of my apartment and back into that rainy 
afternoon.
I should say that I had never spoken to either Carla or the others 
about my delirious episodes, with their sensations of a tropical 
sewer and the emergent concept of the “nightmare of the organ­
ism.” I had never told anyone. I had thought that these episodes 
and the deranged concept of the nightmare of the organism were 
strictly a private hell, even one that was unique. Until that rainy 
afternoon, I had considered it only a coincidence that the artworks 
inspired by Severini, as well as the titles of these works, served to 
call up the sensations and suggestions of my delirious episodes. 
Then I was sent a message by Severini, through Carla, that he and 
I were “sympathetic organisms” and that “the way into the 
nightmare is the way out.” For some time I had dreamed of 
being delivered from the suffering of my delirious episodes, and 
from all the suggestions and sensations that went along with them -

SEVERINI
493
the terrible vision that exposed all living things, including myself, 
as no more than a fungus or a collection of bacteria, a kind of 
monumental slime-mold quivering across the landscape of this 
planet (and very likely others). Any deliverance from such a 
nightmare, I thought, would involve the most drastic (and 
esoteric) procedures, the most alien (and illicit) practices. And, 
ultimately, I never believed that this deliverance, or any other, was 
really possible. It was simply too good, or too evil, to be true - at 
least this is how it seemed to my mind. Yet all it took was a few 
words from Severini, as they reached me through Carla, and I 
began to dream of all kinds of possibilities. In a moment everything 
had changed. I now became ready to take those steps towards 
deliverance; in fact, not to do so seemed intolerable to me. I 
absolutely had to find a way out of the nightmare, it seemed, 
whatever procedures or practices were involved. Severini had 
taken those steps -  I was convinced of that - and I needed to 
know where they had led him.
As might be imagined, I had worked myself into quite a state 
even before the night of the showing (of the Exhibits of the 
Imaginary Museum). But it was more than my frenzy of dreams 
and anticipation that affected my experiences that night and now 
affects my ability to relate what occurred at the tumble-down 
shack on the edge of St. Alban’s Marsh. My delirious episodes 
previous to that night were nothing (that is, they were the 
perfection of lucidity) when compared to the delirium that over­
takes me every time I attempt to sort out what happened at the 
marshland shack, my thoughts disintegrating little by little until I 
pass into a kind of sleeptalking of my own. I saw things with my 
own eyes and other things with other eyes. And everywhere there 
were voices . . .
It was all weedy shadows and frogs croaking in the blackness as I 
walked along the narrow path that, according to the directions 
given to me, led to Severini’s place. I left my car parked alongside 
the road where I saw the vehicles of the others. They had all 
arrived before me, although I was not in the least bit late for this 
scheduled artistic event. But they had always been anxious, I had 
long before noticed, whenever a Severini visit was planned, all that 
day fidgeting with some restless impulse until nightfall would come 
and they could leave the city and go out to St. Alban’s Marsh.
I expected to see a light ahead as I walked along that narrow 
path, but all I heard were frogs croaking in the blackness. The full 
moon in a cloudless sky revealed to me where I should next step 
along the path leading to the shack at the edge of the marsh. But

494
THOMAS LIGOTTI
even before I reached the clearing where the old shack supposedly 
stood, my sense of everything around me began to change. A warm 
mist drifted in from either side of the path like a curtain closing in 
front of my eyes, and I felt something touch my mind with images 
and concepts that were from elsewhere. “We are sympathetic 
organisms,” I heard from the mist. “Draw closer.” But that 
narrow path seemed to have no end to it, like those passages in 
my delirious episodes which extended such great distances in the 
misty darkness of a tropical landscape, where on every side of me 
there were exotic forms of life spawning and seething without 
restraint. I must go to that place, I thought as if these were my own 
words and not the words of another voice altogether, a voice full of 
desperate intensity and confused aspirations. “Calm yourself, 
Mr. Severini, if you insist I still address you by that name. As 
your therapist I cannot advise you to pursue this route . . . chasing 
miracles, if that is what you imagine . . . this ‘temple,’ as you call it, 
is an escape from any authentic confrontation with . . . ”
But he did find his way to freedom, although without properly 
being discharged from the institution, and he went to that place. 
“Documentes. Passportas/” Looking around at those yellow-brown 
faces, you were finally there. You went to that jungle island, that 
tropical sewer, a great temple looming out of the misty darkness in 
your dreams. It rained in every town, the streets streaming like 
sewers. “Disentaría,” pronounced the attending physician. But he 
was not like any of the doctors whom you sought in that place. 
Amoebic dysentery - there it was, the nightmare continued, so 
many forms it could take. The way into the nightmare is the way out. 
And you were willing to follow that nightmare as far as you needed 
in order to find your way out, just as I was following that narrow 
path toward your shack on the edge of St. Alban’s Marsh to enter 
that same nightmare you had brought back with you. The 
Exhibits of the Imaginary Museum. Your shack was now a gallery 
of the nightmares you had inspired in the others with your 
sleeptalking and the fluctuations of your form, those outrageous 
miracles which had not outraged anyone. Only when I was alone 
in my apartment, imaginatively recreating what the others had 
told me, could I see those miracles as the nightmares they were. I 
knew this because of my delirious episodes, which none of the 
others had known. They were the sympathetic organisms, not I. I 
was antagonistic to you, not sympathetic. Because I would not go 
into the nightmare, as you had gone. The Temple of Tantric 
Medicine, this is what you dreamed you would find in that tropical 
sewer - a place where miracles took place, where that sect of

SEVERINI
495
“doctors” could minister with the most esoteric procedures and 
could carry out their illicit practices. But what did you find 
instead? “Disentaría” pronounced the attending physician. Then 
a small group of those yellow-brown faces told you, told us, about 
that other temple which had no name. “For the belly sickness,” 
they said. Amoebic dysentery, simply another version of the 
nightmare of the organism from which none of the doctors you 
had seen in the past could deliver you. “How can the disease be 
cured of itself?” you asked them. “My body - a tumor that was 
once delivered from the body of another tumor, a lump of disease 
that is always boiling with its own disease. And my mind -  another 
disease, the disease of a disease. Everywhere my mind sees the 
disease of other minds and other bodies, these other organisms that 
are only other diseases, an absolute nightmare of the organism. 
Where are you taking me!” you screamed (we screamed) at the 
yellow-brown faces. “Fix the belly sickness. We know, we know.” 
They chanted these words along the way, it seemed, as the town 
disappeared behind the trees and the vines, behind the giant flowers 
that smelled like rotting meat, and the fungus and muck of that 
tropical sewer. They knew the disease and the nightmare because 
they lived in that place where the organism flourished without 
restraint, its forms so varied and exotic, its fate inescapable. 
“Disentaría” pronounced the attending physician. They knew the 
way through the stonework passages, the walls seeping with slime 
and soft with mold as they coiled toward the central chamber of the 
temple without a name. Inside the ruined heart of the temple there 
were candles burning everywhere; their flickering light revealed an 
array of temple art and ornamentation. Intricate murals appeared 
along the walls, mingling with the slime and the mold of that 
tropical sewer. Sculptures of every size and all shapes projected out 
of the damp, viscous shadows. At the center of the chamber was a 
large circular altar, an enormous mandala composed of countless 
jewels, precious stones, or simply bits of glass that gleamed in the 
candlelight like a pool of multi-colored slime molds.
They laid your body upon the altar; they knew what to do with 
you (us) - the words to say, the songs to sing, and the esoteric 
procedures to follow. It was almost as if I could understand the 
things that they chanted in voices of tortured solemnity. Deliver the 
self that knows the sickness from the self that does not know. There are two 
faces which must never confront each other. There is only one body which must 
struggle to contain them both. And the phantom clutch of that sickness, 
that amoebic dysentery, seemed to reach me as I walked along that 
narrow path leading to Severini’s shack at the edge of St. Alban’s

4 9 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Marsh. Inside the shack were all the Exhibits of the Imaginary 
Museum, the paintings lining the damp wood of the walls and the 
sculptures projecting out of the shadows cast by the candles which 
always lighted the single room of that ruined hovel. I had 
imaginatively recreated the interior of Severini’s shack many 
times according to the accounts related to me by the others about 
this place and its incredible inhabitant. I imagined how you could 
forget yourself in such a place, how you could be delivered from the 
nightmares and delirious episodes that tortured you in other 
places, even becoming someone else (or something else) as you 
gave yourself up entirely to the fluctuations of the organism at the 
edge of St. Alban’s Marsh. You needed that marsh because it 
helped you to imaginatively recreate that tropical sewer (where 
you were taken into the nightmare), and you needed those artworks 
in order to make your shack into that temple (where you were 
supposed to find your way out of the nightmare). But most of all 
you needed them, the others, because they were sympathetic 
organisms. I, on the other hand, was now an antagonistic organ­
ism who wanted nothing more to do with your esoteric procedures 
and illicit practices. Deliver the self that knows the sickness from the self 
that does not know. The two faces . .. the one body. You wanted them to 
enter the nightmare, who did not even know the nightmare as we 
knew it. You needed them and their artworks to go into the 
nightmare of the organism to its very end so that you could find 
your way out of the nightmare. But you could not go to the very 
end of the nightmare unless I was with you, I who was now an 
antagonistic organism without any hope that there was a way out 
of the nightmare. We were forever divided, one face from the 
other, struggling within the body -  the organism -  which we 
shared.
I never arrived at the shack that night; I never entered it. As I 
walked along that narrow path in the mist I became feverish. 
(“Amoebic dysentery,” pronounced the doctor whom I visited the 
following day.) The face of Severini appeared at the shack that 
night, not mine. It was always his face that the others saw on such 
nights when they came to visit. But I was not there with them; that 
is, my face was not there. His face was the one they saw as they sat 
among all the Exhibits from the Imaginary Museum. But it was 
my face which returned to the city; it was my body which I now 
fully possessed as an organism that belonged to my face alone. But 
the others never returned from the shack on the edge of St. Alban’s 
Marsh. I never saw them again after that night, because on that 
night he took them with him into the nightmare, with the candle

SEVERINI
497
flames flickering upon those artworks and the fluctuations of form 
which to the others appeared as a pool of twisting snakes or a mass 
of spiderlings newly hatched. He showed them the way into the 
nightmare, but he could not show them the way out. There is no 
way out of the nightmare once you have gone so far into its depths. 
That is where he is lost forever, he and the others he has taken with 
him.But he did not take me into the marsh with him to exist as a 
fungus exists or as a foam of multi-colored slime mold exists. That 
is how I see it in my new delirious episodes. Only at these times when I 
suffer from a physical disease or excessive psychic turmoil do I see 
how he exists now, he and the others. Because I never looked 
directly into the pools of oozing life when I stopped at the shack on 
the edge of St. Alban’s Marsh. I was on my way out of the city the 
night I stopped, and I was only there long enough to douse the 
place in gasoline and set it ablaze. It burned with all the brilliance 
of the nightmares that were still exhibited inside, casting its 
illumination upon the marsh and leaving the most obscure image 
of what was back there - a vast and vague impression of that great 
black life from which we have all emerged and of which we all are 
made.

GAS STATION 
CARNIVALS
utside the walls of the Crimson Cabaret was a world of rain
and darkness. At intervals, whenever someone entered or 
exited through the front door of the club, one could actually see the 
steady rain and was allowed a brief glimpse of the darkness. Inside 
it was all amber light, tobacco smoke, and the sound of the 
raindrops hitting the windows, which were all painted black. 
On such nights, as I sat at one of the tables in that drab little 
place, I was always filled with an infernal merriment, as if I were 
waiting out the apocalypse and could not care less about it. I also 
liked to imagine that I was in the cabin of an old ship during a 
really vicious storm at sea or in the club car of a luxury passenger 
train that was being rocked on its rails by ferocious winds and 
hammered by a demonic rain. Sometimes, when I was sitting in 
the Crimson Cabaret on a rainy night, I thought of myself as 
occupying a waiting room for the abyss (which of course was 
exactly what I was doing) and between sips from my glass of wine 
or cup of cofTee I smiled sadly and touched the front pocket of my 
coat where I kept my imaginary ticket to oblivion.
However, on that particular rainy November night I was not 
feeling very well. My stomach was slightly queasy, as if signalling 
the onset of a virus or even food poisoning. Another source for my 
malaise, I thought to myself, might well have been my long­
standing nervous condition, which fluctuated from day to day 
but was always with me in some form and manifested itself in a 
variety of symptoms both physical and psychic. I was in fact 
experiencing a faint sensation of panic, although this in no way 
ruled out the possibility that the queasiness of my stomach was due 
to a strictly physical cause, either viral or toxic. Neither did it rule 
out a third possibility which I was trying to ignore at that point in 
the evening. Whatever the etiology of my stomach disorder, I felt 
the need to be in a public place that night, so that if I should 
collapse -  an eventuality I often feared -  there would be people

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
499
around who might attend to me, or at least shuttle my body off to 
the hospital. At the same time I was not seeking close contact with 
any of these people, and I would have been bad company in any 
case, sitting there in the corner of the club drinking mint tea and 
smoking mild cigarettes out of respect for my ailing stomach. For 
all these reasons I brought my notebook with me that night and 
had it lying open on the table before me, as if to say that I wanted 
to be left alone to mull over some literary matters. But when Stuart 
Quisser entered the club at approximately ten o’clock, the sight of 
me sitting at a corner table with my open notebook, drinking mint 
tea and smoking mild cigarettes so that I might stay on top of the 
situation with my queasy stomach, did not in the least discourage 
him from walking directly to my table and taking the seat across 
from me. A waitress came over to us. Quisser ordered some kind of 
white wine, while I asked for another cup of mint tea.
“So now it’s mint tea,” Quisser said as the girl left us.
“I’m surprised you’re showing your face around here,” I said by 
way of reply.
“I thought I might try to make up with the old crimson 
woman.”
“Make up? That doesn’t sound like you.”
“Nevertheless, have you seen her tonight?”
“No, I haven’t. You humiliated her at that party. I haven’t seen 
her since, not even in her own club. I don’t know if you’re aware of 
this, but she’s not someone you want to have as an enemy.” 
“Meaning what?” he asked.
“Meaning that she has connections you know absolutely noth­
ing about.”
“And of course you know all about it. I’ve read your stories. 
You’re a confessed paranoid, so what’s your point?”
“My point,” I said, “is that there’s hell in every handshake, 
never mind an outright and humiliating insult.”
“I had too much to drink, that’s all.”
“You called her a deluded no-talent.”
Quisser looked up at the waitress as she approached with our 
drinks, and he made a hasty hand-signal for silence. When she was 
gone he said, “I happen to know that our waitress is very loyal to 
the crimson woman. She will very probably inform her about my 
visiting the club tonight. I wonder if she would be willing to act as 
a go-between with her boss and deliver a second-hand apology 
from me.”
“Look around at the walls,” I said.
Quisser set down his glass of wine and scanned the room.

500
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“Hmm,” he said when he finished looking. “This is more serious 
than I thought. She’s taken down all her old paintings. And the 
new ones don’t look like her work at all.”
“They’re not. You humiliated her.”
“And yet she seems to have done up the stage since I last saw it. 
New paint job or something.”
The so-called stage to which Quisser referred was a small 
platform in the opposite corner of the club. This area was entirely 
framed by four long panels, each of them painted with black and 
gold sigils against a glossy red background. Various events 
occurred on this stage: poetry readings, tableaux vivants, playlets 
of sundry types, puppet shows, artistic slideshows, musical perfor­
mances, and so on. That night, which was a Tuesday, the stage was 
dark. I observed nothing different about it and asked Quisser what 
he imagined he thought was new.
“I can’t say exactly, but something seems to have been done. 
Maybe it’s those black and gold ideographs or whatever they’re 
supposed to be. The whole thing looks like the cover of a menu in a 
Chinese restaurant.”
“You’re quoting yourself,” I said.
“What do you mean?”
“The Chinese menu remark. You used that in your review of the 
Marsha Corker exhibit last month.”
“Did I? I don’t remember.”
“Are you just saying you don’t remember, or do you really not 
remember?” I asked this question in the spirit of trivial curiosity, 
my queasy stomach discouraging the strain of any real antagonism 
on my part.
“I remember, all right? Which reminds me, there’s something I 
wanted to talk to you about. It came to me the other day, and I 
immediately thought of you and your . . . stufT,” he said, gesturing 
toward my notebook of writings open on the table between us. “I 
can’t believe it’s never come up before. You of all people should 
know about them. No one else seems to. It was years ago, but 
you’re old enough to remember them. You’ve got to remember 
them.”
“Remember what?” I asked, and after the briefest pause he 
replied:
“The gas station carnivals.”
And he said these words as if he were someone delivering a 
punchline to a joke, the proud bringer of a surprising and profound 
hilarity. I was supposed to express an astonished recognition, that 
much I knew. It was not a phenomenon of which I was entirely

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5° !
ignorant, and memory is such a tricky thing. This, at least, is what I 
told Quisser. But as Quisser told me his memories, trying to arouse 
mine, I gradually realized the true nature and purpose of the so- 
called gas station carnivals. During this time it was all I could do to 
conceal how badly my stomach was acting up on me, queasy and 
burning. I kept telling myself, as Quisser was talking about his 
memories of the gas station carnivals, that I was certainly 
experiencing the onset of a virus, if in fact I had not been the 
victim of food poisoning. Quisser, nevertheless, was so caught up in 
his story that he seemed not to notice my agony.
Quisser said that his recollections of the gas station carnivals 
derived from his early childhood. His family, meaning his parents 
and himself, would go on long vacations by car, often driving great 
distances to a variety of destinations. Along the way, naturally, 
they would need to stop at any number of gas stations that were 
located in towns and cities, as well as those that they came upon in 
more isolated, rural locales. These were the places, Quisser said, 
where one was most likely to discover those hybrid enterprises 
which he called gas station carnivals.
Quisser did not claim to know when or how these specialized 
carnivals, or perhaps specialized gas stations, came into existence, nor 
how widespread they might have been. His father, whom Quisser 
believed would be able to answer such questions, had died some 
years ago, while his mother was no longer mentally competent, 
having suffered a series of psychic catastrophes not long after the 
death of Quisser’s father. Thus, all that remained to Quisser was 
the memory of these childhood excursions with his parents, during 
which they would find themselves in some rural area, perhaps at 
the crossroads of two highways (and often, he seemed to recall, 
around sunset), and discover in this isolated location one of those 
curiosities which he described to me as gas station carnivals.
They were invariably filling stations, Quisser emphasized, and 
not service stations, which might have facilities for doing extensive 
repairs on cars and other vehicles. There would be, in those days, 
four gas pumps at most, often only two, and some kind of modest 
building which usually had so many signs and advertisements 
applied to its exterior that no one could say if anything actually 
stood beneath them. Quisser said that as a child he always took 
special notice of the signs that advertised chewing tobacco, and 
that as an adult, in his capacity as an art critic, he still found the 
sight of chewing tobacco packages very appealing, and he could 
not understand why some artist had not successfully exploited their 
visual and imaginative qualities. It seemed to me, as we sat that

502
THOMAS LIGOTTI
night in the Crimson Cabaret, that this chewing tobacco material 
was intended to lend greater credence to Quisser’s story. This 
detail was so vivid to him. But when I asked Quisser if he recalled 
any particular brands of chewing tobacco being advertised at these 
filling stations which had carnivals attached to them, he became 
slightly defensive, as if my question was intended to challenge the 
accuracy of his childhood recollection. He then shifted the focus of 
the issue I had raised by asserting that the carnival aspect of these 
places was not exactly attached to the gas station aspect, but that 
they were never very far away from each other and there was 
definitely a commercial liaison between them. His impression, 
which had been instilled in him like some founding principle of 
a dream, was that a substantial purchase of gasoline allowed the 
driver and passengers of a given vehicle free access to the nearby 
carnival.
At this point in his story Quisser became anxious to explain that 
these gas station carnivals were by no means elaborate - quite the 
opposite, in fact. Situated on some empty stretch of land that stood 
alongside, or sometimes behind, a rural filling station, they 
consisted of only the remnants of fully fledged carnivals, the bare 
bones of much larger and grander entertainments. There was 
usually a tall, arched entranceway with colored lightbulbs that 
provided an eerie contrast to the vast and barren landscape 
surrounding it. Especially around sunset, which was usually, or 
possibly always, when Quisser and his parents found themselves in 
one of these remote locales, the colorful illumination of a carnival 
entranceway created an effect that was both festive and sinister. 
But once a visitor had gained admittance to the actual grounds of 
the carnival, there came a moment of letdown at the thing itself- 
that spare assemblage of equipment that appeared to have been 
left behind by a travelling amusement park in the distant past.
There were always only a few carnival rides, Quisser said, and 
these were very seldom in actual operation. He supposed that at 
some time they were in functioning order, probably when they 
were first installed as an annex to the gas stations. But this period, 
he speculated, could not have lasted long. And no doubt at the 
earliest sign of malfunction each of the rides was shut down. 
Quisser said that he himself had never been on a single ride at a 
gas station carnival, though he insisted that his father once allowed 
him to sit atop one of the wooden horses on a defunct merry-go- 
round. “It was a miniature merry-go-round,” Quisser told me, as if 
that gave his recollected experience an aura of meaning or 
substance. All the rides, it seemed, were miniature, he asserted -

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5 0 3
small-scale versions of carnival rides he had elsewhere known and 
had actually ridden upon. Beside the miniature merry-go-round, 
which never moved an inch and always stood dark and silent in a 
remote rural landscape, there would be a miniature ferris wheel 
(no taller than a bungalow-style house, Quisser said), and some­
times a miniature tilt-a-whirl or a miniature roller coaster. And 
they were always closed down because once they had malfunc­
tioned, if in fact any of them was ever in operation, they were never 
subsequently repaired. Possibly they never could be repaired, 
Quisser thought, given the antiquated parts and mechanisms of 
these miniature carnival rides.
Yet there was a single, quite crucial amusement that one could 
almost always expect to see open to the public, or at least to those 
whose car had been filled with the requisite amount of gasoline and 
who were therefore free to pass through the brightly lit entrance­
way upon which the word CARNIVAL was emblazoned in 
colored lights against a vast and haunting sky at sundown some­
where out in a rural wasteland. Quisser posed to me a question: 
how could a place advertise itself as a carnival, even a gas station 
carnival, if it did not include that most vital element - a sideshow? 
Perhaps there was some special law or ordinance regulating such 
matters, Quisser imagined out loud, an old statute of some kind 
that would have particular force in remote areas where certain 
traditions have an endurance unknown to urban centers. This 
would account for the fact that, except under extraordinary 
circumstances (such as dangerously bad weather), there was 
always some type of sideshow performance at these gas station 
carnivals, even though everything else on the grounds stood dark 
and damaged.
Of course these sideshows, as Quisser described them, were not 
terribly sophisticated, even by the standards of the average 
carnival, let alone those that served as commercial enticements 
for some out-of-the-way gas station. There would be only a single 
sideshow attraction at a given site, and outwardly they each 
presented the same image to the carnival patrons: a small tent 
of tom and filthy canvass. At some point along the perimeter of the 
tent would be a loose flap of material through which Quisser and 
his parents, though sometimes only Quisser himself, would gain 
entrance to the sideshow. Inside the tent were a few wooden 
benches that had sunken a little bit into the hard dirt beneath 
them and, some distance away, a small stage area that was raised 
perhaps just a foot or so above ground level. Illumination was 
provided by two ordinary floor lamps - one on either side of the

5 0 4
THOMAS LIGOTTI
stage - that were without lampshades or any other kind of 
covering, so that their bare lightbulbs burned harshly and cast 
dramatic shadows throughout the interior of the tent. Quisser said 
that he always noticed the frayed electrical cords that trailed ofT 
from the base of each lamp and, by means of several extension 
cords, ultimately found a source of power at the gas station, that is, 
from within the small brick building which was obscured by so 
many signs advertising chewing tobacco and other products.
When visitors to a gas station carnival entered the sideshow 
tent and took their places on one of the benches in front of the 
stage, they were not usually alerted to the particular nature of 
the performance or spectacle that they would witness. Quisser 
remarked that there was no marquee or billboard of any type 
that might offer such a notice to the carnival-goers either before 
they entered the sideshow tent or after they were inside and 
seated on one of the old wooden benches. However, with one 
important exception, each of the performances, or spectacles, 
was much the same rigmarole. The audience would settle itself 
on the wooden benches, most of which were about to collapse 
or (as Quisser observed) were so unevenly sunken into the 
ground that it was impossible to sit on them, and the show 
would begin.
The attractions varied from sideshow to sideshow, and Quisser 
said he was unable to remember all of the ones he had seen. He did 
recall what he described as the Human Spider. This was a very 
brief spectacle during which someone in a clumsy costume scuttled 
from one side of the stage to the other and back again, exiting 
through a slit at the back of the tent. The person wearing the 
costume, Quisser added, was presumably the attendant who 
pumped gas, washed windows, and performed various services 
around the filling station. In many sideshow performances, such as 
that of the Hypnotist, Quisser remembered that a gas station 
attendant’s uniform (greasy gray or blue coveralls) was quite 
visible beneath the performer’s stage clothes. Quisser did admit 
that he was unsure why he designated this particular sideshow act 
as the “Hypnotist,” since there was no hypnotism involved in the 
performance, and of course no marquee or billboard existed either 
outside the tent or within it that might lead the public to expect 
any kind of mesmeric routines. The performer was simply clothed 
in a long, loose overcoat and wore a plastic mask which was a 
plain, very pale replica of a human face, with the exception that 
instead of eyes (or eyeholes) there were two large discs with spiral 
designs painted upon them. The Hypnotist would gesticulate

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5 0 5
chaotically in front of the audience for some moments, no doubt 
because his vision was obscured by the spiral-patterned discs over 
the eyes of his mask, and then stumble off stage.
There were numerous other sideshow acts that Quisser claimed 
to have seen, including the Dancing Puppet, the Worm, the 
Hunchback, and Dr. Fingers. With one important exception, 
the routine was always the same: Quisser and his parents would 
enter the sideshow tent and sit upon one of the rotted benches, soon 
after which some performer would appear briefly on the small 
stage that was lit up by two ordinary floor lamps. The single 
deviation from this routine was an attraction that Quisser called 
the Showman.
Whereas every other sideshow act began and ended after 
Quisser and his parents had entered the special tent and seated 
themselves, the one called the Showman always seemed to be in 
progress. As soon as Quisser stepped inside the tent - invariably 
preceding his parents, he claimed - he saw the figure standing 
perfectly still upon the small stage with his back to the audience. Of 
course there were never any other persons in the audience when 
Quisser and his parents stopped at twilight and visited one of 
these gas station carnivals -  with their second-hand, defective 
amusements -  there was only the figure of the Showman standing 
with his back to a few rows of empty benches that might break 
up altogether even as you were attempting to sit on them. And 
whenever Quisser entered the sideshow tent and saw that it was 
the Showman onstage, he wanted to immediately turn around 
and leave that place. But then his parents would come pushing 
into the tent behind him, he said, and before he knew it they 
would all be sitting on one of the benches in the very first row 
looking at the Showman. His parents never knew how terrified 
he was of this peculiar sideshow figure, Quisser repeated several 
times. Furthermore, visiting these gas station carnivals, and 
especially taking in the sideshows, was all done for Quisser’s 
benefit, since his father and mother would have preferred simply 
filling up the family car with gasoline and moving on toward 
whatever vacation spot was next on their itinerary.
Quisser contended that his parents actually enjoyed watching 
him sit in terror before the Showman, until he could not stand it 
any longer and asked to go back to the car. At the same time he 
was quite transfixed by the sight of this sideshow character, who 
was unlike any other that he could remember. There he was, 
Quisser said, standing with his back to the audience and wearing 
an old top hat and a long cape that touched the dirty floor of the

5°6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
small stage on which he stood. Sticking out from beneath the top 
hat were the dense and lengthy shocks of the Showman’s stifF red 
hair, Quisser said, which looked like some kind of sickening 
vermin’s nest. When I asked Quisser if this hair might actually 
have been a wig, deliberately testing his memory and imagination, 
he only gave me a contemptuous look that seemed to reply that I 
was not the one who had seen the stiff red hair; he was the one who 
had seen it sticking out from beneath the Showman’s old top hat. 
The only other feature that was visible to the audience, Quisser 
continued, were the fingers of the Showman, which grasped the 
edges of his long cape. These fingers appeared to Quisser to be 
somehow deformed, curling together in little claws, and were a 
pale greenish color, Quisser said. Apparently, as Quisser viewed it, 
the entire stance of the figure was calculated to suggest that at any 
moment he might twirl about and confront the audience full-face, 
his moldy fingers lifting up the edges of his cape, reaching to the 
height of his stiff red hair. Yet the figure never budged. Sometimes 
it did seem to Quisser that the Showman was moving his head a 
little to the left or a little to the right, threatening to reveal one side 
of his face or the other, playing a horrible game of peek-a-boo. But 
ultimately Quisser concluded that these perceived movements 
were illusory and that the Showman was always posed in perfect 
stillness, a nightmarish mannikin that invited all kinds of imagin­
ings by its very forbearance of any gesture.
“It was all a nasty pretence,” Quisser said to me and then 
paused to finish off his glass of wine.
“But what if he had turned around to face the audience?” I 
asked. While awaiting his response I sipped some of my mint tea, 
which did not seem to be doing much good for my queasy stomach, 
yet at the same time was causing no harm either. I lit one of the 
mild cigarettes that I was smoking on that occasion. “Did you hear 
what I said?” I said to Quisser, who had been looking toward the 
stage located in the opposite corner of the Crimson Cabaret. “The 
stage is the same,” I said to Quisser quite sternly, attracting some 
glances from persons sitting at the other tables in the club. “The 
panels are the same and the designs on them are also the same.”
Quisser played nervously with his empty wine glass. “When I 
was very young,” he said, “there were certain occasions on which I 
would see the Showman, but he wasn’t in his natural habitat, so to 
speak, of the sideshow tent.”
“I think I’ve heard enough tonight,” I interjected, my hand 
pressing against my queasy stomach.
“What are you saying?” asked Quisser. “You remember them,

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5<>7
don’t you? The gas station carnivals. Maybe just a faint 
memory. I was sure you would be the one to know about 
them.”
“I think I can say,” I said to Quisser, “I’ve heard enough of 
your gas station carnival story to know what it’s all about.” 
“What do you mean, ‘what it’s all about’?” asked Quisser, who 
was still looking over at the small stage across the room.
“Well, for one thing, your later memories, your purported 
memories, of that Showman character. You were about to tell 
me that throughout your childhood you repeatedly saw this figure 
at various times and in various places. Perhaps you saw him in the 
distance of a schoolyard, standing with his back to you. Or you saw 
him on the other side of a busy street, but when you crossed the 
street he wasn’t there any longer.”
“Something like that, yes.”
“And you were then going to tell me that lately you’ve been 
seeing this figure, or faint suggestions of this figure - sketchy 
reflections in store windows along the sidewalk, flashing glimpses 
in the rear-view mirror of your car.”
“It’s very much like one of your stories.”
“In some ways it is,” I said, “and in some ways it isn’t. You feel 
that if you ever see the Showman figure turn his head around to 
look at you . . . that something terrible will happen, most likely 
that you’ll perish on the spot from some kind of monumental 
shock.”
“Yes,” agreed Quisser. “An unsustainable horror. But I haven’t 
told you the strangest part. You’re right that lately I have had 
glimpses of. . . that figure, and I did see him during my childhood, 
outside of the sideshow tent, I mean. But the strangest part is that I 
remember seeing him in other places even before I first saw him at 
the gas station carnivals.”
“This is just my point,” I said.
“What is?”
“That there are no gas station carnivals. There never were any gas 
station carnivals. Nobody remembers them because they never 
existed. The whole idea is preposterous.”
“But my parents were there with me.”
“Exactly -  your dead father and your mentally incompetent 
mother. Do you remember ever discussing with them your vaca­
tion experiences at these special gas stations with the carnivals 
supposedly annexed to them?”
“No, I don’t.”
“That’s because you never went to any such places with them.

5 ° 8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Think about how ludicrous it all sounds. That there should be 
filling stations out in the sticks that entice customers with free 
admission to broken-down carnivals -  it’s all so ridiculous. 
Miniature carnival rides? Gas station attendants doubling as side­
show performers?”
“Not the Showman,” interrupted Quisser. “He was never a gas 
station attendant.”
“No, of course he wasn’t a gas station attendant, because he was 
a delusion. The whole thing is an outrageous delusion, but it’s also 
a very particular type of delusion.”
“And what type would that be?” asked Quisser, who was still 
sneaking glances at the stage area across the room of the Crimson 
Cabaret.
“It’s not some type of common psychological delusion, if that’s 
what you were thinking I was about to say. I have no interest at all 
in such things. But I am very interested when somone is suffering 
from a magical delusion. Even more precisely, I am interested in 
delusions that are a result of art-magic. And do you know how long 
you’ve been under the influence of this art-magic delusion?” 
“You’ve lost me,” said Quisser.
“It’s simple,” I said. “How long have you imagined all this 
nonsense about the gas station carnivals, and specifically about this 
character you describe as the Showman?”
“I guess it would be more or less absurd at this point to insist to 
you that I’ve seen this figure since childhood, even if that’s exactly 
how it seems and that’s exactly what I remember.”
“Of course it would be absurd, because you’re definitely 
delusional.”
“So I’m delusional about the Showman, but you’re not delu­
sional about . . . what do you call it?”
“Art-magic. For as long as you’ve been a victim of this 
particular art-magic, this is how long you’ve been delusional 
about the gas station carnivals and all related phenomena.” 
“And how long is that?” asked Quisser, not quite sincerely. 
“Since you humiliated the crimson woman by calling her a 
deluded no-talent. I told you that she had connections you knew 
absolutely nothing about.”
“I’m talking about something from my childhood, something 
I’ve remembered my entire life. You’re talking about a matter of 
days.”
“That’s because a matter of days is exactly the term that you’ve 
been delusional. Don’t you see that through her art-magic she has 
caused you to suffer from the worst kind of delusion, which might

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5 0 9
be called a retroactive delusion. And it’s not only you who’ve been 
afflicted in the past days and weeks and even months. Everyone 
around here has sensed the threat of this art-magic for some time 
now. I’m beginning to think that I’ve found out about it too late 
myself, much too late. You know what it is to suffer from a delusion 
of the retroactive type, but do you know what it’s like to be the 
victim of a severe stomach disorder. I’ve been sitting here in the 
crimson woman’s club drinking mint tea served by a waitress who 
is the crimson woman’s friend, thinking that mint tea is just the 
thing for my stomach when it very well may be aggravating my 
condition or even causing it to transform, in accordance with the 
principles of art-magic, into something more serious and more 
strange. But the crimson woman is not the only one practicing this 
art-magic. It’s happening everywhere around here. It drifted in 
unexpectedly like a fog at sea, and so many of us are becoming lost 
in it. Look at the faces in this room and then tell me that you alone 
are the victim of a horrible art-magic. The crimson woman has 
quite a few adversaries, just as she is connected with powerful 
allies. How can I say exactly who they are - some group 
specializing in art-magic, no doubt, but I can’t just say, with a 
fatuous certainty, ‘Yes, it must be some particular gang of 
illuminati,’ or esoteric scientists, as so many have begun styling 
themselves these days.”
“But it all sounds like one of you stories,” Quisser protested. 
“Of course it does, don’t you think she knows that. But I’m not 
the one with that grotesque yarn about the gas station carnivals 
and the sideshow tent with a small stage not unlike the stage on the 
opposite side of this room. You can’t keep your eyes ofTit, I can see 
that and so can the other people around the room. And I know 
what you think you’re seeing over there.”
“Assumingyou know what you’re talking about,” said Quisser, 
who was now forcing himself to look away from the stage area 
across the room, “what am I supposed to do about it?”
“You can start by keeping your eyes ofT that stage across the 
room. There’s nothing you can see over there except an art-magic 
delusion. There is nothing necessarily fatal or permanent about the 
affliction. But you must believe that you will recover, just as you 
would if you were suffering from some non-fatal physical disease. 
Otherwise these diseases may turn into something far more deadly, 
because ultimately all diseases are magical diseases, especially your 
art-magic delusion.”
I could now see that the intense conviction carried by my words 
had finally had its effect on Quisser. His gaze was no longer drawn

THOMAS LIGOTTI
toward the small stage on the opposite side of the room but was 
directed full upon me. He did remain somewhat distraught in the 
face of the truth about his delusion, yet he seemed to have settled 
down considerably.
I lit another of my mild cigarettes and glanced around the room, 
not looking for anything or anyone in particular but merely 
gauging the atmosphere. The tobacco smoke drifting through 
the club was so much thicker, the amber light was several shades 
darker, and the sound of raindrops still played against the black 
painted windows of the Crimson Cabaret. I was now back in the 
cabin of that old ship as it was being cast about in a vicious storm 
at sea, utterly insecure in its bearings and profoundly threatened 
by uncontrollable forces. Quisser excused himself to go to the rest 
room, and his form passed across my field of vision like a shadow 
through dense fog.
I have no idea how long Quisser was gone from the table. My 
attention became fully absorbed by the other faces in the club 
and the deep anxiety they betrayed to me, an anxiety that was 
not of the natural, existential sort but one that was caused by 
peculiar concerns of an uncanny nature. What a season is upon 
us, these faces seemed to say. And no doubt their voices would 
have spoken directly of certain peculiar concerns had they not 
been intimidated into weird equivocations and double entendres 
by the fear of falling victim to the same kind of unnatural 
affliction that had made so much trouble in the mind of the 
art critic Stuart Quisser. Who would be next? What could a 
person say these days, or even think, without feeling the dread of 
repercussion from powerfully connected groups and individuals? 
I could almost hear their voices asking, “Why here, why now?” 
But of course they could have just as easily been asking, “Why 
not here, why not now?” It would not occur to this crowd that 
there were no special rules involved; it would not occur to them, 
even though they were a crowd of imaginative artists, that the 
whole thing was simply a matter of random, purposeless terror 
that converged upon a particular place at a particular time for 
no particular reason. On the other hand, it would also not have 
occurred to them that they might have wished it all upon 
themselves, that they might have had a hand in bringing certain 
powerful forces and connections into our district simply by 
wishing them to come. They might have wished and wished 
for an unnatural evil to fall upon them but, for a while at least, 
nothing happened. Then the wishing stopped, the old wishes 
were forgotten yet at the same time gathered in strength,

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
5 ”
distilling themselves into a potent formula (who can say!), until 
one day the terrible season began. Because had they really told 
the truth, this artistic crowd might also have expressed what a 
sense of meaning (although of a negative sort), not to mention 
the vigorous thrill (although of an excruciating type), this season 
of unnatural evil had brought to their lives.
It was during the moments that I was looking at all the faces in 
the Crimson Cabaret, and thinking my own thoughts about those 
faces, that a shadow again passed across my foggy field of vision. 
While I expected to find that this shadow was Quisser, my table- 
companion for that evening, on his way back from his trip to the 
rest room, I instead found myself confronted by the waitress who 
Quisser had claimed was so loyal to the crimson woman. She asked 
if I wanted to order yet another cup of mint tea, saying it in exactly 
these words, yet another cup of mint tea. Trying not to become 
irritated by her queerly sarcastic tone of voice, which would only 
have further aggravated my already queasy stomach, I answered 
that I was just about to leave for the night. Then I added that 
perhaps my friend wanted to drink yet another glass of wine, 
pointing across the table to indicate the empty glass Quisser 
had left behind when he excused himself to use the rest room. 
But there was no empty wine glass across the table; there was only 
my empty cup of mint tea. I immediately accused the waitress of 
taking away the empty wine glass while I was distracted by my 
reverie upon the faces in the Crimson Cabaret. But she denied ever 
serving any glass of wine to anyone at my table, insisting that I had 
been alone from the moment I arrived at the club and sat down at 
the table across the room from the small stage area. After a 
thorough search of the rest room, I returned and tried to find 
someone else in the club who had seen the art critic Quisser talking 
to me at great length about his gas station carnivals. But all of them 
said they had seen no one of the kind.
Even Quisser himself, when I tracked him down the next day to 
a hole-in-the-wall art gallery, maintained that he had not seen me 
the night before. He said that he had spent the entire evening at 
home by himself, claiming that he had suffered some indisposition
- some bug, he said - from which he had since fully recovered. 
When I called him a liar, he stepped right up to me as we stood in 
the middle of that hole-in-the-wall art gallery, and in a tense 
whisper he said that I should “watch my words.” I was always 
shooting off my mouth, he said, and that in the future I should use 
more discretion in what I said and to whom I said it. He then asked 
me if I really thought it was wise to open my mouth at a party and

5*2
THOMAS LIGOTTI
call someone a deluded no-talent. There were certain persons, he said, 
that had powerful connections, and I, of all people, he said, should 
know better, considering my awareness of such things and the way 
I displayed this awareness in the stories I wrote. “Not that I 
disagreed with what you said about you-know-who,” he said. “But 
I would not have made such an open declaration. You humiliated 
her. And these days such a thing can be very perilous, if you know 
what I mean.”
Of course I did know what he meant, though I did not yet 
understand why he was now saying these words to me, rather than 
I to him. Was it not enough, I later thought, that I was still 
suffering a terrible stomach disorder? Did I also have to bear the 
burden of another’s delusion? But even this explanation eventually 
fell to pieces upon further inquiry. The stories multiplied about the 
night of that party, accounts proliferated among my acquaintances 
and peers concerning exactly who had committed the humiliating 
offence and even who had been the offended party. “Why are you 
telling me these things?” the crimson woman said to me when I 
proffered my deepest apologies. “I barely know who you are. And 
besides, I’ve got enough problems of my own. That bitch of a 
waitress here at the club has taken down all my paintings and 
replaced them with her own.”
All of us had problems, it seemed, whose sources were untrace- 
able, crossing over one another like the trajectories of countless 
raindrops in a storm, blending to create a fog of delusion and 
counter-delusion. Powerful forces and connections were undoubt­
edly at play, yet they seemed to have no faces and no names, and it 
was anybody’s guess what we - a crowd of deluded no-talents - 
could have possibly done to offend them. We had been caught up 
in a season of hideous magic from which nothing could offer us 
deliverance. More and more I found myself returning to those 
memories of gas station carnivals, seeking an answer in the twilight 
of remote rural areas where miniature merry-go-rounds and ferris 
wheels lay broken in a desolate landscape.
But there is no one here who will listen even to my most abject 
apologies, least of all the Showman, who may be waiting behind 
any door (even the rest room of the Crimson Cabaret). And any 
room that I enter may become a sideshow tent where I must take 
my place upon a rickety old bench on the verge of collapse. Even 
now the Showman stands before my eyes. His stiff red hair moves a 
little toward one shoulder, as if he is going to turn his gaze upon 
me, and moves back again; then his head moves a little toward the 
other shoulder in this neverending game of horrible peek-a-boo. I

GAS STATION CARNIVALS
513
can only sit and wait, knowing that one day he will turn full 
around, step down from his stage, and claim me for the abyss I 
have always feared. Perhaps then I will discover what it was I did - 
what any of us did - to deserve this fate.

THE BUNGALOW HOUSE
Early last September I discovered among the exhibits in a local 
art gallery a sort of performance piece in the form of an audio 
tape. This, I later learned, was the first of a series of tape-recorded 
dream monologues by an unknown artist. The following is a brief 
and highly typical excerpt from the opening section of this work. I 
recall that after a few seconds of hissing tape noise, the voice began 
speaking: “There was far more to deal with in the bungalow house 
than simply an infestation of vermin,” it said, “although that too 
had its questionable aspects.” Then the voice went on: “I could see 
only a few of the bodies where the moonlight shone through the 
open blinds of the living room windows and fell upon the carpet. 
Only one of the bodies seemed to be moving, and that very slowly, 
but there may have been more that were not yet dead. Aside from 
the chair in which I sat in the darkness there was very little 
furniture in the room, or elsewhere in the bungalow house for that 
matter. But a number of lamps were positioned around me, floor 
lamps and table lamps and even two tiny lamps on the mantle 
above the fireplace.”
A brief pause occurred here in the opening section of the tape 
recorded dream monologue, as I remember it, after which the 
voice continued: ‘“The bungalow house was built with a fireplace,* 
I said to myself in the darkness, thinking how long it had been since 
anyone had made use of this fireplace, or anything else in the 
bungalow. Then my attention returned to the lamps, and I began 
trying each of them one by one, twisting their little grooved 
switches in the darkness. The moonlight fell upon the lampshades 
without shining through them, so I could not see that none of the 
lamps was equipped with a lightbulb, and each time I turned the 
switch of a floor lamp or a table lamp or one of the tiny lamps on 
the mantle, nothing changed in the dark living room of the 
bungalow house: the moonlight shone through the dusty blinds 
and revealed the bodies of insects and other vermin on the pale 
carpet.
“The challenges and obstacles facing me in that bungalow house

TH E BUNGALOW  HOUSE
515
were becoming more and more oppressive,” whispered the voice 
on the tape. “There was something so desolate about being in that 
place in the dead of night, even if I did not know precisely what 
time it was. And to see upon the pale, threadbare carpet those 
verminous bodies, some of which were still barely alive; then to try 
each of the lamps and find that none of them was in working order
- everything appeared in opposition to my efforts, everything 
aligned against my taking care of the problems I faced in the 
bungalow house. For the first time I noticed that the bodies lying 
for the most part in total stillness on the moonlit carpet were not 
like any species of vermin I had ever seen,” the voice on the tape 
recording said. “Some of them seemed to be deformed, their 
naturally revolting forms altered in ways I could not discern. I 
knew that I would require specialized implements for dealing with 
these creatures, an arsenal of advanced tools of extermination. It 
was the idea of poisons -  the toxic solutions and vapors I would 
need to use in my assault upon the bungalow hordes -  that caused 
me to become overwhelmed by the complexities of the task before 
me and the paucity of my resources for dealing with them.”
At this point, and many others on the tape (as I recall), the voice 
became nearly inaudible. “The bungalow house,” it said, “was 
such a bleak environment in which to make a stand: the moonlight 
through the dusty blinds, the bodies on the carpet, the lamps 
without any lightbulbs. And the incredible silence. It was not the 
absence of sounds that I sensed, but the stifling of innumerable 
sounds and even voices, the muffling of all the noises one might 
expect to hear in an old bungalow house in the dead of night, as 
well as countless other sounds and voices. The forces required to 
accomplish this silence filled me with awe. The infinite terror and 
dreariness of an infested bungalow house, I whispered to myself. A 
bungalow universe, I then thought without speaking aloud. Suddenly 
I was overcome by a feeling of euphoric hopelessness which passed 
through my body like a powerful drug and held all my thoughts 
and all my movements in a dreamy, floating suspension. In the 
moonlight that shone through the blinds of that bungalow house I 
was now as still and as silent as everything else.”
The title of the tape-recorded artwork from which I have just 
quoted an excerpt was The Bungalow House (Plus Silence). I 
discovered this and other dream monologues by the same artist 
at Dalha D. Fine Arts, which was located in the near vicinity of the 
public library (main branch) where I was employed in the 
Language and Literature department. Sometimes I spent my 
lunch breaks at the gallery, even consuming my brown-bag meals

5 i6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
on the premises. There were a few chairs and benches on the floor 
of the gallery, and I knew that the woman who owned the place 
did not discourage any kind of traffic, however lingering. Her 
actual livelihood was in fact not derived from the gallery itself. 
How could it have been? Dalha D. Fine Arts was a hole in the wall. 
One would think it no trouble at all to keep up the premises where 
there was so little floor space, just a single room that was by no 
means overcrowded with artworks or art-related merchandise. But 
no attempt at such upkeeping seemed ever to have been made. The 
display window was so filmy that someone passing by could barely 
make out the paintings and sculptures behind it (the same ones 
year after year). From the street outside, this tiny front window 
presented the most desolate hallucination of bland colors and 
shapeless forms, especially on late November afternoons. Further 
inside the gallery, things were in a similar state -  from the cruddy 
linoleum floor, where some cracked tiles revealed the concrete 
foundation, to the rather high ceiling, which occasionally sent 
down small chips of plaster. If every artwork and item of art- 
related merchandise had been cleared out of that building, no one 
would think that an art gallery had once occupied this space and 
not some enterprise of a lesser order.
But as many persons were aware, if only through second-hand 
sources, the woman who operated Dalha D. Fine Arts did not make 
her living by dealing in those artworks and related items which only 
the most desperate or scandalously naive artist would allow to be 
put on display in that gallery. By all accounts, including my own 
brief lunchtime conversations with the woman, she had pursued a 
variety of careers in her time. She herself had worked as an artist at 
one point, and some of her works -  messy assemblages inside old 
cigar boxes -  were exhibited in a corner of her gallery. But evidently 
her art gallery business was not self-sustaining, despite minimal 
overhead, and she made no secret of her true means of income.
“Who wants to buy such junk?” she once explained to me, 
gesturing with long fingernails painted emerald green. This same 
color also seemed to dominate her wardrobe of long, loose 
garments, often featuring incredible scarves or shawls that 
dragged along the floor as she moved about the art gallery. She 
paused and with the pointed toe of one of her emerald green shoes 
gave a little kick at a wire wastebasket that was filled with the 
miniature limbs of dolls, all of them individually painted in a 
variety of colors. “What are people thinking when they make these 
things? What was I thinking with those stupid cigar boxes? But no 
more of that, definitely no more of that sort of thing.”

TH E BUNGALOW HOUSE
517
And she made no secret, beyond a certain reasonable caution, of 
what sort of thing now engaged her energies as a businesswoman. 
The telephone was always ringing at her art gallery, always 
upsetting the otherwise dead calm of the place with its cracked, 
warbling voice that called out from the back room. She would then 
quickly disappear behind a curtain that hung in the doorway 
separating the front and back sections of the art gallery. I might be 
eating my sandwich or a piece of fruit, and then suddenly, for the 
fourth or fifth time in a half-hour, the telephone would scream 
from the back room, eventually summoning this woman behind 
the curtain. But she never answered the telephone with the name of 
the art gallery or employed any of the stock phrases of business 
protocol. Not so much as a “good afternoon, may I help you?” did 
I ever hear from the back room as I sat eating my midday meal in 
the front section of the art gallery. She always answered the 
telephone in the same way with the same quietly expectant tone 
in her voice. This is Dalha, she always said.
Before I had known her very long she even had me using her 
name in the most familiar way. The mere saying of this name 
instilled in me a sense of access to what she offered all those 
telephone-callers, not to mention those individuals who person­
ally visited the art gallery to make or confirm an appointment. 
Whatever someone was eager to try, whatever step someone was 
willing to take - Dalha could arrange it. This was the true stock in 
trade of the art gallery, these arrangements. When I returned to the 
library after my lunch break, I continued to imagine Dalha back 
at the art gallery, racing between the front and back sections of the 
building, making all kinds of arrangements over the telephone, 
and sometimes in person.
On the day that I first noticed the new artwork entitled The 
Bungalow House, Dalha’s telephone was extremely vocal. While she 
was talking to her clients in the back section of the art gallery, I 
was practically left alone in the front section. Just for a thrill I went 
over to the wire wastebasket full of dismembered doll parts and 
lifted one of the painted arms (emerald green!), hiding it in the 
inner pocket of my sportcoat. It was then that I spotted the old 
audio tape recorder on a small plastic table in the corner. Beside 
the machine was a business card on which the title of the artwork 
had been hand-printed, along with the following instructions:
PRESS PLAY. PLEASE REWIND AFTER LISTENING. DO NOT REMOVE TAPE.
I placed the headphones over my ears and pressed the pla y button. 
The voice that spoke through the headphones, which were 
enormous, sounded distant and was somewhat distorted by the

5*8
THOMAS LIGOTTI
hissing of the tape. Nevertheless, I was so intrigued by the opening 
passages of this dream monologue, which I have already tran­
scribed, that I sat down on the floor next to the small plastic table 
on which the tape recorder was positioned and listened to the 
entire tape, exceeding my allotted lunchtime by over half an hour. 
By the time the tape had ended I was in another world - that is, the 
world of the infested bungalow house, with all its dreamlike 
crumminess and foul charms.
“Don’t forget to rewind the tape,” said Dalha, who was now 
standing over me, her long gray hair, like steel wool, almost 
brushing against my face.
I pressed the r ew in d button on the tape recorder and got up 
from the floor. “Dalha, may I use your lavatory?” I asked. She 
pointed to the curtain leading to the back section of the art gallery. 
“Thank you,” I said.
The effect of listening to the first dream monologue was very 
intense for reasons I will soon explain. I wanted to be alone for a 
few moments in order to preserve the state of mind which the voice 
on the tape had induced in me, much as one might attempt to hold 
on to the images of a dream just after waking. However, I felt that 
the lavatory at the library, despite its peculiar virtues which I have 
appreciated over the years, would somehow undermine the 
sensations and mental state created by the dream monologue, 
rather than preserving this experience and even enhancing it, as I 
hoped the lavatory in the back section of Dalha’s art gallery would 
do.The very reason why I spent my lunchtimes in the surround­
ings of Dalha’s art gallery, which were so different from those of 
the library, was exactly why I now wanted to use the lavatory in 
the back section of that art gallery and definitely not the lavatory 
at the library, even if I was already overdue from my lunch 
break. And, indeed, this lavatory had the same qualities as the 
rest of the art gallery, as I hoped it would. The fact that it was 
located in the back section of the art gallery, a region of mysteries 
to my mind, was significant. Just outside the door of the lavatory 
stood a small, cluttered desk upon which was the telephone that 
Dalha used in her true business of making arrangements. The 
telephone was centered in the weak light of a desk lamp, and I 
noticed, as I passed into the lavatory, that it was an unwieldy 
object with a straight - that is, uncoiled - cord connecting the 
receiver to the telephone housing, with its enormous dial. But 
although Dalha answered several calls during the time I was in 
her lavatory, these seemed to be entirely legitimate conversations

THE BUNGALOW HOUSE
519
having to do either with her personal life or with practical 
matters relating to the art gallery.
“How long are you going to be in there?” Dalha asked through 
the door of the lavatory. “I hope you’re not sick, because if you’re 
sick you’ll have to go somewhere else.”
I called out that there was nothing wrong (quite the opposite) 
and a moment later emerged from the lavatory. I was about to ask 
for details of the art performance tape I had just heard, anxious to 
know about the artist and what it would cost me to own the work 
entitled The Bungalow House, as well as any similar works that 
might exist. But the phone began ringing again. Dalha answered it 
with her customary greeting as I stood by in the back section of the 
art gallery, which was a dark, though relatively uncluttered, space 
that now put me in mind of the living room of the bungalow house 
that I had heard described on the tape recorded dream mono­
logue. The conversation in which Dalha was engaged (another 
non-arrangement call) seemed interminable, and I was becoming 
nervously aware how long past my lunch break I had stayed at the 
storefront art gallery.
“I’ll see you tomorrow,” I said to Dalha, who responded with a 
look from her emerald eyes while continuing to speak to the other 
party on the telephone. And she was smiling at me, like muted 
laughter, I remember thinking as I passed through the curtained 
doorway into the front section of the art gallery. I glanced at the 
tape recorder standing on the plastic table but decided against 
taking the audio cassette back to the library (and afterward home 
with me). It would be there when I visited on my lunch break the 
following day. Hardly anyone ever bought anything out of the 
front section of Dalha’s art gallery.
For the rest of the day - both at the library and at my home -  I 
thought about the bungalow house tape. Especially while riding 
the bus home from the library, I thought of the images and 
concepts described on the tape, as well as the voice that described 
them and the phrases it used throughout the dream monologue on 
the bungalow house. Much of my commute from my home to the 
library, and back home again, took me past numerous streets lined 
from end to end with desolate-Iooking houses, any of which might 
have been the inspiration for the bungalow house audio tape. I say 
that these streets were lined from “end to end” with such houses, 
even though the bus never turned down any of these streets, and I 
therefore never actually viewed even a single one of them from 
“end to end.” In fact, as I looked through the window next to my 
seat on the bus - on either side of the bus I always sat in the

520
THOMAS LIOOTTI
window seat, never in the aisle seat - the streets I saw appeared 
endless, vanishing from my sight toward an infinity of old houses, 
many of them derelict houses and a great many of them being 
dwarfish and desolate-looking houses of the bungalow type.
The tape-recorded dream monologue, as I recalled it that day 
while riding home on the bus and staring out the window, 
described several features of the infested bungalow house -  the 
dusty window blinds through which the moonlight shone, the 
lamps with all their lightbulb sockets empty, the threadbare 
carpet, and the dead or barely living vermin that littered the 
carpet. The voice on the tape only presented an interior view of the 
bungalow house, never a view from the exterior. Conversely, the 
houses I gazed upon with such intensity as I rode the bus to and 
from the library were only seen by me from an exterior perspective, 
their interiors being visible solely in my imagination as I projected 
it into these houses. And my memory of these interiors, once I had 
emerged from one of my imaginative projections, was always 
spotty and vague, lacking the precise physical layout provided 
by the bungalow house audio tape. Even my recollection of the 
dreams I often had of these houses was spotty and vague, highly 
imperfect. Yet the sensations and the mental state created by my 
imaginative projections into and my dreams of these houses 
perfectly corresponded to those I experienced at Dalha’s art 
gallery when I listened to the tape entitled The Bungalow House. 
That feeling of being in a trance among the most vile and pathetic 
surroundings was communicated to me in the most powerful way 
by the voice on the tape, which described a silent and secluded 
world where one existed in a state of abject hypnosis. While sitting 
on the floor of the art gallery listening to the voice as it spoke 
through those enormous headphones, I had the sense not that I 
was simply hearing the words of that dream monologue but also 
that I was reading them. What I mean is that whenever I have the 
occasion to read words on a page, any words on any page, the voice 
that I hear saying these words in my head is always recognizable in 
some way as my own, even though the words are those of another. 
Perhaps it is even more accurate to say that whenever I read words 
on a page, the voice in my head is my own voice as it becomes merged 
(or lost) within the words that I am reading. Conversely, when I 
have the occasion to write words on a page, even a simple note or 
memo at the library, the voice that I hear dictating these words 
does not sound like my own - until, of course, I read the words back 
to myself, at which time everything is all right again. The 
bungalow house tape was the most dramatic example of this

TH E BUNGALOW HOUSE
521
phenomenon I had ever known. Despite the poor overall quality 
of the recording, the distorted voice reading this dream monologue 
became merged (or lost) within my own perfectly clear voice in my 
head, even though I was listening to its words over a pair of 
enormous headphones and not reading the words on a page. As I 
rode the bus home from the library, observing street after street of 
houses so reminiscent of the one described on the tape-recorded 
dream monologue, I regretted not having acquired this artwork on 
the spot or at least discovered more about it from Dalha, who had 
been occupied with what seemed an unusual number of telephone 
calls that afternoon.
The following day at the library I was anxious for lunchtime to 
arrive so that I could get over to the art gallery and find out 
everything I possibly could about the bungalow house tape, as well 
as discuss terms for its acquisition. Entering the art gallery, I 
immediately looked toward the corner where the tape recorder 
had been set on the small plastic table the day before. For some 
reason I was relieved to find the exhibit still in place, as if any 
artwork in that gallery could possibly have come and gone in a 
single day.
I walked over to the exhibit with the purpose of verifying that 
everything I had seen (and heard) the previous day was exactly as 
I remembered it. I checked that the audio cassette was still inside 
the recording machine and picked up the little business card on 
which the title of the exhibit was given, along with instructions for 
properly operating the tape-recorded artwork. It was then that I 
realized that this was a different card from the first one. Printed on 
this card was the title of a new artwork, which was called The 
Derelict Factory with a Dirt Floor and Voices.
While I was very excited to find a new work by this artist, I also 
felt intense apprehension at the absence of the bungalow house 
dream monologue, which I had planned to purchase with some 
extra money I brought with me to the art gallery that day. Just at 
that moment in which I experienced the dual sensations of 
excitement and apprehension, Dalha emerged from behind the 
curtain separating the back and front sections of the art gallery. I 
had intended to be thoroughly blase in negotiating the purchase of 
the bungalow house artwork, but Dalha caught me off-guard in a 
state of disorienting conflict.
“What happened to the bungalow house tape that was here 
yesterday?” I asked, the tension in my voice betraying desires that 
were all to her advantage.
“That’s gone now,” she replied in a frigid tone as she walked

522
THOMAS LIO O TTI
slowly and pointlessly about the gallery, her emerald skirt and 
scarves dragging along the floor.
“I don’t understand. It was an artwork exhibited on that small 
plastic table.”
“Yes,” she agreed.
“Now, after only a single day on exhibit, it’s gone?”
“Yes, it’s gone.”
“Somebody bought it,” I said, assuming the worst.
“No,” she said, “that one was not for sale. It was a performance 
piece. There was a charge, but you didn’t pay.”
A sickly confusion now became added to the excitement and 
disappointment already mingling inside me. “There was no notice 
of a charge for listening to the dream monologue,” I insisted. “As 
far as I knew, as far as anyone could know, it was an item for sale 
like everything else in this place.”
“The dream monologue, as you call it, was an exclusive piece. 
The charge was on the back of the card on which the title was 
written, just as the charge is on the back of that card you are 
holding in your hand.”
I turned the card to the reverse side, where the words “twenty- 
five dollars” were written in the same hand that appeared on all 
the price tags around the gallery. Speaking in the tones of an 
outraged customer, I said to Dalha, “You wrote the price only on 
this card. There was nothing written on the bungalow house 
card.” But even as I said these words I lacked the conviction 
that they were true. In any case, I knew that if I wanted to hear the 
tape recording about the derelict factory I would have to pay what 
I owed, or what Dalha claimed I owed, for listening to the 
bungalow house tape.
“Here,” I said, removing my wallet from my back pocket, “ten, 
twenty, twenty-five dollars for the bungalow house, and another 
twenty-five for listening to the tape now in the machine.”
Dalha stepped forward, took the fifty dollars I held out to her, 
and in her coldest voice said, “This only covers yesterday’s tape 
about the bungalow house, which was clearly priced at fifty 
dollars. You must still pay twenty-five dollars if you wish to listen 
to the tape today.”
“But why should the bungalow house tape cost twenty-five 
dollars more than the tape about the derelict factory?”
“That is simply because this is a less ambitious work than the 
bungalow house.”
In fact the tape recording entitled The Derelict Factory with a Dirt 
Floor and Voices was of shorter duration than The Bungalow House

THE BUNGALOW  HOUSE
523
(Plus Silence), but I found it no less wonderful in picturing the same 
“infinite terror and dreariness.” For approximately fifteen minutes 
(on my lunch break) I embraced the degraded beauty of the 
derelict factory - a narrow ruin that stood isolated upon a vast 
plain, its broken windows accepting only the most meager haze of 
moonlight to shine across its floor of hard-packed dirt where dead 
machinery lay buried in a grave of shadows and languished in the 
echoes of hollow, senseless voices. Yet how lucid was the voice that 
communicated its message to me through the medium of a tape 
recording. To think that another person shared my love for the icy 
bleakness of things. The comfort I felt at hearing that monotonal and 
somewhat distorted voice singing words that I knew so well - this 
was an experience that even then, as I sat on the floor of Dalha’s 
art gallery listening to the tape through enormous headphones, 
might have been heartbreaking. But I wanted to believe that the 
artist who created these dream monologues about the bungalow 
house and the derelict factory had not set out to break my heart or 
anyone’s heart. I wanted to believe that this artist had escaped the 
dreams and demons of all sentiment in order to explore the fóul and 
crummy delights of a universe where everything had been reduced 
to three stark principles: first, that there was nowhere for you to go; 
second, that there was nothing for you to do; and third, that there 
was no one for you to know. Of course I knew that this view was an 
illusion like any other, but it was also one that had sustained me so 
long and so well - as long and as well as any other illusion and 
perhaps longer, perhaps better.
“Dalha,” I said when I had finished listening to the tape 
recording, “I want you to tell me what you know about the artist 
of these dream monologues. He doesn’t even sign his works.” 
From across the front section of the art gallery Dalha spoke to 
me in a strange, somewhat flustered voice. “Well, why should you 
be surprised that he doesn’t sign his name to his works -  that’s how 
artists are these days. All over the place they are signing their 
works only with some idiotic symbol or a piece of chewing gum or 
just leaving them unsigned altogether. Why should you care what 
his name is? Why should I?”
“Because,” I answered, “perhaps I can persuade him to allow 
me to buy his works instead of sitting on the floor of your art gallery 
and renting these performances on my lunch break.”
“So you want to cut me out entirely,” Dalha shouted back in her 
old voice. “I am his dealer, I tell you, and anything he has to sell 
you will buy through me.”
“I don’t know why you’re getting so upset,” I said, standing up

524
THOMAS LIGOTTI
from the floor. “I’m willing to give you a percentage. All I ask is 
that you arrange something between myself and the artist.” 
Dalha sat down in a chair next to the curtained doorway 
separating the front and back sections of the art gallery. She 
pulled her emerald shawl around herself and said, “Even if I 
wished to arrange something I could not do it. I have no idea what 
his name is myself. A few nights ago he walked up to me on the 
street while I was waiting for a cab to take me home.”
“What does he look like?” I had to ask at that moment.
“It was late at night and I was drunk,” Dalha replied, somehow 
evasively it seemed to me.
“Was he a younger man, an older man?”
“An older man, yes. Not very tall, with bushy white hair like a 
professor of some kind. And he said that he wanted to have an 
artwork of his delivered to my gallery. I explained to him my usual 
terms as best I could, since I was so drunk. He agreed and then 
walked ofTdown the street. And that’s not the best part of town to 
be walking around all by yourself. Well, the next day a package 
arrived with the tape-recording machine and so forth. There were 
also some instructions which explained that I should destroy each 
of the audio tapes before I leave the art gallery at the end of the 
day, and that a new tape would arrive the following day and each 
day thereafter. There was no return address on the packages.” 
“And did you destroy the bungalow house tape?” I asked.
“Of course,” said Dalha with some exasperation, but also with 
insistence. “What do I care about some crazy artist’s work or how 
he conducts his career. Besides, he guaranteed I would make some 
money on the deal, and here I am already with seventy-five 
dollars.”
“So why not sell me this dream monologue about the derelict 
factory? I won’t say anything.”
Dalha was quiet for a moment, and then said, “He told me that 
if I didn’t destroy the tapes each day he would know about it and 
that he would do something. I’ve forgotten exactly what he said, I 
was so drunk that night.”
“But how could he know?” I asked, and in reply Dalha just 
stared at me in silence. “All right, all right,” I said. “But I still 
want you to make an arrangement. You have his money for the 
bungalow house tape and the tape about the derelict factory. If 
he’s any kind of artist, he’ll want to be paid. When he gets in touch 
with you, that's when you make the arrangement for me. I won’t 
cheat you out of your percentage. I give you my word on that.” 
“Whatever that’s worth,” Dalha said bitterly.

TH E BUNGALOW HOUSE
525
But she did agree that she would try to arrange something 
between myself and the tape-recording artist. I left the art gallery 
immediately after these negotiations, before Dalha could have any 
second thoughts. That afternoon, while I was working in the 
Language and Literature department of the library, I could think 
about nothing but the derelict factory that was so enticingly 
pictured on the new audio tape. The bus that takes me to and 
from the library each day of the working week always passes such a 
structure, which stands isolated in the distance just as the artist 
described it in his dream monologue.
That night I slept badly, thrashing about in my bed, not quite 
asleep and not quite awake. At times I had the feeling there was 
someone else in my bedroom who was talking to me, but of course I 
could not deal with this perception in any realistic way, since I was 
half-asleep and half-awake, and thus, for all practical purposes, I 
was out of my mind.
Around three o’clock in the morning the telephone rang. In the 
darkness I reached for my eyeglasses, which were on the nightstand 
next to the telephone, and noted the luminous face of my alarm 
clock. I cleared my throat and said hello. The voice on the other 
end said hello back to me. It was Dalha.
“I talked to him,” she said.
“Where did you talk to him?” I asked. “On the street?”
“No, no, not on the street,” she said, giggling a little. I think she 
must have been drunk. “He called me on the telephone.”
“He called you on the telephone?” I repeated, imagining for a 
moment what it would be like to have the voice of that artist speak 
to me over the telephone and not merely on a recorded audio tape. 
“Yes, he called me on the telephone.”
“What did he say?”
“Well, I could tell you if you would stop asking so many 
questions.”
“Tell me.”
“It was only a few minutes ago that he called. He said that he 
would meet you tomorrow at the library where you work.”
“You told him about me?” I asked, and then there was a long 
silence. “Dalha?” I prompted.
“Yes, I told him about you. But I never knew what you did for a 
living. How long have you worked at the library?”
“Fifteen years. Did he say anything else to you?” I asked Dalha. 
“No, nothing.”
“Maybe it was only a coincidence that he said he would meet me 
at the library and that I also work at the library,” I said. “People

5 * 6
THOMAS LIG O TTI
meet all the time at the library. I see them meeting there every 
day.”
“Of course they do,” said Dalha, a little patronizing it seemed 
for someone who was so drunk at three o’clock in the morning. 
Then she said good-bye and hung up before I could say good-bye 
back to her.
After talking to Dalha I found it impossible to sleep anymore 
that night, even if it was only a state of half-sleeping and half­
waking. All I could think about was meeting the artist of the dream 
monologues. So I got myself ready to go to work, rushing as if I 
were late, and walked up to the corner of my street to wait for the 
bus.It was very cold as I sat waiting in the bus shelter. There was a 
sliver of moon high in the blackness above, with several hours 
remaining before sunrise. Somehow I felt that I was waiting for the 
bus on the first day of a new schoolyear, since after all the month 
was September, and I was so filled with both fear and excitement. 
When the bus finally arrived I saw that there were only a few other 
early risers headed for downtown. I took one of the back seats and 
stared out the window, my own face staring back at me in black 
reflection.
At the next shelter we approached I noticed that another lone 
bus rider was seated on the bench waiting to be picked up. His 
clothes were dark colored (including a long loose overcoat and 
hat), and he sat up very straight, his arms held close to the body 
and his hands resting on his lap. His head was slightly bowed, and 
I could not see the face beneath his hat. His physical attitude, I 
thought to myself as we approached the lighted bus shelter, was 
one of disciplined repose. I was surprised that he did not stand up 
as the bus came nearer to the shelter, and ultimately we passed him 
by. I wanted to say something to the driver of the bus but a strong 
feeling of both fear and excitement made me keep my silence.
The bus finally dropped me ofTin front of the library, and I ran 
up the tiered stairway that led to the main entrance. Through the 
thick glass doors I could see that only a few lights illuminated the 
spacious interior of the library. After rapping on the glass for a few 
moments I saw a figure dressed in a maintenance man’s uniform 
appear in the shadowy distance inside the building. I rapped some 
more and the man slowly proceeded down the library’s vaulted 
central hallway.
“Good morning, Henry,” I said as the door opened.
“Hello, sir,” he replied without standing aside to allow my 
entrance to the library. “You know I’m not supposed to open these

TH E BUNGALOW HOUSE
527
doors before it’s time for them to be open.”
“I’m a little early, I realize, but I’m sure it will be all right to let 
me inside. I work here, after all.”
“I know you do, sir. But a few days ago I got talked to about 
these doors being open when they shouldn’t be. It’s because of the 
stolen property.”
“What property is that, Henry? Books?”
“No, sir. I think it was something from the media department. 
Maybe a video camera or a tape recorder, I don’t know exactly.” 
“Well, you have my word - just let me through the door and I’ll 
go right upstairs to my desk. I’ve got a lot of work to do today.” 
Henry eventually obliged my request, and I did as I told him I 
would do.
The library was a great building as a whole, but the Language 
and Literature department (second floor) was located in a 
relatively small area - narrow and long with a high ceiling and 
a row of tall, paned windows along one wall. The other walls were 
lined with books, and most of the floor space was devoted to long 
study tables. For the most part, though, the room in which I 
worked was fairly open from end to end. Two large archways led to 
other parts of the library, and a normal-sized doorway led to the 
stacks where most of the bibliographic holdings were stored, 
millions of volumes standing silent and out of sight along endless 
rows of shelves. In the pre-dawn darkness the true dimensions of 
the Language and Literature department were now obçcure. Only 
the moon shining high in the blackness through those tall windows 
revealed to me the location of my desk, which was in the middle of 
the long narrow room.
I found my way over to my desk and switched on the small lamp 
that years ago I had brought from home. (Not that I required the 
added illumination as I worked at my desk at the library, but I did 
enjoy the bleakly old-fashioned appearance of this object.) For a 
moment I thought of the bungalow house where none of the lamps 
were equipped with lightbulbs and moonlight shone through the 
windows upon a carpet littered with vermin. Somehow I was 
unable to call up the special sensations and mental state that I 
associated with this dream monologue, even though my present 
situation of being alone in the Language and Literature depart­
ment some hours before dawn was intensely dreamlike.
Not knowing what else to do, I sat down at my desk as if I were 
beginning my normal workday. It was then that I noticed a large 
envelope lying on top of my desk, although I could not recall its 
being there when I left the library the day before. The envelope

528
THOMAS LIG O TTI
looked old and faded under the dim light of the desk lamp. There 
was no writing on either side of the envelope, which was bulging 
slightly and had been sealed.
“Who’s there?” a voice called out that barely sounded like my 
own. I had seen something out of the corner of my eye while 
examining the envelope at my desk. I cleared my throat. “Henry?” 
I asked the darkness without looking up from my desk or turning to 
either side. No answer was ofTered in reply, but I could feel that 
someone else had joined me in the Language and Literature 
department of the library.
I slowly turned my head to the right and focused on the archway 
some distance across the room. At the center of this aperture, 
which led to another room where moonlight shone through high, 
paned windows, stood a figure in silhouette. I could not see his face 
but immediately recognized the long, loose overcoat and hat. It 
was indeed the one whom I saw in the bus shelter as I rode to the 
library in the pre-dawn darkness. Now he was there to meet me 
that day in the library, as he had told Dalha he would do. At that 
moment it seemed beside the point to ask how he had gotten into 
the library or even to bother about introductions. I simply 
launched into a monologue that I had been constantly rehearsing 
since Dalha telephoned me earlier that morning.
“I’ve been wanting to meet you,” I started. “Your dream 
monologues, which is what I call them, have impressed me very 
much. That is to say, your artworks are like nothing else I have ever 
experienced, either artistically or extra-artistically. It seems in­
credible to me how well you have expressed subject matter with 
which I myself am intimately familiar. Of course, I am not 
referring to the subject matter as such -  the bungalow houses 
and so on -  except as it calls forth your underlying vision of things. 
When -  in your tape-recorded monologues -  your voice speaks 
such phrases as ‘infinite terror and dreariness’ or ‘ceaseless nega­
tion of color and life,’ I believe that my response is exactly that 
which you intend for those who experience your artworks, perhaps 
even that which you yourself have experienced that gives you the 
inspiration for your artworks.”
I continued in this vein for a while longer, speaking to the 
silhouette of someone who betrayed no sign that he heard anything 
I said. At some point, however, my monologue veered ofT in a 
direction I had not intended it to take. Suddenly I began to say 
things that had nothing to do with what I had said before and that 
even contradicted my former statements.
“For as long as I can remember,” I said, continuing to speak to

TH E BUNGALOW HOUSE
5 2 9
the figure standing in the archway, “I have had an intense and 
highly aesthetic perception of what I call the icy bleakness of things. 
At the same time I have felt a great loneliness in this perception. 
This conjunction of feelings seems paradoxical, since such a 
perception, such a view of things, would seem to preclude the 
emotion of loneliness, or any sense of a killing sadness, as I think of it. 
All such heartbreaking sentiment, as usually considered, would 
seem to be on its knees before artworks such as yours, which so 
powerfully express what I have called the icy bleakness of things, 
submerging or devastating all sentiment in an atmosphere potent 
with desolate truths, permeated throughout with a visionary 
stagnation and lifelessness. Yet I must observe that the effect, as 
I now consider it, has been just the opposite. If it was your intent to 
evoke the icy bleakness of things with your dream monologues, 
then you have totally failed on both an artistic and an extra-artistic 
level. You have failed your art, you have failed yourself, and you 
have also failed me. If your artworks had really evoked the 
bleakness of things, then I would not have felt this need to know 
who you are, this killing sadness that there was actually someone 
who experienced the same sensations and mental states that I did 
and who could share them with me in the form of tape-recorded 
dream monologues. Who are you that I should feel this need to go 
to work hours before the sun comes up, that I should feel this was 
something I had to do and that you were someone that I had to 
know? This behavior violates every principle by which I have lived 
for as long as I can remember. Who are you to cause me to violate 
these long-lived principles? I think it’s all becoming clear to me 
now. Dalha put you up to this. You and Dalha are in a conspiracy 
against me and against my principles. Every day Dalha is on the 
telephone making all kinds of arrangements for profit, and she 
cannot stand the idea that all I do is sit there in peace, eating my 
lunch in her hideous art gallery. She feels that I’m cheating her 
somehow because she’s not making a profit from me, because I 
never paid her to make an arrangement for me. Don’t try to deny 
what I now know is true. But you could say something, in any case. 
Just a few words spoken with that voice of yours. Or at least let me 
see your face. And you could take ofT that ridiculous hat. It’s like 
something Dalha would wear.”
By this time I was on my feet and walking (staggering, in fact) 
toward the figure that stood in the archway. All the while I was 
walking, or staggering, toward the figure I was also demanding 
that he answer my accusations. But as I walked forward between 
the long study tables toward the archway, the figure standing there

5 3 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
receded backward into the darkness of the next room, where 
moonlight shone through high, paned windows. The closer I 
came to him the farther he receded into the darkness. And he 
did not recede into the darkness by taking steps backward, as I was 
taking steps forward, but moved in some other way that even now 
I cannot specify, as though he were floating.
Just before the figure disappeared completely into the darkness 
he finally spoke to me. His voice was the same one that I had heard 
over those enormous headphones in Dalha’s art gallery, except 
now there was no interference, no distortion in the words that it 
spoke. These words, which resounded in my brain as they 
resounded in the high-ceilinged rooms of the library, were such 
that I should have welcomed them, for they echoed my very own, 
deeply private, principles. Yet I took no comfort in hearing 
another voice tell me that there was nowhere for me to go, 
nothing for me to do, and no one for me to know.
The next voice I heard was that of Henry, who shouted up the 
wide stone staircase from the ground floor of the library. “Is 
everything all right, sir?” he asked. I composed myself and was 
able to answer that everything was all right. I asked him to turn 
the lights on for the second floor of the library. In a minute the 
lights were on, but by then the man in the hat and long, loose 
overcoat was gone.
When I confronted Dalha at her art gallery later that day, she 
was not in the least forthcoming with respect to my questions and 
accusations. “You are crazy,” she screamed at me. “I want 
nothing more to do with you.”
When I asked Dalha what she was talking about, she said, “You 
really don't know, do you? You really are a crazy man. You don’t 
remember that night you came up to me on the street while I was 
waiting for a cab to show up.”
When I told her I recalled doing nothing of the kind, she 
continued her anecdote of that night, and also subsequent 
events. “I’m so drunk I can hardly understand what you are 
saying to me about some little game you are playing. Then you 
send me the tapes. Then you come in and pay to listen to the tapes, 
exactly as you said you would. Just in time I remember that I am 
supposed to lie to you that the tapes are the work of a white-haired 
old man, when in fact you are the one who is making the tapes. I 
knew you were crazy, but this was the only money I ever made off 
you, even though day after day you come and eat your pathetic 
lunch in my gallery. When I saw you that night, I couldn’t tell at 
first who it was walking up to me on the street. You did look

TH E  BUNGALOW HOUSE
531
different, and you were wearing that stupid hat. Soon enough, 
though, I can see that it’s you. And you’re pretending to be 
someone else, but not really pretending, I don’t know. And then 
you tell me that I must destroy the tapes, and if I don’t destroy 
them something will happen. Well, let me tell you, crazy man,” 
Dalha said, “I did not destroy those tape recordings. I let all my 
friends hear them. We sat around getting drunk and laughing our 
heads off at your stupid dream monologues. Here, another one of your 
artworks arrived in the mail today,” she said while walking across 
the floor of the art gallery to the tape machine that was positioned 
on the small plastic table. “Why don’t you listen to it and pay me 
the money you promised? This looks like a good one,” she said, 
picking up the little card that bore the title of the work. “7X* Bus 
Skelter, it says. That should be very exciting for you - a bus shelter. 
Pay up!”
“Dalha,” I said in a laboriously calm voice, “please listen to me. 
You have to make another arrangement. I need to have another 
meeting with the tape-recording artist. You are the only one who 
can arrange for this to happen. Dalha, I’m afraid for both of us if 
you don’t agree to make this arrangement. I need to speak with 
him again.”
“Then why don’t you just go talk into a mirror. There,” she 
said, pointing to the curtain that separated the front section from 
the back section of the art gallery. “Go into the bathroom like you 
did the other day and talk to yourself in the mirror.”
“I didn’t talk to myself in the bathroom, Dalha.”
“No? What were you doing then?”
“Dalha, you have to make the arrangement. You are the go- 
between. He will contact you if you agree to let him.”
“ Who will contact me?”
This was a fair question for Dalha to ask, but it was also one that 
I could not answer. I told her that I would return to talk to her the 
next day, hoping she would have calmed down by then.
Unfortunately, I never saw Dalha again. That night she was 
found dead on the street. Presumably she had been waiting for a 
cab to take her home from a bar or a party or some other human 
gathering place where she had gotten very drunk. But it was not 
her drinking or her exhausting bohemian social life that killed 
Dalha. She had, in fact, choked to death while waiting for a cab 
very late at night. Her body was taken to a hospital for examina­
tion. There it was discovered that an object had been lodged inside 
her. Someone, it appeared, had violently thrust something down 
her throat. The object, as described in a newspaper article, was the

532
THOMAS LIGOTTI
“small plastic arm of a toy doll.” Whether this doll’s arm had been 
painted emerald green, or any other color, was not mentioned by 
the article. Surely the police searched through Dalha D. Fine Arts 
and found many more such objects arranged in a wire wastebasket, 
each of them painted different colors. No doubt they also found the 
exhibit of the dream monologues with its unsigned artworks and 
tape recorder stolen from the library. But they could never have 
made the connection between these tape-recorded artworks and 
the grotesque death of the gallery owner.
After that night I no longer felt the desperate need to possess the 
monologues, not feven the final bus shelter tape, which I have never 
heard. I was now in possession of the original handwritten 
manuscripts from which the tape-recording artist had created 
his dream monologues and which he had left for me in a large 
envelope on my desk at the library. Even then he knew, as I did not 
know, that after our first meeting we would never meet again. The 
handwriting on the manuscript pages is somewhat like my own, 
although the slant of the letters betrays a left-handed writer, 
whereas I am right-handed. Over and over I read the dream 
monologues about the bus shelter and the derelict factory and 
especially about the bungalow house, where the moonlight shines 
upon a carpet littered with the bodies of vermin. I try to experience 
the infinite terror and dreariness of a bungalow universe in the way 
I once did, but it is not the same as it once was. There is no comfort 
in it, even though the vision and the underlying principles are still 
the same. I know in a way I never knew before that there is 
nowhere for me to go, nothing for me to do, and no one for me to 
know. The voice in my head keeps reciting these old principles of 
mine. The voice is his voice, and the voice is also my voice. And 
there are other voices, voices I have never heard before, voices that 
seem to be either dead or dying in a great moonlit darkness. More 
than ever, some sort of new arrangement seems in order, some 
dramatic and unknown arrangement - anything to find release 
from this heartbreaking sadness I suffer every minute of the day 
(and night), this killing sadness that feels as if it will never leave me 
no matter where I go or what I do or whom I may ever know.

THE CLOWN PUPPET
I
t has always seemed to me that my existence consisted purely 
and exclusively of nothing but the most outrageous nonsense. As 
long as I can remember, every incident and every impulse of my 
existence has served only to perpetrate one episode after another of 
conspicuous nonsense, each completely outrageous in its nonsensi- 
cality. Considered from whatever point of view - intimately close, 
infinitely remote, or any position in between - the whole thing has 
always seemed to be nothing more than some freak accident 
occurring at a painfully slow rate of speed. At times I have been 
rendered breathless by the impeccable chaoticism, the absolutely 
perfect nonsense of some spectacle taking place outside myself, or, 
on the other hand, some spectacle of equally senseless outrageous­
ness taking place within me. Images of densely twisted shapes and 
lines arose in my brain. Scribbles of a mentally deranged epileptic, I often 
said to myself. If I may allow any exception to the outrageously 
nonsensical condition I have described - and I will allow none - this 
single exception would involve those visits which I experienced at 
scattered intervals throughout my existence, and especially one 
particular visit that took place in Mr. Vizniak’s medicine shop.
I was stationed behind the counter at Mr. Vizniak’s modest 
establishment very late one night. At that hour there was practi­
cally no business at all, none really, given the backstreet location of 
the shop and its closet-like dimensions, as well as the fact that I 
kept the place in almost complete darkness both outside and inside. 
Mr. Vizniak lived in a small apartment above the medicine shop, 
and he gave me permission to keep the place open or close it up as I 
liked after a certain hour. It seemed that he knew that being 
stationed behind the counter of his medicine shop at all hours of 
the night, and in almost complete darkness except for a few 
lighting fixtures on the walls, provided my mind with some 
distraction from the outrageous nonsense which might otherwise 
occupy it. Later events more or less proved that Mr. Vizniak 
indeed possessed a special knowledge and that there existed, in 
fact, a peculiar sympathy between the old man and myself. Since

534
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Mr. Vizniak’s shop was located on an obscure backstreet, the 
neighborhood outside was profoundly inactive during the later 
hours of the night. And since most of the streetlamps in the 
neighborhood were either broken or defective in some way, the 
only thing I could see through the small front window of the shop 
was the neon lettering in the window of the meat store directly 
across the street. These pale neon letters remained lit throughout 
the night in the window of the meat store, spelling out three words: 
b eef, po r k, g o a t. Sometimes I would stare at these words and 
contemplate them until my head became so full of meat nonsense, 
of beef and pork and goat nonsense, that I had to turn away and 
find something to occupy myself in the back room of the medicine 
shop, where there were no windows and thus no possibility of 
meat-store visions. But once I was in the back room I would 
become preoccupied with all the medicines which were stored 
there, all the bottles and jars and boxes upon boxes stacked from 
floor to ceiling in an extremely cramped area. I had learned quite a 
bit about these medicines from Mr. Vizniak, although I did not 
have a license to prepare and dispense them to customers without 
his supervision. I knew which medicines could be used to most 
easily cause death in someone who had ingested them in the proper 
amount and proper manner. Thus, whenever I went into the back 
room to relieve my mind from the meat nonsense brought on by 
excessive contemplation of the beef-pork-and-goat store, I almost 
immediately became preoccupied with fatal medicines; in other 
words, I then would become obsessed with death nonsense, which 
is one of the worst and most outrageous forms of all nonsense. 
Usually I would end up retreating to the small lavatory in the back 
room, where I could collect myself and clear my head before 
returning to my station behind the counter of Mr. Vizniak’s 
medicine shop.
It was there -  behind the medicine-shop counter, that is - that I 
experienced one of those visits, which I might have allowed as the 
sole exception in an existence of intensely outrageous nonsense, but 
which in fact, I must say, were the nadir of the nonsensical. This 
was my medicine-shop visit, so called because I have always experi­
enced only a single visitation in any given place - after which I 
begin looking for a new situation, however similar it may actually 
be to my old one. Each of my situations prior to Mr. Vizniak’s 
medicine shop was essentially a medicine-shop situation, whether 
it was a situation working as a night watchman who patrolled 
some desolate property, or a situation as a groundskeeper for a 
cemetery in some remote town, or a situation in which I spent

THE CLOW N P U P P E T
535
endless gray afternoons sitting in a useless library or shuffling up 
and down the cloisters of a useless monastery. All of them were 
essentially medicine-shop situations, and each of them sooner or 
later involved a visit - either a monastery visit or a library visit, a 
cemetery visit or a visit while I was delivering packages from one 
part of town to another in the dead of the night. At the same time 
there were certain aspects to the medicine-shop visit that were 
unlike any of the other visits, certain new and unprecedented 
elements which made this visit unique among the ones which came 
before it.
It began with an already familiar routine of nonsense. Gradu­
ally, as I stood behind the counter late one night at the medicine 
shop, the light radiated by the fixtures along the walls changed 
from a dim yellow to a rich reddish-gold. I have never developed 
an intuition that would allow me to anticipate when this is going to 
happen, so that I might say to myself: “This will be the night when 
the light changes to reddish-gold. This will be the night of another 
visit.” In the new light (the rich reddish-gold illumination) the 
interior of the medicine shop took on the strange opulence of an old 
oil painting; everything became transformed beneath a thick 
veneer of gleaming obscurity. And I have always wondered how 
my own face appears in this new light, but at the time I can never 
think about such things because I know what is about to happen, 
and all I can do is hope that it will soon be over.
After the business with the tinted illumination, only a few 
moments pass before there is an appearance, which means that 
the visit itself has begun. First the light changes to reddish-gold, 
then the visit begins. I have never been able to figure out the 
reason for this sequence, as if there might be a reason for such 
nonsense as these visits or any particular phase of these visits. 
Certainly when the light changes to a reddish-gold tint I am being 
forewarned that an appearance is about to occur, but this has 
never enabled me to witness the actual manifestation, and I had given 
up trying by the time of the medicine-shop visit. I knew that if I 
looked to my left, the appearance would take place in the field of 
vision to my right; conversely, if I focused on the field of vision to 
my right, the appearance would take place, in no time at all, on my 
left. And of course if I simply gazed straight ahead, the appearance 
would take place just beyond the edges of my left or right fields of 
vision, silently and instantaneously. Only after it had appeared 
would it begin to make any sound, clattering as it moved directly 
in front of my eyes, and then, as always happened, I would be 
looking at a creature that I might say had all the appearances of an

536
THOMAS LIGOTTI
antiquated marionette, a puppet figure of some archaic type.
It was almost life-sized and hovered just far enough above the 
floor of the medicine shop that its face was at the same level as my 
own. I am describing the puppet creature as it appeared during 
the medicine-shop visit, but it always took the form of the same 
antiquated marionette hovering before me in a reddish-gold haze. 
Its design was that of a clown puppet in pale pantaloons over- 
draped by a kind of pale smock, thin and pale hands emerging 
from the ruffled cufls of its sleeves, and a powder-pale head rising 
above a ruffled collar. I always found it difficult at first to look 
directly at the face of the puppet creature whenever it appeared, 
because the expression which had been created for that face was so 
simple and bland, yet at the same time so intensely evil and 
perverse. In the observation of at least one commentator on 
puppet theater, the expressiveness of a puppet or marionette 
resides in its arms, hands, and legs, never in its face or head, as 
is the case with a human actor. But in the case of the puppet thing 
hovering before me in the medicine shop, this was not true. Its 
expressiveness was all in that face with its pale and pitted 
complexion, its slightly pointed nose and delicate lips, and its 
dead puppet eyes - eyes that did not seem able to fix or focus 
themselves upon anything but only gazed with an unchanging 
expression of dreamy malignance, an utterly nonsensical expres­
sion of stupefied viciousness, dumbfounded cruelty. So whenever 
this puppet creature first appeared I avoided looking at its face and 
instead I looked at its tiny feet which were covered by a pair of pale 
slippers and dangled just above the floor. Then I always looked at 
the wires which were attached to the body of the puppet thing, and 
I tried to follow those wires to see where they led. But at some point 
my vision failed me; I could visually trace the wires only so far 
along their neat vertical path . . . and then they became lost in a 
thick blur, a ceiling of distorted light and shadow that always formed 
some distance above the puppet creature’s head -  and my own - 
beyond which my eyes could perceive no clear image, nothing at all 
except a vague sluggish movement, like a layer of dense clouds seen 
from far away through a gloomy reddish-gold twilight. This phe­
nomenon of the wires disappearing into a blur supported my 
observation over the years that the puppet thing did not have a 
life of its own. It was solely by means of these wires, in my view, that 
the creature was able to proceed through its familiar motions. (The 
term “motions,” as I bothered myself to discover in the course of my 
useless research into the subject, was commonly employed at one 
time, long ago, to refer to various types of puppets, as in the

TH E CLOW N PU P P E T
537
statement: “The motions recently viewed at St. Bartholomew’s Fair 
were engaged in antics of a questionable probity before an audience 
which might have better profited by deep contemplation of the 
fragile and uncertain destiny of their immortal souls.”) The puppet 
swung forward toward the counter of the medicine shop behind 
which I stood. Its body parts ratded loosely and noisily in the late- 
night quiet before coming to rest. One of its hands was held out to 
me, its fingers barely grasping a crumpled slip of paper.
Of course I took the tiny page, which appeared to have been 
torn from an old pad used for writing pharmaceutical prescrip­
tions. I had learned through the years to follow the puppet 
creature’s cues obediently. At one time, years before the visit at 
the medicine shop, I was crazy or foolish enough to call the puppet 
and its visits exactly what they were -  outrageous nonsense. Right 
to the face of that clown puppet I would say, “Take your nonsense 
somewhere else,” or possibly, “I’m sick of this contemptible and 
disgusting nonsense.” But none of these outbursts counted for 
anything. The puppet simply waited until my foolhardy craziness 
had passed and then continued through the motions which had 
been prepared for that particular visit. So I examined the 
prescription form the creature had passed across the counter to 
me, and I noticed immediately that what was written upon it was 
nothing but a chaos of scrawls and scribbles, which was precisely 
the sort of nonsense I should have expected during the medicine- 
shop visit. I knew that it was my part to play along with the clown 
puppet, although I was never precisely certain what was expected 
of me. From previous experience I learned that it was futile to 
determine what would eventually transpire during a particular 
visit, because the puppet creature was capable of almost anything. 
For example, once it visited me when I was working through the 
night at a skid-row pawn shop. I told the thing that it was wasting 
my time unless it could produce an exquisitely cut diamond the 
size of a yo-yo. Then it reached under its pale smock-like garment 
and rummaged about, its hand seeking deep within its pantaloons. 
“Well, let’s see it,” I shouted at the clown puppet. “As big as a yo­
yo,” I repeated. Not only did it come up with an exquisitely cut 
diamond that was, generally speaking, as large as a yo-yo, but the 
object that the puppet thing flashed before my eyes -  brilliant in 
the pawn-shop dimness -  was also made in the form of a yo-yo . . . 
and the creature began to lazily play with the yo-yo diamond right 
in front of me, spinning it slowly on the string that was looped 
about one of those pale puppet-fingers, throwing it down and 
pulling it up over and over while the facets of that exquisitely cut

538
THOMAS LIGOTTI
diamond cast a pyrotechnic brilliance into every corner of the 
pawn shop.
Now, as I stood behind the counter of the medicine shop staring 
at the scrawls and scribbles on that page torn from an old 
prescription pad, I knew that it was pointless to test the clown 
puppet in any way or to attempt to determine what would occur 
during this particular visit, which would be unlike previous visits 
in several significant ways. Thus I tried only to play my part, my 
medicine-shop part, as close as possible to the script that I 
imagined had already been written, though by whom or what I 
could have no idea.
“Could you please show me some proper identification?” I asked 
the creature, while at the same time looking away from its pale and 
pasty clown face and its dead puppet eyes, gazing instead through 
the medicine-shop window and focusing on the sign in the window 
of the meat store across the street. Over and over I read the words 
beef-po r k-g o a t, beef-po r k-g o a t, filling my head with meat non­
sense, which was infinitely less outrageous than the puppet 
nonsense with which I was now confronted. “I cannot dispense 
this prescription,” I said while staring out the medicine-shop 
window. “Not unless you can produce proper identification.” 
And all the time I had no idea what to do once the puppet thing 
reached into its pantaloons and came up with what I requested.
I continued to stare out the medicine-shop window and think 
about the meat nonsense, but I could still see the clown puppet 
gyrating in the reddish-gold light, and I could hear its wooden 
parts clacking against one another as it struggled to pull up 
something that was cached away inside its pantaloons. With stifT 
but unerring fingers the creature was now holding what looked like 
a slim booklet of some kind, waving it before me until I turned and 
accepted the object. When I opened the booklet and looked inside 
I saw that it was an old passport, a foreign passport with no words 
that I recognized save those of its rightful owner: Ivan Vizniak. 
The address below Mr. Vizniak’s name was a very old address, 
because I knew that many years had passed since Mr. Vizniak 
emigrated from his homeland, opened the medicine shop, and 
moved into the rooms directly above it. I also noticed that the 
photograph had been torn away from its designated place in the 
document belonging to Mr. Vizniak.
Nothing like this had ever occurred during one of these puppet 
visits: no one else had ever been involved in any of the encounters I 
had had over the years with the clown puppet, and I was now at a 
loss for my next move. The only thing that occupied my mind was

TH E  CLOW N P U P P E T
539
the fact that Mr. Vizniak lived in the rooms above the medicine 
shop, and here in my hands was his passport, which the puppet 
creature had given me when I asked it to provide some identifica­
tion so that I could fill the prescription it had given me, or rather, 
go through the motions of filling such a prescription, since I had no 
hope of deciphering the scrawls and scribbles on that old prescrip­
tion form. And all of this was nothing but the most outrageous 
nonsense, as I well knew from past experience. I was actually on 
the verge of committing some explosive action, some display of 
violent hysterics by which I might bring about an end, however 
unpleasant, to this intolerable situation. The eyes of the puppet 
creature were so dark and so dead in the reddish-gold light that 
sufTused the medicine shop; its head was bobbing slightly and also 
qüivering in a way that caused my thought processes to race out of 
control, becoming all tangled in a black confusion. But exactly at 
the moment when I approached my breaking point, the head of 
the puppet thing turned away from me and its eyes seemed to be 
looking toward the curtained doorway that led to the back room of 
the medicine shop. Then it began to move in the direction of the 
curtained doorway, its limbs swinging freely with the sort of spastic 
and utterly mindless gestures of playfulness that only puppets can 
make. Nothing like this had ever happened before in the course of 
the creature’s previous visits: it had never left my presence in this 
manner. And as soon as it disappeared entirely behind the curtain 
of the doorway leading to the back room, I heard a voice calling to 
me from the street outside the medicine shop. It was Mr. Vizniak. 
“Open the door,” he said. “Something has happened.”
I could see him through the paned windows of the front door, 
the eyes of his thin face squinting into the dimness of the medicine 
shop. With his right hand he kept beckoning, as if this incessant 
gesturing alone could bring me to open the door for him. Another 
person is about to enter the place where one of these visits is occurring, I 
thought to myself. But there seemed to be nothing I could do, 
nothing I could say, not with the clown puppet only a few feet 
away in the back room. I stepped around the counter of the 
medicine shop, unlocked the front door, and let Mr. Vizniak 
inside. As the old man shuffled in I could see that he was wearing 
an old robe with torn pockets and a pair of old slippers.
“Everything is all right,” I whispered to him. And then I 
pleaded: “Go back to bed. We can talk about it in the morning.” 
But Mr. Vizniak seemed to have heard nothing that I said to 
him. From the moment he entered the medicine shop he appeared 
to be in some unusual state of mind. His whole manner had lost the

5 4 0
THOMAS LIGOTTI
vital urgency he displayed when he was rapping at the door and 
beckoning to me. He pointed one of his pale, crooked fingers 
upward and slowly gazed around the shop. “The light . . . the 
light,” he said as the reddish-gold illumination shone on his thin, 
wrinkled face, making it look as if he were wearing a mask that had 
been hammered out of some strange metal, some ancient mask 
behind which his old eyes were wide and bright with fear.
“Tell me what happened,” I said, trying to distract him. I had 
to repeat myself several times before he finally responded. “I 
thought I heard someone in my room upstairs,” he said in a 
completely toneless voice. “They were going through my things. I 
thought I might have been dreaming, but I was awake when I 
heard something going down the stairs. Not footsteps,” he said. 
“Just something quietly brushing against the stairs. I wasn’t sure. I 
didn’t come down right away.”
“I didn’t hear anyone come down the stairs,” I said to 
Mr. Vizniak, who now seemed lost in a long pause of contempla­
tion. “I didn’t see anyone on the street outside. You were probably 
just dreaming. Why don’t you go back to bed and forget about 
everything,” I said. But Mr. Vizniak no longer seemed to be 
listening to me. He was staring at the curtained doorway leading to 
the back room of the medicine shop.
“I have to use the toilet,” he said while continuing to stare at the 
curtained doorway.
“You can go back to your room upstairs,” I suggested.
“No,” he said. “Back there. I have to use the toilet.”
Then he began shuffling toward the back room, his old slippers 
lightly brushing against the floor of the medicine shop. I called to 
him, very quietly, a number of times, but he continued to move 
steadily toward the back room, as if he were in a trance. In a few 
moments he had disappeared behind the curtain.
I thought that Mr. Vizniak might not find anything in the back 
room of the medicine shop. I thought that he might see only the 
bottles and jars and boxes upon boxes of medicines. Perhaps the visit 
has already ended, I thought. It occurred to me that the visit could 
have ended the moment the puppet creature went behind the 
curtain of the doorway leading to the back room. I thought that 
Mr. Vizniak might return from the back room, after having used 
the toilet, and go upstairs again to his rooms above the medicine 
shop. I thought all kinds of nonsense in the last few moments of 
that particular visit from the clown puppet.
But in a number of its significant aspects this was unlike any of 
the previous puppet visits I had experienced. I might even claim

TH E  CLOW N PU P P E T
541
that I was not the one whom the puppet creature was visiting on 
this occasion, or at least not exclusively so. Even though I had 
always felt that my encounters with the clown puppet were 
nothing but the most outrageous nonsense, the very nadir of the 
nonsensical, as I have said, I nonetheless always had the haunting 
sense of being singled out in some way from all others of my kind, of 
being cultivated for some special fate. But after Mr. Vizniak 
disappeared behind the curtained doorway I discovered how 
wrong I had been. Who knows how many others there were 
who might say that their existence consisted of nothing but the 
most outrageous nonsense, a nonsense that had nothing unique 
about it at all and that had nothing behind it or beyond it except 
more and more nonsense -  a new order of nonsense, perhaps an 
utterly unknown nonsense, but all of it nonsense and nothing but 
nonsense.
Every place I had been was only a place for puppet nonsense. 
The medicine shop was only a puppet place like all the others. I 
came there to work behind the counter and wait for my visit, but I 
had no idea until that night that Mr. Vizniak was also waiting for 
his. Upon reflection, it seemed that he knew what was behind the 
curtained doorway leading to the back room of the medicine shop, 
and that he also knew there was no longer any place to go except 
behind that curtain, since any place he could ever go would only 
be another puppet place. Yet it still seemed he was surprised by 
what he found back there. And this is the most outrageously 
nonsensical thing of all -  that he should have stepped behind 
the curtain and cried out with such profound surprise as he did. 
You, he said, or rather, cried out. Get away from me. These were the 
last words that I heard clearly before Mr. Vizniak’s voice faded 
quickly out of earshot, as though he were being carried away at 
incredible velocity toward some great height.
When morning Anally came, and I looked behind the curtain, 
there was no one there. I told myself at that moment that I would 
not be so surprised when my time came. No doubt, Mr. Vizniak, at 
some time, had told himself the same, utterly nonsensical, thing.

THE RED TOWER
he ruined factory stood three stories high in an otherwise
featureless landscape. Although somewhat imposing on its 
own terms, it occupied only the most unobtrusive place within the 
gray emptiness of its surroundings, its presence amounting to no 
more than a faint smudge of color upon a desolate horizon. No 
road led to the factory, nor were there any traces of one that might 
have led to it at some time in the distant past. If there had ever 
been such a road it would have been rendered useless as soon as it 
arrived at one of the four, red-bricked sides of the factory, even in 
the days when the facility was in full operation. The reason for this 
was simple: no doors had been built into the factory, no loading 
docks or entranceways allowed penetration of the outer walls of the 
structure, which was solid brick on all four sides without even a 
single window below the level of the second floor. The phenom­
enon of a large factory so closed off from the outside world was a 
point of extreme fascination to me. It was almost with regret that I 
ultimately learned about the factory’s subterranean access. But of 
course that revelation in its turn also became a source for my truly 
degenerate sense of amazement, my decayed fascination.
The factory had long been in ruins, its innumerable bricks 
worn and crumbling, its many windows shattered. Each of the 
three enormous stories that stood above the ground level was 
vacant of all but dust and silence. The machinery, which densely 
occupied the three floors of the factory as well as considerable 
space beneath it, is said to have evaporated, I repeat, evaporated, 
soon after the factory ceased operation, leaving behind it only a 
few spectral outlines of deep vats and tanks, twisting tubes and 
funnels, harshly grinding gears and levers, giant belts and wheels 
that could be most clearly seen at twilight - and later, not at all. 
According to these strictly hallucinatory accounts, the whole of 
the Red Tower, as the factory was known, had always been 
subject to fadings at certain times. This phenomenon, in the 
delirious or dying words of several witnesses, was due to a 
profound hostility between the noisy and malodorous operations

TH E RED TO W ER
543
of the factory and the desolate purity of the landscape surround­
ing it, the conflict occasionally resulting in temporary erasures, or 
fadings, of the former by the latter.
Despite their ostensibly mad or credulous origins, these testi­
monies, it seemed to me, deserved more than a cursory hearing. 
The legendary conflict between the factory and the grayish 
territory surrounding it may very well have been a fabrication 
of individuals who were lost in the advanced stages of either 
physical or psychic deterioration. Nonetheless, it was my theory, 
and remains so, that the Red Tower was not always that peculiar 
color for which it ultimately earned its fame. Thus the encrimsoning 
of the factory was a betrayal, a breaking-off, for it is my postulation 
that this ancient structure was in long-forgotten days the same pale 
hue as the world which encompassed it. Furthermore, with an 
insight born of dispassion to the point of total despair, I envisioned 
that the Red Tower was never solely devoted to the lowly functions 
of an ordinary factory.
Beneath the three soaring stories of the Red Tower were two, 
possibly three, other levels. The one immediately below the ground 
floor of the factory was the nexus of a unique distribution system 
for the goods which were manufactured on all three of the floors 
above. This first subterranean level in many ways resembled, and 
functioned in the manner of, an old-fashioned underground mine. 
Elevator compartments enclosed by a heavy wire mesh, twisted 
and corroded, descended far below the surface into an expansive 
chamber which had been crudely dug out of the rocky earth and 
was haphazardly perpetuated by a dense structure of supports, a 
criss-crossing network of posts and pillars, beams and rafters, that 
included a variety of materials - wood, metal, concrete, bone, and 
a fine sinewy webbing that was fibrous and quite firm. From this 
central chamber radiated a system of tunnels that honeycombed 
the land beneath the gray and desolate country surrounding the 
Red Tower. Through these tunnels the goods manufactured by the 
factory could be carried, sometimes literally by hand, but more 
often by means of small wagons and carts, reaching near and far 
into the most obscure and unlikely delivery points.
The trade that was originally produced by the Red Tower was 
in some sense remarkable, but not, at first, of an extraordinary or 
especially ambitious nature. These were a gruesome array of goods 
that could perhaps best be described as novelty items. In the 
beginning there was a chaotic quality to the objects and construc­
tions produced by the machinery at the Red Tower, a randomness 
that yielded formless things of no consistent shape or size or

544
THOMAS LIGOTTI
apparent design. Occasionally there might appear a particular 
ashen lump that betrayed some semblance of a face or clawing 
fingers, or perhaps an assemblage that looked like a casket with 
tiny irregular wheels, but for the most part the early productions 
seemed relatively innocuous. After a time, however, things began 
to fall into place, as they always do, rejecting a harmless and 
uninteresting disorder -  never an enduring state of afTairs -  and 
taking on the more usual plans and purposes of a viciously intent 
creation.
So it was that the Red Tower put into production its terrible and 
perplexing line of unique novelty items. Among the objects and 
constructions now manufactured were several of an almost inno­
cent nature. These included tiny, delicate cameos that were 
heavier than their size would suggest, far heavier, and lockets 
whose shiny outer surface flipped open to reveal a black rever­
berant abyss inside, a deep blackness roaring with echoes. Along 
the same lines was a series of lifelike replicas of internal organs and 
physiological structures, many of them evidencing an advanced 
stage of disease and all of them displeasingly warm and soft to the 
touch. There was a fake disembodied hand on which fingernails 
would grow several inches overnight, every night like clockwork. 
Numerous natural objects, mostly bulbous gourds, were designed 
to produce a long deafening scream whenever they were picked up 
or otherwise disturbed in their vegetable stillness. Less scrutable 
were such things as hardened globs of lava into whose rough 
igneous forms were set a pair of rheumy eyes that perpetually 
shifted their gaze from side to side like a relentless pendulum. And 
there was also a humble piece of cement, a fragment broken away 
from any street or sidewalk, that left a most intractable stain, 
greasy and green, on whatever surface it was placed. But such 
fairly simple items were eventually followed, and ultimately 
replaced, by more articulated objects and constructions. One 
example of this complex type of novelty item was an ornate music 
box that, when opened, emitted a brief gurgling or sucking sound 
in emulation of a dying individual’s death rattle. Another product 
manufactured in great quantity at the Red Tower was a pocket 
watch in a gold casing which opened to reveal a curious timepiece 
whose numerals were represented by tiny quivering insects while 
the circling “hands” were reptilian tongues, slender and pink. But 
these examples hardly begin to hint at the range of goods that 
came from the factory during its novelty phase of production. I 
should at least mention the exotic carpets woven with intricate 
abstract patterns that, when focused upon for a certain length of

THE RED T O W ER
545
time, composed themselves into fleeting phantasmagoric scenes of 
the kind which might pass through a fever-stricken or even 
permanently damaged brain.
As it was revealed to me, and as I have already revealed to you, 
the means of distributing the novelty goods fabricated at the Red 
Tower was a system of tunnels located on the first level, not the 
second (or, possibly, third), that had been excavated below the 
three-story factory building itself. It seems that these subterranean 
levels were not necessarily part of the original foundation of the 
factory but were in fact a perverse and unlikely development that 
might have occurred only as the structure known as the Red 
Tower underwent, over time, its own mutation from some prior 
state until it finally became a lowly site for manufacturing. This 
mutation would then have demanded the excavating - whether 
from above or below I cannot say - of a system of tunnels as a 
means for distributing the novelty goods which, for a time, the 
factory produced.
As the unique inventions of the Red Tower achieved their final 
forms, they seemed to have some peculiar location to which they 
were destined to be delivered, either by hand or by small wagons or 
carts pulled over sometimes great distances through the system of 
underground tunnels. Where they might ultimately pop up was 
anybody’s guess. It might be in the back of a dark closet, buried 
under a pile of undistinguished junk, where some item of the 
highest and most extreme novelty would lie for quite some time 
before it was encountered by sheer accident or misfortune. Con­
versely, the same invention, or an entirely different one, might be 
placed on the night-table beside someone’s bed for near-immediate 
discovery. Any delivery point was possible, none was out of the 
reach of the Red Tower. There has even been testimony, either 
intensely hysterical or semi-conscious, of items from the factory 
being uncovered within the shelter of a living body, or one not long 
deceased. I know that such an achievement was within the 
factory’s powers, given its later production history. But my own 
degenerate imagination is most fully captured by the thought of 
how many of those monstrous novelty goods produced at the Red 
Tower had been scrupulously and devoutly delivered - solely by 
way of those endless underground tunnels - to daringly remote 
places where they would never be found, nor ever could be.
Just as a system of distribution tunnels had been created by the 
factory when it developed into a manufacturer of novelty goods, an 
expansion of this system was required as an entirely new phase of 
production gradually evolved. Inside the wire-mesh elevator

5 4 6
THOMAS LIGOTTI
compartment that provided access between the upper region of the 
factory and the underground tunnels, there was now a special lever 
installed which, when pulled back, or possibly pushed forward (I 
do not know such details), enabled one to descend to a second 
subterranean level. This latterly excavated area was much smaller, 
far more intimate, than the one directly above it, as could be 
observed the instant the elevator compartment came to a stop and 
a full view of things was attained. The scene which now confronted 
the uncertain minds of witnesses was, in many ways, like that of a 
secluded graveyard, one surrounded by a rather crooked fence of 
widely spaced pickets held together by rusty wire. The headstones 
inside the fence all closely pressed against one another and were 
quite common, though somewhat antiquated, in their design. 
However, there were no names or dates inscribed on these monu­
ments, nothing at all, in fact, with the exception of some rudimentary 
and abstract ornamentation. This could be verified only when the 
subterranean graveyard was closely approached, for the lighting at 
this level was dim and unorthodox, provided exclusively by the 
glowing stone walls enclosing the area. These walls seemed to have 
been covered with phosphorescent paint which bathed the grave­
yard in a cloudy, grayish haze. For the longest time - how long I 
cannot say -  my morbid reveries were focused on this murky vision of 
a graveyard beneath the factory, a subterranean graveyard sur­
rounded by a crooked picket fence and suffused by the highly 
defective illumination given off by phosphorescent paint applied 
to stone walls. For the moment I must emphasize the vision itself, 
without any consideration paid to the utilitarian purposes of this 
place, that is, the function it served in relation to the factory above it.
The truth is that at some point all of the factory functions were 
driven underground to this graveyard level. Long before the 
complete evaporation of machinery in the Red Tower, something 
happened to require the shut-down of all operations in the three 
floors of the factory which were above ground level. The reasons 
for this action are deeply obscure, a matter of contemplation only 
when a state of hopeless and devouring curiosity has reached its 
height, when the burning light of speculation becomes so intense 
that it threatens to incinerate everything on which it shines. To my 
own mind it seems entirely valid to reiterate at this juncture the 
longstanding tensions that existed between the Red Tower, which 
I believe was not always stigmatized by such a hue and such a title, 
and the grayish landscape of utter desolation that surrounded this 
structure on all sides, looming around and above it for quite 
incalculable distances. But below the ground level of the factory

TH E RED TO W ER
547
was another matter: it was here that its operations at some point 
retreated; it was here, specifically at this graveyard level, that they 
continued.
Clearly the Red Tower had committed some violation or offense, 
its clamoring activities and unorthodox products - perhaps its very 
existence - constituting an affront to the changeless quietude of the 
world around it. In my personal judgement there had been a 
betrayal involved, a treacherous breaking of a bond. I can certainly 
picture a time before the existence of the factory, before any of its 
features blemished the featureless country that extended so gray 
and so desolate on every side. Dreaming upon the grayish desola­
tion of that landscape, I also find it quite easy to imagine that there 
might have occurred a lapse in the monumental tedium, a 
spontaneous and inexplicable impulse to deviate from a dreary 
perfection, perhaps even an unconquerable desire to risk a move 
toward a tempting defectiveness. As a concession to this impulse or 
desire out of nowhere, as a minimal surrender, a creation took place 
and a structure took form where there had been nothing of its kind 
before. I picture it, at its inception, as a barely discernible irruption 
in the landscape, a mere sketch of an edifice, possibly translucent 
when making its first appearance, a gray density rising in the 
gray ness, embossed upon it in a most tasteful and harmonious 
design. But such structures or creations have their own desires, their 
own destinies to fulfil, their own mysteries and mechanisms which 
they must follow at whatever risk.
From a gray and desolate and utterly featureless landscape a 
dull edifice had been produced, a pale, possibly translucent tower 
which, over time, began to develop into a factory and to produce, 
as if in the spirit of the most grotesque belligerence, a line of quite 
morbid and disgusting novelty goods. In an expression of defiance, 
at some point, it reddened with an enigmatic passion for betrayal 
and perversity. On the surface the Red Tower might have seemed 
a splendid complement to the grayish desolation of its surround­
ings, a unique, picturesque composition that served to define the 
glorious essence of each of them. But in fact there existed between 
them a profound and ineffable hostility. An attempt was made to 
reclaim the Red Tower, or at least to draw it back toward the 
formless origins of its being. I am referring, of course, to that show 
of force which resulted in the evaporation of the factory’s dense 
arsenal of machinery. Each of the three stories of the Red Tower 
had been cleaned out, purged of its offending means of manufac­
turing novelty items, and the part of the factory that rose above the 
ground was left to fall into ruins.

548
THOMAS LIGOTTI
Had the machinery in the Red Tower not been evaporated, I 
believe that the subterranean graveyard, or something very much 
like it, would nonetheless have come into existence at some point or 
another. This was the direction in which the factory had been 
moving, as was suggested by some of its later models of novelty 
items. Machines were becoming obsolete as the diseased mania of 
the Red Tower intensified and evolved into more experimental, 
even visionary projects. I have previously reported that the 
headstones in the factory’s subterranean graveyard were absent 
of any names of the interred, or dates of birth and death. This fact 
is also confirmed by numerous accounts rendered in borderline- 
hysterical gibberish. The reason for these blank headstones is 
entirely evident as one gazes upon them standing crooked and 
closely packed together in the phosphorescent haze given offby the 
stone walls covered with luminous paint. None of these graves, in 
point of fact, could be said to have anyone buried in them whose 
names and dates of birth and death would require inscription on 
the headstones. These were not what might be called burying graves. 
This is to say that these were in no sense graves for burying the 
dead, quite the contrary: these were graves of a highly experi­
mental design from which the newest productions of the Red 
Tower were to be born.
From its beginnings as a manufacturer of novelty items of an 
extravagant nature, the factory had now gone into the business of 
creating what came to be known as “hyper-organisms.” These new 
productions were also of a fundamentally extreme nature, repre­
senting an even greater divergence on the part of the Red Tower 
from the bland and gray desolation in the midst of which it stood. 
As implied by their designation as hyper-organisms, this line of goods 
displayed the most essential qualities of their organic nature, which 
meant, of course, that they were wildly conflicted in their two basic 
features. On the one hand, they manifested an intense vitality in all 
aspects of their form and function; on the other hand, and 
simultaneously, they manifested an ineluctable element of decay 
in these same areas. That is to say that each of these hyper­
organisms, even as they scintillated with an obscene degree of vital 
impulses, also, and at the same time, had degeneracy and death 
written deeply upon them. In accord with a tradition of dumb­
struck insanity, it seems the less said about these offspring of the 
birthing graves, or any similar creations, the better. I myself have 
been almost entirely restricted to a state of seething speculation 
concerning the luscious particularities of all hyper-organic phe­
nomena produced in the subterranean graveyard of the Red

TH E RED TO W ER
549
Tower. Although we may reasonably assume that such creations 
were not to be called beautiful, we cannot know for ourselves the 
mysteries and mechanisms of, for instance, how these creations 
moved throughout the hazy luminescence of that underground 
world; what creaky or spasmic gestures they might have been 
capable of executing, if any; what sounds they might have made or 
the specific organs used for making them; how they might have 
appeared when awkwardly emerging from deep shadows or 
squatting against those nameless headstones; what trembling 
stages of mutation they almost certainly would have undergone 
following the generation of their larvae upon the barren earth of 
the graveyard; what their bodies might have produced or emitted 
in the way of fluids and secretions; how they might have responded 
to the mutilation of their forms for reasons of an experimental or 
entirely savage nature. Often I picture to myself what frantically 
clawing efTorts these creations probably made to deliver themselves 
from that confining environment which their malformed or non­
existent brains could not begin to understand. They could not 
have comprehended, any more than can I, for what purpose they 
were bred from those graves, those incubators of hyper-organisms, 
minute factories of flesh that existed wholly within and far below 
the greater factory of the Red Tower.
It was no surprise, of course, that the production of hyper­
organisms was not allowed to continue for very long before a 
second wave of destruction was visited upon the factory. This time 
it was not merely the fading, and ultimate evaporation of machin­
ery, that took place; this time it was something far more brutal. 
Once again, forces of ruination were directed at the factory, 
specifically the subterranean graveyard located at its second 
underground level, its three-story structure that stood above 
ground having already been rendered an echoing ruin. Informa­
tion on what remained of the graveyard, and of its cleverly 
blasphemous works, is available to my own awareness only in 
the form of shuddering and badly garbled whispers of mayhem and 
devastation and wholesale sundering of most unspeakable sort. 
These same sources also seem to regard this incident as the 
culmination, if not the conclusion, of the longstanding hostilities 
between the Red Tower and that grayish halo of desolation that 
hovered around it on all sides. Such a shattering episode would 
appear to have terminated the career of the Red Tower.
Nevertheless, there are indications that, appearances to the 
contrary, the factory continues to be active despite its status as 
a silent ruin. After all, the evaporation of the machinery which

550
THOMAS LIG O TTI
turned out countless novelty items in the three-story red-brick 
factory proper, and the ensuing obsolescence of its sophisticated 
system of tunnels at the first underground level, did not prevent the 
factory from pursuing its business by other and more devious 
means. The work at the second underground level (the graveyard 
level) went very well for a time. Following the vicious decimation 
of those ingenious and fertile graves, along with the merchandise 
they produced, it may have seemed that the manufacturing history 
of the Red Tower had been brought to a close. Yet there are 
indications that below the three-story above-ground factory, 
below the first and the second underground levels, there exists a 
third level of subterranean activity. Perhaps it is only a desire for 
symmetry, a hunger for compositional balance in things, that has 
led to a series of the most vaporous rumors of this third under­
ground level, in order to provide a kind of complementary 
proportion to the three stories of the factory that rise into the 
gray and featureless landscape above ground. At this third level, 
these misty rumors maintain, the factory’s schedule of production 
is being carried out in some new and strange manner, representing 
its most ambitious venture in the output of putrid creations, 
ultimately consummating its tradition of degeneracy, reaching 
toward a perfection of defect and disorder, according to every 
polluted and foggy rumor concerned with this issue.
Perhaps it seems that I have said too much about the Red 
Tower, and perhaps it has sounded far too strange. Do not think 
that I am unaware of such things. But as I have noted throughout 
this document, I am only repeating what I have heard. I myself 
have never seen the Red Tower -  no one ever has, and possibly no 
one ever will. And yet wherever I go people are talking about it. In 
one way or another they are talking about the nightmarish novelty 
items or about the mysterious and revolting hyper-organisms, as 
well as babbling endlessly about the subterranean system of 
tunnels and the secluded graveyard whose headstones display no 
names and no dates designating either birth or death. Everything 
they are saying is about the Red Tower, in one way or another, 
and about nothing else but the Red Tower. We are all talking and 
thinking about the Red Tower in our own degenerate way. I have 
only recorded what everyone is saying (though they may not know 
they are saying it), and sometimes what they have seen (though 
they may not know they have seen it). But still they are always 
talking, in one deranged way or another, about the Red Tower. I 
hear them talk of it every day of my life. Unless of course they begin 
to speak about the gray and desolate landscape, that hazy void in

TH E RED TO W ER
551
which the Red Tower - the great and industrious Red Tower - is 
so precariously nestled. Then the voices grow quiet until I can 
barely hear them as they attempt to communicate with me in 
choking scraps of post-nightmare trauma. Now is just such a time 
when I must strain to hear the voices. I wait for them to reveal to 
me the new ventures of the Red Tower as it proceeds into ever 
more corrupt phases of production, including the shadowy work­
shop of its third subterranean level. I must keep still and listen for 
them; I must keep quiet for a terrifying moment. Then I will hear 
the sounds of the factory starting up its operations once more. 
Then I will be able to speak again of the Red Tower.


