
The Routledge Handbook of
Forensic Linguistics
The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics provides a unique work of reference to the
leading ideas, debates, topics, approaches and methodologies in Forensic Linguistics.
Forensic Linguistics is the study of language and the law, covering topics from legal
language and courtroom discourse to plagiarism. It also concerns the applied (forensic)
linguist who is involved in providing evidence, as an expert, for the defence and prose-
cution, in areas as diverse as blackmail, trademarks and warning labels.
The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics includes a comprehensive introduction to
the ﬁeld written by the editors and a collection of thirty-seven original chapters written
by the world’s leading academics and professionals, both established and up-and-coming,
designed to equip a new generation of students and researchers to carry out forensic
linguistic research and analysis.
The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics is the ideal resource for undergraduates or
postgraduates new to the area.
Malcolm Coulthard is Professor of Forensic Linguistics at Aston University, UK. He is
author of numerous publications, the most recent being An Introduction to Forensic Lin-
guistics (co-authored with Alison Johnson, Routledge, 2007).
Alison Johnson is Lecturer in Modern English Language at the University of Leeds,
UK. Previous publications include An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics (co-authored with
Malcolm Coulthard, Routledge, 2007).
Contributors: Janet Ainsworth, Michelle Aldridge, Dawn Archer, Kelly Benneworth,
Vijay K. Bhatia, Ronald R. Butters, Deborah Cao, Malcolm Coulthard, Paul Drew,
Bethany K. Dumas, Diana Eades, Derek Edwards, Susan Ehrlich, Fiona English, Laura
Felton Rosulek, Edward Finegan, Tim Grant, Peter R.A. Gray, Gillian Grebler, Mel Greenlee,
Sandra Hale, Kate Haworth, Chris Heﬀer, Elizabeth Holt, Michael Jessen, Alison Johnson,
Krzysztof Kredens, Gerald R. McMenamin, Gregory M. Matoesian, Ruth Morris,
Frances Rock, Nancy Schweda Nicholson, Roger W. Shuy, Lawrence M. Solan, Elizabeth
Stokoe, Gail Stygall, Peter Tiersma, Tatiana Tkacˇuková, Traci Walker, David Woolls.

Routledge Handbooks in Applied Linguistics
Routledge Handbooks in Applied Linguistics provide comprehensive overviews of the key
topics in applied linguistics. All entries for the handbooks are specially commissioned and
written by leading scholars in the ﬁeld. Clear, accessible and carefully edited Routledge
Handbooks in Applied Linguistics are the ideal resource for both advanced undergraduates
and postgraduate students.
The Routledge Handbook of Corpus Linguistics
Edited by Anne O’Keeﬀe and Mike McCarthy
The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics
Edited by Malcolm Coulthard and Alison Johnson
Forthcoming
2010
The Routledge Handbook of World Englishes
Edited by Andy Kirkpatrick
The Routledge Handbook of Multilingualism
Edited by Marilyn Martin-Jones, Adrian Blackledge and Angela Creese
2011
The Routledge Handbook of Applied Linguistics
Edited by James Simpson
The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition
Edited by Susan Gass and Alison Mackey
The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis
Edited by James Paul Gee and Michael Handford
2012
The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies
Edited by Carmen Millan Varela and Francesca Bartrina
The Routledge Handbook of Language Testing
Edited by Glenn Fulcher and Fred Davidson
The Routledge Handbook of Intercultural Communication
Edited by Jane Jackson

The Routledge Handbook
of Forensic Linguistics
Edited by Malcolm Coulthard
and Alison Johnson

First edition published 2010
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2010 selection and editorial matter, Malcolm Coulthard and Alison Johnson; individual chapters, the
contributors
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Routledge handbook of forensic linguistics / edited by Malcolm Coulthard
and Alison Johnson. – 1st ed.
p. cm. – (Routledge handbooks in applied linguistics)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Forensic linguistics.
I. Coulthard, Malcolm.
II. Johnson, Alison, 1959–
HV8073.5.R68 2010
363.25 – dc22
2009037930#
ISBN 13: 978-0-415-46309-6 (hbk)
ISBN 13: 978-0-203-85560-7 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2010.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-85560-4 Master e-book ISBN

This book is dedicated to all the students past and present who
studied with us at the Universities of Aston, Birmingham, Leeds and
Huddersﬁeld.


Contents
List of illustrations
xii
List of conventions used
xv
List of contributors and aﬃliations
xvii
Notes on editors and contributors
xx
Acknowledgements
xxvii
1
Introduction
Current debates in forensic linguistics
1
Alison Johnson and Malcolm Coulthard
Section I
The language of the law and the legal process
17
1.1
Legal language
2
Legal talk
Socio-pragmatic aspects of legal talk: police interviews and
trial discourse
21
Elizabeth Holt and Alison Johnson
3
Legal writing: speciﬁcity
Speciﬁcation in legislative writing: accessibility, transparency,
power and control
37
Vijay K. Bhatia
4
Legal writing: complexity
Complex documents/average and not-so-average readers
51
Gail Stygall
vii

5
Legal writing: attitude and emphasis
Corpus linguistic approaches to ‘legal language’: adverbial expression
of attitude and emphasis in Supreme Court opinions
65
Edward Finegan
6
Legal translation
Translating legal language
78
Deborah Cao
1.2
Participants in police investigations, interviews and interrogation
7
Citizens’ emergency calls
Requesting assistance in calls to the police
95
Paul Drew and Traci Walker
8
Miranda rights
Curtailing coercion in police interrogation: the failed promise of
Miranda v. Arizona
111
Janet Ainsworth
9
Witnesses and suspects in interviews
Collecting oral evidence: the police, the public and the written word
126
Frances Rock
10 Sexual oﬀences
Negotiating paedophilia in the investigative interview: the construction of
sexual oﬀences against children
139
Kelly Benneworth
11 Lawyers in interviews
‘I advise you not to answer that question’: conversation analysis, legal
interaction and the analysis of lawyers’ turns in police interrogations of suspects
155
Elizabeth Stokoe and Derek Edwards
12 Police interviews in the judicial process
Police interviews as evidence
169
Kate Haworth
1.3
Courtroom genres
13 The historical courtroom
A diachronic investigation of English courtroom practice
185
Dawn Archer
14 Narrative in the trial
Constructing crime stories in court
199
Chris Heﬀer
CONTENTS
viii

15 Prosecution and defense closing speeches
The creation of contrastive closing arguments
218
Laura Felton Rosulek
16 Sentencing convicted murderers
Convicted murderers’ allocutions or leniency pleas at
sentencing hearings
231
Nancy Schweda Nicholson
1.4
Lay participants in the judicial process
17 Instructions to jurors
Redrafting California’s jury instructions
251
Peter Tiersma
18 Rape victims
The discourse of rape trials
265
Susan Ehrlich
19 Youth and gangs
Sociolinguistic issues in gang-related prosecutions: homies, hearsay and
expert standards
281
Mel Greenlee
20 Vulnerable witnesses
Vulnerable witnesses in the Criminal Justice System
296
Michelle Aldridge
21 False confessors
A jihadi heart and mind? Strategic repackaging of a possibly false confession in
an anti-terrorism trial in California
315
Gillian Grebler
22 Representing oneself*
Cross-examination questioning: lay people as cross-examiners
333
Tatiana Tkacˇuková
Section II
The linguist as expert in legal processes
347
2.1
Expert and process
23 Trademark linguistics
Trademarks: language that one owns
351
Ronald R. Butters
CONTENTS
ix

24 Consumer product warnings
Composition, identiﬁcation, and assessment of adequacy
365
Bethany K. Dumas
25 The forensic phonetician*
Forensic speaker identiﬁcation by experts
378
Michael Jessen
26 The forensic linguist
The expert linguist meets the adversarial system
395
Lawrence M. Solan
2.2
Multilingualism in legal contexts
27 Nationality claims*
Language analysis and asylum cases
411
Diana Eades
28 Non-native speakers in detention
Assessing non-native speaking detainees’ English language proﬁciency
423
Fiona English
29 Court interpreting
The need to raise the bar: Court interpreters as specialized experts
440
Sandra Hale
30 Interpreting outside the courtroom*
‘A shattered mirror?’ Interpreting in legal contexts outside the courtroom
455
Krzysztof Kredens and Ruth Morris
2.3 Authorship and opinion
31 Experts and opinions
In my opinion
473
Malcolm Coulthard
32 Forensic stylistics
Theory and practice of forensic stylistics
487
Gerald R. McMenamin
33 Text messaging forensics
Txt 4n6: Idiolect free authorship analysis?
508
Tim Grant
34 Plagiarism
Four forensic linguists’ responses to suspected plagiarism
523
Malcolm Coulthard, Alison Johnson, Krzysztof Kredens and David Woolls
CONTENTS
x

Section III
New debates and new directions
539
35 Multimodality and forensic linguistics*
Multimodal aspects of victim’s narrative in direct examination
541
Gregory M. Matoesian
36 Terrorism and forensic linguistics
Linguistics and terrorism cases
558
Roger W. Shuy
37 Computational forensic linguistics*
Searching for similarity in large specialised corpora
576
David Woolls
38 The future for forensic linguists in the courtroom
Cross-cultural communication
591
Peter R. A. Gray
39 Concluding remarks
Future directions in forensic linguistics
602
Malcolm Coulthard and Alison Johnson
References
615
Index
661
Note
The chapters marked with * are supplemented by additional material on an accompanying website
at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/
CONTENTS
xi

Illustrations
Tables
1.1
Some of the researched linguistic features of legal language
10
4.1
Literacy levels percentages and reading types 1992
58
4.2
Literacy levels percentages and reading types 2003
59
5.1
Stance adverbials per million words in three corpora
74
5.2
Emphatic adverbials per million words in three corpora
74
7.1
A continuum or cline of request forms
100
15.1
Frequency of character voices as sources of legitimation
224
19.1
Glossary of ‘gang slang’ terms distributed to parents in Redwood City,
California
284
19.2
Common functions and examples of graﬃti
286
22.1
The comparison of the self-represented litigants’ declarative questions
and tag questions in two diﬀerent periods
338
25.1
Diﬀerent tasks of forensic speaker identiﬁcation
379
25.2
Important speaker-speciﬁc characteristics in speaker comparisons
387
31.1
Word sequence length and frequency
476
31.2
Comparison of suspect and candidate author choices
479
31.3
Suggested semantic labels for likelihood ratios
484
32.1
Phone number formats (USA)
490
33.1
Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny
Nicholl: Known messages of Jenny Nicholl
516
33.2
Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny
Nicholl: Known messages of David Hodgson
516
33.3
Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny
Nicholl: Disputed messages
517
33.4
Example coding of text message
519
34.1
Lexical similarities between Bill, Bob and Barry
530
34.2
Similarity and uniqueness of voice in six student essays as percentages
530
34.3
Comparisons between four translated texts
531
xii

34.4
Comparisons between the two competing dictionaries and two reference
dictionaries (ﬁgures show percentages of shared deﬁnitions between
pairs of dictionaries)
533
37.1
Word ending lists for all four main lexical classes
579
37.2
Similarity, diﬀerence and identity in two reviews
582
37.3
Comparison of original sentence with new sentence
582
37.4
Measuring similarity
583
Figures
14.1
A model of jury trial as complex genre (adapted from Heﬀer 2005: 71)
201
19.1
Graﬃti photo 1
285
19.2
Graﬃti photo 2
291
19.3
Over-representation of African American youth in gang databases
293
19.4
Youth sentence averages in days as a function of race
293
22.1
The ratio of cross-examination questions used by Mr. Rampton QC
and Steel during the three periods
337
22.2
The ratio of cross-examination questions used by Mr. Rampton QC
and Morris during the three periods
338
25.1
Domains in forensic speaker classiﬁcation
381
25.2
Negative correlation between body size (cm) and average frequency
of third formant (Hz) among 81 adult male speakers of German
382
25.3
Tasks in speaker proﬁling and speaker comparison
386
25.4
Histogram of mean f0 in spontaneous speech among 100 male adult
speakers of German. Results are presented for Lombard speech (light
columns, back row) and speech at normal vocal loudness (dark columns,
front row)
387
25.5
Illustration of LTF-method: spectrogram (time in seconds on x-axis;
frequency in Hz on y-axis) together with formant tracks for F1, F2 and
F3 (from bottom to top) on vocalic portions of a speech signal. Example
taken from a case of blackmail to the owner of a discotheque
388
25.6
Reference data for average LTF values [Hz] in spontaneous speech (closed
circles) and read speech (open circles) for 71 male adult speakers of
German. Long-term second formant on x-axis, long-term third formant
on y-axis (after Moos 2008a)
389
25.7
Average LTF values [Hz] in a forensic case, with one value for the
questioned (= unknown) speaker (closed circle) and one separate value for
each of the ﬁve readings of the transcribed text by the suspect (open circles)
390
28.1
Street scene photo 1
430
28.2
Street scene photo 2
431
32.1
Spelling: separation of graphemic units in digraph -gh-
493
32.2
Punctuation: unmotivated parentheses
494
32.3
Punctuation: end-quote marks
495
32.4
Spelling: already
496
32.5
Word formation: to who it may concern vs. to whom it may concern
496
32.6
Syntax: Impersonal relative “which” for personal “who” or “whom”
497
ILLUSTRATIONS
xiii

32.7
Syntax: Sequence of tenses: main clause (past) followed by
subordinate clause (present)
497
32.8
Syntax: order of indirect and direct objects within the sentence
498
32.9
Comma for apostrophe
498
32.10
Sentence-ﬁnal punctuation spaced away from last word
499
32.11
Absent –ed inﬂections
499
32.12
Absent plural inﬂection
499
32.13
Preﬁx separation
499
32.14
Apostrophe inserted before inﬂectional suﬃx
500
32.15
Plural/possessive confusion
500
32.16
Adverb/adjective substitution
500
32.17
Five variations of form on the same lexical phrase
501
32.18
Subject/verb agreement
501
32.19
Long periodic sentences with multiple levels of embedding
501
32.20
VERB + in + V-ing
502
32.21
Identical content of letter-closings
502
35.1
What he did to me was wro:::ng
543
35.2
I
550
35.3
have a child
550
35.4
What he did to me was wro:::ng
551
35.5
n’ it’s not right
552
35.6
n’I don’t want to live the rest of my life
553
35.7
in fear of that man
554
35.8
n’ I don’t want to be responsible …
555
ILLUSTRATIONS
xiv

Conventions used
Figures and tables are numbered ﬁrst according to the chapter number and then
sequentially in the chapter, for example: 34.1.
Data extracts and examples are numbered in each chapter and referred to by number, as
(1), (2), etc., beginning at (1) for each chapter.
We have used the following abbreviations for participants in data extracts in the majority
of the chapters:
Abbreviation Participant(s)
A
Adult speaker (or Answer(er) where data is from oﬃcial court transcripts)
AA
Appropriate Adult
CT
Call Taker
Ca
Caller
CP
Convicted Person
D
Defence barrister/attorney
IE
Interviewee
IR
Police Interviewer
J
Judge
Pr
Prosecuting barrister/attorney
Q
Question(er) (for Barrister in oﬃcial court transcripts)
S
Solicitor/Attorney
W
Witness in court
The following transcription conventions have been used (based on Jeﬀerson 2004):
Symbol
Meaning
(.)
short pause
(2.6)
timed pause
( )
empty brackets for transcriber uncertainty
((cough))
double brackets for other sounds or descriptions of events ((telephone
rings))
xv

[
left bracket for overlap onset
]
right bracket where overlapped utterances end
=
latched utterance
> <
speech within is speeded up relative to surronding talk
< >
speech within is slowed down relative to surrounding talk
>
rush through into the next sound
"
rise in intonation
#
fall in intonation
.hhh
inbreath
hhh
outbreath
°word°
softer sounding than surrounding talk
word
underlining for emphasis
WORD
upper case for louder than surrounding talk
lo:::ng
colon for extended syllable
abil-
cut oﬀutterance
CONVENTIONS USED
xvi

List of contributors and afﬁliations
Professor Janet Ainsworth, School of Law, Seattle University, Washington, USA
Dr Michelle Aldridge, School of English, Communication and Philosophy, Cardiﬀ
University, UK
Dr Dawn Archer, Department of Humanities, University of Central Lancashire, UK
Dr Kelly Benneworth, Department of Sociology, University of York, UK
Dr Vijay K. Bhatia, Department of English and Communication, City University of
Hong Kong
Professor Ronald Butters, Emeritus Professor of English and Cultural Anthropology,
Duke University, North Carolina, USA
Dr Deborah Cao, Griﬃth University, Queensland, Australia
Professor Malcolm Coulthard, School of Languages and Social Sciences, Aston Uni-
versity, UK
Professor Paul Drew, Department of Sociology, University of York, UK
Professor Bethany K. Dumas, Department of English, University of Tennessee, USA
Dr Diana Eades, Honorary Research Fellow, University of New England, Armidale,
NSW, Australia
Professor
Derek
Edwards,
Department
of
Social
Sciences,
Loughborough
University, UK
xvii

Professor Susan Ehrlich, Department of Languages, Literatures and Linguistics, York
University, Canada
Dr Fiona English, Department of Humanities, Arts and Languages, London Metropolitan
University, UK
Dr Laura Felton Rosulek, Department of Anthropology, University of Montana, USA
Professor Edward Finegan, Gould School of Law, University of Southern California,
USA
Dr Tim Grant, School of Languages and Social Sciences, Aston University, UK
Justice Peter R.A. Gray, Federal Court of Australia, Melbourne, Australia
Miss Gillian Grebler, Freelance consultant and teacher at Santa Monica College,
California, USA
Dr Mel Greenlee, StaﬀAttorney, California Appellate Project, USA
Dr Sandra Hale, School of Humanities and Languages, University of Western Sydney,
Australia
Dr Kate Haworth, School of Languages and Social Sciences, Aston University, UK
Dr Chris Heﬀer, School of English, Communication and Philosophy, Cardiﬀ
University, UK
Dr Elizabeth Holt, School of Music, Humanities and Media, University of
Huddersﬁeld, UK
Dr Michael Jessen, Bundeskriminalamt Sprecher-Erkennung und Tonträgeranalyse,
Wiesbaden, Germany
Dr Alison Johnson, School of English, University of Leeds, UK
Dr Krzysztof Kredens, School of Languages and Social Sciences, Aston University, UK
Professor Gerald R. McMenamin, Department of Linguistics, California State
University, USA
Professor Gregory M. Matoesian, Department of Criminology, Law and Justice,
University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
Dr Ruth Morris, Freelance Interpreter and Translator, Israel
Dr Frances Rock, School of English, Communication and Philosophy, Cardiﬀ
University, UK
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS AND AFFILIATIONS
xviii

Dr Nancy Schweda Nicholson, University of Delaware, USA
Professor Roger W. Shuy, Emeritus Professor, Georgetown University, Washington,
DC, USA
Professor Lawrence M. Solan, Brooklyn Law School, New York, USA
Dr Elizabeth Stokoe, Department of Social Sciences, Loughborough University, UK
Professor
Gail
Stygall,
Department
of
English,
University
of
Washington,
Seattle, USA
Professor Peter Tiersma, Loyola Law School, Los Angeles, USA
Ms Tatiana Tkacˇuková, Department of English, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic
Dr Traci Walker, Department of Language and Linguistic Science, University of
York, UK
Mr David Woolls, CEO of CFL Software Limited and Honorary Visiting Fellow,
Aston University, UK
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS AND AFFILIATIONS
xix

Notes on editors and contributors
Janet Ainsworth is the John D. Eshelman Professor of Law at Seattle University. Before
joining the law faculty, she practiced law as a public defender. Her scholarship
explores the application of linguistics research to legal issues and the analysis of lan-
guage ideology in law. She is the author of numerous book chapters and articles in
social science journals and law reviews.
Michelle Aldridge is a senior lecturer in the Centre for Language and Communication
at CardiﬀUniversity. Her research interests include child language acquisition, com-
munication disorders and forensic linguistics. Her particular expertise is in the lin-
guistic experiences of vulnerable witnesses in the police interview and court context as
well as in the training of professionals within the legal setting.
Dawn Archer is a reader in corpus linguistics at the University of Central Lancashire.
Her forensic/legal interests primarily relate to the historical courtroom: she has written
one monograph – Historical Sociopragmatics: Questions and Answers in the English
Courtroom (1640–1760) – and is currently planning a second, which will explore the
nineteenth-century courtroom.
Kelly Benneworth is a lecturer in Social Psychology in the Department of Sociology at
the University of York. She has a long-standing interest in applying discourse analysis
and conversation analysis to interactions in forensic settings and her current work
examines how police and suspects describe adult–child sexual relationships in the
investigative interview. She has contributed to the edited book The Language of Sexual
Crime (Palgrave).
Vijay K. Bhatia has been in the teaching profession for 44 years, most recently at the
City University since 1993 and at the National University of Singapore (1983–93). In
his recent research projects, ‘Analyzing Genre-bending in Corporate Disclosure Docu-
ments,’ and ‘International Arbitration Practice: A Discourse Analytical Study,’ he has led
xx

research teams from more than 20 countries. His research interests are: genre analysis of
academic and professional discourses, including, legal, business, newspaper and advertis-
ing genres; ESP and professional communication; simpliﬁcation of legal and other
public documents; and cross-cultural and cross-disciplinary variations in professional
genres. Amongst his more than a hundred publications, two of his books, Analysing
Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings and Worlds of Written Discourse: A Genre-based
View, are widely used in genre theory and practice.
Ronald R. Butters (http://trademarklinguistics.com/) is Emeritus Professor of English
and Cultural Anthropology and former chair of the Linguistics Program at Duke
University, where he began teaching in 1967. He is president of the International
Association of Forensic Linguists (2009–11) and one of the present co-editors of The
International Journal of Speech, Language, and the Law. He maintains an active presence in
American forensic linguistic consulting; his practical and scholarly interests include (1)
ethical issues in forensic linguistic consulting, (2) statutes and contracts, (3) death-
penalty appeals, (4) copyrights, (5) discourse analysis of linguistic evidence, and (6)
semiotic and linguistic issues in trademark litigation.
Deborah Cao is an Associate Professor at Griﬃth University (Australia). Her books
include Chinese Law: A Language Perspective and Translating Law. She is the editor of
the International Journal for the Semiotics of Law and Chinese editor of the Journal of
Specialised Translation.
Malcolm Coulthard is Professor of Forensic Linguistics and Foundation Director of the
Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston University, which, since 2006, has hosted the
annual International Summer School in Forensic Linguistic Analysis. He was the Chair
of the Founding Committee of the International Association of Forensic Linguists and
its ﬁrst President and the founding co-editor of The International Journal of Speech Lan-
guage and the Law. Over the past 20 years, he has written reports in some 200 cases.
His latest court appearance was at the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny
Nicholl in February 2008. He is co-author with Alison Johnson of An Introduction to
Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence (2007).
Paul Drew conducts research on conversation and interaction, including repair, topic
and how social actions (such as oﬀering, requesting and complaining) are managed in
interaction. He also works extensively on institutional and workplace interactions,
notably questioning in courtroom examination, and medical (especially doctor–
patient) interactions. He is author and editor (with John Heritage) of Talk at Work:
Interaction in Institutional Settings (Cambridge University Press, 1992).
Bethany K. Dumas, J.D., PhD (Professor of English, University of Tennessee) pub-
lishes on language variation, discourse analysis, and language and law, especially jury
instructions and product warnings. Courses include Language and Law, Rhetoric of
Legal Discourse, Lawyers in Literature, American English Dialects, Discourse Analysis,
and Talkin’ Trash. She has testiﬁed in court cases since 1984.
Diana Eades is a Research Fellow at the University of New England, Australia. She has
worked in forensic linguistics for more than two decades. Her work addresses
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxi

assumptions about how the language works and how sociolinguistic and legal pro-
cesses interact, including a critical linguistic approach to language in legal processes.
Her most recent publication is Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control (Mouton de
Gruyter, 2008) and ‘Sociolinguistics and the Legal Process’ (Multilingual Matters, 2010).
Derek Edwards is Professor of Psychology in the Department of Social Sciences,
Loughborough University, England. His interests are in the analysis of language and
social interaction in everyday and institutional settings. He specializes in discursive
psychology, in which relations between psychological states and the external world
are studied as discourse categories and practices. Current work focuses on subject–
object relations, person descriptions and intentionality in mundane conversation,
neighbor dispute mediation, and police interrogations. His books include Common
Knowledge, with Neil Mercer (Routledge, 1987), Ideological Dilemmas, with Michael
Billig and others (Sage, 1988), Discursive Psychology, with Jonathan Potter (Sage, 1992),
and Discourse and Cognition (Sage, 1997).
Susan Ehrlich is Professor of Linguistics at York University in Toronto. She does
research in the areas of discourse analysis, language and gender, and language and the
law. Her books include Point of View: A Linguistic Analysis of Literary Style (Routledge,
1990), Representing Rape (Routledge, 2001), the edited collection, Language and
Gender: Major Themes in English Studies (Routledge, 2008) and the forthcoming ‘Why
Do You Ask?’: The Function of Questions in Institutional Discourse (Oxford), co-edited
with Alice Freed.
Fiona English is a Senior Lecturer in TESOL and Applied Linguistics at London
Metropolitan University where she works on the Masters programs for English lan-
guage teachers from all over the world. Her research interests include genres and
academic knowledge, pedagogy across cultures and the analysis of verbal texts. Her
involvement in forensic linguistics, which concerns assessing detainees’ English
language performance, began several years ago and she continues to reﬁne her
methodology in response to the diﬀerent experiences that each case brings.
Laura Felton Rosulek is currently an adjunct Professor at the University of Montana.
Her PhD dissertation, from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, was
entitled The Sociolinguistic Construction of Reality in Closing Arguments in Criminal Trials.
Her interests include forensic linguistics, critical discourse analysis, and systemic-
functional linguistics.
Edward Finegan is Professor of Linguistics and Law at the University of Southern
California. He teaches discourse analysis in the Linguistics department and Law
School and has served for over three decades as a consultant and expert in forensic
linguistics. He is author of numerous books and articles, including: Language: Its
Structure and Use (2008); The Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English (with
others 1999); and Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register (edited with Douglas Biber
1994).
Tim Grant is Deputy Director of the Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston Uni-
versity. His consultancy primarily involves authorship analysis and he has worked in
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxii

many diﬀerent contexts including investigations into sexual assault, murder and ter-
rorist oﬀences. His research into text messaging analysis was awarded the 2008 Joseph
Lister Prize by the British Science Association.
Peter R. A. Gray is a judge of the Federal Court of Australia.
Gillian Grebler (DPhil cand. Oxon) is a linguistic anthropologist based in Santa
Monica, California. She teaches at Santa Monica College and works as an ethno-
grapher and as a consultant on legal cases where spoken language is at issue. Her
special interest is in police interrogation and false confessions and resulting
miscarriages of justice. Grebler worked in London during the 1980s, carrying out
research on police interrogation and false confessions and participating in the BBC’s
Rough Justice.
Mel Greenlee received her PhD in Linguistics and J.D. from the University of California-
Berkeley. She is a criminal defense attorney specializing in capital appeals and habeas
corpus matters in California. In her academic career, she conducted research on lan-
guage acquisition, bilingualism and other sociolinguistic topics; she continues to
investigate the interface between language and law in her legal career.
Sandra Hale is the leader of the Interpreting and Translation Research Node at the
University of Western Sydney. She is an experienced Spanish interpreter, educator
and researcher. She was the chair of the Critical Link 5 Congress held in Sydney in
April 2007.
Kate Haworth is currently a lecturer at the Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston
University. She is also a barrister (non-practicing). Her research interests include all
aspects of language and the law, especially language as evidence.
Chris Heﬀer is Senior Lecturer and Director of the MA in Forensic Linguistics at the
Centre for Language and Communication Research at CardiﬀUniversity. He is the
author of The Language of Jury Trial (Palgrave 2005) and Forensic Discourse (Continuum
2010) and has published articles in linguistic and legal journals on various aspects of
the trial process.
Elizabeth Holt is a lecturer in English Language at the University of Huddersﬁeld. She
is editor and author (with Rebecca Clift), of Voicing: Reported Speech and Footing in
Conversation (Cambridge University Press, 2007). She has had papers published in the
journals Language and Society, Research on Language and Social Interaction, Social Problems
and Text.
Michael Jessen (MA Linguistics Universität Bielefeld; PhD Linguistics Cornell University)
was lecturer for linguistics and phonetics in the Department of Computational
Linguistics and Phonetics at Universität Stuttgart for eight years. Since 2001, he has
worked as a forensic expert and research associate at the Speaker Identiﬁcation and
Audio Analysis Department of the Federal Forensics Laboratory of Bundeskriminalamt,
Germany. His research interests lie in forensic speaker identiﬁcation and the interaction
between phonetics and phonology.
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxiii

Alison Johnson is a lecturer in English language and linguistics at the University of
Leeds. Her doctoral research was on the pragmatics of questions in police interviews
and her research interests in Forensic Linguistics are in the pragmatics of legal talk,
narrative and evaluation, children in the legal system, historical forensic linguistics and
plagiarism. She is author (with Malcolm Coulthard) of Language in Evidence: An
Introduction to Forensic Linguistics.
Krzysztof Kredens received his MA in English Studies and PhD in English Linguistics
from the University of Lodz, Poland. He is a Lecturer in Applied Linguistics in the
School of Languages and Social Sciences at Aston University, UK. His academic
interests include corpus linguistics, translation studies and social applications of lin-
guistics. His main research interest lies with language and the law, and particularly the
linguistics of the individual speaker and its implications for forensic authorship analysis.
He is a practicing public service interpreter.
Gerald R. McMenamin is Professor Emeritus of Linguistics at California State Uni-
versity, Fresno, where he has taught since 1980, after teaching assignments at the Uni-
versidad Autónoma de Guadalajara, University of Delaware, and UCLA. His research
specialties include Spanish linguistics, second language acquisition, stylistics, linguistic
variation, and forensic linguistics. He received his MA (Linguistics) from California State
University, Fresno and Doctorado en Lingüística Hispánica from El Colegio de México.
He is the author of several books, including Forensic Linguistics: Advances in Forensic Sty-
listics, 2002, and many articles on language acquisition, linguistic variation, and forensic
linguistics. He presently works as a consultant and expert witness in forensic linguistics.
Gregory M. Matoesian is Professor in the Department of Criminology, Law and Jus-
tice at the University of Illinois at Chicago. He studies verbal and visual conduct in
the constitution of legal identity and is author of Reproducing Rape: Domination through
Talk in the Courtroom (U. of Chicago Press, 1993) and Law and the Language of Identity
(Oxford U. Press, 2001), as well as numerous articles in linguistic journals.
Ruth Morris is a former Brussels-based European Union staﬀinterpreter. In the early
1980s, she became a freelance interpreter and translator in Israel, where she also gives
a research seminar on interpreting in the legal system at Bar-Ilan University’s master’s
program in translation studies. Her ﬁrst casework sparked an enduring and passionate
research interest in the area of interpreting in the legal system, including observations
at the multilingual Demjanjuk trial, as well as historical and contemporary views of
the interpreter in various English-speaking legal systems.
Frances Rock is a lecturer in Language and Communication at CardiﬀUniversity. Her
research interests are in discourse analysis, interactional sociolinguistics and literacies.
She is currently working on applications of language study to policing and other
professional and legal settings. She is author of Communicating Rights (Palgrave, 2007).
Nancy Schweda Nicholson has a PhD from Georgetown University and is Professor
of Linguistics and Cognitive Science with a Joint Appointment in the Legal Studies
Program at the University of Delaware (USA). In addition to her work on allocutions,
Dr. Nicholson’s research interests include: language planning and policy development
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxiv

for court interpreter services; interpreting at international criminal tribunals; and European
Union law.
Roger W. Shuy is Emeritus Professor of Linguistics at Georgetown University follow-
ing 30 years’ service that continues through his company, Roger W. Shuy, Inc.,
incorporated in 1982. Over the past 40 years he has consulted on some 500 cases and
has testiﬁed as an expert witness 54 times in criminal and civil trials (in 26 states), as
well as before the US Senate and US House of Representatives. He is author of
numerous books and articles, including: Fighting over Words (2007), Linguistics in the
Courtroom: A Practical Guide (2006), Creating Language Crimes: How Law Enforcement
Uses (and Misuses) Language (2005) and Linguistic Battles in Trademark Disputes (2002).
Lawrence M. Solan is the Don Forchelli Professor of Law and Director of the Center
for the Study of Law, Language and Cognition at Brooklyn Law School. He holds a
PhD in Linguistics from the University of Massachusetts and a J.D. from Harvard Law
School. His writings address such issues as legal interpretation, the attribution of
responsibility and blame, and the role of the expert in the courts. His books include
The Language of Judges, Speaking of Crime (with Peter Tiersma), and his forthcoming
book, Under the Law: Statutes and their Interpretation, all published by the University of
Chicago Press.
Elizabeth Stokoe is Reader in Social Interaction at Loughborough University. Her
research interests are in conversation analysis and social interaction in various
ordinary and institutional settings, including neighbor mediation, police interroga-
tion, speed dating and talk between friends. She is the author of Discourse and Identity
(with Bethan Benwell, Edinburgh University Press, 2006) and is currently writing
Talking Relationships: Analyzing Speed-Dating Interactions for Cambridge University
Press.
Gail Stygall is Professor of English at the University of Washington, Seattle, WA, US,
where she teaches English language courses and writes about legal discourse and for-
ensic issues. She has consulted on a variety of cases and is especially interested in cases
involving lay understanding of complex documents. She is author of Trial Language:
Diﬀerential Discourse Processing and Discursive Formation (Benjamins, 1994).
Peter Tiersma teaches at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, where he holds the Judge
William Matthew Byrne chair. He has a PhD in Linguistics from the University of
California, San Diego, and a juris doctor degree from the University of California,
Berkeley. His books include Legal Language and Speaking of Crime: The Language of
Criminal Justice (with Lawrence Solan).
Tatiana Tkacˇuková is currently aﬃliated with the Department of English, Faculty of
Education, Masaryk University in Brno, Czech Republic. Her research interests lie
mainly in the study of spoken courtroom discourse and the interaction between legal
professionals and lay people.
Traci Walker’s work is grounded in an interest in discovering the order and structure of
language in everyday use. Her research combines the methods of Conversation
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxv

Analysis with more traditional means of linguistic analysis, and her recent publications
show how principled variation in syntactic or phonetic structure is used to achieve
diﬀerent interactional outcomes.
David Woolls is the CEO and founder of CFL Software Limited and an Honorary
Visiting Fellow at the Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston University. He has
designed and built computer programs to assist forensic linguists since 1994, with
recent development work in real-time, large-scale, automated applications of
such tools.
NOTES ON EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS
xxvi

Acknowledgements
Parts of this handbook have been written in Brazil, England, Holland, Poland, Sicily and
several parts of the USA (Chicago, Ithaca and Manhattan) – and that’s just the editors –
and those locations have provided us with inspiration and wonderful places for writing
and editing. We would like to acknowledge the support and hard work of all our con-
tributors and also our grateful thanks for invaluable editorial assistance from Francisco
Alberto Gomez Moya (student of the University of Leeds, UK and Universidad de
Murcia, Spain) and Robert Coulthard (doctoral student at the Universidade Federal de
Santa Catarina, Brazil).
xxvii


1
Introduction
Current debates in forensic linguistics
Alison Johnson and Malcolm Coulthard
‘Language is as it is because of what it has to do’.
Halliday (1973: 34)
Introduction
When Halliday wrote ‘language is as it is because of what it has to do’ a functional
theory of language was born, giving us a perspective of meaning-making that is
grounded in social practice and in the many varied and complex contexts in which we
ﬁnd ourselves. Context is dynamic and socially constructed through and by discourse –
both in its linguistic and non-linguistic semiotic modes – and we know that the legal
world is context-rich. It is peopled by a hierarchical mini-nation of judges, lawyers,
police and law-enforcement oﬃcers and then the common man and woman, who walk,
like Adam and Eve, unknowing, through this strange world. Its texts are also richly
layered with meaning; its language has evolved over many centuries and its peculiar form
is a result of this history and specialised use. What legal people do with lay people
through legal language, legal texts and legal interaction is the focus of this Handbook.
Leading scholars from the disciplines of linguistics, law, criminology and sociology
examine the ways that language has and is being used, who is using it, how they are
writing, where they are speaking, why they are interacting in that way and what is being
accomplished through that interaction.
Forensic Linguistics has now come of age as a discipline. It has its own professional
association, The International Association of Forensic Linguists, founded in 1993; its own
journal, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, founded in 1994; and a
biennial international conference. There are three major introductory textbooks – Coulthard
and Johnson (2007), Gibbons (2003) and Olsson (2nd ed. 2008a) – and a growing
number of specialist monographs: Cotterill (2003), Eades (2008b), Heﬀer (2005) Heydon
(2005) and Rock (2007), to mention just a few. Modules in forensic linguistics and/or
language and the law are taught to undergraduate and Masters level students in a rapidly
increasing number of universities worldwide and, at the time of writing, there are three
1

specialist Masters degrees at the universities of Aston, Pompeu Fabra (Barcelona) and
Cardiﬀ, and an annual international summer school at Aston training the next generation
of forensic linguists.
Aim, contents and organisation
The aim of this Handbook is to provide a unique work of reference to the leading ideas,
debates, topics, approaches and methodologies in Forensic Linguistics, with chapters written
by the world’s ﬁnest academics, both established and up-and-coming. Our intended
audience is advanced undergraduates, graduates and research students as well as established
researchers in other disciplines who are new to forensic linguistics. This is a handbook,
not a textbook (as we noted above there are already several textbooks, including our
own, Coulthard and Johnson 2007), and as such it is a comprehensive advanced introduction
to core issues and topics in contemporary forensic linguistics. All the contributions include a
richness of examples and case studies to enable the reader to see forensic linguistics
applied and in action. Contributors come from Australia, Canada, the Czech Republic, Ger-
many, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Poland, the UK and the USA and cross several profes-
sional and academic areas. The professions represented are numerous too: academic,
attorney, computer scientist, forensic speaker identiﬁcation and audio analyst, freelance con-
sultant, interpreter, judge and translator, and some of the contributors have former pro-
fessional experience as lawyer and police oﬃcer. The academics, as the list of
contributors shows (p. xvi), are based in a wide range of departments and span a number
of disciplines: anthropology, communication, criminology, English, humanities, law, linguistics,
modern languages, philosophy, social science, sociology and translation studies. As a
group, we are truly inter- and cross-disciplinary in composition and often in approach.
After this introductory chapter, the almost encyclopaedic range of topics covered in
the remaining 38 chapters is organised into three major sections:
Section I: The language of the law and the legal process
Section II: The linguist as expert in legal processes
Section III: New debates and new directions.
Within each of these sections the reader will ﬁnd small collections of between four and
six chapters, which are arranged according to broad topics, but there are, in fact, as many con-
nections across groups as there are between the chapters in a particular group. For
example, the common denominator across the six chapters in the section called ‘Participants
in police investigations, interviewing and interrogation’ is a focus on who is talking, but in
a sense that link is arbitrary, as the contributors themselves didn’t identify that theme. Instead, it
was the editors who made the connection for the beneﬁt of you, the reader, and we now
invite you to see the many other connections that can be made. Such is the nature of reading
and research; the intellectual activity that enables us to perceive connections between ideas
creates new areas of scholarship and, as each of you reads chapters in the multiple combinations
that are possible with such an extensive collection, we anticipate a blossoming research
landscape in our next and successive springs. We do make many connections for readers
between chapters, though, by saying, for example – Archer (this volume) – to help readers
locate relevant material as they read. We hope you will go on a journey of discovery and
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
2

that soon your own work will join the already extensive library of books, chapters,
papers, corpora and software in this ﬁeld.
Section I – The language of the law and the legal process
The Handbook begins with ﬁve chapters on legal language in Section 1.1. Though much
of the research on legal language focuses on written texts, Holt and Johnson’s chapter
takes speech as its subject and puts talk ahead of writing as the primary mode of com-
munication, though talk is intertextually linked and contextualised by a whole array of
written texts: statutes, the police Caution and other written texts.
1.1 Legal language
Holt and Johnson’s chapter is one of several in the volume that examines questions. This
most characteristic of legal interactional forms accomplishes important institutional work
and the chapter, in focusing on formulations, repeating questions and reported speech
(both in questions and responses), explores the socio-pragmatic uses of questions in
police interviews and trials. Formulation, or ‘saying what has already been said’ in prior
talk is an important part of institutional evidence construction, which ‘ﬁxes facts’ for
consumption and decision-making by juries. While Holt and Johnson deal with spoken
interaction, the chapters by Bhatia, Stygall, Finegan and Cao deal with written legal
texts: Bhatia on speciﬁcation, Stygall on complexity and Finegan on attitude and emphasis.
Stygall deals with the real-world problems that readers encounter when they try and fail
to understand the implications of pension documents. Her chapter also crosses into the
area of linguistic expertise in action, as she reports on how her analysis of complexity
reveals some of the comprehension and comprehensibility issues that impact on citizens.
Bhatia deals with the other side of the argument: when legislation is simpliﬁed or made
plainer it can, paradoxically, create perhaps unintended diﬃculties, since it transfers
matters of interpretation to the judiciary rather than the legislature (which represents the
people). Finegan focuses on a so far little researched area of the legal register, written
opinions or decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States, and in particular
adverbial expressions of judicial attitude and emphasis in the state of California. Though
legal drafters are warned in textbooks against using intensiﬁers, emphatic adverbs are
abundant in Finegan’s COSCO corpus (Corpus of Supreme Court Opinions, consisting
of nearly 1 million words) and so he examines this ‘gap’, demonstrating how empirical
corpus analysis of judges’ opinions can reveal ‘justice with attitude’. And Cao deals with
the practical challenges for translators of private legal documents, domestic statutes and
multilateral legal instruments and she illustrates some of the issues arising from
complexities in translating laws in bilingual jurisdictions, with examples from Canada
(English–French) and Hong Kong SAR (English–Chinese).
1.2 Participants in police investigations, interviewing and interrogation
Section 1.2’s six chapters are concerned with participants in police investigations. In our
List of the Conventions used in this Handbook (p.xiv) we list all the participants referred
to in the course of this book (e.g. caller, call taker, convicted person, defence lawyer, prosecuting
lawyer, interviewee, interviewer, testee, tester, witness) and it therefore seemed appropriate to
have a section speciﬁcally devoted to participants (in fact we have two, as section 1.4 is
INTRODUCTION
3

devoted solely to lay participants). Drew and Walker focus on the citizen and their
telephone interactions with police call handlers as they request assistance in emergency
and non-emergency situations, showing how in their use of questions call takers assess
whether there is an urgent need (or not) for dispatch of oﬃcers to the incident. They show
how particular request forms ‘reﬂect a speaker’s assessment of their entitlement to have a
request granted’ and how ‘diﬀerent forms may be used to display speakers’ knowledge of the
contingencies surrounding the granting of a request’ (p. 100). Ainsworth, Rock, Ben-
neworth, Stokoe and Edwards and Haworth all deal with police interviews and interroga-
tions. ‘Interview’ seems the preferred term in the UK with ‘interrogation’ more usual in
the US, though Stokoe and Edwards use the term ‘interrogation’. The diﬀerent nomenclature
partially reﬂects the diﬀerent investigative styles used by the police in the two countries,
as readers will see, and in attitudes to interviewees, which are revealed in Ainsworth’s
disturbing chapter. Ainsworth deals with problems of access to and an eﬀective denial of
rights for suspects in the US, while Stokoe and Edwards show how rights are negotiated
by suspects and on their behalf, through the support of a lawyer, in interviews where lawyers
are successfully accessed and present. Their chapter examines ‘lawyer-initiated actions,
responses and interjections including objections to police questioning, advice to clients
(both spontaneous and in response to requests), various “repair” operations on oﬃcers’
questions, and actions such as questioning clients, and helping them formulate their evidence’
(p. 167) and they show the advantages and disadvantages for the suspect of the varying
forms of intervention. Rock’s chapter focuses not only on the suspect but also on witnesses.
Like Drew and Walker, she recognises the role of witnesses in the investigative process
and focuses in particular on the importance of reading and writing. Though she acknowledges
the importance of talk, she establishes the central role of reading and writing practices in the
interview ‘showing how these activities ﬁgure, how they are oriented to and how inﬂuential
they are on the structures, practices and outcomes of police interviews’ (p. 126). Benne-
worth focuses on a particular kind of suspect – paedophiles – and also on the interview
itself as an object of study. Her chapter reports on her research, which found that open
and closed interviewing styles exist and these produce diﬀerent evidential eﬀects.
Haworth also sees the interview as an evidential object in the judicial process as she
explores the diﬀerent and sometimes competing investigative and evidential functions of
the interview and looks at how evidence constructed discursively can be ‘contaminated’
in the process, and this clearly has implications for the suspect. The chapters in this section
use conversation analysis, discourse analysis and critical discourse analysis approaches.
1.3 Courtroom genres
Section 1.3 moves from the interview room to the courtroom and begins with a historical
approach to the courtroom genre by Archer, who maps a changing landscape over the
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The early period is characterised by
interactivity between judges and defendants, but Archer shows that ‘a decline in the
interactivity of defendants and judges is mirrored by an increase in lawyers’ interactivity’ and
there is ‘a move towards adversarialism in its modern form’ (p. 185). The other three chapters
grouped under the heading of ‘Courtroom genres’ include Heﬀer’s focus on narrative
throughout the many phases of the trial; Felton Rosulek’s speciﬁc look at closing speeches
and the creation of contrasting prosecution and defence arguments through a range of
linguistic techniques; and Nicholson’s emphasis on the persuasive power of the allocu-
tion – the plea for leniency, made to the jury by a convicted murderer in the US system.
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
4

1.4 Lay participants in the judicial process
Section 1.4 remains in the courtroom, but this section focuses on the challenges faced by a range
of lay participants: jurors (Tiersma), rape victims (Ehrlich), youths and suspected gang members
(Greenlee), false confessors (Grebler), vulnerable witnesses such as children and the physically
and intellectually impaired (Aldridge) and people who choose to represent themselves in court,
rather than engage an advocate (Tkacˇuková). All of these chapters examine the power of lan-
guage to complicate meaning-making and make outcomes for lay participants at best diﬃcult
and at worst result in ‘distorted perceptions’ that place severe restrictions on civil liberties.
Section II – The linguist as expert in the legal process
As we move from looking at what legal language does to what the linguistic expert does,
we see how linguists can make an important contribution to the presentation of evi-
dence. An expert’s opinion is called on in cases where linguistic knowledge – semantic,
syntactic, pragmatic, discoursal, phonetic, lexicographic and corpus linguistic – can assist
the judge and jury in a particular case.
2.1 Expert and process
Butters, Dumas, Jessen and Solan each oﬀer a diﬀerent perspective: Butters on trademarks – that
particular language that companies try to own; Dumas on consumer product warnings – for
example, the way that the language of warnings on tobacco products warns or fails to warn
consumers of the dangers; and Jessen on phonetics – the ways that speakers are identiﬁed by
their voices through technical and descriptive methods. All these encapsulate a struggle between
the expert, a client and the legal system. Solan also takes up this theme in his chapter that deals
with the linguist’s encounter with the adversarial system. Testing of opinions and struggling for
the ‘truth’ involve argument that is based on inquiry and Solan warns against naivety and makes
the point that academic research tolerates uncertainty to a higher degree than the legal system.
He presents a stark picture of a legal system on the one hand that exploits uncertainty in experts
and, on the other, experts who are susceptible to cognitive bias in the pursuit of conﬁrming
results.
2.2 Multilingualism in legal contexts
The multilingual legal context is no less fraught for the expert, and Eades, English, Hale
and Kredens and Morris have some hard-won lessons to share with readers. The message
they all share is one of what Eades calls ‘awareness raising’. Linguistic experts have a
responsibility to draw attention to potential for serious injustice in the judicial process.
For Eades injustice may arise from the misuse of language analysis by governments and
immigration departments, for English because assessments of non-native speakers’ proﬁ-
ciency may be more complex than is understood, and for Hale and Kredens and Morris,
because of ignorance and inadequate interpreting practice that requires a wise allocation
of resources – the use of qualiﬁed interpreters – both in and outside the courts.
2.3 Authorship and opinion
Experts on authorship have a diﬃcult task – ownership of text is easy to dispute, but
diﬃcult to settle, because individual style is diﬃcult to pin down and, as we have said,
INTRODUCTION
5

the legal profession relies on certainties or at the very least being sure. Juries have to base
decisions on being sure beyond ‘reasonable doubt’ and it is the expert’s job to give an
opinion that is neither inﬂated nor wavering or indecisive – Coulthard shows how
diﬃcult it can be to express an opinion in the ﬁrst place and then to convert it into
jury-friendly language. Grant problematises the notion of idiolect in authorship identiﬁ-
cation in relation to text messaging data by suggesting that authorship style can instead be
determined on the basis of ‘observation and description of consistency and distinctive-
ness’. He then uses ‘pair-wise contrasts between text messages by two authors’ (p. 521) to
take a step towards presenting opinions statistically. McMenamin’s theory of idiolect is
one that encompasses ‘style markers’, that is markers that ‘are the observable result of the
habitual and usually unconscious choices an author makes in the process of writing’
(p. 488) and Grant, too, argues for stylometry. McMenamin distinguishes two general
types of style marker: one, where the writer makes a choice from available optional forms
(and this might be ‘consistent’, to use Grant’s term) and second where a writer deviates
from a norm. Both Grant and McMenamin call for further research to strengthen the science,
but what is presented here is the state of the current art.
In Coulthard, Johnson, Kredens and Woolls’s chapter on plagiarism prevention and
detection we examine some of the claims made by writers and the responses of forensic
linguists to allegations of plagiarism. We identify lexical features for establishing similarity
and diﬀerence and describe how writers usually say the same things uniquely, and so,
when writers use the same or similar words and phrases, they are probably not writing
independently.
Section III – New debates and new directions
As this is a forward-looking section, it is the shortest; we cannot predict the future, but
we oﬀer four chapters that present new debates and new directions for research. In
Matoesian’s chapter, we see how research in multimodality might be extended to for-
ensic and legal contexts, though this is not without its challenges, given the diﬃculty of
access and permission to videotape interviews, interrogations and judicial proceedings at
all levels: lower and higher courts and coroners’, military and civil courts, etc. Matoesian
demonstrates what a detailed micro-conversation analysis can tell us about the power of
talk. In his assertion, future researchers are provided with a challenge:
Focusing on just words neglects the role of multimodal activities in legal proceed-
ings – how both language and embodied conduct mutually contextualize one
another in a reciprocal dialectic – and leaves the study of forensic linguistics with an
incomplete understanding of legal discourse.
(p. 541)
Shuy’s challenge is as much to the legal community as to the forensic linguistic
community in his chapter on terrorism cases. How might law-enforcers and the courts
protect the public from terrorism whilst protecting citizens’ civil rights? There are
worrying trends of potential over-protection of the one at the expense of the other, not
only revealed in Shuy’s chapter, but also in those by Ainsworth, Grebler, Greenlee and
Haworth, which all point future research in a particular direction: towards reassessing and
prioritising the suspect’s rights.
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
6

Woolls’s chapter shows the power of computational approaches to forensic linguistics,
particularly in commercial and business settings and there is at present a need to attract
more computational linguists into collaboration and research in forensic linguistics.
Programming and linguistic skills rarely come together, and adding a forensic dimension
makes the multi-disciplinarity even rarer, but there is plenty of work to be done. The
creation and analysis of large-scale corpora (see also Finegan’s chapter – Chapter 5) allows
the researcher to say much more about texts and practices and in a post-Daubert era,
where forensic linguistic expertise must be quantitatively accountable and measurable. It
is one of the ways forward.
Gray’s chapter (Chapter 38) reﬂects on some of the preceding chapters from the per-
spective of a judge. He argues for a greater cross-disciplinary discussion and exchange of
ideas, since, as he says, lawyers, including judges, are woefully unaware of the existence
of forensic linguists, linguistics and our expertise. He challenges linguists to start the
conversation. Finally, our ‘Concluding remarks’, Chapter 39, look to the future.
What is forensic linguistics?
Our recent book, An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence (Routledge,
2007), organised material into two sections: the language of the legal process and language
as evidence. In other words, we made a distinction between the description of the lan-
guage of the law (both written and spoken) and the work of the expert linguist, which, of
course, involves both the production of written reports and the presentation of oral evi-
dence in court. This binary distinction blurred the boundary between written and spoken
language and there are several good reasons for now sub-dividing the ﬁeld into three areas:
i) the study of the written language of the law;
ii) the study of interaction in the legal process, which in criminal cases includes
everything from an initial call to the emergency services to the sentencing of
someone who has been found guilty; and
iii) the description of the work of the forensic linguist when acting as an expert
witness.
This more satisfying tri-partite division must, however, not allow us to forget that
a) some ﬁxed-form written texts, like the police caution, the Miranda Warnings and
Pattern Jury Instructions, are ‘performed’ or perhaps better ‘verbalised’ as part of
what are otherwise real-time now-encoding spoken interactions;
b) in some jurisdictions, police investigative interviews are standardly audio- or
video-recorded and these recordings are then transcribed into written form using
ordinary orthography;
c) these written transcripts are often reconverted into speech in the courtroom with a
lawyer, usually the prosecutor, performing the part of the accused; and
d) expert forensic linguists typically provide their evidence in both written and
spoken modes.
In the previous section, we outlined the contents of the chapters in this Handbook, but in
the next three sub-sections we will discuss in more detail the three major topic areas
INTRODUCTION
7

outlined above in order to put the chapters in this volume in context. We refer both to
research reported in chapters in this volume and to the wider research context.
The language of the law
We begin with the wider topic of legal language, which has been discussed and deﬁned
in a range of scholarly works. Cao (this volume) makes a distinction between the
language of the law, language about the law and the language used in legal commu-
nication. We make a distinction between just two of these; the language of the law
(written laws, statutes and contracts) and the language used in legal communication. This
is simply a convention; legal communication can clearly include the written as well as the
spoken mode, since lawyers communicate to their clients in letters and there are many
other instances of written communication in legal contexts. Here, though, we deal
with written law and spoken interaction, and, in relation to the latter (in the next sec-
tion), we chieﬂy consider two interactive contexts: the police interview and the criminal
trial. We look ﬁrst at legal writing, because ‘talking like a lawyer’ (Tiersma 1999: 51)
involves using legalese as a professional code, although as Tiersma (1999: 145) says, while
we can observe many of the characteristics found in legal writing in the spoken language
of the courtroom, ‘when lawyers are suﬃciently motivated, they quickly abandon legalese’.
The language of written statutes and contracts and many other legal documents has
been described in terms of its complexity (see Bhatia; Stygall this volume), and legal talk
can also be remarkably complex in terms of syntax and structure. However, legal lan-
guage is more remarkable for what it does; it has specialised institutional functions and
pragmatic eﬀects, or as Tiersma (1999: 145) says the courtroom gives us ‘legal language
in its most dramatic setting’. Holt and Johnson (this volume) explore the ‘dramaturgical
quality of [direct reported speech]’ in legal talk and its uses not simply ‘to replay an
interaction but also to enable the speaker to simultaneously convey his or her attitude
towards the reported utterance’ (Clift and Holt 2007: 7) and Finegan (this volume) also
examines attitudes – those of judges in appeal decisions – which are revealed through his
corpus linguistic analysis of adverbs and adverbials.
The written language of the law
Legal writing has been traced over a considerable span of history and has been widely
characterised by linguists across a range of legal text types, including:
 contracts (Trosborg 1995),
 judgments (e.g. Bhatia 1987; Maley 1985),
 jury instructions (Charrow and Charrow 1979; Tiersma, this volume),
 notices to people in custody (Rock 2007),
 product warnings (Dumas, this volume; Heaps and Henley 1999; Shuy 1990b;
Tiersma 2002),
 the police caution (Cotterill 2000; Rock 2007 and this volume) and the Miranda
warning (Ainsworth, this volume; Berk-Seligson 2002; Leo 1998, 2001; Shuy
1997),
 statutes (e.g. Bhatia 1994; Gunnarsson 1984; Foyle 2002; Wagner 2002),
 temporary restraining orders (Stratman and Dahl 1996),
 trademarks (Butters 2008c; Shuy 2002),
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
8

 and wills (Danet and Bogoch 1994).
These researchers have focused on a wide range of linguistic features – of expression,
including lexis, syntax, semantics and pragmatics, and also of reception: comprehensi-
bility, complexity and readability. When we consider the language of legal talk, we have
to also examine turn-taking rules and speech acts.
Tiersma (1999: 1) observes that ‘Our law is a law of words’ and he traces its history
from its roots in ancient Britain, through the multilingual Latin and French period to the
present day. He notes that:
there is no single, easy answer to the question of how legal language came to be
what it is. Much of the explanation lies in a series of historical developments, each
of which left its mark on the language of the law.
(Tiersma 1999: 47)
The extensive range of research on legal language, its history and its distinctive text types
exempliﬁes what Maley (1994: 13) calls the ‘great eﬄorescence of interest in the
language of the law’. As she notes, much of this research and writing, in addition to
being descriptive, is critical. And Tiersma (1999: 69) argues that reform of legal language
may be necessary to protect lawyers from public criticism and rejection, since one
perception is that legalese is unnecessarily exclusive and that preserving stylistic features,
such as lengthy and complex sentences with a high degree of subordination and
embedding, wordiness, conjoined phrases and impersonal constructions, ‘excludes those
who do not belong’. However, Bhatia (this volume) counter-argues that, in legislative
writing, processes of simpliﬁcation (carried out under a reformist project) can lead to
under-speciﬁcation and this has implications for power and control. If the legislature goes
for simplicity, it paradoxically gives power to the judiciary to interpret the law and takes
it away from the people, which the legislature represents. Even so, the changes stimulated
by the Plain English campaign are interesting and Tiersma’s chapter on the simpliﬁcation
of the California Pattern Jury Instructions is instructive.
Rock (2007) also combines descriptive and critical approaches to the analysis of two
texts, The Anglo-Welsh caution and Notice to Detained Persons, whose use in a series
of police stations she studied in depth. She notes that these two legal texts are capable of
creating issues in relation to: diﬃculty, multifunctionality, performativity, politics, literacy and
diﬀerence (Rock 2007: 8–12). Rock’s treatment highlights a number of important aspects
which are true of most legal texts. Like Danet and Bogoch (1994) she emphasises their
performative aspect and the productive and receptive challenges these texts provide for users.
Police oﬃcers demonstrate a range of attitudes to institutionality in their explanations of
the caution, and suspects display a range of understanding and misunderstanding of their
rights. Like Bhatia, Rock partially rejects the simpliﬁcation argument, pointing out that,
in rewriting the Notice to Detained Persons to maximise understanding, simplicity can
obscure intent. In her analysis of the revisions of the Notice, Rock (2007: 68–70) shows
that there is a tension between simpliﬁcation and comprehensiveness. A badly simpliﬁed text
can be heard as patronising, and also simpliﬁcation risks ‘register shift, thus changing the
Notice’s character’. Even worse, simpliﬁcation may create misunderstanding or even transmit
an erroneous message.
INTRODUCTION
9

Linguistic features of legal writing
We have already mentioned some of the linguistic features that have been described and
criticised in the plethora of research to date. A range of these features is summarised in
Table 1.1, along with examples. For ease of reference the features have been organised
alphabetically rather than by linguistic sub-domain, such as syntax or semantics.
Table 1.1 Some of the researched linguistic features of legal language
Linguistic domain
Research
Examples
Binominal expressions and
listing
Gustafsson 1975,
1984
Mellinkoﬀ1963
by and with
write, edit, print or publish
act or omission
Cohesion
Bhatia 1994
See ‘textual mapping’ in Bhatia 1994
Complex prepositions
prep+noun+prep
Gustafsson 1975
Mellinkoﬀ1963
Swales and Bhatia
1983
in respect of
for the purpose of
by virtue of
Generic/cognitive
structuring
Bhatia 1994
Swales and Bhatia
1983
Two-part move structure of [provision] and
(qualiﬁcation):
[The Chief Land Registrar shall] (if so requested by the
Secretary of State) [supply him](on payment of the
appropriate fee) [with an oﬃce copy of any document
required]
Impersonal noun phrase
constructions – lack of
pronoun use in repeated
references
Tiersma 1999
Lundquist 1995
Maley 1994
The sex oﬀender shall register
The plaintiﬀalleges
The lessor shall
Legal archaisms
Gibbons 2003
Hager 1959
O’Barr 1982
Tiersma 1999
Archaic deictic: hereunder
Modal verb: shall
Be it enacted – the subjunctive enactment formula in
Statutes.
Modality
Foyle 2002
Wagner 2002
may, shall and must as frequent modal verbs.
Ambiguity of may: epistemic and deontic.
Negation
Tiersma 1999
innocent misrecollection is not uncommon (California jury
instruction)
Nominalisation
representing processes
Maley 1994
Bhatia 1994
Tiersma 1999
On the prosecution of a person for bigamy…
The girl’s injury happened at
Passive constructions
Tiersma 1999
Trosborg 1995
one hour is allotted for oral argument
This agreement shall be interpreted
Sentence length and
complexity –
subordination, qualiﬁcation
and embedding
Austin 1984
Bhatia 1994
Gustafsson 1975
Hiltunen 1984
Hill and King 2004
See example (1) and ‘generic and cognitive
structuring’ (this table)
Specialised, distinctive and
technical legal lexis
Trosborg 1997
Tiersma 1999
Gibbons 2003
Coulthard and
Johnson 2007
Frequency of any
Impersonal nouns: the parties, any person
Legal lexis: defendant, mens rea, recognisance, testator
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
10

Example (1) below, which is extracted from a Singaporean Act (Bhatia 1994: 142),
shows virtually all of the features listed in Table 1.1 in a single punctuated sentence. You
may like to tick them oﬀfor yourself.
(1)
No obliteration, interlineation or other alteration made in any will after the
execution thereof shall be valid or have eﬀect except so far as the words or eﬀect of
the will before such alteration shall not be apparent, unless such alteration shall be
executed in like manner as hereinbefore is required for the execution of the will;
but the will, with such alteration as part thereof, shall be deemed to be duly exe-
cuted if the signature of the testator and the subscription of the witnesses be made
in the margin or on some other part of the will opposite or near to such alteration
or at the foot or end of or opposite to a memorandum referring to such alteration
and written at the end or some other part of the will.
(Section 16 of the Wills Act, 1970, Republic of Singapore)
The example is particularly rich in nominalisations, for example, ‘No obliteration,
interlineation or other alteration’, but the phrase also exempliﬁes two other of the listed
features: negation and listing with ‘or’. Pretty much any short extract from a legal statute
or contract will be characterised by the generic and register features shown in Table 1.1
and in example (1).
One side of the critical argument in the discussion of the complexity of legal language
is that it is deliberately so and its purpose is to distance the layperson and obfuscate; the
other side of the critical argument is that legalese is the way it is because of what it is
doing. Although we can say that the primary function of statutes and laws is to try to
regulate human behaviour through communicative acts that place obligations and
prohibitions on members of society (it also sometimes gives permissions), there are
paradoxical (Flückiger 2008) and competing tensions in legal writing: vagueness and
precision, ambiguity and clarity, ﬂexibility and certainty, simplicity and inclusivity. Long
sentences with subordination and embedding, for example, can be accounted for in terms
of avoiding uncertainty and attempting to achieve all-inclusiveness (see Bhatia, this
volume), but, in terms of speech (consider English’s example (this volume) of a police
oﬃcer speaking ‘like a statute’ to a non-native speaker: ‘I require you to provide two
specimens of breath for analysis by means of an approved device’), their primary purpose
seems to be to exploit complexity.
But can we really use diﬀerent arguments to explain the same phenomenon? Is not
complexity always obfuscation? Perhaps not; complex prepositions are semantically more
precise than simple ones and therefore avoid vagueness. They are found in legal speech as
well as in writing, though probably not as densely, although as yet there is no systematic
comparative study of their use (or many other lexical features) across both modes and in
large corpora (but consider Finegan, this volume, on adverbs and adverbials in his COSCO
corpus). Impersonal terms are vague, but inclusive and ﬂexible in statutes and contracts
and, as Trosborg (1997: 103) says, the impersonal and decontextualised third person point
of view, created, for example, by the selection of the noun phrase ‘any person’ rather
than use of the personal pronoun ‘you’, ‘reduces the immediacy of the illocution, but
adds to the generality of the message’ and creates a necessary ‘social distance between
sender and receiver’. Rock (2007), in her discussion of revisions of the Notice to
Detained Persons, supports this view in both reference to other research – Solomon
INTRODUCTION
11

(1996: 289) found that simpliﬁcation can create ‘friendly’ texts ‘as if this kind of rela-
tionship can be assumed’ – and with her ethnographic work. Some of her informants
liked the informality of one of the revisions, but others felt ‘that simpliﬁcation can be
overdone’, saying:
it comes across as being ‘we’re here to help’
these guys shouldn’t be friendly to me they should be scowling at me and saying
‘you’re a naughty boy aren’t you’ [Novice detainee 25]
(Rock 2007: 70)
Flexibility of meaning and interpretation is also desirable when putting the law to its
regulatory and punitive uses (but see Bhatia, this volume). By selecting a specialised
legal word such as ‘reasonable’ legislators can, for example, give judges ﬂexibility and
discretion in dealing with oﬀences. In the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008
(OPSI 2008), for instance, there are 27 occurrences of the word ‘reasonable’. One of
these is: ‘A person who without reasonable excuse fails to comply with a condition
imposed under this section commits an oﬀence’ (133, 5). In this Act and others, ‘rea-
sonable’ collocates
with: ‘action’,
‘belief’, ‘cause’, ‘enquiries’, ‘excuse’,
‘force’,
‘grounds’, ‘mistake’, ‘person’, ‘precautions’ and ‘steps’. Looking at the collocates of the
word tells us more about the kinds of meanings entailed by ‘reasonable’, but not what
it actually means. This kind of ﬂexibility in drafting practice, according to Maley (1994:
28), ‘contrast[s] with the other, and more typical, drafting devices … those employing
technical terms, repetition, single sentence sections with involved syntactic structures,
which are intended to achieve certainty in the legal rule’. The regulatory voice of legal
writing gains authority through its power to be ﬂexible, while at the same time being
precise.
Interaction in the legal process
We illustrate the nature and context of legal interaction with just three research themes
that are important in any analysis of interaction in the legal process: asymmetry, audience
and context. These issues interact, as we shall see.
Asymmetry
Asymmetry in dialogue is deﬁned by Linell and Luckmann (1991: 4) in terms of
‘inequivalences’ rather than inequalities, since they say they ‘prefer to use that term for
various background … conditions for dialogue, such as (diﬀerences in the distribution of)
knowledge and social positions’. Asymmetry includes both global patterns of dominance
and local properties such as ‘the allocation of speaker versus listener roles’. According to
Linell and Luckmann (1991: 9) asymmetries are multidimensional and can contain four
types of dominance:
Quantitative dominance concerns the relation between the parties in terms of
amount of talk … (words spoken).
Interactional dominance has to do with the distribution of ‘strong’ versus ‘weak’
interactional moves … .
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
12

Semantic dominance [relates to who determines] topics sustained in the discourse,
and impos[es] the interpretive perspectives on things talked about.
Strategic dominance involve[s who] contribut[es] the strategically most important
interventions.
(Linell and Luckmann 1991: 9)
In thinking about asymmetries it helps to consider what symmetrical discourse is like
in order to consider where the balance of roles is diﬀerent. Symmetrical discourse
presupposes conditions such as:
 commonality (or sharedness) of knowledge (etc.) between people;
 mutuality (of knowledge and assumptions) of common ground;
 reciprocity in the circumstances, so that in the co-presence of others, any act by one
actor is an act with respect to the other and with the expectation that the other
will do something in return.
(adapted from Linell and Luckmann 1991: 2–3)
These aspects vary in strength, moving the discourse from symmetrical to asymmetrical as
the variables of commonality, mutuality and reciprocity are weakened by the global
context of role, genre and situation (who? what? and where?).
Audience
Who is speaking and to whom is important in relation to the symmetrical/asymmetrical
balance; Linell and Luckmann (1991: 9) talk of ‘roles tied to professions’ and the power
such roles give to institutional speakers (e.g. police interviewers and prosecuting
barristers), but even greater power is derived from their knowledge and orientation to
the conduct and design of their talk for the future audience. Heritage (2003: 57),
examining news interviews, says that ‘skill in question design is at the heart of the
interviewer’s (IRs) craft’ and questions ‘can be primarily geared to the concerns and
preoccupations of either the questioner, the answerer, the overhearing audience, or all
three of these to varying degrees’ (Heritage 2003: 61). Although he is writing about the
television viewing audience, there are direct implications for looking at audience design
in questions in legal interaction. Audiences for police interviews are future courtroom
juries and judges, and records are made for that future audience: either in note form or as
audio- or video-recordings. As in news interviews, ‘the IR [interviewer] can manage
questioning so that particular presuppositions are incorporated in the design of questions
and at varying levels of embeddedness’ and
the IR can manage questions so that particular audience expectations for the IE’s response
are mobilised: expectations that the IE may need to resist, and where such resistance
may incur an additional burden of explanation than might otherwise be the case.
(Heritage 2003: 86)
But the diﬀerence for us with our legal focus is that the IE in a police interview is much
less aware of the future co-present audience than is the television IE. This adds to the
asymmetrical power of the police interviewer and the dominance of the legal context.
INTRODUCTION
13

Context
Asymmetries are contextualised in the ‘endogenous and exogenous conditions’ of talk
(Linell and Luckmann 1991: 10), that is in ever widening circles, ﬁrst within the dialo-
gue, then outside the talk itself in the institutional context and then further out in the
wider social context (see Fairclough 1989). Thus, meaning works at multiple levels in the
micro-detail of sound, semantics, syntax and non-linguistic semiotics (gesture and gaze)
and in the macro-systems of activity type (Levinson 1992), identity and institutionality.
Finegan has shown us, in his chapter, the polysemantic nature of adverbs and he
demonstrates how an empirical micro-analysis combined with a corpus linguistic
approach can uncover the rich semantic detail of attitudinal stance and emphasis that is
below the level of notice for the judges who use them. Stygall, in her chapter, which
focuses on Pension Plan documents and credit-card disclosures, shows the importance of
the ‘context of reception’, not just of the ‘context of production’ (Fairclough 1989). She
shows that text producers fail to take account of the literacy levels of citizens, lay readers
who need to process these highly complex hybrid legal/ﬁnancial documents.
Lay individuals are always disadvantaged in institutional contexts because they lack an
institutional perspective and lack knowledge of the hybrid institutional registers they
encounter, as Linell and Jönsson (1991: 96) also point out: lay interviewees are seen to
have a personal perspective with regard to their own stories and this generally conﬂicts
with the more ‘anonymizing case-type’ institutional perspective. The pragmatic resources
that are mobilised by institutional speakers mean that blame is assigned in ‘institutiona-
lised communicative acts’ (Linell, Alemyr and Jönsson 1993), which assume collaboration
with the communicative project of interviews or cross-examination: the admission of
responsibility. Therefore, as Scollon and Scollon (2003: 1) point out, one of the jobs of
discourse analysis in the twenty-ﬁrst century is to explain meanings made ‘in place’, what
they term geosemiotics: ‘the study of the social meanings of the material placement of signs
and discourses and of our actions in the material world’ (Scollon and Scollon 2003: 2). In
such a view of meaning-in-context, the abstract meanings made by text producers only
gain meaning when we act on them in our daily lives and there may be a semantic gap
between one and the other, which it is incumbent on us to explain.
The work of the forensic linguist as expert
Linguistics has a long tradition of describing written and spoken texts and so the
description of legal texts and of interactions in a legal context, as exempliﬁed, for
example, in Mellinkoﬀ(1963), Solan (1993), Tiersma (1999) and Heﬀer (2005), could
quite easily be regarded as a sub-branch of descriptive linguistics. So, what essentially
distinguishes forensic linguistics as a separate sub-discipline is its engagement with the
socio-legal consequences of the written and spoken texts it describes. Since the early days
when, with the exception of Svartvik (1968), most experts were working in the US –
Dumas (1990), Levi (1993), Prince (1984) and Shuy (1993b), for example – this
engagement has been almost exclusively reactive, with linguists acting occasionally as
expert witnesses, when invited to do so. The range of topics covered and the number of
diﬀerent methodologies used are now enormous – see many of the chapters in section II
of this Handbook, as well as Coulthard and Johnson (2007), particularly chapter 6 for
examples – and linguists have now had a major eﬀect on the outcome of a large number
of trials (see Coulthard, this volume).
JOHNSON AND COULTHARD
14

More recently, we have seen linguists becoming pro-active and setting out, where
they feel it is necessary to do so, to change and improve what they have described.
Drawing on Caldas-Coulthard, who observed that
discourse is a major instrument of power and control and Critical Discourse Ana-
lysts … feel that it is part of their professional role to investigate, reveal and clarify
how power and discriminatory value are inscribed in and mediated through the
linguistic system. Critical discourse analysis is essentially political in intent with its
practitioners acting on the world in order to transform it.
(Caldas-Coulthard and Coulthard 1996: xi)
We can see them as contributing to a new sub-discipline of Critical Forensic Linguistics
(CFL). Examples of CFL in the Handbook are (amongst others) the work of Tiersma in
improving the comprehensibility of the California Pattern Jury Instructions; the work of
Eades, along with fellow linguists, to provide guidelines for the categorisation of asylum
seekers by means of language tests (see the website accompanying the Handbook for this
document); and the work of Haworth towards increasing the eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness
of investigative interviewing and provision of professional development for police oﬃcers
by the Aston Centre for Forensic Linguistics. Readers will recognise critical and evalua-
tive stances taken in other chapters too, and, like critical linguists, we see part of our role
as clarifying and revealing power and discriminatory values in texts through an analysis of
micro- and macro-linguistic features.
Concluding observation
We are delighted to have been able to assemble such an exciting collection of
contributions which cover all the signiﬁcant areas of forensic linguistics. Whatever your
interests, we are sure that you will ﬁnd things to inform and inspire you in this Handbook.
We ourselves have learned a great deal in putting the collection together. Each chapter
ends with suggestions for further reading, in case you want to pursue a particular topic
in greater depth and there is a wealth of further reading to explore in the very wide
scholarship referred to by contributors and contained in the references. Forensic linguis-
tics has not just come of age; we believe this Handbook will launch the next generation of
researchers into an exciting new world.
There is a website that accompanies this Handbook, which can be found on Aston
University’s website for the Centre for Forensic Linguistics at: http://www.forensiclingu
istics.net/
There are documents and powerpoint shows to support chapters by the following
authors: Eades (Chapter 27), Jessen (Chapter 25), Kredens and Morris (Chapter 30),
Matoesian (Chapter 35), Tkacˇuková (Chapter 22) and Woolls (Chapter 37).
INTRODUCTION
15


Section I
The language of the law
and the legal process


1.1
Legal language


2
Legal talk
Socio-pragmatic aspects of legal talk: police
interviews and trial discourse
Elizabeth Holt and Alison Johnson
Introduction
Probably the most distinctive and most widespread linguistic feature of legal talk is
the question – in both interrogative and declarative form and across a range of for-
ensic settings: emergency calls to the police (Drew and Walker, this volume), police
interviews (Aldridge; Benneworth; Haworth; this volume), lawyer and client interactions
(Kozin 2008) and examination and cross-examination in court (Ehrlich; Felton Rosulek;
Heﬀer; this volume). Lay interactants are largely controlled by and at the mercy of ques-
tions from professionals in dyadic legal encounters: a caller to a 999 or 911 number; an
interviewee in a police interview; a witness in a trial. Any examination of legal talk
must therefore involve an analysis of what is accomplished interactionally through the use
of questions, including accounting for the eﬀects of forensic questioning on the lay
interactant.
Syntactic and formal features of questioning are important aspects of any linguistic
analysis. However, our focus in this chapter is not merely on form, but on the pragmatic
eﬀects of legal talk in two important interactional contexts: police interviews and crim-
inal trials. Pragmatic, social and inferential meaning-making is signiﬁcant for both the
institutional and the lay speaker, and what is done through questions and answers is
particularly clear in cross-examination, as our ﬁrst example (1) from Brennan (1994)
illustrates. This syntactically complex cross-examination question is directed to a child;
embedded clauses are shown by the use of square brackets (our addition).
(1) A cross-examination question to a 15-year-old
Q:
Would it be incorrect [to suggest [that it was not so much a tripping] [but
[because of the state of inebriation of yourself], that you fell over]]?
(Brennan 1994: 216)
Brennan (1994: 212–16) outlines a whole range of linguistic features of cross-examination
questions, including: use of negative; juxtaposition of topics that are not overtly related;
21

nominalisations; multifaceted questions; unclear questions; embedding and much more.
Several of these features are demonstrated in extract (1). It contains a negative:
‘would it be incorrect to suggest’, rather than positive polarity, which adds to the
complexity created by the embedding. It employs the dummy ‘it’, the subjunctive, and a
non-ﬁnite verb, rather than the more direct subject pronoun and ﬁnite verb form: ‘I
suggest’ and these distance the speaker from the accusation contained in the non-ﬁnite
subordinate clause ‘to suggest’. The negative polarity of the question ‘would it be
incorrect?’ makes it more diﬃcult to deny, because denial would have to be in the
aﬃrmative (‘yes’) and denial is more congruent with ‘no’ than ‘yes’. And it contains
nominalisation (‘a tripping’) which is also negated: ‘not so much a tripping’. The double
negation provided by the negative question and then the negated noun makes denial
even more diﬃcult by making an implied comparison. The questioner uses ‘not so much
a tripping but you fell over’, where the pattern, not so much X but more Y, is upgraded
by changing the noun to a verb: ‘a tripping’ and then ‘you fell over’. ‘You fell over’
is absolute, by contrast with the nominalisation of ‘a tripping’, and the indeﬁnite
article ‘a’ is replaced by the accusatory ‘you’. But, as Brennan notes, the complexity and
power of cross-examination questions is not in their syntax alone. It is their pragmatic
force that makes them powerful. Complex syntax does mean that the listener has to
work extremely hard to answer, but these linguistically tactical questions draw their eﬀect
from the fact that the talk is designed to ‘make a witness acquiescent’ and make material
signiﬁcant for the hearer (a jury) in terms of ‘display[ing] evidence’ (Brennan 1994:
209–10).
The arrangement and sequencing of clauses produces a powerful eﬀect too, perform-
ing what Winter (1994) calls a denial–correction sequence. This does the work of
denying the prosecution version of the facts (the witness tripped) and substitutes a more
powerful defence version (the witness fell over while drunk).
DENIAL
CORRECTION
it was not so much a tripping
BUT … that you fell over
And, through the complex syntax, juxtaposition of clauses and embedding, all of the
following meanings are possible:
I suggest: because you were drunk you didn’t trip but you fell over.
you fell over rather than tripping (as you say) and you did that because
you were drunk and out of control.
you are an out-of-control reckless youth.
What the defence does in suggesting that the witness is a reckless drinker is to place him
in a particular social category for the jury. As Levinson (1992: 72) says, the ‘activity’ of
cross-examination has
a corresponding set of inferential schemata [and] these schemata are tied to (derived
from, if one likes) the structural properties of the activity in question. …
[Furthermore, in] activities where questions have a focal role [such as cross-
examination, they function] to extract from the witness answers that build up to
form a ‘natural’ argument for the jury.
(Levinson 1992: 80 and 84)
HOLT AND JOHNSON
22

Our analysis of the question in (1) shows how the jury is led to construct an argument
that is derived from the schema of the anti-social problem-drinker youth. This sort of
person is much less credible as a witness, adding to the ‘credibility gap’ which has already
been ‘partially created by a language mismatch between the lawyer and the child witness’
(Brennan 1994: 216). Brennan (1994: 216) describes this kind of pragmatic work as
‘abusing again’ the child, by (ab)using the goals of cross-examination: to undermine the
prosecution case and prioritise a defence view of the facts for the jury.
Rather than simply seeing language as an abstract grammatical system, then, a socio-
pragmatic view of language is concerned with users of language and the uses to which
they put it (Mey 2001: 29). Socio-pragmatic aspects of legal interaction form a rich
area of study and much is yet to be empirically explored. Here we focus on a small
range of interactional patterns and devices that are used in the construction of questions,
including formulations, repeats of prior testimony, reported speech and evaluative
contrasts.
Legal language
‘Talking like a lawyer’ (Tiersma 1999: 51) involves using legalese as a professional code,
but, as Tiersma (1999: 145) says, ‘when lawyers are suﬃciently motivated, they quickly
abandon legalese’ in courtrooms. In police interviews, too, oﬃcers move strategically
between formal institutional modes of talk and more familiar ones, changing their foot-
ing as Johnson (2006) shows.
The language of written statutes and contracts and many other legal documents has
been described in terms of its complexity (see Bhatia; Stygall; this volume), and legal talk
is also remarkably complex in terms of syntax and structure (as we have seen). However,
it is more remarkable for what it does; it has specialised institutional functions and prag-
matic eﬀects, or as Tiersma (1999: 145) says the courtroom gives us ‘legal language in it
most dramatic setting’. In our examination of legal talk, we explore the ‘dramaturgical
quality of DRS [direct reported speech]’ and its uses in questions not simply ‘to replay an
interaction but also to enable the speaker to simultaneously convey his or her attitude
towards the reported utterance’ (Clift and Holt 2007: 7).
Legal talk – Questions in court trials and police interviews
Central to the nature of legal talk is the system of turn-taking that participants adopt.
Thus, for example, fundamental to the character of court trials is that, at certain points
during the proceedings, the judge and lawyers have long turns where no one else con-
tributes (e.g. during opening and closing speeches and in summing up), whereas the
examination of witnesses proceeds through a series of question and answer exchanges.
Although there can be a considerable number of people present, there are rules con-
cerning who can talk and when (Atkinson and Drew 1979). The same may be said of
police interviews where there are rules that dictate that a police oﬃcer should begin and
end the proceedings, and will invite the suspect to give his version of events and then ask
a series of questions which the interviewee may or may not answer (Heydon 2005;
Benneworth; Haworth; this volume). There are particular rules for any lawyer present
and Stokoe and Edwards (this volume) deal with what is accomplished by these lawyer
turns in police interviews.
LEGAL TALK
23

Maley puts her ﬁnger on a central diﬀerence between legal writing and legal talk
when she says:
Despite popular belief about the esoteric nature of legal language, courtroom dis-
course may not be – except in specialised areas like tax or property law – technical
at all. But the unique and to most newcomers most inaccessible aspect of what goes
on in court lies in its discourse rules. The central business of the court, the exam-
ination of witnesses, is conducted in sequences of question and answer.
(Maley 2000: 247)
The almost insurmountable challenge for lay interactants in spoken legal interaction is
therefore to transcend the powerful institutional discourse rules and to recognise that
courtroom or interview room talk is essentially fairly ordinary language being put to
special use. Institutional participants are expert users, whereas the lay participants –
suspects, witnesses (even expert witnesses) and defendants – are not and, since the key
resource is the highly controlling institutional exploitation of the interrogative turn
or question, institutional users are equipped to exploit the special pragmatic uses that
language can be put to, making legal talk a potent source of institutional control.
In legal settings and other institutional settings (unlike ordinary conversation), turns are
‘preallocated’ (Greatbatch 1988). Not only is the pattern of who can contribute ﬁxed in
advance, the kind of activity they do in their turns is predetermined. Extract (2) is from a
police interview from our data and we can see that the police interviewer’s role is to
question and manage the interaction and the interviewee’s to respond, with little
opportunity to alter the topic or ask questions.
(2)
1 IR: And then you mention this bloke. Do you just want to describe his
2
actions to me? What-what happened?
3 IE:
Well, he-he were stood at the bar for ages and he were like staring
4
over and he kept like look-doing like dirty looks so, I thought oh
5
I didn’t think a lot of it-oh no that’s w- and then he went-he sat down
6
and I were looking and he were saying …
7 IR:
So this is the same bloke who’s been assaulted?
8 IE:
Yeah
9 IR:
Right so ﬁrst of all you said that you saw him-you noticed stood
10
at the bar?
11 IE:
Yeah.
12 IR:
And he were looking over towards your group?
13 IE:
Yeah uh hah
14 IR:
Making comments about you?
15 IE:
Yeah.
16 IR:
And then he sat down?
17 IE:
He was-I think he were with a woman, maybe his wife I don’t know,
18
and she were telling him to shut up.
Question and answer pairs, though central to talk in many institutional settings (such as
news interviews, classroom talk, calls to call centres) have speciﬁc roles in police
HOLT AND JOHNSON
24

interviews and a number of distinctive features. For example in (2) we note that several
of the questions begin with ‘and’ or ‘so’ (lines 1, 7, 9, 12 and 16) and we will consider
the function of these questions in the next section.
Extract (2) demonstrates some of the diﬀerent forms and purposes of questions. They
may take the form of interrogatives, for example, what, where and why questions (e.g.
‘what happened?’ line 2); they may involve a statement plus a tag question (e.g. ‘This was
February the fourteenth wasn’t it’); or a declarative which functions as a question,
sometimes with questioning intonation (i.e. a rise at the end) (e.g. line 7, 9, 12, 14
and 16). Researchers exploring legal talk (and other institutional environments such as
news interviews) have noticed patterns in the design of questions that are associated
with particular actions in these environments: and- and so-prefaced questions (Johnson
2002), formulations (Heritage and Watson 1979; Heritage 1985) and reported speech
(Philips 1986; Matoesian 2000; Galatolo 2007). These devices, recurrently employed in
questions (and sometimes in other parts of trial discourse such as the use of reported
speech in summing up), are often central to one of the main aims of legal discourse: to
establish the culpability of one or more parties involved. They are also central to the
asymmetry that exists between the participants in these environments (Heydon 2005;
Drew 1992).
Gibbons (2003: 95) points out that questions in legal settings have two objectives:
1. eliciting information and 2. obtaining conﬁrmation of a version of events that the
questioner has in mind. Many of the devices considered in the subsequent sections
appear to be mainly concerned with the latter objective.
And- and so-prefaced questions
Johnson (2002) investigated so-prefaced and and-prefaced questions in police interviews.
She found that so-prefaced questions are used to construct evidential discourse and to
evaluate and label (Francis 1994) previous utterances produced by the interviewee.
Adults who are suspected of being involved in serious criminal oﬀences are largely able,
but unwilling, to produce an extensive account of something that may incriminate; for
this reason so-prefaced questions perform a key role for interviewers. They allow them to
repeat previous interviewee discourse, and in the process evaluate and label it, signalling
its signiﬁcance in the developing narrative and producing weighted evidence (lines 17 and
18 in extract (3)). In addition, we can see that these questions can be used by the inter-
viewer to challenge IE to say more (lines 3–4) and to get the interviewee to reformulate
an earlier position (lines 25–26).
(3) Interview with rape suspect
1 IR:What did he say?
2 IE: Nothing.
3 IR:So what other conversation was there about T [the rape complainant]
4
then?
5 IE: That was about it.
6 IR:What he-him suggesting that you and K had sex with her in her r-
7 IE: Mm.
8 IR:A- and with or without her consent?
9 IE: No. With her consent.
LEGAL TALK
25

…
10 IR:Did T tell you to go in there and uhh speak to her?
11 IE: Yeah
12 IR:And did K tell you to go in there and shag her? You’re nodding your
13
head.
14 IE: Yes.
15 IR:And did D tell you to go in there and shag her as well?
16 IE: Yeah.
17 IR:So you were a bit under pressure really to go in there and – have sex
18
with her weren’t you?
19 IE: Mm.
…
20 IR:-at that stage she was obviously saying to you she didn’t want you to
21
have sex with her otherwise you wouldn’t have said those words would you?
22 IE: No.
23 IR:D’you see? You’re nodding your head.
24 IE: Yes.
25 IR:So is it fair to say then that before you had sex with her she was
26
certainly saying to you she didn’t want to have sex with you?
27 IE: She says she don’t know I think.
28 IR:You think?
29 IE: As far as I can remember.
So-prefaced questions therefore have an important function in evaluatory summary and are
eﬀective in challenging and transforming the interviewee’s account, to such an extent
that they may be forced to reformulate it in a way that is evidentially more signiﬁcant (see
also Johnson 2008a, 2008b; Kozin 2008; on transformation of ongoing discourse in legal
processes). And, as we see in lines 25–26 in (3), indirect reported speech is also used within
the so-prefaced question to summarise. (We return to reported speech later in the chapter.)
Also, countering the powerless asymmetry analysis in the literature, Johnson (2002)
argues that these questions have a vital function in interviews with child witnesses. Here
the goal for the interviewer is to elicit and represent evidence as fully as possible, using
the child’s words and as much relevant narrative as possible. Since children may be
unwilling and/or unable to produce large stretches of spontaneous narrative, so- and and-
prefaced questions have an important positive role. In this setting power is used
supportively, since the questions construct, ‘scaﬀold’, support, arrange and rearrange the
discourse into a narrative that empowers the child, though this depends on the skill
of the interviewers. Aldridge (this volume) gives some examples of the diﬃculties
and challenges faced by interviewers of young children and gives some instances of
miscommunication and unproductive interviewing.
Johnson (2002) also notes that in interviews with child witnesses, so-prefaced questions
have topic opening, developing and sequencing functions, though Heydon (2005: 141)
notes their use as ‘disjunctive topic shift’ markers in interviews with adult suspects. In
extract (4) from the ﬁrst 60 interviewer turns from an interview with a child we see how
so-prefacing marks topic development.
(4) So-prefacing at the start of an interview with a child.
HOLT AND JOHNSON
26

21 IR:Right so are D and G your brothers?
36 IR:Three. Right. So can you tell me who sleeps in what bedroom then?
52 IR:Ah. Right. So does he work away from home a lot?
53 IR:Oh. Right. So was he at your birthday?
The eﬀect of so in questions with suspects also signals topic development, but is additionally
used to signal the status of the talk and often marks challenges to the suspect in relation
to the evidential value of the talk, as in extract (5) from an interview with a suspect.
(5) Challenging so
1 IR:And how many drinks did you have in the Indian restaurant?
2 IE: One.
3 IR:So are you saying that all evening you had four pints?
4 IE: Mm.
IE’s responsibility to agree or disagree, is also signalled, with a preference for agreement,
because part of the challenge is that they have said it. In extract (5) preferred agreement
also seeks to get the IE to accept that his own account is not believed, through the
evaluative ‘all evening’. Together with and-prefaced questions (see also Heritage and
Sorjonen 1994; Matsumoto 1999), they help to construct narrative sequence through
interviewer turns. In this way, it is often the interviewer who tells the story, as we see in
the brief sequence in extract (5).
And-prefaced questions are also very common in trial interaction to do storytelling, as
we see in extract (6) from the trial of Harold Shipman (www.the-shipman-inquiry.
org.uk).
(6) Examination of Shipman by defence barrister, Shipman Trial, Day 27
Q: By September 1997 you took up your position at the Donneybrook House
practice. You were there with a number of other doctors?
A: I was.
Q: How many?
A: 6.
Q: And after one year in practise ?(sic) did you become a partner at that practice?
A: I did.
Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 102) found that of the ﬁrst 19 questions put to Shipman
by his friendly counsel 15 required only conﬁrmation and and-prefaced questions
accounted for 6 of these (including the one in extract (6)), allowing the lawyer to ani-
mate the witness’s story and develop an extended narrative on behalf of the witness with
only minimal responses and interruptions from him. This enables co-production of
authoritative evidence with minimum eﬀort.
Formulations
Garﬁnkel and Sacks observed that participants in interaction may sometimes formulate
what it is they are saying:
LEGAL TALK
27

A member may treat some part of the conversation as an occasion to describe that
conversation, to explain it, or characterize it, or explicate, or translate, or sum-
marize, or furnish the gist of it, or take note of its accordance with the rules, or
remark on its departure from the rules. That is to say, a member may use some part
of the conversation as an occasion to formulate the conversation.
(Garﬁnkel and Sacks 1970: 350)
Heritage and Watson noticed that formulations are a recurrent feature of questions in news
interviews. They focused on a subclass of formulations, where they ‘characterize states of
aﬀairs already described or negotiated … in the preceding talk’ (Heritage and Watson 1979:
126). Heritage and Watson describe formulations as manifesting three central properties:
(1) the preservation of some (selected) aspects of the sense and reference of the news
materials delivered in the content of the formulating utterance
(2) the transformation of the syntactic and semantic framework within which the
news was originally delivered
(3) the deletion of some aspect or aspects of the news delivered.
(Heritage and Watson 1977: 2–3)
Extract (7) is from their collection:
(7)
IE: The inescapable facts are these, er in nineteen thirty two when he was er
aged twenty three mister Harvey was er committed to Rampton hospital
under something called the mental deﬁciency act nineteen thirteen which
of course is a statute that was swept away years ago and er he was
committed as far as I can er ﬁnd out on an order by a single magistrate er
sitting I think in private.
IR:How long did he spend in Rampton
IE: Well he was in er Rampton and Mosside hospitals er alternatively
Er until nineteen sixty one
! IR:That’s the best part of thirty years
IE: That’s right. Now in nineteen sixty one …
(Heritage and Watson 1979: 130)
In the (arrowed) formulation the interviewer preserves some information, the length of time
spent in hospital, deletes other information, such as the hospitals; and transforms the information,
by, for example, referring to the number of years spent there rather than the numerical names
of the years (Heritage and Watson 1979: 130; see also Heritage and Watson 1980).
According to Drew (2003) formulations are a generic device in interaction, but the
forms they take are associated with the activities managed through formulating in speciﬁc
settings, and formulations have diﬀerent interactional functions in diﬀerent settings. He
focuses on those formulations
in which a speaker oﬀers his or her interpretation of what the other meant – an
activity which generally takes the form (So) what you mean/are saying is … , or
something resembling that.
(Drew 2003: 296)
HOLT AND JOHNSON
28

Heydon (2005) considers formulations in police interviews. Extract (8) is from her collection
and concerns, in part, alleged criminal damage to the door of a shop.
(8)
IR: uh you saw the glass shatter to the ground
IE: (0.4) I jest kept walking#
(0.2) I just got in the car =
And Rob (0.6) me friend said what the hell’s going on
(0.4) whaddcha do
! IR: (1.2) so you didn’t bother saying anything to them#
!
that the glass was broken or#
(Heydon 2005: 123, Extract 4–26 INT1)
IR formulates IE’s turns about walking to the car as suggesting that he ‘didn’t bother
saying anything to them#’ (Heydon 2005: 137). According to Heydon, formulations are
a powerful tool in constructing the police version of events because they appear to be a
summary, for the sake of achieving understanding, of prior talk. But, in instances ana-
lysed by Heydon, changes made to the suspect’s version ‘systematically introduce terms
of violence and intentionality that were not present in the original utterances’ (Heydon
2005: 141). Komter (1998, 2003, 2006) also examined formulations in police interviews
and found that they are an important resource in stating ‘the record-thus-far’ (Komter
2006: 201).
Holt and Johnson (2006) analysed a device similar to formulations in police interview
data. ‘Repeating questions’ were found to have a similarly formulating function, but in
these questions, police interviewers speciﬁcally attempt to preserve the interviewee’s
words or phrases sometimes through the use of reported speech. Direct repetition of IE’s
previous words does the work of drawing attention to a prosecution point for the record,
but these repetitions are arguably even more powerful ways of recording prosecution
arguments for future audiences than formulations which change the words of the suspect.
Repeating questions
Extract (9) is a repeating question from a police interview involving an assault charge.
(9)
1
IR: How-I mean what did th-what impression did he give, what was
2
he going to do with the stool?
3
IE: He were going to hit him he had it above his head and he were like
4
going for him.
5
IR: What did your brother do?
6
IE: He like he’d stopped and were going to grab it going up like that
7
but I had already hit him so he fell down before he had a chance
8
to hit him.
9 ! IR: So you thought that he were going to hit your brother with a stool?
10
IE: Yeah
The question in line 9 repeats elements of the suspect’s story mentioned earlier in the
interview. In lines 3 and 4, IE has already said, in answer to the preceding question, that
LEGAL TALK
29

he believed the victim was going to hit his brother with a stool. In line 5, IR asks a
related question about the suspect’s brother’s actions. Then in line 9, IR does a repeat of
IE’s earlier answer: he repeats ‘he were going to hit’ (him/your brother) and adds ‘you
thought’, transforming it, not in the words attributed to IE, but in the comment clause
which adds the interviewer’s viewpoint.
Holt and Johnson (2006) note four recurrent features of the design of these questions:
1. they are often so-prefaced; 2. grammatically they are not built as questions; 3. they
repeat elements of the interviewee’s testimony, often bringing several elements together;
4. they invite conﬁrmation. Extract (10) illustrates all these features.
(10)
1
IE:
Now then, what did he say? I’ve g-he said I’ve come to talk
2
to you I said you want to go talk to the police not bloody me.
3
((cough)) And he swung at me. I pushed him back with my foot
4
he had hold of me foot and my slipper came oﬀwith him and I got
5
the kettle which I had on a shelf at the side with acid in and I tossed
6
it on him but unfortunately as he was coming towards me I brought
7
the kettle back and got the bloody acid on myself.
8
IR:
Right
…
23 ! IR:
Right. Just bringing it back to tonight though [First Name] erm so
24 !
he came to your house and you say he took a swing at you?
25
IE:
He took a swing at me
The repeating question in lines 23 and 24 begins with ‘so’; it is not built as an inter-
rogative; it repeats elements of the interviewee’s testimony – that the person in question
came to his house (referred to earlier in the interview) and that he ‘swung’ at him; and it
invites conﬁrmation by the interviewee which it gets in the form of a repeat of the last
part. These questions often, but not always, have a ‘you say’ or other reporting clause,
emphasising the repetition of IE’s own prior talk.
Holt and Johnson (2006) also found that these repeating questions play an important
role in the overall organisation of the interview. They can be used as summaries by
linking back across prior turns to bring together several matters mentioned previously (as
in extract (10)). In so doing they can initiate a series of questions or bring a section of the
interview to a close. An initial so-prefaced question can begin a series of and-prefaced
questions or end a series of and-prefaced questions that all serve to conﬁrm aspects of the
interviewee’s testimony (as in extract (3) lines 10–19 above). Thus, they are part of a
freeze-frame eﬀect in the interview where the IE’s narrative is frozen and, in that
moment of productive paralysis, it is examined by IR, reformulated and then the narra-
tive is restarted. These are moments where evidence is examined and created or ‘ﬁxed’
for the record (see also Kozin 2008: 221, 226, 235, 236 for ‘ﬁxing’ of items in talk-to-
talk transformations). Kozin (2008) discusses the dangers associated with such ﬁxing, as it
settles facts that may not be settled and this has consequences as the facts travel across the
legal process, taking on further signiﬁcance.
The reporting of speech
There are two main ways of reporting speech: directly (sentence (a)) and indirectly (b).
HOLT AND JOHNSON
30

(a) Direct reporting:
I said, ‘I’d really love to come for dinner, and I was really
looking forward to it, but I’m too busy’.
(b) Indirect reporting: I explained that I was just far too busy to go round to eat.
As Toolan (2001: 124) points out, neither is a verbatim report, but ‘direct speech pre-
tends to be a faithful verbatim report of a person’s actual words’. However in indirect
speech, the speech of the reported speaker is not simply reproduced, but ‘instead, the
narrator’s words and deictic orientation’ are foregrounded as the reported speech
becomes subordinate to the main reporting clause (Toolan 2001: 124). So, if we com-
pare sentence (a) with sentence (b), we can see that in (b) the speech is summarised and
summary brings with it the capacity for the speech to be ‘fairly remote from [its] hypo-
thesized speech source’ (Toolan 2001: 124). An even more remotely reported version is
shown in (c).
(c) I politely excused myself from dinner on account of my hectic schedule.
In (c) the reporting verb ‘excused’ transforms the act of saying or explaining something
into a speech act of excusing and the adverb ‘politely’ represents the manner of the
excuse. The noun phrase ‘my hectic schedule’ tells the listener more than the direct
speech ‘I’m far too busy’ and indirect speech therefore has the power to do pragmatic
and inferential work. In legal contexts of evidence giving, it is important for witnesses to
report as accurately as possible what was said, and ‘the hearsay rule’ means that witnesses
may only report their own words or what they have direct knowledge of, that is they
must have been present when someone said something, but clearly cross-examiners can
question witnesses about the accuracy of their attempted report. The remote reporting of
(c) would attract even more probing questioning to get closer to the actual words and, if
a witness makes a report based on what someone else said they heard, that would be
rejected as hearsay. Witnesses therefore have a legal need to report faithfully, but, as we
have seen, police interviewers (extract (3) above) and lawyers use a range of direct,
indirect and more remote ways of reporting what might have been said with diﬀerent
eﬀects. In the interview with an IE suspected of rape in extract (3) the interviewer uses a
range of ways to get at what was said by the victim. In lines 21–22 (extract (3)) IR says:
IR:She was obviously saying to you she didn’t want you to have sex with her.
This turn uses the summarising power of indirect reported speech (IRS) to persuade the
suspect to accept a version of events, and in another exchange between IR and IE we see
that IE uses direct reported speech (DRS) to counter the IRS of IR:
IR:She says that she deﬁnitely said no. (Pause) She did say no didn’t she at that
stage?
IE: She said, ‘I don’t know’.
So far we have been focusing on systematic patterns identiﬁed within questioning turns
in court trials and police interviews, but reported speech occurs in both questions and
answers during legal talk, as we have just seen, and in monologue (see Felton Rosulek,
this volume, for an analysis of its use in trials in closing speeches). One of the central
features of reported speech is its evidential function: that is, not only does it purport to
LEGAL TALK
31

portray words (and also thoughts) that occurred previously, but in reproducing them,
evidence (both in the lay and legal sense) of their occurrence is simultaneously provided.
In this respect, DRS, where the speaker claims to oﬀer a verbatim rendition, is seen as
more powerful as witness evidence than IRS (though police oﬃcers and lawyers can do
powerful things with IRS). Philips (1986, 1992) conducted an analysis of American
courtroom trials and found that lawyers exploited the fact that DRS is seen as more
reliable than IRS. Further, in court trials lawyers and judges can elect to have sections of
police interviews ‘reproduced’ by playing recordings, distributing transcripts, or even
having sections enacted for the beneﬁt of the jury. Matoesian, in an analysis of the
Kennedy Smith rape trial analysed a sequence where the defense attorney plays a section
of the recording of a police interview of the witness during cross-examination.
He showed how, although the
tape appears to speak for itself and although its meaning appears transparent, it only
obtains such a quality because the defense attorney possesses the power to con-
textualize it, instruct the jury of its signiﬁcance, and suggest how it should be
interpreted and evaluated.
(Matoesian 2000: 897)
Galatolo (2007) found that witnesses in an Italian court trial recurrently made use of
reported speech in their answers. She found that answers often consisted of two parts: a
direct answer to the question (e.g. ‘yes’ or ‘no’) followed by an expansion. Reported
speech recurrently occurs in the expansion. Extract (11) is from her collection (here
we have only reproduced the English translation of the talk). The trial concerned the
murder of a university student who was shot as she walked through the campus. Two
students from the Philosophy and Law department were charged. However, the role of
the director of the department, Professor Romano, was also questioned. The witness in
the extract was a researcher in the department and she is under direct and therefore
friendly examination.
(11)
PM: excuse me but did it happen often that Professor Romano in the evening
called you at home to ask [how you were"
L:
[it had never-
(.) it had never happened.hhh e: hm he said (2.0) pt.h did you see
anything (0.5) or hear anything"
(Galatolo 2007: 204, Extract 3) (PM: Prosecutor, L: witness)
In the denial ‘it never happened’ the witness rejects both the prosecutor’s ‘did it happen’
and what is inferred in IRS ‘how you were’, that is: ‘Was your professor in the habit of
ringing you up to pass the time of day?’. This is followed by an expansion that
corrects the prosecutor, giving an ‘animation’ of the other person’s words (Galatolo
2007: 204) in DRS. We can see that DRS is a useful device whereby witnesses can try
to show that they have ﬁrst-hand knowledge of events by quoting words, phrases or
entire conversations and this gives witnesses credibility, as their ‘ability to recall the
exact proﬀered words is generally interpreted as being evidence of having directly and
eﬀectively heard those words [and this] is commonly associated with having had a
HOLT AND JOHNSON
32

direct experience with those events’ (Galatolo 2007: 207). In direct examination, there-
fore, correcting the lawyer by replacing IRS with DRS, produces positive eﬀects, as the
witness is able to give evidence of what she presents as verbatim memory and
experience. However, at the same time, if this were done in cross-examination, the
eﬀect would be diﬀerent, since disagreement in cross-examination is risky as it can
negatively aﬀect the jury’s opinion of the witness. We deal with this below in terms of
contrast.
Galatolo also found that reported speech can be used to convey moral judgments
implicitly. Her example is shown in (12) when another witness is examined.
(12)
PM: e:h later when you the next morning (.) went with your
daughter to speak with Professor Romano (.) was this decision
to go-to accompany-(.) your daughter-was it your decision
or was it your daughter tha: [t
NL:
[NO NO my daughter told me
that she didn’t want to go she used this expression
because I don’t trust him.
(Galatolo, 2007: 215, Extract 8) (PM: Prosecutor, NL: witness)
Galatolo draws our attention to the technical form of the reporting expression ‘she used
this expression’ rather than the plainer reporting form ‘she said’, which ‘emphasises the
claim of just reproducing what was said, limiting itself to the level of the linguistic (re)
production, without any claim about what was meant’ (Galatolo 2007: 216).
Emphasis is also added through the use of the proximal deictic ‘this’ making the
DRS immediate and present in the courtroom. And then we have the evaluation in the
DRS: ‘because I don’t trust him’. The implicit nature of the moral evaluation of the
Professor by the father, as well as the daughter, ‘encourages the jury to treat those ele-
ments as indirectly proving that Romano’s behaviour was eﬀectively blameworthy’
(Galatolo 2007: 216). We see then, as Galatolo (2007: 219) points out, that implicit
moral work can be accomplished through the use of reported speech, particularly the
apportioning of blame. The shift from IRS to DRS between question and answer, in
(11) also does pragmatic work in terms of increasing the authenticity of the evidence,
and, as Clift and Holt (2007: 8) point out, shifts of footing from IRS and non-reported
speech into DRS are worthy of greater study (see also Holt 2009). In our brief look at
reported speech, we have seen that there are three central areas of focus, as Clift and
Holt (2007: 3) observe: ‘form’ (whether it is IRS or DRS), ‘authenticity’ (plausible,
probable and improbable quotations) and ‘what is done’ (blame allocation, moral
evaluation, etc.).
Contrasting versions in cross-examination
Pragmatic work is also done across questions and answers through drawing contrasts, as
we saw in the contrast in (11) between ‘often’ and ‘never’ and IRS and DRS. This
works well for friendly examination, but for witnesses in cross-examination there are
risks to this kind of work. In a study of cross-examination in a rape trial, Drew (1992)
explored both features of witnesses’ answers and lawyers’ questions. He notes that, when
disputing a version of events proposed in the attorney’s questions, witnesses can use
LEGAL TALK
33

contrast to avoid overt correction preceded by ‘No’. By oﬀering an alternative version,
they mitigate the risks associated with disagreement. Extracts (13) and (14) are from
Drew (1992).
(13)
A: An’ you went to a: uh (0.9) ah you went to a ba:r? in ((city))
(0.6) is that correct?
(1.0)
W: It’s a clu:b.
(Drew 1992: 489, Extract 11) (A: Attorney, W: Witness)
(14)
A: An during that eve:ning (0.6) uh: didn’t Mistuh ((name))
Come over tuh sit with you
(0.8)
W: Sat at our table.
(Drew 1992: 489, Extract 13)
In (13) and (14) the attorney’s questions are designed to elicit ‘yes’/‘no’ conﬁrmatory
answers, but the witness declines to answer in this way and instead oﬀers descriptions that
implicitly disconﬁrm his version by oﬀering a contrasting version (i.e. describing it as a
‘club’ instead of a ‘bar’; and saying he ‘sat at our table’ rather than sitting with her on her
own). They do not intrinsically exclude hisversion but are ‘qualiﬁed, guarded versions of
what the attorney suggests’ (Drew 1992: 490) and they reject the implied meanings in
the questions concerning the start of a disputed encounter between victim and alleged
rapist. Extract (15) is also from Drew’s collection and in this we can see a contrast device
that the attorney uses in response.
(15)
A: Well you kne:w at that ti:me that the defendant was. in:terested
(.) in you (.) didn’n you?
(1.3)
W: He: asked me how I’(d) bin: en
(1.1)
W: J-just stuﬀlike that
A: Just asked yuh how (0.5) yud bi:n (0.3) but he kissed yuh
goodnight. (0.5) izzat righ:t =
W: = Yeah = he asked me if he could?
(Drew 1992: 479, Extract 3 (fragment))
In answer to the attorney’s question that she knew he was ‘interested in her’, the witness
oﬀers a contrasting version which suggests that the most that happened between them
was that he asked her how she’d been, thus suggesting a much less intimate relationship
than the version conveyed in his question. In response, the attorney brings together two
pieces of evidence to which the witness has already attested, forming a contrast: the
claimed non-intimacy of their greeting, and the intimacy of their parting, thus creating a
puzzle. According to Drew,
HOLT AND JOHNSON
34

The contrast works, then to challenge not her characterization of the greeting itself,
but the credibility of that as an adequate representation of everything else that
happened, of all the scene’s other essential particulars and how they are to be
glossed.
(Drew 1992: 509)
Drew points out that the preallocation of speaker roles and the types of turns they can
take in court trials means that it is only the attorney who is able to put together ‘facts’
from the prior testimony in order to create a contrast that can be seen as damaging to the
cross-examination witness’s testimony. He points out that contrasts are summary devices
and it is only the attorney who uses ‘the power of summary’. Such summaries can end a
line of questioning, thus leaving the jury to draw out the implicit, damaging implications
alluded to in the question.
Conclusion
Reporting, contrasting, formulating and repeating are at the heart of the process of for-
mulating the facts of the legal story in trials and police interviews. Their use produces
important fact-making moments that distil and encode a version of reality, which play an
important part in the legal case: an authorised-authoritative version. Repeating questions,
reported speech and other formulating devices are part of the ‘local accomplishment’ of
police authority in the interview; it is in these moments that interviewers exert their
institutional authority to ‘say what is being said’ for conﬁrmation by the interviewee,
thereby ‘ﬁxing’ the talk and transferring it from the private to the public, institutional
plane of discourse. Reported speech is used in interviews and trial accounts to produce
authoritative evidence and to do moral evaluation while contrast is used by cross-examiners
to put together contradictory versions that produce damaging accounts and, as Buttny
and Cohen (2007) show, ‘drawing on the words of others’ is a way of creating powerful
evidence. All of these devices in some way use repetition or imply summary and the
power of summary is one of the most important pragmatic devices used by institutional
participants in legal talk. It settles on certain facts and makes the ongoing talk evidentially
relevant (see Haworth, this volume for more on evidence).
In the space available here, we can do little more than draw together some observa-
tions on research we and others have carried out. There remains much to be said about
the use, distribution and signiﬁcance of reporting forms. Saying what has been and is
being said in prior texts, in present texts and across texts and contexts is key work done
by institutional speakers across the judicial process and is a central part of evidence con-
struction. Talk about talk – metatalk and metadiscursivity – is at the heart of processes of
legitimating and rejecting evidence in the many contexts where the police oﬃcers, law-
yers and judges formulate the facts of legal stories.
Further reading
Drew, P. (2003) ‘Comparative analysis of talk-in-interaction in diﬀerent institutional settings: a sketch,
in P.J. Glenn, C.D. leBaron, J. Mandelbaum and R. Hopper (eds) Studies on Language in Social Interaction,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 293–308.
LEGAL TALK
35

Galatolo, R. (2007) ‘Active voicing in court’, in E. Holt and R. Clift (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported
Speech in Interaction. Studies in Sociolinguistics 24, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 195–220.
Holt, E. (2009) ‘Reported speech’, in S. D’Hondt, J.O. Östman and J. Verschueren (eds) The Pragmatics
of Interaction: Handbook of Pragmatics Highlights 4, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 190–205.
Johnson, A.J. (2008) ‘“From where we’re sat … ”: Negotiating narrative transformation through
interaction in police interviews with suspects’, Special issue of Text & Talk, 28(3): 327–49.
Matoesian, G. (2000) ‘Intertextual authority in reported speech: Production media in the Kennedy
Smith rape trial’, Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 879–914.
Tannen, D. (2007) Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue and Imagery in Conversational Discourse. Studies in
Interactional Sociolinguistics 6 (2nd edition), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
HOLT AND JOHNSON
36

3
Legal writing: speciﬁcity
Speciﬁcation in legislative writing: accessibility,
transparency, power and control1
Vijay K. Bhatia
Introduction
Legal discourse is diﬀerent from most other professional discourses, in that the nature of
its interpretation process, whether spoken or written, is very much dependant on the
context in which it is likely to be applicable. In most professional and disciplinary
contexts interpretation of discourse is largely hearer- or reader-based, in that there is
some freedom for variable interpretation, of course, with some relevance to the context
in which it has been used, but interpretation of legal discourse is most often based
on its relevance and hence application to critical moments in speciﬁc ‘sites of engage-
ment’ (Scollon 1998), and is often irrespective of the participants involved, and every
eﬀort is made to ensure consistency of interpretation. It is particularly so in the case of
legislative writing, which is drafted to correct a speciﬁc social ‘mischief’ and hence
invariably interpreted in the context of relevant descriptions of such instances of ‘mis-
chief’, often treated as the material facts of the case to which a speciﬁc legislative
statement is applied. Seidman, Seidman and Abeyesekere point out that the ‘mischief
rule’ holds that
in construing a statute, a court should ﬁrst examine the social problem at which the
statute aims (the ‘mischief’), determine the means that the statute ordains to address
that mischief, and then construe the statute to further those objectives … Of all the
general principles of interpretation, the mischief rule seems best adapted to ensuring
that courts construe statutes to carry out the legislative purpose.
(Seidman et al. 2001: 293)
In a court of law, particularly in an adversarial system of justice, maximum eﬀort is made
to establish the material facts of the case and this is invariably done in the light of the
applicable law, including the precedents established through relevant earlier judgements.
It is therefore crucial for the negotiation of justice that precedents as well as legislative
37

statements are clearly, precisely, unambiguously and adequately speciﬁed (Bhatia 1982,
1983, 1993).
Clarity, precision, unambiguity and inclusiveness
Legislative rules, as far as possible, should have clarity of expression, in that the legislative
intentions are clearly textualised without any vagueness. Vague expressions, though not
very uncommon in this writing, are often strategically used for speciﬁc reasons, some of
which, we will take up later in the chapter. One important resource for clarity is the use
of terminological explanation, as indicated in example (1) from the UNCITRAL Model
Law Article 2:
(1)
For the purposes of this Law:
(a) ‘arbitration’ means any arbitration whether or not administered by a permanent
arbitral institution;
(b) ‘arbitral tribunal’ means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;
(c) ‘court’ means a body or organ of the judicial system of a State.
(Gotti 2005)
Another device used for clarity is complex-prepositional phrases, such as in accordance with
or in pursuance of, instead of simple prepositions.
The second quality of this genre is precision, which requires the use of as few words as
possible, which is often achieved through the use of nominalised expressions (e.g. No will
shall be revoked by any presumption of an intention on the grounds of an alteration in circum-
stances, s.14 of the Wills Act, Republic of Singapore (Quoted in Bhatia 1993: 107)) to make
sentences shorter and keep clause proliferations under control.
The third desirable characteristic of legislative sentences is unambiguity, which means
certainty of legal interpretation and application, which is often achieved by inserting
relevant qualiﬁcations at speciﬁc syntactic positions, as in example (2) from s.1 of the
Housing Act, 1980, UK:
(2)
A secure tenant has the right—
(a) If the dwelling-house is a house, to acquire the freehold of the dwelling-house;
(b) If the dwelling-house is a ﬂat, to be granted a long lease of the dwelling-house.
(quoted in Bhatia 1993: 112)
The ﬁnal and perhaps the most controversial characteristic is what I have called ‘all-
inclusiveness’, which deals with adequacy of speciﬁcation of legal scope. This requirement of
adequate speciﬁcation further leads to the identiﬁcation of other important issues of
accessibility (comprehensibility and interpretability) and transparency, which have
important implications for the interpretation of legal discourse. In this chapter, I would
like to argue that whereas over-speciﬁcation in legislative expression creates problems
of comprehension, especially for the uninitiated readership, under-speciﬁcation, on the
other hand, creates an even more serious issue of transparency in the construction and
VIJAY K. BHATIA
38

interpretation of legislative intent. Speciﬁcation of scope in legislative statements also
has interesting implications for power and control in diﬀerent socio-political and legal
systems. However, before I take up the issue of speciﬁcation, I would like to discuss,
though brieﬂy, the related notion of ambiguity, which is crucial for this chapter.
Ambiguity
Ambiguity is an inherent property of language; it may stem from a text-internal linguistic
source, e.g. lack of semantic clarity in the use of a particular lexico-grammatical feature, or
from a text-external resource, such as features of context in which the discourse is inter-
preted or to which it is considered applicable. This is particularly so in the case of legislative
discourse, where interpretation is almost entirely dependent on the context in which it
is interpreted and to which it is applied. Ambiguity resulting from text-internal factors
can be viewed as vagueness and indeterminacy, which have considerable overlap. Without
making any detailed attempt in this chapter to identify and diﬀerentiate these notions, I
would like to suggest that both of the terms have potential for the negotiation of meaning
based on the use of a word or expression in a legislative provision, and hence have
been eﬀectively and somewhat creatively used by legal draftsmen in legislative dis-
course. Engberg and Heller (2008) illustrate vagueness resulting from text-internal use
of a particular lexico-grammatical feature in example (3) from the Arbitration Act of
England 1996.
(3)
If without showing suﬃcient cause a party fails to comply with any order or
directions of the tribunal, the tribunal may make a peremptory order to the
same eﬀect, prescribing such time for compliance with it as the tribunal con-
siders appropriate.
(Arbitration Act of England 1996, section 41, 5; emphasis added)
‘This sentence’, they claim,
is inherently vague in that a reader, on the basis of the statute’s wording, will be
unable to decide or describe what amount of justiﬁcation will be adequate in
concrete cases. This diﬃculty is due to the use of the word suﬃcient. Being one of
the key words in the sentence, it leaves it up to the recipient (here the tribunal) to
decide whether in a concrete case the cause is suﬃcient or not; there is no single
answer to be found, without knowledge about the case in question or subjective
interpretation of the utterance through knowledge of previous uses of the
expression.
(Engberg and Heller 2008: 148)
Legislative discourse can also be ambiguous because of lack of speciﬁcation or of
clariﬁcation of semantic information in speciﬁc expressions, in which case we encounter
vagueness, or it may be because of the unpredictability of the scope or the force of
legislative expressions. If it stems from a linguistic source, it is often referred to as
vagueness or indeterminacy (see Engberg and Heller 2008 for a detailed discussion of
these aspects); however, when it stems from the fact that law is inherently contestable
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
39

and hence ambiguous, as it is invariably interpreted in the context of speciﬁc descriptions
of cases, which are almost impossible to predict, it will be viewed as ambiguity (Bhatia
1982, 1993; White 1982). One of the main advantages of vagueness and indeterminacy
in language as well as ambiguity in legal interpretation is that all of them allow the legal
draftsman to bring in often necessary elements of ﬂexibility and discretion by using
vagueness, and precision through the use of qualiﬁcations inserted at various points in the
syntactic structure of legislative provisions (Bhatia 1982, 1993; Maley 1987, 1994;
Channell 1994; Engberg and Heller 2008).
Legislative provisions describe legal action and the cases to which this legal action
applies, which typically state what should be done under what circumstances. However,
it is rare that such a proposition can be captured simply in terms of an ‘if X, then Y’ kind
of syntactic structure; there are often additional qualifying or explanatory conditions
imposed on the doing of such an action (Coode 1845; Crystal and Davy 1969; Bhatia
1982, 1993). There is always a possibility that ambiguity and vagueness will occur in all
the three aspects of the legislative sentence (i.e. the legal subject as well as the legal
provision), case description, or qualiﬁcations (Bhatia 1982) and make it diﬃcult to
interpret or execute a certain kind of legal action. Let me now turn to the main topic of
this chapter, which is, the source of ambiguity that results from inadequate speciﬁcation
of legal scope in legislative discourse.
Speciﬁcation of legal scope
As mentioned earlier, legislative expressions are required not only to be clear, precise and
unambiguous, but all-inclusive too. Although it appears to be a contradiction in terms, a
close analysis will reveal that a clever balance between the two is the essence of the
craftsmanship of legislative intent. Before taking up a detailed illustration of this tension
between precision and all-inclusiveness, I would like to give a brief contextual analysis of
the constraints on legislative construction and interpretation. Draftsmen have always
been conscious of the institutional conﬂicts involved in the speciﬁcation of legislative
intentions as well as the legislative authority, especially in parliamentary democracies.
In parliamentary democracies, legislative authority is invested in the legislature as it
represents the people who elect them, and they zealously guard this right (Renton 1975)
and would not like to hand over this role either to the judiciary or the executive. This
creates the possibility of a three-way institutional conﬂict.
The ﬁrst dimension of this potential conﬂict is between the legislature (the parlia-
mentary institution responsible for making socio-political and economic policies) and the
executive (the government bureaucratic institution responsible for executing policies
discussed and framed in the legislature) especially in parliamentary democracies. The
essence of this conﬂict is the tension between political power that is invested in the
legislature by virtue of the fact that they are elected by the people, and the bureaucratic
privilege that is often available to the members of the government, who have a duty to
implement the socio-political and economic policies of the government and who often
believe that they have the privilege to interpret legislative intent in the context of the
implementation of policies. Since members of the executive are not present in the
legislature when government policies are discussed and formed, there is always a danger
of conﬂict between the interpretations viewed as authoritative by the two institutional
players.
VIJAY K. BHATIA
40

The second dimension of this potential conﬂict is between the legislature and the
judiciary. The basis for such a conﬂict stems from the question, ‘Who has the ultimate
power to give the most authoritative interpretation of legislative intent?’ In parliamentary
democracies, the courts at various levels seem to have wide-ranging freedom to authorise
ﬁnal interpretations of the legislative intent, but on the part of the legislature, one often
ﬁnds maximum control over the way legislative intentions are expressed. A senior par-
liamentary counsel frames it nicely when he points out that no eﬀort is spared ‘to box
the judge ﬁrmly into a corner’ (Edward Caldwell, quoted in Bhatia 1982) from which he
cannot escape.
There’s always the problem that at the end of the day there’s a system of courts and
judges who interpret what the draftsman has done. It is very diﬃcult to box the
judge ﬁrmly into a corner from which he cannot escape … given enough time and
given enough length and complexity you can end up with precision but in practice
there comes a point when you can’t go on cramming detail after detail into a bin.
(Reported in Bhatia 1982: 25)
The third dimension of this potential conﬂict, therefore, is often between the judiciary
and the executive, which allows absolute freedom to interpret legislative intentions to
the system of courts, and at the same time gives unlimited power to the legislature
to give voice to peoples’ socio-political rights and privileges, on the one hand, and
obligations on the other.
Within and across these institutional conﬂicts, it is the job of the legal draftsman to
guard against any possible misinterpretation or misapplication of legislative provisions not
only by any of the institutional players, but also by other citizens in conﬂict who often
are prone to extend their rights and privileges and shrink their obligations to unexpected
limits. It is almost an impossible task to ﬁnd an appropriate degree of balance by giving
expression to legislative intentions in a way to minimise any chance of such mis-
adventures. Another factor that makes their task even more diﬃcult is that they also need
to construct their legislative provisions in such a way as to avoid any potential conﬂict
with any preceded or preceding legislation. Caldwell points out,
Very rarely is a new legislative provision entirely free-standing … it is part of a
jigsaw puzzle … in passing a new provision you are merely bringing one more
piece and so you have to acknowledge that what you are about to do may aﬀect
some other bit of the massive statute book.
(Quoted in Bhatia 1982)
To make matters more complex, these draftsmen are almost universally criticised for
making their provisions inaccessible to ordinary citizens, often questioning their loyalty
to their so-called ‘real readers’. In fact, one may, with some justiﬁcation perhaps, claim
that legal discourse, especially in common law jurisdictions, is an instance of conspiracy
theory, according to which legislative provisions are purposely written in a complex and
convoluted manner, so as to keep ordinary readers out of accessible range and to
perpetuate dependence on the specialist legal community. Danet (1980b) points out:
Critics claim that the professions use language in ways that mystify the public or at
least stultify critical thinking … Critics argue that the language of the professions is
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
41

both a symbol and a tool of power, creating dependence and ignorance on the part
of the public. In Gusﬁeld’s view, it creates the illusion of authority.
(Danet 1980b: 452)
However, legal discourse written in civil law jurisdictions, which may appear to be
simple and plain as compared with similar discourse in common law jurisdictions, pre-
sents a diﬀerent kind of accessibility issue, which is the other side of the coin (Bhatia
2005).
It is necessary to recognise that civil and common law systems have developed from
diﬀerent sources. The civil law system relied almost entirely on legislation, whereas the
common law system relies on legal precedents as well as legislation. Most of the European
community nations and the People’s Republic of China follow some version of the civil
law system, whereas most of the countries of the Commonwealth, primarily because of
historical reasons, have adopted the British common law system. Let me take two instances
of legislative provisions from these two systems to illustrate the diﬀerences in drafting
styles. First take example (4) from the People’s Republic of China’s Arbitration Law:
(4)
An arbitration agreement refers to an arbitration clause provided in the contract or
other written agreements requesting arbitration concluded prior or subsequent to
the occurrence of disputes.
An arbitration agreement shall have the following contents:
(1) an expressed intent to request arbitration;
(2) items for arbitration; and
(3) the choice of arbitration commission.
Compare this to a similar clause (5) from a Commonwealth jurisdiction, that is, India.
(5)
(1) In this Part, ‘arbitration agreement’ means an agreement by the parties to submit
to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise
between them in respect of a deﬁned legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a
contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in-
a. a document signed by the parties;
b. an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams, or other means of telecommunica-
tion which provide a record of the agreement; or
c. an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of
the agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause
constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the refer-
ence is such as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract.
The crucial issue here is whether there is a conspiracy of the other kind in civil law
jurisdictions, by which simple enactments are used as instruments of socio-political
VIJAY K. BHATIA
42

control. Relevant to our discussion here is also the current debate about the use of plain
language in legislative contexts, which, on the one hand, makes legal discourse more
accessible to ordinary readers, but, on the other hand, has a tendency to reduce trans-
parency. Transparency is reduced by removing the detailed speciﬁcation of legal scope in
the expression of legislative intentions, and thus gives unlimited power of interpreta-
tion to either the judiciary or the government at the cost of the legislature and, by
implication, of ordinary citizens.
Speciﬁcation, easiﬁcation, simpliﬁcation and plain English
Let me now give substance to this argument by taking examples from legislative dis-
course from diﬀerent legal jurisdictions to examine the extent to which the under-
speciﬁcation of information leads to greater accessibility of legal information and to what
extent the detailed speciﬁcation of legal scope leads to greater transparency in legal
contexts. I will then discuss the issue of power and control in such interpretations when
legal information is either under- or over-speciﬁed. Who gets the power and control?
Are these members of the judiciary, who make court decisions everyday, or the decision
makers in the government, who otherwise are only responsible for carrying out the
decisions of the judiciary, or the ordinary people, who constitute the ‘real’ readership for
these legislative provisions? Let me take a simple example (6) of legislative provision to
illustrate this issue.
(6) Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act, 1904 (Original Version)
If any excisable liquor is sold or supplied in a registered club for consumption
outside the premises of the club, except as provided in section four, paragraph
(h), every person supplying or selling such liquor, every person who shall pay for
such liquor and every person authorising the sale or supply of such liquor shall be
liable severally, on summary conviction, to a ﬁne not exceeding for a ﬁrst oﬀence
seven pounds, for a second oﬀence ﬁfteen pounds and for a third or subsequent
oﬀence thirty pounds, unless he proves to the satisfaction of the court that such
liquor was so sold or supplied without his knowledge or against his consent, and,
where it is proved that such liquor has been received, delivered or distributed
within the premises of the club and taken outside the premises, it shall, failing
proof to the contrary, be deemed to have been so taken for consumption outside
the premises.
Although this provision was enacted more than a century ago, it is still somewhat
typical of much of the legislative writing practised within common law jurisdictions,
in which it is still considered advantageous to condense all the necessary information
in a single sentence. No doubt, it has the advantage of not allowing the user to
interpret any part of the provision out of context, but, at the same time, it tends to
carry too much of an information load and hence adds to the problem of lack of
accessibility for its intended readers. Much of this is a function of syntactic com-
plexity, which makes cognitive processing almost beyond uninitiated non-specialist
readers. Bhatia (1982, 1993, 2004) suggests a number of ‘easiﬁcation’ devices (Bhatia
1983, 1987b, 1993), one of which clariﬁes cognitive structuring by simplifying syn-
tactic complexity. Let me present another version of the same provision using one
such device.
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
43

(7) Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act, 1904 (Easiﬁed Version by Bhatia)
If any excisable liquor is sold or supplied in a registered club for consumption
outside the premises of the club, except as provided in section four, paragraph (h),
then
every person supplying or selling such liquor, every person who shall pay for such
liquor and every person authorising the sale or supply of such liquor shall be liable
severally, on summary conviction, to a ﬁne not exceeding
(a) seven pounds, for a ﬁrst oﬀence,
(b) ﬁfteen pounds, for a second oﬀence and
(c) thirty pounds, for a third or subsequent oﬀence,
unless he proves to the satisfaction of the court that such liquor was so sold or
supplied without his knowledge or against his consent,
and,
where it is proved that such liquor has been received, delivered or distributed
within the premises of the club and taken outside the premises,
it shall, failing proof to the contrary, be deemed to have been so taken for con-
sumption outside the premises.
This easiﬁed version does not compromise on the degree of speciﬁcation of legal
scope in any way; it is as detailed and all-inclusive as the original, yet it displays
syntactic complexity in a way that can be processed in chunks favourable to easy accessi-
bility. The use of this and other similar linguistic devices is becoming increasingly common
in modern-day legislative drafting, although this is not the main concern of this paper.
What is signiﬁcant here, though, is the fact that this device maintains an adequate level of
speciﬁcation of legal information within a single sentence and yet makes it relatively more
accessible to all the stakeholders and wider readership, both within and outside the legal
profession.
Let me now turn to the issue of the speciﬁcation of legal information, and identify the
kind of information that is often sacriﬁced in an attempt to make the provision simpler,
and the implications of such a move. To illustrate what I have in mind, let me take a
simpliﬁed version of the same provision (8), which is conceptually diﬀerent from the
earlier easiﬁed version.
(8) Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act, 1904 (Simpliﬁed Version by Bhatia)
If any excisable liquor is sold for consumption outside the club, then every
person who either pays for or authorises the sale of such liquor shall be liable to a
maximum ﬁne of
(a) seven pounds, for the ﬁrst oﬀence,
(b) ﬁfteen pounds, for a second oﬀence,
(c) thirty pounds, for a third or subsequent oﬀence.
The most notable aspect of this simpliﬁcation process is that it makes the provision more
accessible to its intended readership by reducing the level of speciﬁcation of complicating
legal qualiﬁcations (Bhatia 1982, 1993), particularly of three diﬀerent kinds. First of all, the
possibility of a potential conﬂict between this provision and another one in the same Act
has not been speciﬁed, and hence it is left for the interpreter or the authorised user of the
VIJAY K. BHATIA
44

Act to resolve, if the occasion demands. Secondly, there could be exceptional circumstances
such that someone might have sold excisable liquor without the consent or knowledge of
the person who holds the license to sell it. Once again, the exceptional circumstances are
left for the authorised interpreter to make a decision to ﬁgure out, if such an exceptional
behaviour should be taken into account in the process of negotiation of justice in a court
of law. Finally, this simpliﬁed version is also silent on yet another foreseeable case scenario
where a person receives liquor within the premises of the club and then takes it out for
consumption. The interesting question is whether this act is covered by the provision. The
original and the easiﬁed versions clearly state that in a case like this, it will be ‘deemed to
have been so taken for consumption outside the premises’ and hence it is covered by the
provision. In the simpliﬁed version, however, such an exceptional case is not mentioned at all,
and it is left to the judiciary to draw its own conclusion. Let me now move to yet another
version of the same provision in plain English to make it accessible to ordinary readers.
(9) Registration of Clubs (Ireland) Act, 1904 (Plain Version by Bhatia)
It is unlawful to sell or buy excisable liquor for consumption outside a club and is
punishable by ﬁne to a maximum of thirty pounds.
In this case, although the main provision is drafted in simple plain English, clearly
accessible to an ordinary readership, it is far from all-inclusive. It leaves a number of
qualiﬁcations necessary for a precise and unambiguous interpretation in speciﬁc sites of
application in which the provision is likely to be applicable. Much of this kind of accu-
rate interpretation in real life contexts will require the use of additional speciﬁcation of
legal content, primarily the descriptions of cases to which the provision is likely or not
likely to apply. Finally, this plain version also leaves the amount of ﬁne to the judgment
of the judiciary. Edward Caldwell, the very experienced and well-established parlia-
mentary counsel already referred to above, underlines the value of this aspect of speciﬁcation
in the drafting process, when he says:
If you extract the bare bones … what you end up with is a proposition which is so
untrue because the qualiﬁcations actually negative [sic] it all … it’s so far from the
truth … it’s like saying that all red-headed people are to be executed on Monday,
but when you actually read all the qualiﬁcations, you ﬁnd that only one per cent of
them are.
(Reported in Bhatia 1982: 51)
I have purposely taken four rather diﬀerent versions of the same provision, ranging from
1904 to what we might ﬁnd in modern-day drafting, to illustrate not simply the varying
degrees of speciﬁcation of legal scope in legislative provisions, but also to give some
indication of the development of legislative drafting over the years. I would now like to
move to the socio-political and jurisdictional implications of diﬀerent styles of drafting,
and identify diﬀerent aspects of transparency and their implications for those who are
empowered by such speciﬁcation or rather lack of it.
Implications of different drafting styles: power and control
There seem to be diﬀerent perspectives on this issue. The view from within the drafting
community is in stark contrast to the view expressed by some members of the reformist
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
45

lobby, who claim that legal content can and must be expressed in everyday language
accessible to ordinary people who are the real ‘recipients’ of such legal provisions. The
truth, however, seems to lie somewhere in between the two extremes.
Proponents of the plain English movement, in particular Joseph Kimble in his mono-
graph on Answering the Critics of Plain Language, claim that traditional legal writing displays
‘centuries of inﬂation and obscurity’. Mellinkoﬀ(1963: 24) describes it as ‘wordy,
unclear, pompous, and dull’. Friedman (1993: 5) seems to agree with this view when he
says: ‘The fact is that legal writing is overblown yet timid, homogeneous, and swaddled
in obscurity. The legal academy is positively inimical to spare, decent writing.’ Similarly,
Lindsey (1990: 2) views legal writing as ‘the largest body of poorly written literature ever
created by the human race’. Thornton, in his well-known book on drafting, also
points out:
The purposes of legislation are most likely to be expressed and communicated
successfully by the drafter who is ardently concerned to write clearly and to be
intelligible. The obligation to be intelligible, to convey the intended meaning so
that it is comprehensible and easily understood, … requires the unremitting pursuit
of clarity by drafters. Clarity … requires simplicity and precision … The blind
pursuit of precision will inevitably lead to complexity; and complexity is a deﬁnite
step along the way to obscurity.
(Thornton 1996: 52–53)
Of course, there are many sources of obscurity, such as those resulting from vagueness,
wordiness, complexity of syntax, archaic expressions, etc. all contributing positively or
otherwise to the requirements of clarity, precision and unambiguity, as discussed earlier.
However, the most important source relevant to our discussion here is the one that
concerns the extent to which it is necessary to specify the scope of application of legal
action, considering speciﬁcally the nature and function of qualiﬁcations considered
essential for the implementation of the provision to a myriad of real life cases.
Any discussion of the nature and function of detailed speciﬁcation, or lack of it, has
to be discussed in the wider context of the legal jurisdiction as well as the wider socio-
political context in which the provision is written and interpreted. In parliamentary
democracies, particularly in common law jurisdictions, as discussed in the earlier sections,
the real authority for legal construction rests with the legislative institution, and not
with the judiciary, even though they are given the ultimate power of authoritative
interpretation of what the legislative institution drafts. Similarly, the executive arms of
the government have no power to construct or even interpret legislative provisions but
certainly have the mandate to execute the decisions of the courts. This three-part
division of power ensures that no institution can become autocratic in their use or abuse
of power. Thus it is one of the major responsibilities assigned to the members of the
legislative community to give voice to the people of the country they represent through
the legal construction and not to give too much freedom of interpretation to other
institutional players, such as the executive or the judiciary, whose job is simply to inter-
pret and apply what the legislature constructs through the parliamentary draftsmen. If
this argument is sustainable, and I believe it is, then the ﬁrst concern for the drafting
community is to give an honest expression to the intentions of the legislative institution
as comprehensively as the linguistic resources permit. All other concerns, such as the
accessibility and ease of comprehension for ordinary users of language, resulting from the
VIJAY K. BHATIA
46

complexity of syntax, the over-speciﬁcation of qualiﬁcations, etc., though important,
become secondary when compared to their loyalty to legislative intentions.
Another important factor in present-day contexts is that although law has traditionally
been considered jurisdictional in nature, because of the recent globalisation of trade,
commerce and industrial practices, it is increasingly being constructed, interpreted, used
and exploited in settings across jurisdictional boundaries. Sometimes it is done because of
other socio-political developments, such as the return of the sovereignty of Hong Kong
to the People’s Republic of China, and the subsequent establishment of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) within the PRC. A similar phenomenon in
some respects is seen in Europe as a result of the establishment of the European Union.
Similarly, the perception that legislative discourse is impersonal and highly formal, and
that diﬀerences in linguistic, socio-political, economic and cultural factors across national
and ideological boundaries will have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on its construction and
interpretation no longer seems to be entirely valid. Moreover, with the increasing dis-
mantling of international trade barriers as a result of international trade agreements and
treaties, laws are often being written and interpreted across geographical and socio-political
borders in diﬀerent ways, such that general assumptions about meanings cannot be taken
for granted in these contexts.
There is some evidence of such phenomena from the studies of arbitration laws
reported in Bhatia et al. (2008). In this chapter, I would like to take a diﬀerent example
focusing on the construction and interpretation of the Basic Law of Hong Kong SAR,
which was drafted within the frameworks of the Sino-British Joint Declaration 1984 and
the People’s Republic of China’s civil law system, but was meant to be interpreted in
Hong Kong within the common law system.
A case from Hong Kong
Popularly known in the HKSAR media as the ‘right of abode’ case, this was one of the
most controversial cases involving the interpretation of the Basic Law. The case was
decided on 29 January 1999; it brought into focus the unanimous decision of the
Court of Final Appeal, which interpreted Article 24 of the Basic Law to allow all those
‘persons of Chinese nationality born outside Hong Kong of those residents’, who were
permanent residents in Hong Kong, irrespective of the fact whether they acquired the
status before or after the birth of the child. The Basic Law did not specify whether it
was necessary for any of the parents to have had this status of permanent residence at
the time of the birth of the child. The Court of Final Appeal took the generous view.
According to the Government of HKSAR, this landmark decision opened up
the ﬂoodgates for millions of mainland people to acquire the right of abode in
Hong Kong.
It so happened that a large number of people from Hong Kong had moved to
Mainland China prior to the transfer of power on 1 July 1997. They had children born
in the Mainland who had no right of abode in Hong Kong under the immigration laws
prior to the handover. Many of these children had already entered Hong Kong illegally
and thus presented themselves to immigration authorities and claimed their right of
abode under Article 24(2)(3). The controversy went to the courts and after a long drawn
out battle, the Court of Final Appeal, the highest court in Hong Kong SAR, decided in
its 1999 judgment that according to Article 24 of the Basic Law, the Chinese nationals
may acquire the right of abode in Hong Kong by one of three ways:
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
47

1. if they were born in Hong Kong before or after the transfer of sovereignty (Article
24(2) (1));
2. if they have resided in Hong Kong for a continuous period of not less than seven
years before or after the transfer of sovereignty (Article 24(2) (2)); or
3. if they were born outside Hong Kong to persons covered by the above two
categories (Article 24(2) (3)).
The Court of Final Appeal aﬃrmed some fundamental constitutional principles in
reaching its decision, that is, the Basic Law was a living document, like any other
constitution, and hence should be interpreted broadly. The Court ruled that Article
24(2)(3) of the Basic Law gives the right of abode to children born of a Hong Kong
permanent resident, ‘regardless of whether that parent became a permanent resident
before or after the birth of the child’. It became a landmark decision by the highest
court in Hong Kong and became the battleground for the contested interpretations
of the Article 24 of the Basic Law on the part of the judiciary, the government and
the legislating authority based in Beijing, which was responsible for the construction
of the Basic Law within the Civil Law system. The Government estimated that the
additional eligible persons in Mainland China who could obtain the right of abode
within ten years would reach 1.6 million, and would result in very severe social and
economic problems, which prompted the Hong Kong Government to ask the
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress to reinterpret Articles 22(4)
and 24(2)(3) of Hong Kong’s Basic Law, which eﬀectively overturned the court
decision. This move prompted large protests and debate over whether or not Hong
Kong’s judiciary remained independent from that of the Mainland. The interpreta-
tion oﬀered by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress was
helpful to the Government in appealing against the earlier decision of the Court of
Final Appeal, which subsequently ruled that the interpretation of the National People’s
Congress of Article 24 of the Basic Law was constitutional, thereby subsequently
denying the right of abode to all those who were given it in the earlier decision.
This scenario presents a very interesting illustration of the lack of speciﬁcity
in legislative construction which led to this serious contestation among the three
institutional perspectives in the process of negotiation of justice, which raised issues
of power and politics based on the use of inadequate levels of speciﬁcity. This case
clearly established that the power of interpretation of legislative provisions, which in
the common law system rests with the court of ﬁnal appeal, was seriously compro-
mised by the overriding power of the legislature, which in the PRC civil law system
is invested in the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. If the
Government is likely to get more power in the interpretation and execution of leg-
islative outcomes, then most autocratic institutions would prefer to leave legislative
provisions vague, indeterminate, and hence ambiguous as a function of the lack of
necessary speciﬁcation of scope in legal drafting.
One of the main issues brought into focus in this controversy was the question of
who should have the ﬁnal authority to interpret the Basic Law: the highest Court of
Final Appeal within the common law system in force in Hong Kong, or the National
People’s Congress, which operates within a very diﬀerent civil law system? Although
the Basic Law empowers the NPC as the ﬁnal interpreter of the mini constitution of
Hong Kong under the ‘one country two systems’ framework, the real issue at stake is
that a number of such unpleasant controversies and decisions could have been avoided,
VIJAY K. BHATIA
48

or at least minimised, by drafting the Basic Law in a legislative style that did not con-
ﬂict with the normal expectations of the legal system within which it was likely to be
interpreted and used. By incorporating, as far as foreseeable, the necessary constraints
and qualiﬁcations operating on such provisions, one would have made the law more
transparent and less controversial. Ghai, a prominent specialist on constitutional law,
rightly identiﬁes this lack of speciﬁcity in drafting as one of the main reasons for
contentious interpretations.
The two broad areas on which there was considerable contention were the
relations between the Central Authorities and the HKSAR and the political struc-
ture of the HKSAR. China had fought oﬀthe British during the negotiations for
the Joint Declaration on these issues, and an appearance of consensus was
purchased at the expense of ambiguity and obfuscation.
(Ghai 1997: 61)
The other interesting issue the case brings into focus is that social action in the
courtroom often depends not simply on semantically or logically accurate inter-
pretations (Allen 1957), but also on pragmatically appropriate interpretations, keeping
in mind the socio-political, economical and cultural constraints, which are often
preferred by institutions who hold executive powers. The institutions with executive
responsibilities would like to exercise maximum control and power to implement
administrative and social policies, and would like to have under their control a
measure of ﬂexibility in interpretation, which is often lost through detailed spe-
ciﬁcation in legislative instruments. It is hardly surprising that a high degree of
transparency in legislative intention is often negatively viewed by autocratic executive
organisations and institutions.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that although clarity, precision, unambiguity and
all-inclusiveness are the four key aspects of the construction and interpretation of legis-
lative intentions, particularly in the context of common law jurisdictions, all-inclusiveness
plays the most signiﬁcant role in the speciﬁcation of legal scope, which in turn has
implications for accessibility and transparency in the expression of legislative intentions.
I also make an attempt to demonstrate that transparency, or rather lack of it, is strategi-
cally used in diﬀerent legal systems in diﬀerent ways to assign power and control to
diﬀerent institutions which have diﬀerent roles in the construction and interpretation of
legislative intentions. Depending on the institutional roles and the privileges available to
institutional players, for instance, the legislature, the judiciary, or the bureaucracy,
invariably show preference or dispreference for greater transparency in legislative
expressions.
Note
1 This chapter draws on the international projects funded by the RGC-CERG (HKSAR) grant
(9041191: CityU 1501/06H) entitled: International Commercial Arbitration Practice: A Discourse Analytical
Study.
LEGAL WRITING: SPECIFICITY
49

Further reading
Bhatia, Vijay K. (1983) ‘Simpliﬁcation v. easiﬁcation: The case of legal texts’, Applied Linguistics, 4(1):
42–54.
——(1987) ‘Textual-mapping in British legislative writing’, World Englishes, 6(1): 1–10.
Bhatia, Vijay K., Engberg, Jan, Gotti, Maurizio and Heller, Dorothee (2005) Vagueness in Normative
Texts, Bern: Peter Lang.
Danet, Brenda (1980) ‘Language in the legal process’, Law and Society Review, 14(3): 445–564.
Gibbons, John (ed.) (1994) Language and the Law, London: Longman.
Maley, Y. (1987) ‘The language of legislation’, in Language and Society, 16: 25–48.
VIJAY K. BHATIA
50

4
Legal writing: complexity
Complex documents/average
and not-so-average readers
Gail Stygall
Introduction
In this chapter, I examine two types of complex document: notices required by US
retirement law when there are decreases in future beneﬁts for pension plan participants;
and the disclosures required in credit card solicitations, contracts and other ﬁnancial
accounts. By complex documents, I mean those dense, intricate, often confusing hybrid
documents, typically composed of a combination of legal and ﬁnancial languages and
discourse. These diﬃcult, complex documents often contain critical information that lay
readers need to understand in order to make important ﬁnancial decisions.
The ﬁrst type of document I discuss here is a notice/warning to participants in a
pension plan that their retirement beneﬁts are going to decrease because the pension plan
administrators made a change in the way the plan operates. This notice is required by US
law. The reason that pension plan participants need the information is to make necessary
changes in their retirement plans because one source of their retirement income is going
to decrease. With the recent ﬁnancial crisis, many pension plan administrators have
changed their plan, sometimes eliminating it altogether, other times changing the com-
pany’s contribution to the retirement plan. Sometimes the person with the pension plan
might receive a letter or ﬂyer extolling the “new” plan, without any focus on, or perhaps
no mention at all, of the negative piece of information. The person might also receive a
brief letter, ﬁlled with ﬁnancial and legal terms, such as “freeze,” “beneﬁt accrual,” and
“plan amendment” and little other text.
The second type of documents I discuss here are those associated with credit cards:
the letters that we receive asking us to apply for a credit card, the terms of the credit
card, and the credit card notices often enclosed with bills from the credit card
company. These documents have some terms highlighted, as required by US law,
but often contain much ﬁne print that presents excellent examples of legal language
unintelligible to most people. These documents are ﬁlled with lengthy, complex, and
51

embedded sentences, organization that is diﬃcult to discern, and terms that have
legal and ﬁnancial meanings. These documents include sentences such as
The 0% introductory Annual Percentage Rate (APR) on Balance Transfers and
Convenience Checks is applicable for the ﬁrst 9 billing cycles after the account is
opened and requires that timely payments are received.
(Travelocity 2009)
The long interruptive elements in the ﬁrst noun phrase are followed, after the verb (‘is’),
by two more clauses. This information is presented in a tiny type (6 point, 200+ char-
acters per line). How long the introductory rate applies is important information for a
consumer and it is likely to be missed because of the way that it is presented both syn-
tactically and graphologically.
Recently, linguists and language scholars have been consulted about the likelihood
that average pension plan participants would understand the notices sent to them by their
pension plans. Credit card disclosure is an area of possible future consultation with lin-
guists because the Federal Reserve Board and the US Congress have made changes in
what information is required for consumers. Although the new regulations are not yet in
eﬀect, it seems likely that there will be litigation to test whether these disclosure
requirements have been met. My purpose in this chapter is to outline the issues, the
standards and the information for a linguist to conduct an analysis of these complex
documents. I begin by describing the two types, I follow that with a discussion of literacy
issues in the US and I close with a section on additional research that may play a role in
understanding how people read these documents. For additional examples of documents,
I invite readers to consult similar documents they have received themselves. Any credit
card application will include the kinds of features I am discussing here.
Types of documents
Pension plan documents
Over the past two decades in the United States, a number of companies that oﬀered
their employees a pension plan have faced litigation from their employees or former
employees for violations of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(ERISA). ERISA does not require that employers provide pensions, but when they do,
they are required to follow the ERISA statutes and regulations, some of which require
plan administrators to communicate with their employees and former employees about
speciﬁc aspects of their retirement beneﬁts. There are two types of document commonly
involved with litigation over ERISA-required communication with “plan participants”
(current or former employees): a “204(h) notice” and a summary plan description.
A “204(h) notice” is required to inform pension plan participants who will or are
likely to experience a “signiﬁcant reduction in the rate of future beneﬁt accruals”
through an amendment to the pension plan (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconci-
liation Act of 1985, Pub. L. No. 99–272 § 11006, 100 Stat 82, 243 (1986)). This section
of the ERISA statute has been amended several times, each time requiring more speciﬁc
guidelines for the notices. The pension plan administrators are also required to provide a
summary plan description (SPD) to each employee and then resend it at least once every
GAIL STYGALL
52

ﬁve years, though many companies provide the SPD annually. The SPD must include all
important beneﬁts and limitations, as well as any amendments and changes. These
documents are required to “be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the
average plan participant” (For 204(h) notices see 60 Fed. Reg. 64,320 to 64,324, 1995
and 63 Fed. Reg. 68,678, 68,678, 1998). Since 2001, the notices must “provide suﬃ-
cient information … to allow applicable individuals to understand the eﬀect of the plan
amendment” (Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001, Pub.
L. No. 107–16, § 659, 115 Stat. 38, 140 [2001]). These then are the basic parameters
with which the linguist conducts an analysis of the documents.
Much of the litigation arose as corporations changed their pension plans from those
that oﬀered employees a retirement beneﬁt based on the average salary of the ﬁnal ﬁve
years of employment to what is called a “cash-balance” plan. This plan presents an
employee with a hypothetical or notional account that is made up of two parts: an
annual percentage based on the employee’s years of service and an additional interest
payment usually based on a ﬁnancial market indicator, such as the rate for US Treasury
bills. The cash-balance plan “increases” each year, at least according to a statement given
to employees annually. For some employees, usually older ones, the change from a tra-
ditional pension to a cash-balance plan means that their notional account increases, but
their actual account does not. Actual account means the money that is paid to an
employee at retirement. Although there isn’t a separately kept account for each
employee, the amount due at retirement for each employee is supposed to increase over
time. The cash-balance plan appears to work better for younger employees, while older
employees, who have less time to accumulate beneﬁts, do worse (Oppel 1999). More-
over, the way the accrued beneﬁts are calculated at the moment of change from one plan
to another means that some plan participants may spend some years without earning any
additional pension. This process is called wear away. These “hybrid” cash-balance plans
continue to make news, as in Barclays’ recent decision to fund only its cash-balance plan
and stop contributing to the ﬁnal average salary plan (Slater and Valente 2009).
Litigation over the duty to inform has had mixed results. In many cases, the most
prominent cause of action was age discrimination, with the duty to inform of signiﬁcant
reductions in the rate of beneﬁt accruals sometimes an afterthought, though still a cause
of action under ERISA. The age discrimination cause has been resisted by some courts.
One of the most important cases involving the issue of 204(h) notices is Amara v.
CIGNA (Case No. 3:01CV2361(MRK)), tried in the Federal District of Connecticut,
now on appeal in the Court of Appeals, Second Circuit. I am participating now as an
expert in ﬁve cases, none of which has yet come to trial, although depositions are com-
plete in two of them. I am under a conﬁdentiality order in these cases, so I will be
drawing on Judge Kravitz’s decision in Amara for some of my examples. Congress
amended ERISA in 2006 in ways that changed how cash-balance plans are understood.
The recent economic climate has meant that most current notices are 204(h) notices of
complete freezes of both ﬁnal average salary plans and cash-balance plans, where no
further beneﬁts will be available to any plan participants. Ultimately, this duty to inform
is a curious one: it only involves informing plan participants of a negative piece of
information—a signiﬁcant reduction in the rate of future beneﬁt accruals. The negative
character of the information transforms the speech act of informing to that of warning.
Pension plan 204(h) notices can take several forms. One prominent means of pur-
portedly notifying pension plan participants of reductions in the rate of future beneﬁt
accruals for retirement was to embed “notice” or “news” of a diﬀerent plan in a “new”
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
53

beneﬁts promotion document. Judge Kravitz in Amara v. CIGNA describes one such
document as follows:
In an inset box on the 1997 Newsletter’s cover, a “Message from CEO Bill
Taylor” states: “I am pleased to announce that, on January 1, 1998, CIGNA will
signiﬁcantly enhance its retirement program … These enhancements will
make our retirement program highly competitive [citation omitted]. The 1997
Newsletter tells employees that “the new plan is designed to work well for both
longer- and shorter-service employees,” it provides “steadier beneﬁt growth
throughout [the employee’s] career and it “build[s] beneﬁts faster” than the old
plan [citation omitted].
(Kravitz 22) (bolding added)
The newsletter did not tell employees that some of them were about to undergo a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in their retirement beneﬁts. Instead, the newsletter extols the new
plan. The CEO is “pleased”; the corporation will “signiﬁcantly enhance” the plan; the
new plan is “highly competitive,” “works well” with both short- and long-term
employees and the plan “builds beneﬁts faster.” Judge Kravitz noted, “The 1997 News-
letter did not discuss or even mention wear away” (Kravitz 22). It would be diﬃcult for
a reader to know that they were being told about something negative happening to their
pension plan. Thus, plan participants in Amara v. CIGNA were neither informed nor
warned of the consequences of the plan amendment making the changes.
Another strategy for “informing” plan participants of the coming negative con-
sequence is to use a short letter telling plan participants that their pension plan is to be
“frozen.” I oﬀer a hypothetical “notice” in example (1).
(1) NOTICE
To:
Participants in the First Global Megacorporation Retirement Plan
From:
Plan Administration Committee of the First Global
Megacorporation Retirement Plan
Re:
Freeze of Plan
The First Global Megacorporation Retirement Plan has been amended to cease
accruals as of December 31, 1998. This amendment freezes the First Global
Megacorporation Retirement Plan as of December 31, 1998.
Beginning January 1, 1999, employees who have at least one year of service will be
eligible to participate in the First Global Megacorporation Cash-Balance Retirement
Plan.
There is considerable knowledge needed by readers to make sense of this brief hypo-
thetical example of the 204(h) notice. Although it calls itself a notice, this version does
not call itself a 204(h) notice; it’s simply a notice of something, not required by anyone
or anybody. But it certainly has the language of a legal document. Notice that the plan
names, First Global Megacorporation Retirement Plan and First Global Megacorporation
Cash-Balance Retirement Plan, are the formal, legal names of these pension plans.
Additionally, there is language—freeze, amend/amendment, cease, accruals—that is
likely to be unfamiliar to plan participants. Those plan participants who didn’t under-
stand the terms here would also be faced with a notice that tells them that one plan stops
on one day and another plan starts the next day. It would be fair for readers to conclude
GAIL STYGALL
54

that there really is no change for them as employees. Unfortunately, the freezing of the
ﬁrst plan will mean for some part of the participant population that their ﬁnal retirement
beneﬁts will be reduced. The “freeze” notice doesn’t actually say anything about
reductions. There are a variety of other strategies including presentations of pension plan
amendments in very technical language or providing question and answer sheets about
the “changes” in the pension plan among others. So, as the linguist will ﬁnd, the analysis
of these notices and other pension plan documents will allow him or her to identify
many places where understanding begins to dissolve.
Credit card disclosures
If informing/warning is the speech act in pension plan litigation, disclosing is the speech
act in making credit card solicitations, card agreements, notiﬁcations of changes in card
agreements and information included on periodic statements. Governed by the Truth in
Lending Act (TILA), 15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq, Regulations AA (Unfair Acts or Practices)
and Z (TILA) of the Federal Reserve, and the corresponding regulations, 12 C.F.R.
§ 226.5 through 226.16, issuers of credit cards (or, as they call it here, open end credit)
must disclose a number of elements of credit card costs. The original idea for the Truth
in Lending Act, in 1969, was to allow more consumers to make better, more informed
choices from the options that various creditors made available to them. TILA was
amended in 1988 through the Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act, providing
more speciﬁc disclosure and requiring that the disclosure begin with the moment of
solicitation. Even these additional disclosure requirements eventually proved to be
inadequate in getting important information to consumers. Recent actions by creditors—
changing interest rates at will after oﬀering a promotional low rate, adding little under-
stood fees, reducing grace periods, separating credit card purchases from rules and interest
rates on convenience checks—seem to indicate that consumers are surprised and angry
when they become aware of these actions.
Concerned consumers and their advocates complained vigorously to Congress and to
the Federal Reserve Board. The Federal Reserve Board responded ﬁrst and conducted
extensive consumer testing on current disclosure requirements and made recommendations
for change. Macro International conducted the design and testing of various documents
that a consumer might receive: a solicitation letter, a periodic statement, and con-
venience checks (Macro, 16 May 2007; Macro, 15 December 2008). The studies did not
take up the comprehension issues of card agreements, which often appear as tiny (3.25  7)
inserts mailed to consumers. As far as I could ascertain, the research also did not involve
making organizational or syntactic changes. For the solicitation letters and enclosures, it
may have been diﬃcult to change the organization as the graphic boxes, (named Schumer
boxes after the Senator who sponsored the 1988 Fair Credit Act), have certain, quite speciﬁc
current requirements, such as the 18 point size on the Annual Percentage Rate (APR).
These studies were conducted in various cities in the United States and used focus
groups, interviews and “cognitive interviews” to develop their recommendations. Their
work was tested on a variety of documents and the interviewers asked participants about
their understanding in careful ways. This is, in essence, usability testing, by asking actual
consumers to examine and use the documents and to identify where and how there were
problems in understanding. Although better labeling, movement of key phrases, changes
of vocabulary and the creation of tables could improve participants’ understanding
somewhat, there were at least three areas with deeper problems: the calculation of
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
55

interest charges, fees versus interest rates, and balances on diﬀerent types of transactions
(Macro, May 16, 2007: 52–53). They conclude that
fundamental gaps, such as [the three] listed above are diﬃcult to address through
disclosures. Eﬀectively explaining the diﬀerence between a 5% fee on balance
transfer and a 5% APR on balance transfers, for example, would require a great
deal of text—so much, in fact, that the consumer for whom it was intended would
be unlikely to read it.
(Macro, May 16, 2007: 53)
They conclude this report by referring to a Federal Reserve Board proposal to use its
website for consumer education. But they acknowledge that web-based consumer edu-
cation would not solve the problem. Consequently, they follow this ﬁrst conclusion with
a second: “expand coverage of these topics in K-12 school curricula … the need for such
a solution was very apparent in the course of this work” (53–54). With the two reports
taken together, Macro International highlights the profound lack of understanding that
consumers have of these credit card disclosure documents. The Federal Reserve Board,
the Oﬃce of Thrift Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration voted to
prohibit a number of credit card company practices considered anti-consumer on
December 18, 2008, but these rules were not to take eﬀect until July 1, 2010. Congress
passed and the President signed its own version of needed changes, the Credit Card Act
of 2009, to take eﬀect in February of 2010.
Appellate decisions on credit card disclosures disputed in multiple US Circuit Courts
of Appeal have held that TILA requires “clear and conspicuous” disclosure of all
important elements of credit card agreements. The linguist in this type of case would be
examining documents for their being “reasonably understandable” to consumers and in a
form “readily noticeable to consumers” (Supplement I to 12 CFR Part 226, Regulation Z).
In the future, there will be new requirements and additional disclosures to be made.
Credit card documents are well known to be diﬃcult to understand, despite attempts
to make rules that require disclosure. Below, I compare a credit card solicitation (SB-12)
modeled by the Macro International study for the Federal Reserve Board with a
recent solicitation sent to me for a Barnes and Noble credit card. Both documents have
the “Schumer box,” a table-like form with two columns, one narrow column on the left
announcing the topic of the box and the other wider column on the right providing
more detailed information. Both documents have other information that appears outside
the Schumer box, but most of this information is diﬀerent. The model form from the
study provides four other sections of information: how the interest will be calculated,
state law disclosures (in both forms), a billing rights summary, and how the periodic
ﬁnance charge is calculated. The Barnes and Noble form has many more sections: a ﬁxed
APR section; an introductory rate notice; a default APR section; a credit performance
section; and, on the back side, an additional statement with six sections of its own. The
model form has information in the Schumer boxes at 11 or 12 point typeface, while the
entire Barnes and Noble form is in 8 point typeface, except for the interest rate required
to be in 18 point typeface.
There are enhancements to understanding in the model form, such as a section called
“Penalty APR and When it Applies.” The information on the right for this section puts
31.99% at the top in bold. What follows is a list of conditions when the penalty APR
could be applied to the whole balance owed. This is followed by a boldface question,
GAIL STYGALL
56

“How long will the Penalty APR Apply?” and then gives the conditions. The Barnes
and Noble solicitation insert shows a typographical dagger in the section “Other APRs”
next to “Default APR: Up to 29.99% variable.” The dagger refers readers to the bottom
of the page and a section labeled “Default APR.” Below is the ﬁrst sentence in that
section:
1) If your payment is received late,
2) you fail to pay at least the minimum due,
3) your payment is not honored by your bank,
4) or your balance exceeds your credit card line,
5) the APR on all balances (including any introductory balances) may be increased to
the then applicable Default APR.
This forty-nine word sentence is presented in the same 8 point typeface, and it contains a
total of ﬁve clauses—six counting the to-inﬁnitive clause at 2. Although the “you”
pronoun is often oﬀered to make this prose reader-friendly, the type size, the number of
clauses and its position at the bottom of the page, away from the Schumer box, makes it
challenging for most readers. A number of sentences in the sections outside the Schumer
box are similar in diﬃculty. Clauses one and ﬁve are passives, with the credit card
company as the invisible actor.
Another issue is that the APR here is called “default.” “Default” has a range of
meanings, from failure to act to failure to act on legal or ﬁnancial obligations or even a
computer program that assumes a value when no other value is entered. But at least in
part because there is a strong legal sense to default and the necessity of going to court to
get a judgment of default, default seems to be an inappropriate word to substitute for
paying an account late rather than not paying an account at all or to substitute default for
incurring more debt than the available credit limit. The model form calls these situations
“penalty” APRs, which better characterize the process.
Exophoric references appear throughout the Barnes and Noble form: references to the
Wall Street Journal for money rates, credit reports and to speciﬁc statutes in the state of
Wisconsin. There is only one exophoric reference in the model form and that is to the
website of the Federal Reserve Board.
What appears above, however, should not be taken to mean that the model form is
ﬂawless. As I indicated earlier, the studies completed by Macro International did not take
up discourse and syntactic issues with the disclosures. Below is a particularly diﬃcult
sentence that appears outside of the Schumer box in the model form, in the “Periodic
Finance Charge Calculation.”
1) We compute the daily balance for each transaction category on each day by the
[sic] ﬁrst adding the following to the previous day’s daily balance:
2) transactions made that day,
3) fees charged that day
4) and Periodic Finance Charges accrued on the previous day’s daily balance,
5) and then by subtracting any credits and payments
6) that are applied against the balance of the transaction category on that day.
I marked both the ﬁnite and non-ﬁnite verbs here to show how many diﬀerent calcu-
lations are required for the consumer to total even a single day’s daily balance ﬁnance
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
57

charge. Because this material was placed outside the Schumer box, Macro International
did not test improvements.
Literacy issues in the US
In discussing literacy with attorneys who are involved in cases where understanding
pension plan information or credit card disclosure is involved, I often ﬁnd that the
attorneys operate with some unfounded assumptions about literacy. They proceed as if
they think that almost everyone is fully literate. Although common reference works such
as almanacs estimate US literacy as 99%, the functional literacy rates are much more
nuanced and critical in understanding complex documents. For a linguist assessing the
comprehensibility of documents, some understanding of literacy levels is important. Two
national assessments of US literacy, one in 1992 and one in 2003, oﬀer some insights into
what functional literacy levels are, before assessing the comprehensibility of the particular
documents considered here. Both studies measure primarily functional literacy and both
studies ﬁnd a relatively small percentage of the population able to accomplish the more
complex tasks.
The 1992 study, Adult Literacy in America, interviewed more than 13,000 people, plus
an additional 1,000 in each state to produce state-level results (xiv). Reading and sub-
sequent tasks were divided into three categories: prose, document and quantitative.
These were tasks where the participants were required to read various passages and
documents and then perform an additional task related to the passages or documents.
This type of test is in contrast to the more school-centered multiple choice tests, such as
the SAT. Results were presented in ﬁve levels, based on a 0–500 point scale, with Level
5 representing the most diﬃcult reading and tasks to complete, each level corresponding
to a score for each category. Average scores across the entire test population were 276 for
the prose tasks, 271 for the document tasks, and 275 for the quantitative literacy tasks.
Table 4.1 gives the percentages of proﬁciencies in each level.
Level 1 was minimal literacy and the category includes some people who could not
perform the tasks at all and participants whose ﬁrst language was not English. The
population in Level 1 represents those readers who can perform the most basic of tasks,
such as “locat[ing] a single piece of information which is identical or synonymous with
the information given in the question or directive” (11). Level 2 was still very basic, but
participants in Level 3 were able to complete a range of tasks. Level 4 was more com-
plex, asking participants to “make high level text-based inferences or draw on their
background knowledge” (19). Level 5 was most complex and participants could search
through information to ﬁnd speciﬁc parts that would allow them to complete very dif-
ﬁcult tasks. Level 5 prose tasks “require the reader to search for information in dense text
Table 4.1
Literacy levels percentages and reading types 1992
Task Type
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Prose
21%
27%
32%
17%
3%
Document
23%
28%
31%
15%
3%
Quantitative
22%
25%
31%
17%
4%
Source: Adult Literacy in America 1992.
GAIL STYGALL
58

which contains a number of plausible distracters” (11). Document tasks on Level 5
“require the reader to search through complex displays that contain multiple distracters,
to make high-level text-based inferences and to use specialized knowledge” (11). An
example of a Level 5 task is “[u]sing a table comparing credit cards, identify the two
categories used and write two diﬀerences between them” (10). The study indicates that
only “[b]etween 6 and 8 million adults nationwide demonstrated success on these types
of tasks” (19). Educational levels roughly corresponded to the levels, with Level 1 typi-
cally with less than a high school education, high school graduates at the high end of
Level 2, college graduates at the high end of Level 3, and those who had some education
beyond college were primarily in Level 4 (27).
The 2003 study, Literacy in Everyday Life: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of
Adult Literacy, presented overall results that were not substantially diﬀerent from those in
1992, although the survey was given to a larger national sample, 19,000, including 1,200
prisoners (1). The report apparently does not mention a 2003 state-by-state collection of
data, so the actual total of the 1992 study was larger. Only in quantitative literacy was
there a statistically signiﬁcant change in overall results, a slight increase. Average results
were 275 for prose, 271 for documents, and 283 for quantitative tasks. Seventy of the
questions from the 1992 assessment were used in 2003, with new questions added in
2003 but not released. What was diﬀerent about the 2003 study was their decision to
reduce the number of levels from ﬁve to four. Level 1 is called Below Basic, Level 2 is
Basic, Level 3 is Intermediate, and Level 4 is Proﬁcient. In short, they eliminated
Level 5, collapsing the upper Level 4 with Level 5, including the tasks most related to
the documents I discuss here. Level 1 in the 1992 study was divided into Levels 1 and 2
in the 2003, presumably also adjusting Levels 2 and 3. Additionally, they added a cate-
gory called “nonliterate in English,” if participants were unable to complete “a minimum
number of simple literacy questions” (3). These results were not included in the overall
presentation of the data. Table 4.2 gives the percentages of results for all other types of
reading and task.
For Level 4, the minimum score required on the reading and the performance was
340. The credit card document comparison, used in both surveys, was rated 387 in 1992
but only 372 in 2003. No detailed information was given in the 2003 report about
changes in questions between years. Even with changes, it is important to note that only
13% of the surveyed population was able to achieve Level 4 performance, the level most
likely to require interaction with complex texts and documents. Although it is unclear
how the study collapsed Levels 4 and 5, it is clear that the overall literacy levels
decreased. The Proﬁcient category, used in both reports, dropped 35% in prose literacy,
28% in document literacy, and 38% in quantitative literacy. The Proﬁcient category is
the only one in which study participants could carry out the tasks required by reading
and acting upon complex documents. The report comments, “Between 1992 and 2003,
Table 4.2
Literacy levels percentages and reading types 2003
Task Type
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Prose
14%
29%
44%
13%
Document
12%
22%
53%
13%
Quantitative
22%
33%
33%
13%
Source: Literacy in Everyday Life 2003.
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
59

there was a decline in the average prose literacy of adults between the ages of 25 and 39
and between the ages of 40 and 49” (v), but this comment does not account for the
overall decline in the upper literacy levels. Additional comments clariﬁed the relationship
between literacy and income:
A higher percentage of adults with Below Basic prose, document, and quantitative
literacy lived in households with income below $10,000 than adults with higher
levels of literacy. A higher percentage of adults with Proﬁcient prose, document, and
quantitative literacy than adults with lower levels of literacy lived in household
with incomes above $100,000.
(Literacy in Everyday Life 2003: v)
So in addition to the decrease in the Proﬁcient category, there is also a clear association
between Proﬁciency and a household income of more than $100,000 per year. There
are, of course, more pension plan participants and credit card holders than just those in
households with $100,000 annual income. These results have implications for a forensic
linguistic analysis of the comprehensibility of complex documents. The audience for
whom these documents are understandable enough to act upon is very small relative to
the general population. That is to say, most people cannot understand or act upon these
literacy tasks.
Other relevant research
In this section, I examine and review some of the research available to a linguist in
determining the likely comprehensibility of a complex document. Because both types of
cases I analyze here are civil cases, I recommend a thorough reading of Roger Shuy’s
(2008b) Fighting Over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases as an initial step in conducting
a similar analysis. Shuy details an array of linguistic issues he found in these civil cases and
many of them are applicable to cases of these types, especially from the sections on
business contracts, deceptive trade practices and product liability. In these sections, Shuy
outlines ﬁndings from his analysis of various documents and his strategies include ana-
lyzing topics, conducting semantic analysis, assessing grammatical scope, judging pro-
minence and legibility, and presenting narrative analysis. I also want to suggest in this
section that there are some additional aspects for a linguist to consider. First, there are the
similarities between the language in the documents that I describe and legal language and
discourse. Some of these materials are an especially diﬃcult hybrid of legal and ﬁnancial
languages. Second, the early work on how diﬃcult syntax contributes to slower proces-
sing time has been extended and enriched and I brieﬂy review this research. Newer
studies ﬁnd that there are continuing constraints on working memory. Third, the con-
nection between the text world of the attorneys and ﬁnancial specialists makes it very
diﬃcult for them to write for lay understanding. Finally, I suggest that linguists consider
the literature of document designers and technical communicators for conﬁrmation of
their linguistic analysis.
As the ﬁeld of legal language and discourse began to emerge in the 1970s and 1980s,
there was sustained interest in improving lay understanding of jury instructions (Charrow
and Charrow 1979; Elwork et al. 1977, 1982). More recently, researchers Bethany
Dumas and Peter Tiersma worked with state bar associations and judiciaries to revise state
GAIL STYGALL
60

pattern jury instructions, although considerable resistance remains. Although the com-
prehensibility of product warnings has received attention in the law and language com-
munity (Tiersma 2002; Heaps and Henley 1999; Dumas 1990; Shuy 1990b, 2008b), the
comprehensibility of other complex documents has received less attention. Frances Rock
(2007) has addressed the complexity of the police caution given in England and Wales, a
document that functions as both written and spoken text in the legal setting. She
examines
the
multiple
communicative
purposes
of
both
detainees
and
police
in Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention. Recently, ﬁnancial
documents, especially those directed at consumers, have proliferated. Although many of
these documents are regulated either by federal or state statute or code of regulations,
enforcement of consumer-oriented comprehension requirements has remained limited.
As many observers suggest, these consumer documents are likely to be contracts of
adhesion, that is, a standardized contract in which the consumer is not able to negotiate
terms with the other party. Because there is no negotiation, the terms of the contract
may be disadvantageous or even harmful to the consumer, yet courts have typically not
challenged contracts of adhesion unless they are quite outrageous. Legal scholars Alan
White and Cathy Lesser Mansﬁeld suggest that courts are not taking into account the
actual literacy levels of most consumers (White and Mansﬁeld 2002).
Peter Tiersma devotes a chapter in Legal Language to “What Makes Legal Language
Diﬃcult to Understand?” He compiles a list of features that “impede communication”
(Tiersma 1999: 203). He includes the following: technical vocabulary; archaic, formal
and unusual words; impersonal constructions; overuse of nominalizations and passives;
modal verbs; multiple negation; long and complex sentences; and poor organization
(Tiersma 1999: 203–10). Some or all of these may appear in legal documents; all detract
in various ways from comprehension. To these, I would add several other characteristics
including references to inaccessible texts; critical background texts not apparent to lay
readers; repetitive use of formal legal names of entities; and common words used with a
specialized legal meaning. As Tiersma suggests, the problem isn’t that attorneys have a
professional vocabulary, language and discourse, but that they must communicate
important information to people who are not attorneys.
One study comparing the case law reading strategies of legal professionals (law pro-
fessors) with novices found signiﬁcant diﬀerences (Lundeberg 1987). When handed an
appellate decision to read, legal professionals immediately put the case in context
by noticing the headings, the parties, the court, the date, the name of the judge, the
decision, the facts of the case, legal terms used, evaluation, and synthesizing the infor-
mation. Novices were confused about legal terms, ordinary words used with a legal
meaning, attempting to deﬁne words contextually although unfamiliar with the domain,
adding incorrect information, and assigning names to the parties rather than their roles
(e.g. plaintiﬀ, defendant). In overall strategy, the professionals spent initial time creating
an overview of the case, including looking immediately for the decision. Novices did
neither. The result was that the novices did not understand the import of what they were
reading. As Lundeberg suggests, the novice would beneﬁt from direct instruction on
how to read in this particular domain.
When presented with these types of texts, lay readers are true beginners, relying on the
most basic procedures, even if these procedures are those of strong readers. In such a
case, the readers are heavily dependent on working memory. The entire knowledge
domain is unfamiliar to lay readers and so the transfer between working memory and
long-term memory becomes more complicated. Without domain knowledge, readers
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
61

may not have a means to permanently store or retrieve the new information. Technical
vocabulary is often a feature of domain knowledge and is likely to be unfamiliar to those
unacquainted with the domain. The key process for lay readers then becomes working
memory, previously called short-term memory. The term “short-term” memory dates
from the earlier years of psychological study of memory, when short-term memory was
seen as a unitary short-term bank of information. Some sixty years ago, George Miller
described the limits of “short-term” memory as “the magical number seven plus or
minus two,” indicating that people seemed capable of managing about seven chunks of
information in short-term memory (Miller 1956). Although George Miller’s idea has
become much elaborated, psychologists, psycholinguists and linguists remain aware of
this sort of limit on working memory and still approximate it at around seven. However,
the model is no longer unitary and in the US, psychologists have developed a model
encompassing three parts: the central executive, a visuospatial sketch pad, and phonolo-
gical loop (Baddeley 1992). But no matter what the shape of the model is, the limitations
on working memory remain.
So lay readers lack access to domain knowledge about specialized areas of information
and their working memory presents limitations on easily processing new information.
Add to those limitations sentences that are already well known to present processing
problems and we have a recipe for comprehension diﬃculties. Processing problems may
include sentence length, complexity, number of embeddings, the presence of negation or
passivization, syntactic ambiguity, and the absence of relative pronouns marking clauses.
Awareness of these processing issues reaches back as far as the late 1960s and 1970s in the
United States, as in Slobin (1966; passives, negatives), Fodor and Garrett (1967; embed-
dings and presence of relative pronouns), and Larkin and Burns (1977; embeddings and
memory) and proceeds forward to the present, as in Lord (2002; subordinate clauses
more diﬃcult), Van Dyke and McElree (2006; retrieval interference), Van Dyke (2007;
retrieval interference from more than one plausible subject), Reali and Christiansen
(2006; pronominal subject clauses more diﬃcult than object clauses), and Ye and Zhou
(2008; passives and incompatible sentence alternatives). Although a short sentence may
be as diﬃcult to process as a longer sentence if the available slots are ﬁlled with technical
and unknown terms, very lengthy sentences impose other problems. Embeddings, espe-
cially those in the subject NP, slow processing down; ambiguous syntax or scope
increases processing diﬃculties; texts with more of these features impede comprehension
more than those sentences with fewer such features. Additional issues may appear when
lengthy sentences are presented in a bulleted list of non-parallel items, inconsistently
punctuated, as seen in US immigration documents (Stygall 2002).
Discourse level phenomena also may present diﬃculties to lay comprehension (orga-
nization, references to outside texts, cohesion, visual presentations of information, speech
acts). As Tiersma (1999) suggests, poor organization may be a feature of legal texts. To
the legal professional, a text may appear to be organized sensibly, but this organization
may be based on a knowledge of how legal text works that is inaccessible to lay readers.
For example, jury instructions often sound disordered to lay jurors. Attorneys, who
know that the order of the instructions may roughly follow a pattern book of instruc-
tions, ﬁnd the organization quite sensible, but although it may make sense to the legal
professional, it has very few aids to comprehension for lay jurors (Stygall 1991). The lay
reader of a particular corporation’s ﬁnancial document may not know that all documents
of that type have the same form, perhaps required by statute or regulation. Professional
ﬁnancial readers may unconsciously know the document type, without realizing that lay
GAIL STYGALL
62

readers do not have experience of reading many such documents. Thus, the same text
may seem sensible to the professional reader but disorganized to the lay reader.
Another feature of professional and academic disciplinary discourse is explicit and
visible exophoric referencing; that is, references to other texts completely outside the
body of the text. In legal texts, there may be references to judicial decisions, legal journal
articles, briefs, regulations or statutes (or all of these). Lay readers are distracted by such
references, as they generally lack access to the texts being referenced. As I have suggested
elsewhere, these exophoric references mark the text’s audience as readers other than
laypeople. Professional readers at least would know of the references and how to access
the other texts, while lay readers in general would not.
Another set of resources for the linguist working on complex documents are those
associated with document designers and technical communicators. As I have reported
elsewhere, document designers did work with linguists in the 1970s and early 1980s on
projects to improve the overall usefulness of complex documents to readers (Stygall
2002). These projects were often associated with consumer initiatives, such as Roger
Shuy’s work to make Social Security documents more understandable (Shuy 1998a).
With the election of Ronald Reagan as President, emphasis on consumer understanding
in the US yielded to an emphasis on the amount of time it took to complete forms for
the government. Plain English initiatives were reversed at the federal level and research
funding for document design centers was lost. However, during the Reagan administra-
tion, a number of colleges and universities began programs in technical communication,
sometimes associated with schools of engineering, sometimes associated with English
departments. At least two books emerging from this tradition are useful to linguists as
reference materials: Paul V. Anderson’s Technical Communication: A Reader-Centered
Approach and Karen A. Schriver’s Dynamics in Document Design. Another set of resources
emerging now in document design of special interest to linguists is the Document Design
Companion Series from John Benjamins and Information Design Journal, both of which
often feature linguists working on documents or collaborations between linguists and
document designers.
Conclusion
Many commentators have wondered how legal language and discourse could be
improved. Most large companies hire an actuarial/communications or communications
consulting ﬁrm to work with their staﬀon developing the notices, plan descriptions or
credit card documents of various kinds. To my knowledge, these companies seem not to
know of either linguists or technical communicators. A linguist could certainly advise
developers on better ways to communicate and on the discourse and syntax to avoid.
Some suggest Plain English standards or say that there should be a Plain English law.
Although those Plain English standards might help temporarily, it seems likely that the
legal language would reappear in a form that meets the Plain English standards but still
remains mostly incomprehensible to lay readers. The idea that there would likely be a
reformulation back into law—or in this case, legal language—has been discussed by those
who theorize law as an autopoietic system, resistant to the aims and principles of other
systems (Luhmann 2004; Tuebner 1993; King 1997). Similarly, legislated language
change has been remarkably diﬃcult. Together, the two tendencies suggest that
while Plain English measures may help understanding in the short term, the prospects for
LEGAL WRITING: COMPLEXITY
63

long-term change are problematic. Consequently, I believe that a better strategy would be
to combine linguists with document designers to conduct usability testing on a repre-
sentative sample of the target reading group and then revise the documents as necessary.
And the ﬁnal evaluation of the documents before they go out to lay readers would need
to be made by a group including linguists, document designers and attorneys.
In the meantime, linguists working in a forensic setting with these complex documents
should examine and analyze them thoroughly, keeping in mind what the literacy levels
of varying populations may be. The discourse and linguistic features that may impede
reader understanding are prominent in these documents. Although I have described only
two types of document here, I could have done the same analysis for real estate Truth in
Lending Statements, End User License Agreements (EULAs for computer programs),
Medicare forms, asylum requests, military disability forms, lease agreements, rental con-
tracts and a host of others. We live in a world of complex documents that are diﬃcult for
almost all readers to understand.
Further reading
Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin, Y., Boyle, B., Hsu, Y. and Dunleavy, E. (2007) Literacy in Everyday Life:
Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education, available online at: http://nces.ed.gov/Pubs2007/2007480.pdf.
Shuy, R. (1998) Bureaucratic Language in Government and Business, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
——(2008) Fighting over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tiersma, P. (1999) Legal Language, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Legal sources
60 Fed. Reg. 64,320 to 64,324, 1995.
63 Fed. Reg. 68,678, 68,678, 1998.
12 C.F.R. § 226.5 through 226.16.
Amara v. CIGNA, Case No. 3:01CV2361 (MRK), “Memorandum of Decision.” United States District
Court, District of Connecticut, available online at: www.ctemploymentlawblog.com/erisa.pdf
(accessed 30 December 2008).
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, Pub. L. No. 99–272 § 11006, 100 Stat 82,
243 (1986).
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107–16, § 659, 115 Stat.
38, 140 (2001).
Supplement I to 12 CFR Part 226, Regulation Z.
Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq.
GAIL STYGALL
64

5
Legal writing: attitude and emphasis
Corpus linguistic approaches to ‘legal
language’: adverbial expression of attitude
and emphasis in Supreme Court opinions
Edward Finegan
Introduction
The US common law system relies heavily on the written opinions of appellate courts,
and it is from such opinions more than statutory law that American jurisprudence is
learned. Particularly in the ﬁrst of the three years required to complete a doctor of laws
degree, opinions rendered by appellate court judges are the principal focus of attention in
law school classrooms in the United States (Mertz 2007).
Writing about legal decision-making and the presentation of legal opinions, Solan
(1993: 1) observes that “Any judge who takes himself and his position seriously struggles
with these dual tasks.” Having clerked for an associate justice of the Supreme Court of
New Jersey, he adds that “judges usually care deeply about making the best decision they
can, and about conveying their decision in a manner that makes the decision appear as
fair as possible to the parties, and often to the public.” Once judges have made a decision
about a case, however, they do not typically report the anguish that went into making it.
Says Solan: “Any lawyer who has been on the losing side of a close question will recall
the shock of reading how easily the judge rejects the losing arguments out of hand, as if
they could not have been made by a thinking person” (1993: 2). As we shall see with
respect to split decisions made by supreme court justices, “any lawyer” could readily
encompass justices on both sides of the decision.
Conley and O’Barr (2005: 129) stress the point that “the details of legal discourse
matter because language is the essential mechanism through which the power of the law
is realized, exercised, reproduced, and occasionally challenged and subverted.” The pre-
sent chapter focuses on small details of legal language in a legal register that has received
relatively little attention from forensic linguists but which is crucially important in the
training of attorneys in the United States. In particular, it examines adverbial expressions
of attitude and emphasis in decisions rendered by the Supreme Court of the United
States and, as a state example, the Supreme Court of California. The opinions rendered
by these courts are drafted as written documents intended to be published in
65

written form. Because they are usually not read aloud by the justices, but prepared for
publication, they are not drafted as oral documents.
US court systems
By way of background and speaking somewhat generally, the US has two major cate-
gories of court systems—a federal system and the various state systems. The federal
system comprises 94 judicial districts, whose trial courts are organized into a dozen
regional circuits, each with an appellate level. For example, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit handles appellate cases for the district courts in California
and in eight neighboring states, including Hawaii and Alaska, as well as in two Paciﬁc
Ocean territories. Typically, a panel of three judges hears an appellate case, but occa-
sionally all the judges in a circuit hear a case en banc; in the exceptionally large Ninth
Circuit, with 28 active circuit judges, an en banc hearing panel comprises a randomly
selected 11 judges. Circuit court decisions constitute binding precedent within the dis-
trict courts of the particular circuit and on subsequent three-judge panels in the circuit
but not on other circuits. When diﬀerent circuits arrive at competing conclusions about a
point of federal law, when disagreements arise between individual states, and when it
agrees to grant an appeal from a circuit court decision, the US Supreme Court has jur-
isdiction. The highest court in the land, its decisions, generally speaking, are binding
throughout the country. Under the US Constitution, the judicial branch holds equal
power with the executive and legislative branches.
As to state courts, there are as many systems as states, and each operates under the
constitution and statutes of its state and within the reach of prior appellate decisions of its
state. Each state has a highest court and, like federal courts and the US Supreme Court,
each typically handles civil and criminal matters. State court systems usually have a
website, as with New York’s (www.nycourts.gov/) and California’s (www.courtinfo.ca.
gov/). A wider range of information is available through the website for the National
Center for State Courts (www.ncsconline.org/).
Generally, courts of appeal rely principally on written records, notably briefs written
by attorneys on each side and amici (friend-of-the-court) briefs written by third parties.
Given that what most Americans understand about their judicial systems derives princi-
pally from experience with trial courts as occasionally broadcast and more commonly
dramatized on television, many have only a general understanding of the workings of
appellate courts, despite knowing of the existence of their state supreme court and the
US Supreme Court. To appreciate how Americans likely perceive their court systems, it
may be helpful to think of LA Law, Judge Judy, and Law and Order, the last being the
longest-running primetime drama on US television and the most realistic of the court
shows. Also popular are the televised hearings in Judge Judy’s small claims court, where
litigants represent themselves in disputed matters of relatively small ﬁnancial con-
sequence. Because courtroom dramas of the kind broadcast on television do not produce
the written opinions that constitute the great bulk of what is studied in US law schools,
the opinions that law school students study and practitioners rely on—and which are the
focus of this chapter’s analysis—deserve more attention than forensic linguists have thus
far aﬀorded them.
In mid 2009, to ﬁll a vacancy arising from the retirement of Associate Justice David
Souter from the nine-member US Supreme Court, President Barack Obama nominated
EDWARD FINEGAN
66

Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the post. A member of the federal Second Circuit, Judge
Sotomayor was well qualiﬁed, and much of the opposition among those who lacked
enthusiasm for the nomination focused not on her judicial opinions but on a line in a
speech she had delivered eight years earlier. In that speech, she said,
I would hope that a wise Latina woman with the richness of her experiences would
more often than not reach a better conclusion than a white male who hasn’t lived
that life.
(Savage 14 May 2009)
Her statement has been contrasted with one credited to Justice Sandra Day O’Connor,
the ﬁrst woman appointed to the US Supreme Court. O’Connor had remarked about
judges that, in deciding cases, a wise old man and a wise old woman would reach the
same conclusion. Sotomayor’s speech is noteworthy, among other reasons, because her
nomination prompted widespread discussion about whether and to what degree judges
are engines of sheer rationality—pure logicians, even—or are inﬂuenced by matters
other than knowledge of the law and what might be called legal logic. Thus, the
degree to which the language of emotion ﬁnds its way into legal opinions is a matter of
increasing interest and scrutiny.
Expressing attitude and emphasis
This chapter examines some aspects of the linguistic expression of judicial attitude, taking
its examples not from televised courtroom dramas but from written opinions rendered
and published in the year 2008 by the United States and California supreme courts.
Speciﬁcally, it focuses on adverbial expressions of attitude and emphasis. With respect to
emphasis, it addresses what appears to be a gap between a prominent feature of supreme
court opinions and a near-universal recommendation in legal-drafting textbooks.
As an example of a judge who freely expresses her attitudes, Judge Judy has called one
of her books Beauty Fades, Dumb is Forever and another Keep it Simple, Stupid: You’re
Smarter than You Look, while a third carries the title, Don’t Pee on My Leg and Tell Me It’s
Raining. As in her books, so in her televised courtroom appearances Judge Judy gives
voice to strong opinions and unﬂinching judgments. It is fair to say she wears her senti-
ments on her sleeve and expresses her attitudes with unmistakable force, and that is
doubtless encouraged by her television producers, who have presumably chosen the
outspoken judge with successful television ratings in mind. By contrast, appellate court
judges, such as the panels mentioned above and the California and US supreme courts
examined here, tend to be more circumspect in their precedential decisions. But by no
means should a tendency toward circumspection suggest that appellate court judges mute
the expression of attitude or the intended emphasis of their written appellate opinions.
Not surprisingly, the tagline of Judge Judy’s show is “Justice with an attitude,” and that
tagline tidily captures the thrust of this chapter.
Like other English speakers, judges have a range of grammatical structures through
which to convey attitudinal stance in legal opinions. Those forms include:
predicate adjectives
“it is absurd to do this”; “It is therefore unsurprising that … ”;
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
67

attributive adjectives
“It is a sad day for the rule of law when such an important constitutional precedent
is discarded”;
“if Delaware could forbid the wharﬁng out that Article VII allowed New Jersey to
permit, Article VII was a ridiculous nullity”;
“In light of the fundamental nature of the substantive rights embodied in the right to
marry—and their central importance to an individual’s opportunity to live a happy,
meaningful, and satisfying life as a full member of society … ”;
“Unable to point to any such evidence, the Court stakes its holding on a strained
and unpersuasive reading of the Amendment’s text … ”);
verb choice
(“the Court warps our Constitution”; “the majority fails to persuade me”; “The
majority ignores the fact that plaintiﬀs already have those rights and privileges”).
(All excerpts from court opinions quoted in this chapter come from the corpus of
supreme court opinions—COSCO—described below; within the excerpts, internal
citations to other court opinions have been silently omitted.) In this chapter, we focus on
adverbial expressions of attitudinal stance and emphasis.
As perhaps the most notorious exemplar of an acerbic opinion writer, US Supreme
Court Associate Justice Antonin Scalia’s attitudes are often palpable. In a case involving
“enemy combatants” detained at the United States Naval Station at Guantanamo Bay, a
majority of justices ruled that those detainees had certain rights of due process. Scalia
dissented and in his dissenting opinion made no attempt to disguise his distaste for the
majority opinion. He voiced that distaste by using strong predicate adjectives, as in
In the long term, then, the Court’s decision today accomplishes little. … “In the
short term, however, the decision is devastating” and “It is nonsensical to interpret
those provisions themselves in light of some general “separation-of-powers principles”
dreamed up by the Court.
But a particularly preferred mode in so many examples in his opinions is the deployment
of adverbs. If not quite as earthy as Judge Judy, Justice Scalia nonetheless pulls no
punches with his attitudes:
Today the Court warps our Constitution in a way that goes beyond the narrow issue
of the reach of the Suspension Clause, invoking judicially brainstormed separation-of-
powers principles to establish a manipulable “functional” test for the extraterritorial reach
of habeas corpus. … It blatantly misdescribes important precedents. … And, most tragically,
it sets our military commanders the impossible task of proving to a civilian court …
that evidence supports the conﬁnement of each and every enemy prisoner.
In the remainder of this chapter we examine how jurists express attitude and emphasis in
their use of adverbials, as in Scalia’s “judicially brainstormed,” “blatantly misdescribes”
and “most tragically” sets an impossible task. Scalia’s caustic exploitation of adverbs is by
no means a solitary practice. However calm, cool, and collected the logic behind
supreme court opinions, the justices’ words have teeth—and can bite.
EDWARD FINEGAN
68

Emphatic adverbials and their prohibition
Some adverbials receive special treatment in legal writing textbooks and handbooks of
legal usage. Brian Garner, regarded by many as the dean of American legal usage, notes
that from the sense ‘as a matter of course’ “the phrase of course took on the sense ‘natu-
rally; obviously; clearly’” and, like them, he says, “is sometimes used to fortify lame
propositions. It therefore requires careful, responsible use” (Garner 1995: 614). About
clearly, another shibboleth among legal drafting experts, Garner quotes a literary scholar
talking of judicial style: “when a judge (some other judge) begins a sentence with a term
of utter conviction (Clearly, Undeniably, It is plain that … ), the sentence that follows is
likely to be dubious, unreasonable, and fraught with diﬃculties” (Garner 1995: 161,
citing Gibson 1961: 925). Had that scholar been writing decades later, he could have
illustrated his point with examples from Scalia’s dissent in a case involving the right of an
individual to bear arms: “Story’s Commentaries also cite as support Tucker and Rawle,
both of whom clearly viewed the right as unconnected to militia service” or “Nothing so
clearly demonstrates the weakness of Justice Stevens’ case” (underscoring of relevant
examples added here and elsewhere throughout the chapter).
Obviously is another adverb that receives unfavorable marks from legal drafting guides.
Garner calls it a dogmatic word that “lawyers tend to use when they are dealing with
exceptionally obscure matters” (Garner 1995: 161, citing Gilmore 1974: 116, n. 63). He
even captions a chapter of The Winning Brief with this directive: “Shun clearly and its
allies” (Garner 2004b: 363), and he justiﬁes the directive on the admittedly paradoxical
grounds that words like clearly and obviously “protest too much. They signal weakness.”
Elsewhere Garner calls such words “exaggerators,” and he notes that “a statement pre-
faced by one of these words is [often] conclusory, and sometimes even exceedingly
dubious” (Garner 2003: 152).
Garner is not alone in objecting to clearly and other exaggerators. A drafting textbook
used at the University of Southern California’s law school directs students to “avoid
intensiﬁers” and oﬀers this curious and provocative explanation:
Because generations of writers have overused words like “clearly” or “very,” these
and other common intensiﬁers have become virtually meaningless. As a matter of
fact, they have begun to develop a connotation exactly opposite their original
meaning.
(Edwards 2006: 232)
Other legal writing guides make similar comments, and if their assessments are accurate,
it is no wonder that authors direct novice legal drafters to “rid your writing” of clearly,
extremely, obviously, and very (Edwards 2006: 233).
The disparagement of such intensiﬁers, exaggerators, and emphatics in legal language
ranges well beyond handbook writers and textbook authors. John G. Roberts, chief
justice of the United States Supreme Court, lambasted such adverbials in a discussion
session following a speech at Northwestern University law school and lamented their
appearance in briefs submitted to the United States Supreme Court.
We get hundreds and hundreds of briefs, and they’re all the same. Somebody says,
“My client clearly deserves to win, the cases clearly do this, the language clearly
reads this,” blah, blah, blah. And you pick up the other side and, lo and behold,
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
69

they think they clearly deserve to win. How about a little recognition that it’s a
tough job? I mean, if it was an easy case, we wouldn’t have it.
(Barnes 2007: A15, cited in Long and Christensen 2008)
From the legal writing textbook author to the legal writing usage handbook compiler to
the chief justice of the United States Supreme Court, the condemnation of certain kinds
of adverbials is loud and consistent.
Adverbs and adverbials
Although not much attended to in scholarship about legal language, adverbs and adverbials
are interesting on several grounds. For one thing, they display impressive grammatical
ﬂexibility, serving to modify not only verbs, adjectives, and adverbs but entire clauses.
They may have within their scope single words, as in (1a), or complicated clauses, as
in (1b).
(1)
a) Defendant contends the challenged condition … is unconstitutionally overbroad.
b) Certainly such agreements would require courts to vacate clear errors appearing on
the face of an arbitration award that cause substantial prejudice.
Solan (1993) discusses a case (United States v. Yermian) at whose heart was the scope of
the expression knowingly and willfully as it appeared in a section of the United States
Criminal Code. The defendant’s conviction at trial was overturned on appeal to the
Ninth Circuit, which disagreed with the lower court’s interpretation of adverbial
scope. Then, on appeal to the US Supreme Court, the Ninth Circuit’s interpretation of
adverbial scope was itself overturned—although the highest court’s 5–4 decision
underscores how diﬃcult it can be to disambiguate the scope of an adverb unan-
imously. Schane (2006) discusses wide and narrow adverbial scope in another US
Supreme Court case (Liparota v. United States), while Tiersma (1999) talks about
adverbial scope in statutory law. In legal contexts, then, ambiguities of adverbial scope
carry some notoriety.
Besides in scope, adverbials may be ambiguous in other ways (Biber et al. 1999: 782ﬀ.;
Huddleston and Pullum 2002: 436), and it is possible that this very disposition to ambi-
guity makes them attractive in legal opinions. Still, despite their playing a prominent role
in the expression of attitude and particularly because as emphatics and intensiﬁers they
are the target of proscription and contempt in textbooks on legal drafting, forensic lin-
guists and professional analysts of legal language seldom treat adverbs and adverbials
in depth.
Adverbials serve several communicative or grammatical functions, two of which (aﬀect
or attitude and emphasis) are examined in this chapter. Not treated here are:
 adverbials marking stylistic stance, such as brieﬂy, candidly, frankly, honestly, to tell the
truth, in truth, and in fact, only the last of which occurs more than sporadically in
our corpus of supreme court opinions and seems often an intensiﬁer;
 adverbials marking epistemic stance, such as logically, psychologically, textually, inevi-
tably and naturally, only the last two occurring more than sporadically in
our corpus;
EDWARD FINEGAN
70

 hedging, as in about, allegedly, almost, apparently, approximately, arguably, conceivably,
generally, hardly, in eﬀect, largely, likely, maybe, nearly, seemingly, virtually, perhaps,
possibly, presumably, probably, relatively, reportedly, reputedly;
 conjoining, as in accordingly, consequently, however, subsequently, thereby, therefore, thus,
nevertheless, nonetheless, in addition, in conclusion, in short, in sum, instead, and rather.
Hedging and conjoining adverbials occur in supreme court opinions but lie beyond the
ambit of this chapter. Ditto for adverbials expressing manner or circumstance (again, then,
now, carefully, clearly, deceptively, deliberately, earnestly, erroneously, faithfully, frequently, often,
seldom, plainly, quickly, respectfully, swiftly, unreasonably), which are also frequent but not
speciﬁcally pertinent to judicial expression of attitude or emphasis.
Noting that both clearly and plainly are listed among the manner or circumstance
adverbials just above highlights the point that adverbials may carry multiple meanings and
serve diﬀerent functions, depending on their context of use. For example, in fact may
mark stylistic or epistemic stance as well as emphasis, while clearly and plainly may indicate
circumstance, epistemic stance, or emphasis. As another example, consider an adverb that
occurs very frequently in COSCO. The adverb simply, like so many others, is poly-
semous. The American Heritage Dictionary lists ﬁve senses, including three that are not
common in supreme court opinions (‘in a plain and unadorned way or an unambiguous
way’; ‘not wisely or sensibly’; ‘frankly, candidly’) and two that are common (‘merely,
only’ and ‘absolutely, altogether’). Linguists have categorized these senses in diﬀerent
ways, including as manner or circumstance adverbials, markers of stance, and markers of
emphasis (see Biber and Finegan 1988, 1989). From the COSCO corpus the sense of
‘merely, only’ can be seen in examples such as, “‘Keep arms’ was simply a common way
of referring to possessing arms, for militiamen and everyone else,” while the ‘absolutely,
altogether’ sense appears in “The Court is simply wrong when it intones that Miller
contained ‘not a word’ about the Amendment’s history” (underscore here and in other
examples added; italics in original).
The corpus of supreme court opinions (COSCO)
To examine adverbial expression of stance and emphatics in supreme court opinions, a
corpus can be useful, and constructing one for research or teaching purposes is not dif-
ﬁcult. To begin this examination, a corpus comprising cases decided by the US and
California supreme courts in the year 2008 was compiled. Cases from a single calendar
year encompass decisions rendered roughly in the second half of one term (here, the
2007–8 term) and the ﬁrst half of another (here, the 2008–9 term). Aiming to avoid
strictly procedural decisions, the corpus of supreme court opinions, or COSCO, includes
only substantive decisions that were not unanimously decided. Choosing decisions with
at least one dissenting opinion proved an expedient way of simultaneously excluding
procedural matters (which are otherwise abundant) and including diﬀerences of opinion
likely to prompt or multiply expressions of attitude and emphasis.
Taken from the Lexis-Nexis database, COSCO includes the majority opinion and all
concurring and dissenting opinions for 17 California cases (comprising approximately
259,000 words) and 56 federal cases (comprising about 647,000 words). In all, COSCO
contains 905,464 words, including citations. Because a given supreme court opinion
usually contains signiﬁcant internal citation to preceding opinions and occasional internal
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
71

citation to other parts of the given decision (including concurring and dissenting opi-
nions), frequency counts of linguistic features “per million words” of legal opinions can
fairly be viewed as distinctly conservative in that, were the internal citations removed
from a judicial opinion as not part and parcel of ordinary language use, the frequency
counts of adverbs per million words would increase.
Researchers and students can readily compile corpora of American supreme court
opinions, relying on material available through Lexis-Nexis or Westlaw and through
websites for individual state courts and the US Supreme Court. In many instances, these
resources also make available the briefs that were ﬁled in connection with a case. Further
still, at its website (www.supremecourtus.gov/) the US Supreme Court makes available
transcripts of oral arguments, which usually last for one hour in all, half an hour for each
side, including questions from the bench. Audio recordings of oral arguments before the
US Supreme Court have been made since 1955 and are available through the Oyez
Project (www.oyez.org), going back several decades, although with somewhat uneven
quality. Thus, written texts originating in speech (transcriptions of oral arguments by
litigants and questions by justices) and texts originating in writing and not usually
intended to be read aloud (briefs, court opinions), as well as audio recordings of the
spoken materials, are increasingly available. State supreme court websites often provide
archived audio recordings of oral arguments, leaving researchers who need transcripts to
produce them on their own. Recordings of oral arguments, which may be highly inter-
actional, are likely to prove invaluable to forensic linguists keen to understand and
describe this hitherto largely inaccessible legal register. A corpus of such transcripts, cor-
rected and augmented from audio recordings to any degree of detail a researcher might
need, could aﬀord a rich database for study of registers of legal language largely over-
looked by linguists. Almost any aspect of the language of oral arguments could be
analyzed and in some cases compared with the language of written briefs ﬁled in support
of one side or the other or with the written opinions of the court. In contrast to a bur-
geoning interest in supreme court cases and their attendant written and spoken registers
among political scientists and communications specialists, forensic linguists are in the early
stages of such analysis (for an application of automated analysis of content in advocacy
briefs, see Evans et al. 2007; Apitz and Lin 2007). But forensic linguists are beginning to
recognize the value of these resources and exploit them (see, e.g. Tracy 2009; Tracy and
Craig 2009).
To turn to the principal focus of this chapter, COSCO provides an extraordinary
range of adverbials used to express judges’ attitudes toward the content of their analysis.
The adverbial markers of stance illustrated in examples (2.1–2.7) may be paraphrased as
something akin to, “It should not surprise us that … ”; “I ﬁnd it remarkable/inexplicable
that … ”; “It is most important to note that … ”; “It is signiﬁcant that. … ”; and “I regard
it as unfortunate that. … ”
(2)
1. Not surprisingly, the parties vigorously disputed the waiver issue, and it sharply
divided the Court.
2. Remarkably, this Court does not require petitioners to exhaust their remedies
under the statute. …
3. The Court inexplicably concludes, however, that the liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG)
unloading wharf at stake in this litigation “goes well beyond the ordinary or
usual.”
EDWARD FINEGAN
72

4. Most importantly, the circumstance that the oﬀense is aggravated does not, in
every case, provide evidence that the inmate is a current threat to public safety.
5. Signiﬁcantly, AB 1889 authorizes not only the California Attorney General but
also any private taxpayer … to bring a civil action against suspected violators. …
6. Happily, we need not imagine such cases, since they come before our courts every
day.
7. Unfortunately, it would likely create, rather than alleviate, confusion to change
our terminology at this point.
In COSCO, we may note, surprisingly is used almost invariably in the negative, as in
(2.1), and importantly is almost invariably preceded by more or most, as in (2.4). As we shall
see below, adverbial expression of attitudinal stance is less common than adverbial
expression of emphatics.
Also abundant in COSCO are emphatics—adverbs that merely add emphasis to some
aspect of content but do not otherwise add content itself. Example (3.1) shows in par-
enthesis the original utterance but without the emphatic, a contrast intended to highlight
the fact that emphatics merely emphasize.
(3)
1. But when discussing these words, the Court simply ignores the preamble. (But
when discussing these words, the Court ignores the preamble.)
2. The Navy’s alternative course … is surely not what Congress had in mind when it
instructed agencies to comply with NEPA “to the fullest extent possible.”
3.
… an “absolute certainty” standard is plainly inconsistent with Brecht.
4. It is particularly appropriate for us to refrain from employing equal protection
doctrine to thwart the will of the voters in this case.
5. A drug purchase was not the only possible explanation for the defendant’s
conduct, but it was certainly likely enough to give rise to probable cause.
6. But the two readings of the language that Congress chose are not equally
plausible: Of the two, Florida’s is clearly the more natural.
Frequency of emphatics in COSCO
It would require considerable resources to examine each occurrence of selected adverbs
in a corpus of over 900,000 words, and it was not the aim of this chapter to do the kind
of exact and detailed study that a research paper would exhibit. Instead, we sought to
highlight the availability of a range of linguistic resources for the study of supreme court
cases in all their public facets and to illustrate that, contrary to much public belief and
considerable legal posturing, both state and federal supreme court opinions are far from
lacking in expressions of attitude and emphasis.
For this chapter, COSCO has served principally to identify the character of certain
adverbial types in a sample of supreme court opinions. Further, frequency counts of
selected adverbs in COSCO, in the Brown Corpus of Written American English (Francis and
Kucˇera 1982), and in the British National Corpus (http://sara.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/lookup.
html) allow tentative comparisons to be made between court opinions and more general
ranges of written English. The Brown Corpus contains just over 1 million words from 15
genres of American English, while the BNC in about 100 million words likewise con-
tains a range of written registers as well as a relatively small portion of speech.
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
73

Normalizing counts of adverbs in COSCO to frequencies per million words allows
rough comparison with frequencies in the Brown Corpus as published in Francis and
Kucˇera (1982). Using the Sara simple search of the BNC (http://sara.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/
lookup.html) to determine frequencies of speciﬁc adverbs and dividing by 100 provided
an approximation of frequencies per million words and permits comparisons across the
three corpora. No attempt was made to distinguish the diﬀerent adverbial uses of a given
adverbial form (e.g. plainly), and in the Tables 5.1 and 5.2 a small limitation to compar-
ing phrasal adverbs is reﬂected in some blank cells because the published Francis and
Kucˇera (1982) frequencies do not include phrasal adverbs such as in fact and of course. Still,
some rough and ready comparisons can be oﬀered.
Table 5.1 shows frequencies per million words for several attitudinal adverbials across
the three corpora. The ﬁrst ﬁve of the seven adverbials are more frequent in COSCO
than in Brown or BNC. The dramatically more frequent occurrences of properly and
improperly in COSCO than in the more general corpora point to judges’ special use of
these terms to assess earlier court opinions and the decisions of the courts below, which
they are considering on appeal. A similar explanation likely applies to the relative
frequency of correctly. About unfortunately (which we have illustrated above) and for-
tunately, it is not surprising that justices seldom use these expressions, given that they so
patently express inner emotion.
Table 5.2 Emphatic adverbials per million words in three corpora
COSCO
BROWN
BNC
simply
375
171
173
indeed
306
146
184
merely
235
135
74
clearly
184
128
150
plainly
88
18
7
precisely
81
48
34
surely
71
47
60
readily
52
43
28
of course
178
297
particularly
163
146
217
actually
163
166
255
in fact
162
163
certainly
84
143
181
fully
71
80
88
especially
71
174
highly
50
94
90
Table 5.1 Stance adverbials per million words in three corpora
COSCO
BROWN
BNC
appropriately
15
5
9
correctly
59
13
1
importantly
24
8
13
improperly
23
2
1
properly
207
55
55
fortunately
3
20
16
unfortunately
4
33
46
EDWARD FINEGAN
74

Table 5.2 shows frequencies per million words across the three corpora for selected
adverbials commonly used as emphatics. No claim is made here that any listed adverb is
an emphatic in all its occurrences; the counts are nevertheless likely to be indicative
chieﬂy of use as an emphatic, particularly in COSCO. Words like even and so, that are
frequent and vary so much in function that comparison across diﬀerent corpora would
certainly be misleading, are not included.
In Table 5.2, the adverbs simply (at 375 per million words in COSCO), indeed (306
pmw), merely (235 pmw), and the notorious clearly (184 pmw) occur much more fre-
quently in the supreme court opinions represented in COSCO than in Brown and the
BNC, the more general corpora. Less frequent than those four but still more highly
favored in supreme court opinions than in the two general corpora are plainly, precisely,
surely, and readily. By contrast, actually, certainly, fully, and highly—carrying more absolute
senses—occur more frequently in the general corpora. Of course appears less frequently in
COSCO than in BNC, and in fact appears about equally; as noted earlier published
sources provided no usable information for these items in Brown. A closer look at actual
instances could reveal the reasons, but of course seems concessive in a good many supreme
court uses, and concession may risk conveying condescension. While most occurrences
in COSCO of the Table 5.2 adverbs are probably emphatics, it is necessary to stress that
identifying particular functions for these adverbs was not attempted here and therefore, as
emphatics the cited frequencies are merely indicative and subject to reﬁnement. Besides
the emphatic adverbials that we have discussed as occurring in COSCO, several
emphatics did not occur even once in our supreme court opinions, including absolutely,
totally, and wholly and a set that could be emphatics or represent epistemic stance, namely,
really, obviously, patently, and undoubtedly.
Efﬁcacy of emphatics in appellate briefs
The frequency of some emphatics in the supreme court opinions in COSCO may be
surprising, given the strong criticism of them by drafting experts and members of the
judiciary. While clearly is not the most frequent emphatic in COSCO, its use in supreme
court opinions is notably more frequent than in Brown or BNC, both of which represent
more familiar genres of written English. Others among the condemned emphatics—
though not all—are far from uncommon. Given the frequent use of some emphatics—
including some of those most explicitly condemned—one must wonder to what end
handbook authors like Garner (2004b) and textbook writers like Edwards (2006) are so
insistent on legal drafters avoiding such adverbs. In other words, given the nearly uni-
versal condemnation of such emphatics, the question that remains is whether attorneys
who use those adverbs in their briefs before appellate courts are as disadvantaged by their
use as drafting experts would suggest. Given the bad press for intensiﬁers, one must
wonder about their eﬃcacy in legal briefs. Do lawyers and their clients fail more often
when a lawyer’s brief utilizes the intensiﬁers condemned by drafting experts and ridiculed
by the chief justice of the United States Supreme Court?
Just that question has been addressed in a recent study that exploited the availability of
appellate court opinions and the related briefs ﬁled in those cases. Long and Christensen
(2008) carried out a statistically sophisticated analysis of correlations between lawyers’ use
of a dozen adverbial intensiﬁers (very, obviously, clearly, patently, absolutely, really, plainly,
undoubtedly, certainly, totally, simply, and wholly) in their briefs and the outcome of the
cases in which the briefs had been ﬁled. They analyzed 400 federal and state appeals cases
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
75

to determine whether the widespread condemnation of clearly and its cousins aﬀected
outcomes. They randomly chose federal circuit court cases and state appellate cases from
the years 2001–3 roughly in proportion to the number of cases handled by those jur-
isdictions. They examined only civil cases in which there was “a clearly discernable
outcome, usually either ‘reversed’ or ‘aﬃrmed,’ and the selected cases had at least one
brief for each party—usually the principal and the response brief” (Long and Christensen
2008: 182). They made “every eﬀort … to exclude the selected intensiﬁers when they
were not used as intensiﬁers” or appeared in quoted materials (2008: 182), a reﬁnement
not available to us in the frequency counts of Table 5.1 and Table 5.2. As a measure of
intensiﬁer usage rate, Long and Christensen tallied the number of (the twelve) intensiﬁers
per page for each brief.
They found that decisions that were not unanimous prompted high rates of intensiﬁers
in both majority and dissenting opinions and that dissenting judges were “by far the
worst oﬀenders.” As Long and Christensen put it, “when things are clearly less clear in
the judges’ chambers, the judges, too, are more likely to use ‘clearly’ and other intensi-
ﬁers” (Long and Christensen 2008: 184), precisely as claimed by Garner (2004b) and
Edwards (2006). Interestingly, however, no correlation was found generally between
intensiﬁer use in lawyers’ briefs and the outcome for the clients on whose behalf the
briefs had been ﬁled. Still, the analysis did uncover some fascinating correlations; in par-
ticular, “the rate of intensiﬁer use is associated with a statistically signiﬁcant change in the
likelihood of success on appeal” (Long and Christensen 2008: 181).
According to Long and Christensen, “the conventional wisdom that intensiﬁers are asso-
ciated with losing arguments is validated” for the majority of cases. That means that authors
of legal-drafting textbooks should be relieved to learn that “in certain situations, excessive
intensiﬁer use in appellate briefs is associated with a statistically signiﬁcant increase in
adverse outcomes for the ‘oﬀending’ party” (Long and Christensen 2008: 173). Look-
ing closer, however, one may wonder whether it pays not so much to know your
judge as to know your judge’s writing style! Here’s why: for petitioners aiming to get a
higher court to reverse a lower-court ruling, the odds of reversal actually improved for
appellants with high intensiﬁer usage rates—“but only when the judge writing the
opinion is also a prodigious user of intensiﬁers” (Long and Christensen 2008: 185).
Language and thought
Long and Christensen (2008) cite a study that identiﬁed scalar values attributed to the use
of the intensiﬁer very. Subjects were given sentences to read in which very was and was
not used in modiﬁcation of some quality or other—e.g. very smart, very tall. Cliﬀ(1959)
found that intensiﬁers do indeed intensify and that very has a scalar value of 1.25. In other
words, readers reading a sentence referring to a very tall student judged the student to be
about 25 percent taller than a tall one and a very smart lecturer about 25 percent smarter
than a smart one. Other research, however, has found that when not paired in con-
trasting sentences (with and without the intensiﬁer) readers did not make a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between adjectives modiﬁed and not modiﬁed by very. Long and Christensen
conclude that:
the best characterization of the literature seems to suggest that intensiﬁers, if iso-
lated from other forms of powerless speech, or if used in simultaneous comparison
EDWARD FINEGAN
76

with a phrase omitting the intensiﬁer, actually do what intensiﬁers seem meant to
do—they intensify. On the other hand, when used in connection with other
forms of powerless speech, and without reference to a phrase lacking the given
intensiﬁer, they may negatively aﬀect the writer’s or speaker’s perceived credibility
or competence—they ‘detensify.’
(Long and Christensen 2008: 179–80)
Elsewhere in the psycholinguistic literature, Loftus (1996) has found that the language
form used in questioning can aﬀect a witness’s reply (see also Eades 2009; Matoesian
1993). Van der Houwen’s (2005) discourse analysis of the televised Judge Judy trials also
suggests a correlation between the judge’s insistence on certain language in litigants’
narratives and the way to reaching an acceptable decision among small claims litigants.
From various sources, then, it seems fair to say that particular language choices inﬂuence
a story and presumably the perception of facts behind the story (see Heﬀer, this volume,
for a discussion of narrative in trials).
Eric Kandel, distinguished psychiatrist and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology
and Medicine in 2000, has marshaled evidence indicating that the physiological healings
in the brain that pharmacotherapy accomplishes and that traditional psychotherapy
accomplishes are strikingly alike. In other words, as fMRIs and other technologies are
beginning to witness, therapeutic drugs and therapeutic talk shows have kindred eﬀects on
the brain (Kandel 1998, 2006). It is clear that investigation into the power of discourse to
inﬂuence the brain is only in its infancy.
Conclusion
Language in use—that is, discourse—doubtless aﬀects perception, albeit in ways that
remain unclear and under investigation. Still, we ought not think or let others believe
that language form does not matter. Like naïve language judges generally, appellate court
judges, including supreme court justices, are not necessarily adept at understanding their
own language use, and none of us knows well the eﬀect of reading appellate court
opinions on the minds of law students. It is the duty and the responsibility of forensic
linguists to be assertive in describing legal language as fully and accurately as possible.
Further reading
Biber, D. and E. Finegan (1988) “Adverbial stance types in English,” Discourse Processes, 11: 1–34.
——(1989) “Styles of stance in English: Lexical and grammatical marking of evidentiality and aﬀect,”
Text, 9: 93–124.
Biber, D., S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad and E. Finegan (1999) “Stance adverbials,” in Longman
Grammar of Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Longman, 853–75.
Solan, L. (1993) The Language of Judges, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
LEGAL WRITING: ATTITUDE AND EMPHASIS
77

6
Legal translation
Translating legal language
Deborah Cao
Introduction
The translation of law has played an important part in the contact between diﬀerent
peoples and diﬀerent cultures in history, and is playing an even more important role in
our increasingly globalised world with the demand for legal translation on the increase.
It is commonly acknowledged that legal translation is complex and that it requires special
skills, knowledge and experience on the part of the translator to produce such translation.
This chapter outlines the key concepts and issues involved in legal translation, in
particular the practical aspects of translating law with an analysis of diﬀerent types of
legal texts, including private legal documents, domestic statutes and multilateral legal
instruments.
Legal translation deﬁned
Legal translation is a type of specialist or technical translation, a kind of translational
activity that involves special language use, that is, language for special purpose (LSP) in
the context of law, or language for legal purpose (LLP).
Legal language and legal texts
For our purpose, legal language refers to the language of law and its relation to law and
legal process. This includes language of the law, language about law, and language used
in legal communicative situations (cf. Kurzon 1997, 1998a, who distinguishes language of
the law and legal language which is language about law). Legal language is a variety of
language appropriate to diﬀerent legal occasions and legal situations of use and appro-
priate to those diﬀerent legal situations of use. Legal texts refer to the texts produced or
used for legal purposes in legal settings.
78

We may distinguish four major variants or sub-varieties of written legal texts:
(1) legislative texts, for example, domestic statutes and subordinate laws, international
treaties and multilingual laws;
(2) judicial texts produced in the judicial process by judicial oﬃcers and other legal
authorities;
(3) legal scholarly texts produced by academic lawyers or legal scholars in scholarly
works and commentaries whose legal status depends on the legal systems in diﬀerent
jurisdictions; and
(4) private legal texts which include texts written by lawyers, for example, contracts,
leases, wills and litigation documents, and also texts written by non-lawyers, for
example, private agreements, witness statements and other documents, which are
used in litigation and other legal situations.
These diﬀerent sub-text types have their own peculiarities. As noted, legal language is
not homogeneous, not just one legal discourse, but ‘a set of related legal discourses’
(Maley 1994: 13). Legal language does not just cover the language of law alone, but all
communications in legal settings.
Legal texts may have various communicative purposes. They can be for normative
purposes, as in the case of bilingual and multilingual statutes and other laws and
documents that establish legal facts or create rights and obligations. These are mostly
prescriptive. Legal texts can also be for informative purposes, as in some legal scholarly
works and commentaries, legal advice, correspondence between lawyers, between law-
yers and clients, and documents used in court proceedings. These are mostly descriptive.
For the translator, then, it is necessary to ascertain the legal status and communicative
purpose of the original texts and the target texts, as these may impact on any translation.
Also importantly for our purpose, the legal status and communicative purposes of the
Source Language (SL) texts are not automatically transferred or carried over to the Target
Language (TL) texts. They can be diﬀerent.
Legal translation and its classiﬁcations
In view of the foregoing description of legal language and legal texts, as a generic deﬁnition,
legal translation refers to the rendering of legal texts from the SL into the TL.
Legal translation can be classiﬁed according to diﬀerent criteria. For instance, legal
translation has been categorised according to the subject matter of the SL texts into the
following categories:
(1) translating domestic statutes and international treaties;
(2) translating private legal documents;
(3) translating legal scholarly works; and
(4) translating case law.
For further discussion, see Cao (2007a).
Legal translation can also be divided according to the status of the original texts:
(1) translating enforceable law, for example, statutes; and
(2) translating non-enforceable law, for example, legal scholarly works.
LEGAL TRANSLATION
79

According to Sarcevic (1997), legal translation may be classiﬁed according to the
functions of the legal texts in the SL into the following categories:
(1) primarily prescriptive, for example, laws, regulations, codes, contracts, treaties and
conventions. These are regulatory instruments and they are normative texts;
(2) primarily descriptive and also prescriptive, for example, judicial decisions and legal
instruments that are used to carry out judicial and administrative proceedings such
as actions, pleadings, briefs, appeals, requests, petitions, etc.; and
(3) purely descriptive, for example, scholarly works written by legal scholars such as
legal opinions, law textbooks, articles. They belong to legal scholarship, the
authority of which varies in diﬀerent legal systems (Sarcevic 1997: 11).
Sarcevic (1997: 9) deﬁnes legal translation as special-purpose communication between
specialists, excluding communication between lawyers and non-lawyers.
Legal translation can also be classiﬁed in the light of the purposes of the TL texts.
Firstly, there is legal translation for normative purposes. This refers to the production
of equally authentic legal texts in bilingual and multilingual jurisdictions of domestic laws
and international legal instruments and other laws. These are translations of the law.
Often such bilingual or multilingual texts are ﬁrst drafted in one language and then
translated into another language or languages. They may also be drafted simultaneously
in both or all languages. In either case, the diﬀerent language texts have equal legal force
and one is not superior to another irrespective of their original status. Such legal texts in
diﬀerent languages are regarded as authoritative once they go through the authentication
process in the manner prescribed by law. By virtue of this process, such texts are not
mere translations of law, but the law itself (Sarcevic 1997: 20). Examples of these are
the legislation in the bilingual jurisdictions of Canada and Hong Kong, the multilingual
legal instruments of the United Nations (UN) and the multilingual laws of the European
Union (EU). In the case of the EU, the authentic language versions of EU laws, are
equivalent since they have the same legal force and value and can be invoked indis-
criminately in appeals to the European Court of Justice by EU citizens or businesses,
irrespective of their member state of origin or that country’s oﬃcial language or lan-
guages (Correia 2003: 41). They are usually drafted in English or French ﬁrst to be
translated into the other oﬃcial languages. Nevertheless, they all have equal legal force.
This category of legal translation may also include private documents such as contracts,
the bilingual texts of which are equally authentic in a bilingual or monolingual jurisdic-
tion. For instance, in a non-English speaking country, contracts sometimes may stipulate
that the versions of the contract in the oﬃcial language of the country and English are
both authentic, even though the language of the court and the country does not include
English. In this ﬁrst category of legal translation, the communicative purposes of the SL
and TL texts are identical.
Secondly, there is legal translation for informative purposes, with constative or
descriptive functions. This includes the translation of statutes, court decisions, scholarly
works and other types of legal documents if the purpose of the translation is to provide
information to the target readers. This is most often found in monolingual jurisdictions.
Such translations are diﬀerent from the ﬁrst category where the translation of the law is
legally binding. In this second category, the SL is the only legally enforceable language
while the TL is not. For instance, a statute written in French from France translated into
English for informative purpose for the beneﬁt of foreign lawyers or other English
DEBORAH CAO
80

readers is not legally enforceable. This is diﬀerent from the ﬁrst category where, for
instance, a statute written in French in the bilingual jurisdiction of Canada is translated
into English or vice versa and where both the French and English versions are equally
authentic. Sometimes, publishers of translations of laws in the second category include a
disclaimer to the eﬀect that the translation of such and such a law is for reference only,
and that in legal proceedings, the original language text of the law shall prevail. Another
example is the translation of the legal instruments of the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) which has English and French as its authentic languages. Here only the original
texts written in English and French have legal force, while their translations into other
languages are not binding, but for information only. In this category, the SL and TL texts
may have diﬀerent communicative purposes.
Thirdly, there is legal translation for general legal or judicial purpose. Such transla-
tions are primarily for information, and are mostly descriptive. This type of translated
document may be used in court proceedings as part of documentary evidence. Original
SL texts of this type may include legal documents, such as statements of claims or
pleadings, contracts and agreements; and ordinary texts such as business or personal cor-
respondence, records, and certiﬁcates, witness statements and expert reports, among
many others. The translations of such documents are used by clients who do not speak
the language of the court, for example, statements of claims, or by lawyers and courts
who otherwise may not be able to access the originals such as contracts, correspondence
or other records and documents.
Such translated texts have legal consequences attached to them due to their use in the
legal process. In practice, for instance, in Australian courts, a sworn aﬃdavit from the
translator is normally required as to the quality of the translation and the competency of
the translator. Sometimes, the translator is also called upon as a witness in court regarding
the translation. For some of these, the otherwise ordinary non-legal documents written
by non-lawyers are elevated to legal status because of the special use of the original and
the translation. This is similar to court interpreting. Court interpreters in most cases
interpret oral evidence of witnesses who may be retelling ordinary events and answering
ordinary personal questions. These witnesses could say the same or similar things outside
the courtroom in non-legal settings. The main diﬀerence is that interpreting a story in a
non-legal setting is ordinary interpreting, while interpreting the same in court is legal
interpreting, as the interpreted words are used for a legal purpose under special circum-
stances and conditions. In these situations, the language use or translation use is contingent
upon the existence of a legal order which must be considered to be part of the com-
municative situation. The law’s institutional character plays a major part in language use
in legal settings (Madsen 1997), thus, should be given prominent consideration in our
classiﬁcations of legal texts and legal translation. Many parts of the court or litigation
documents are the closest to everyday language use in all the sub-types of legal texts.
The third type of translation is diﬀerent from the second category described above in
that it may include ordinary texts that are not written in legal language by legal profes-
sionals, but by the layperson. This type of legal translation is often left out in the discussion
and classiﬁcation of legal translation. However, in fact, in the practice of legal translation,
it constitutes a major part of the translation work of the legal translator in real life, the
‘bread and butter’ activities (Harvey 2002: 178).
Thus, we can say that legal translation refers to the translation of texts used in law and
legal settings. Legal translation is used as a general term to cover both the translation of
law and other communications in legal settings. For the legal translator, it is important
LEGAL TRANSLATION
81

to ascertain the status and communicative purposes of both the original text and its
translation.
Translating private legal documents
Private legal documents are those that are drafted and used by lawyers in their daily
practice on behalf of their clients. They may include deeds, contracts and other agree-
ments, leases, wills and other legal texts such as statutory declaration, power of attorney,
statements of claims or pleadings and other court documents and advice from lawyers to
clients. The translation of these documents constitutes the bulk of actual translation work
for many legal translation practitioners. In this chapter, the linguistic features of major
private legal documents in English are examined with regard to translation.
Purpose and status of translated private legal documents
Private legal documents, either original or translated, serve many purposes. Some of the
major functions include creating, conferring, varying or negating legal rights and obli-
gations and recording such rights and obligations (Aitkin and Butter 2004). They are also
used before courts or legal authorities to protect rights or enforce obligations. Private
legal documents are important. It is said that drafting legal documents is like drafting
statutes between private parties, setting out the relationships and ground rules in a formal
or written form (Dick 1985: 1).
There are diﬀerent purposes and uses for translated private legal documents. They may
be requested by organisations or individuals. For instance, legal documents may be
translated for business purpose, such as contracts that are used as part of a business trans-
action. There are documents that are translated for use by individuals for various purposes,
for instance, a will, a statutory declaration, or a marriage certiﬁcate. There are documents
that are translated for litigation purposes, for instance, statements of claims or pleadings
and witness statements. Legal advice of lawyers to their clients may also require
translation if they speak diﬀerent languages. So do instructions of clients to their legal
representatives.
The legal status of these translated documents may vary. They may be for informative
or for normative purposes. For instance, contracts sometimes stipulate that two language
versions are equally authentic, that is, both texts have equal legal force in the court of
law. At other times, contracts may stipulate that only one language version, not both, is
legally binding. They may nevertheless require translation, and such translations are
mainly for informative purposes. Court documents and other litigation documents
sometimes may require translations so that all the parties and the court can have linguistic
access to documents written in diﬀerent languages. Today, due to the increased move-
ment of people across national borders for educational, employment, immigration and
other purposes, legal certiﬁcates such as marriage, divorce, birth and death certiﬁcates are
often in need of translation.
Key linguistic features of private legal documents
Private legal documents often follow certain established patterns and rules in a particular
jurisdiction. The Common Law drafting style has been inherited from the United
DEBORAH CAO
82

Kingdom over the last two to three hundred years and is similar in many ways across the
Common Law countries (see Bhatia, this volume). Moreover, the use of standard
documents by law ﬁrms, called ‘precedents’, is common, maintaining similar drafting
styles. For instance, wills, contracts of sale of land, mortgages and leases of premises are
normally in standard forms. Such precedents are often available in law books and now
also online. Legal ﬁrms usually have their own precedents. For the commonly used legal
forms such as marriage, divorce, death, birth certiﬁcates and statutory declaration, they are
often also in standard form in a particular jurisdiction, issued by the relevant authorities.
In these texts, the linguistic form is often as important as the content.
Textual features
Due to the commonalities in private legal drafting in English, certain textual features can
be identiﬁed. Agreements and contracts, which are among the most commonly translated
private legal documents from and into English, are often written in similar styles. Such
documents vary in their actual contents, which can be wide-ranging from intellectual
property rights transfer to the sale of equipment, depending upon the needs of the cli-
ents. They also vary in terms of length and complexity. Some are short and general but
most are lengthy and detailed.
In terms of textual components, with respect to general agreements drafted in English,
for instance, agreements on business or research collaboration, joint business ventures, or
collaborative projects, some common parts and clauses can be identiﬁed. They often
include the following:
 date of the agreement
 names and addresses of the parties
 recital
 deﬁnition clause
 rights, obligations and liabilities of the parties
 force majeure
 termination
 breach and remedies
 dispute resolution
 notice
 assignment
 waiver
 warranty and exclusion
 entire agreement clause
 governing law
 language clause, if two or more languages are involved
 signature, date and execution.
Not all agreements have all of these elements, but many cover similar ground.
Key lexical and syntactical features
Lawyers are often criticised for their old or archaic drafting style. In English legal documents,
one often ﬁnds words such as ‘aforementioned’, ‘hereinafter’, ‘hereinabove’, ‘hereunder’,
LEGAL TRANSLATION
83

‘said’, ‘such’, etc., and these words do not often present enormous problems in translation
once the translator gets accustomed to such usage. However, a major linguistic feature of
private legal documents written in English that does present a translation challenge is the use
of word strings, also known as binomial expressions (Mellinkoﬀ1963), for instance,
‘authorise and direct’, ‘deemed and considered’, ‘ﬁnal and conclusive’, ‘full and complete’,
‘observe and perform’, ‘release and discharge’ and ‘covenants, conditions and terms’.
Syntactically, in legal documents, a common linguistic feature is that sentences are
typically long and complex. This is true in many languages, not just in English. Another
one is the extensive use of passive structures. Lawyers like to use passive structures, as
these permit the writer to avoid naming or referring to the person or thing that performs
the action. For instance, the sentence, ‘The contract was breached’, simply states the fact.
It does not indicate who was the wrongdoer or who breached the contract. There are
many instances of the use of passive structures in legal documents with phrases such as
‘shall be forthwith terminated’, ‘may be reinstated and continued’, ‘to be observed and
performed’, ‘may be rendered’, ‘written notice be given’ and ‘indemnity is sought of’.
Example (1) is taken from a lease:
The Lessee covenants with the Lessor to observe and perform the terms, covenants
and conditions contained in the said Lease and on the Lessor’s part to be observed
and performed in the same manner in all respects as if those terms, covenants
and conditions, with such modiﬁcations only as may be necessary to make them
applicable to the said Lease, had been repeated in full in the Lease as terms,
covenants and conditions binding on the Lessee in favour of the Lessor.
In this example, we can see that there is the use of word strings or binomials (‘observe
and perform’, ‘terms, covenants and conditions’), passive structure (‘to be observed and
performed’) and it consists of one long sentence of 82 words.
English legal language and legal drafting have been undergoing reform and change in
the last few decades to make them more accessible and comprehensible to the layperson.
In the past twenty or thirty years, in major English speaking countries, there have been
eﬀorts by the legal profession to simplify legal drafting and writing style in the Plain
English Movement. Nevertheless, legal English and legal drafting are and will remain
diﬀerent from ordinary English (see Bhatia, this volume).
Translating domestic legislation
Essentially, there are two types of situation where municipal statutes are translated. The
ﬁrst type is found in bilingual and multilingual jurisdictions where two or more
languages are the oﬃcial legal languages. Examples include Canada, Switzerland and,
more recently, Hong Kong. The second type of translated legislation is found in any
monolingual country where its laws are translated into a foreign language or languages
for information purposes. We will discuss these two categories in detail next.
Translating laws in bilingual/multilingual jurisdictions
In bilingual and multilingual jurisdictions, the law may be drafted ﬁrst in one language
and then translated into the other language(s). For instance, in Hong Kong, up until
DEBORAH CAO
84

1989, all legislation was enacted in English only, and Hong Kong was a monolingual
English Common Law jurisdiction despite the fact that the majority of Hong Kong
people have always used Chinese in their daily life. Since the return of Hong Kong to
China, both English and Chinese have been made oﬃcial legal languages in Hong Kong.
Before April 1989, Chinese translations of Hong Kong laws were for informative pur-
poses only with no oﬃcial status. In 1987, the Hong Kong Oﬃcial Languages Ordinance
was amended to give oﬃcial language status to Chinese in addition to English (Section 3
(1)) and to require that all legislation be enacted and published in both English and
Chinese (Section 4(1)). Article 9 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Adminis-
trative Region (1990) also provides that Chinese and English may be used as oﬃcial
languages by the executive authorities, legislature and judiciary. The new law also pro-
vided a mechanism for translating and publishing authentic texts, in Chinese, of statutes
enacted in English, and the Chinese translated texts went through the formal legislative
process of authentication. Since then, Hong Kong statute law has become fully bilingual.
Now both the English and Chinese statutory texts are equally authentic, that is, both
have equal legal force. The Chinese legislative text is neither subordinate to nor a mere
translation of its English counterpart, despite the fact that the laws were ﬁrst enacted in
English, and the Chinese texts were their translation. Today, in Hong Kong, there are
two types of bilingual laws: the earlier laws that were enacted ﬁrst in English and sub-
sequently translated into Chinese and went through the authentication process, and the
laws that have been enacted simultaneously in both English and Chinese since 1989.
In other bilingual and multilingual jurisdictions, the law may be drafted in two or
more languages with drafters, lawyers, linguists and translators working together pro-
ducing a working document in the form of a bill that is written in all the relevant
languages. Even in such a case, translation is still involved. For instance, in Canada, the
practice of bilingual drafting of federal legislation in both English and French, as opposed
to translation from one language into another, was standardised in the 1980s, but still
translation has been very much part of the process. According to Revell (2004), in
Canada, there are three basic models of authoring or drafting bilingual laws: apart
from the translation model, there are also the co-drafting and double drafting models.
Irrespective of the methods employed, whether it is translation or simultaneous bilingual
drafting, in both situations all the language versions are equally authentic, that is, they
enjoy equal legal force.
In this type of translation, as the law written in diﬀerent languages is binding on the
citizens concerned with equal legal force, the purpose of such translation is normative.
It is related to lawmaking, that is, to establishing new laws and to publishing the law in
the oﬃcial language or languages of the jurisdiction.
Translating laws in monolingual jurisdictions
In contrast, when domestic legislation is translated in monolingual jurisdictions, such
translations are used for information purposes, not normative ones. The translated text
does not have any legal force, and the original law and the translated text are not equal.
Take for example China. The Chinese language is the oﬃcial language of China. All
Chinese laws are enacted in Chinese. However, many people, including legal and other
scholars, and the business and legal communities in and outside China, require translation
of such laws for information purposes. There are many diﬀerent translated versions of
various Chinese laws, oﬃcial and non-oﬃcial. There are private translations by legal
LEGAL TRANSLATION
85

publishers and legal academic research bodies as well, but none of these translations
enjoys binding legal force in the Chinese or any other jurisdictions.
Possible complexities arising from translated laws
To illustrate the complexity of the translation of statutes and possible legal implications of
translation errors of statutes, in a Canadian case, Gulf Oil Canada Ltd v. Canadien Paciﬁque
Ltée [1979] C.S. 72 (discussed in Sullivan 2002 and Beaupré 1986), the Supreme Court
of Quebec was asked to interpret an Order in Council made pursuant to the federal
National Transportation Act of Canada. Under this Order, carriers like the defendant
railway were not liable for losses caused by ‘acts of God’, while the French version pro-
vided non-liability for cas fortuit or force majeure. The court took into account the Civil
Law system in interpreting this provision, recognising that in the English and French
provisions, the legislature tried to take into account the two legal systems in Canada. It
concluded that in Common Law the meaning of ‘acts of God’ would not include third
party negligence, but under Quebec’s Civil Code, cas fortuit included the negligent act of
a third party. The court held that in these circumstances, the Civil Law meaning should
prevail. This meant that the civilian understanding of cas fortuit or ‘acts of God’ was
applicable in Quebec regardless of which language version was read and relied on by the
parties to the case. In particular, the court held that if ‘act of God’ had been translated by
the words ‘Acte de Dieu’ in the Order, it would not be possible to appeal to the Civil
Law concept of cas fortuit, consisting of the act of a third party (see Sullivan 2002: 100
and Beaupré 1986). The ambiguity basically arose from the diﬀerent laws in the two
systems.
In a case from Hong Kong, a new bilingual jurisdiction, in HKSAR v. Lau San Ching
and Others HCMA 98/2002, one of the issues before the court concerned the
discrepancy found between the equally authentic English and Chinese laws. One of the
main issues was the discrepancy between the English and Chinese versions of an
Ordinance, arising from the modal verb ‘may’, found in the English, and its omission in
the Chinese. The relevant section in this case is Section 4(28) of the Summary Oﬀences
Ordinance. Its English text reads:
Any person who without lawful authority or excuse … does any act whereby injury
or obstruction whether directly or consequentially, may accrue to a public place or to
the shore of the sea, or to navigation, mooring or anchorage, transit or traﬃc. …
shall be liable to a ﬁne of $500 or to imprisonment of 3 months [italics added].
The equally authentic Chinese text when back translated into English reads:
Any person who without lawful authority or excuse … does any act whereby injury
or obstruction whether directly or consequentially, accrues to a public place or to the
shore of the sea, or to navigation, mooring or anchorage, transit or traﬃc. … shall be
liable to a ﬁne of $500 or to imprisonment of 3 months [italics added].
There is a signiﬁcant discrepancy of meaning between the English and Chinese texts.
According to the Chinese text, actual obstruction, be it direct or consequential, must
have accrued to a public place for the oﬀence to occur. But according to the English
text, obstruction may accrue to a public place to create an oﬀence. The Chinese text
DEBORAH CAO
86

gives the oﬀence a narrower meaning in that actual obstruction must be caused before an
oﬀence can be made out. So, there is a clear conﬂict between the two authentic texts.
We do not know how the variation in the two versions occurred and why an important
word ‘may’ was left out of the Chinese translation. Possibly, it was an oversight or a
translation error. As no actual obstruction occurred in this case, the appellant argued that
there was no case to answer. The court relied on a number of principles and factors to
resolve the discrepancy. The court stated that the word ‘may’ does not mean ‘must’, as
there is a diﬀerence in the use of ‘may’ and its omission. The appeal was upheld. For
bilingual laws in Hong Kong in Chinese and English, see www.legislation.gov.hk which
is the Hong Kong bilingual laws information system. It has the English and Chinese
legislation and subordinate legislation, constitution and amendments, and bilingual legal
terms in Chinese and English.
In short, complexities and diﬃculties may arise from translated laws, unknown or
unforeseen in monolingual laws for the simple fact that the languages and legal traditions
may be diﬀerent giving rise to diﬀerent implications.
Translating international instruments
The translation of legal instruments in international or supranational bodies such as the
UN and the EU forms a special area of legal translation practice. Such translational activ-
ities can entail translating multilingual documents such as international instruments of the
UN involving several languages, and translating bilateral treaties involving two languages.
The translation of legal documents of an international nature, as opposed to domestic laws,
has its own idiosyncrasies as well as sharing the characteristics of translating law in general.
Translating multilingual instruments
Today, most multilingual instruments are negotiated under the auspices of international
organisations such as the UN, so we will use the UN and the EU as examples in the
following discussion. International legal instruments produced under the auspices of the
UN are written in its six oﬃcial languages. In the EU, currently, there are twenty-three
oﬃcial languages.
One important principle in the practice of multilingual law is the principle of equal
authenticity. The common practice is that the ﬁnal clause of a treaty usually speciﬁes the
original language(s) in which it was composed and also the fact that all oﬃcial language
texts are equally authentic, that is, have equal legal force. This practice was codiﬁed in
the 1969 Vienna Convention. Article 33(1) provides that when a treaty has been
authenticated in two or more languages, the text is equally authoritative in each language
unless the treaty provides or the parties agree that, in case of divergence, a particular text
shall prevail. Article 33(3) provides that the terms of the treaty are presumed to have the
same meaning in each authentic text. As pointed out, the importance attached to the
principle of equal authenticity was intended to confer indisputable authority on each of
the authentic texts, de facto eliminating the inferior status of authoritative translations
(Sarcevic 1997: 199).
As regards the drafting of multilingual instruments relevant to translation, in the EU, as
part of the European Community legislative process, a proposal for a particular piece of
legislation ﬁrst comes from the European Commission (EC). As reported by Robinson
LEGAL TRANSLATION
87

(2005), normally, the ﬁrst step is that the initial draft of a legislative proposal is prepared by
the technical department or technical experts for the sector concerned. Drafters must write
in either English or French and their choice is determined by the language used in their
department. Once the technical department has prepared its preliminary draft, as a second
step, the draft is submitted to the other Commission departments as part of the internal
consultation procedure. The Commission’s Legal Service is consulted on all draft legisla-
tion with lawyers specialising in the sector examining the draft for compliance with the
law and coherence with other legislation. The legal revisers, who all have dual legal and
language qualiﬁcations, will examine it for compliance with rules on the form and pre-
sentation of legislation, in particularly the Joint Practical Guide of the European Parliament, the
Council and the Commission for Persons Involved in the Drafting of Legislation within the Com-
munity Institutions (available at http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/lex/en/techleg). As Robinson
(2005) points out, at this early stage, the draft exists in only one language. As a third step,
the text must then be translated into all the oﬃcial languages by the Directorate-General
for Translation (DGT). At this stage, the legal revisers will have another opportunity to
review the text. The legal revisers must also correct formal or terminological errors and
ensure that the legal scope is exactly the same in the diﬀerent language versions. Then, the
legislative proposal is submitted to the European Parliament and the Council where it
passes through those institutions’ internal pre-adoption procedures before their ﬁnal
deliberation and eventual adoption (see also Gordon-Smith 1989).
We can see that translation is an integral part of the legislative process in the EC.
Similarly, multilingual drafting was experimented with at the UN, as a means of
improving the quality and reliability of parallel texts. (For further discussion of UN
multilingual drafting, see Nelson 1987, Tabory 1980 and Rosenne 1983.) Nevertheless,
the general practice for international treaties at the UN has been through translation.
The draft texts are ﬁrst produced in English and/or French, and then translated into
other languages. Parallel and simultaneous multilingual drafting is rare at the international
level. Translation is very much part of the process.
An important factor in the multilateral instrument-making process relevant to transla-
tion is the fact that international agreements are negotiated texts which represent the
diverse interests of the participating State parties (Tabory 1980; Sarcevic 1997: 204).
There are no particular requirements as to the manner of negotiation, the reaching of
agreement or the form of a treaty, and as it happens, in international diplomacy, nego-
tiators frequently resort to a compromise that glosses over their diﬀerences with vague,
obscure or ambiguous wording, sacriﬁcing clarity for the sake of obtaining consensus in
treaties and conventions (Tabory 1980; Sarcevic 1997: 204). In the EC, as EU draft
legislative texts go through extensive consultation, examination and revision, EU law is
often the fruit of diﬃcult compromises (Robinson 2005: 5). As Robinson points out,
often changes are made in the draft legislation to achieve policy ends. Sometimes a
provision is delicately left vague (known in French as ﬂou artistique) to paper over a failure
to reach full agreement (Robinson 2005: 7). Consequently, translators should avoid
attempts to clarify vague points, obscurities and ambiguities, and as pointed out, those
who do run the risk of upsetting the delicately achieved balance and misrepresenting the
intent of the parties (Sarcevic 1997: 204; Rosenne 1983: 783). However, there is also the
diﬃcult question of how the translator distinguishes the deliberate obscurity that is the
expression of a political and often hard-won compromise from inadvertent obscurity
produced when those drafting the original text use a language that is not their mother
tongue (Correia 2003: 42).
DEBORAH CAO
88

Textual features of international conventions
International conventions normally follow an established format, consisting of the title,
preamble, main text, ﬁnal clauses, an attestation clause and signature block and annex, for
instance in (2).
(2)
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora (1973)
The Contracting States,
Recognising that wild fauna and ﬂora in their many beautiful and varied forms are an
irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the earth which must be protected for
this and the generations to come;
Conscious of the ever-growing value of wild fauna and ﬂora from aesthetic, scientiﬁc,
cultural, recreational and economic points of view;
Recognising that peoples and States are and should be the best protectors of their
own wild fauna and ﬂora;
Recognising, in addition, that international co-operation is essential for the protec-
tion of certain species of wild fauna and ﬂora against over-exploitation through
international trade;
Convinced of the urgency of taking appropriate measures to this end;
Have agreed as follows: …
The preamble is normally followed by the substantive provisions set out under such
heading as: Part I, Section I or Chapter I, Article 1. The substantive provisions normally
start with deﬁnitions. For instance, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (1973) starts with (3).
(3)
Article I
Deﬁnitions
For the purpose of the present Convention, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) ‘Species’ means any species, subspecies, or geographically separate population
thereof;
(b) ‘Specimen’ means:
(i) any animal or plant, whether alive or dead;
(ii) in the case of an animal: for species included in Appendices I and II, any
readily recognisable part or derivative thereof; and for species included in
Appendix III, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof speciﬁed
in Appendix III in relation to the species; and
(iii) in the case of a plant: for species included in Appendix I, any readily
recognisable part or derivative thereof; and for species included in
Appendices II and III, any readily recognisable part or derivative thereof
speciﬁed in Appendices II and III in relation to the species;
(c) ‘Trade’ means export, re-export, import and introduction from the sea;
(d) ‘Re-export’ means export of any specimen that has previously been
imported;. …
LEGAL TRANSLATION
89

Given the practice of translating international conventions into many diﬀerent lan-
guages over the years, much of the legal terminology, format and usage has become
established also in diﬀerent languages. The common usage in diﬀerent languages for
international treaties is most often followed in translation without reinventing
the wheel, and importantly, without the risk of creating new problems or mis-
communication. Nevertheless, new terminology and new situations constantly appear
in human activities requiring new regulations or laws in the international arena. Thus,
translation of these instruments with their new terminology into various languages is
always a challenge.
Databases and other technological tools accessing international treaties
One of the modern technological developments and innovations that has greatly assisted
the work of the translator of international treaties is the information and computer
technology related to documentation and translation. International agreements have
proliferated since the end of the Second World War. More than 50,000 treaties have
been registered with the United Nations since 1945. The UN Treaty Series (UNTS)
database (http://treaties.un.org) is an invaluable resource for international lawyers and
translators of international law. It contains the treaties and statements of treaties and
international agreements registered or ﬁled and recorded with the UN Secretariat in
oﬃcial languages since 1945. It also has the treaties from the League of Nations con-
cluded between 1920–44, among other resources. Apart from the printed volumes of the
United Nations Treaty Series, the UNTS database is an online storage and retrieval
system for the international instruments published in the UNTS. The site also contains
the full text of treaties deposited with the Secretary-General but not yet published in the
UNTS. The UNTS database contains the texts of over 50,000 bilateral and multilateral
treaties and subsequent treaty actions in their authentic languages, along with a transla-
tion into English and French. All treaties and international agreements registered or ﬁled
and recorded with the Secretariat since 1946 are published in the UNTS in their original
language or languages, together with a translation in English and French as necessary.
This is the world’s largest database of multilateral treaties deposited with the UN
Secretary-General and treaties registered with and published by the UN Secretariat; with
over 3 million pages of text in more than 140 languages of various multilateral treaties
deposited with the UN Secretary-General, including the major treaties in the areas of
human rights, organised crime, terrorism, trade and the environment. It has full text search
capability.
Another documentation database is the UN Oﬃcial Document system (ODS) (http://
ods.un.org). This is a multilingual database of UN documents with full text search in six
UN oﬃcial languages. It covers all types of oﬃcial United Nations documentation,
beginning in 1993. Older UN documents are being added to the system. ODS also
provides access to the resolutions of the General Assembly, Security Council, Economic
and Social Council and the Trusteeship Council from 1946 onwards. This is also
accessible by the public via http://documents.un.org.
For the EU, CELEX (http://europa.eu.int/celex) is a source of complete and
authoritative information in EU law, and gives access to a broad multilingual range of
legal instruments: the founding treaties, binding and non-binding secondary legislation,
opinions and resolutions by EU institutions and bodies, and the case law of the ECJ. But
it has stopped being updated and has been merged with EUR-Lex.
DEBORAH CAO
90

EUR-Lex (http://eur-lex.europa.eu) is a free public resource tool. It is the result of
merging the EUR-Lex site with the CELEX database to provide the biggest doc-
umentary holdings existing on EU law. It contains the full texts in EU oﬃcial languages
of the treaties, secondary legislation and preparatory acts in all oﬃcial EU languages, as
well as national implementing measures and case law of the ECJ. It oﬀers extensive
search facilities.
The DGT of the EC also has a free on-line CCVista Translation Database (http://
ccvista.taiex.be) which contains translations of the legal acts of the EU in all its oﬃcial
languages.
There are various other types of terminology, tools and databases used at the UN and
the EC. For the UN, the United Nations Terminology Database – UNTERM (http://
unterm.un.org) is a multilingual terminology database which provides UN nomenclature
and special terms in all six oﬃcial UN languages. The database is mainly intended for use
by the language and editorial staﬀof the UN to ensure consistent translation of common
terms and phrases used within the Organisation. It has about 70,000 entries in six lan-
guages and daily updates. Similarly, in the EC, the main terminology tools include
Eurodicautom (Europe dictionnaire automatisé, http://europa.eu.int/eurodicautom), EC’s
central terminology database maintained by the DGT. Eurodicautom is a multilingual
dictionary which covers all areas of the EC’s activities.
Conclusion
Due to the natural diﬀerences among languages and cultures, translating from one language
into another whatever the subject matter is never easy. It is particularly diﬃcult and com-
plex in the ﬁeld of law given the additional diﬀerences in legal systems and laws. Readers,
be they citizens, legislators, lawyers or linguists, should constantly bear in mind that lan-
guages and words in diﬀerent languages are not identical and seemingly identical words
may carry very diﬀerent meanings and connotations (for further discussion, see Cao 2007a,
2007b). Naturally, we cannot and should not expect absolute identity in translation
between diﬀerent languages. Legal language is no exception. Diﬀerences are natural and
inherent in the diversity of languages as is true with human experiences and human
activities in general. It is also what makes life and, for our purpose, translating interesting.
Further reading
Bhatia, Vijay K. (1997) ‘Translating legal genres’, in Anna Trosborg (ed.), Text Typology and Translation,
Amsterdam, John Benjamins, 203–16.
Cao, Deborah (2007a) Translating Law, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2007b) ‘Inter-lingual uncertainty in bilingual and multilingual law’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39: 69–83.
Sarcevic, Susan (1997) New Approach to Legal Translation, The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Legal cases cited
Gulf Oil Canada Ltd v. Canadien Paciﬁque Ltée [1979] C.S. 72.
HKSAR v. Lau San Ching and Others HCMA 98/2002.
LEGAL TRANSLATION
91


1.2
Participants in police investigations,
interviews and interrogation


7
Citizens’ emergency calls
Requesting assistance in calls to the police
Paul Drew and Traci Walker
Introduction
Whether they are witness to or somehow involved (usually as victims) in incidents of a
potentially or manifestly criminal nature, citizens may call the police to seek their assis-
tance. They do so either on the emergency line by dialling 999 (in the UK; 911 in the
US, and 118 in much of Europe); or, for incidents which may seem less urgent or serious
and which are perhaps more ‘local’ in nature, by calling their local police station. Either
way, citizens call the police about ongoing incidents in order to request police assistance.
The call-takers (who may be serving police oﬃcers or civilians) typically question callers
about the nature of the incident, often in some detail, in order to determine the appropriate
police action. Call-takers enter the information they obtain into a Computer Aided Dispatch
(CAD) system, which provides an on-screen data entry form with ﬁxed ﬁelds for the type of
incident, location, and other relevant details (Whalen 1995). Using a CAD system, call-takers
are responsible for dispatching police to the scene of the incident, and therefore need to decide
whether urgent police action/attendance is required, in which case police are dispatched for
immediate attendance; whether the incident is less urgent, in which case attendance within
some hours will be suﬃcient; or whether any police action is necessary or appropriate – the
call-taker may decide that the incident is not a police matter, that it is insuﬃciently urgent to
require police presence (e.g. a caller might instead go to the local police station to report the
matter), or even that it is a hoax call. In these respects, call-takers act as gatekeepers, assessing
both the genuineness and urgency of the call; they make these (often diﬃcult) judgements on
the basis of the information given by callers, in response to questions that they ask about the
incident reported, and in relation to which callers have requested assistance.
These questions, and the information that callers provide in their responses, are
therefore forensic insofar as they serve as the basis for assessments about the urgency,
seriousness and potential criminality of the incident reported. These assessments, in turn,
underlie decisions about appropriate police action, and whether and how urgently to
dispatch police to the scene. Call-takers’ questions, and the interaction between them
and callers, are also forensic in another sense; calls to the police are recorded, and these
recordings may play a part in crime investigations – and they are frequently used as
95

evidence in criminal hearings. Therefore, calls for police assistance play a signiﬁcant role
both in protecting citizens against crimes, and in criminal investigations and prosecutions.
The structure of emergency calls
Much of the research literature about emergency calls to the police has documented their
organisation, and the typical structure that arises from the pattern of stages through
which such calls proceed. Researchers, particularly Zimmerman, have shown that
emergency calls to the police consist of phases of activity that recurrently unfold in
approximately the same order, each phase consisting of a distinctive task or activity
(Zimmerman 1984, 1992a; for an overview see Heritage and Clayman 2010). The
structure of emergency calls to the police can be summarised as follows:
1. Opening
2. Request
3. Interrogative Series
4. Dispatch Response
5. Closing
This sequence of stages is clearly illustrated in a brief call, example (1) (transcribed
according to the conventions widely used in Conversation Analysis).
(1) [Zimmerman 1984: 214] (cited in Heritage and Clayman 2010: ch. 4)
1 911:
Midcity Emergency::,
Opening
2
(.)
3
U::m yeah (.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
4
somebody just vandalized my car,
Request
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
5
(0.3)
6 911:
What’s your address.
7 C:
three oh one six maple
8 911:
Is this a house or an apartment.
9 C:
I::t’s a house
Interrogative Series
10 911:
(Uh-) your last name.
11 C:
Minsky
12 911:
How do you spell it?
13 C:
M I N S K Y
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
14 911:
We’ll send someone out to see you.
Dispatch Response
15 C:
Thank you.=
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
16 911:
=Umhm bye.=
Closing
17 C:
=Bye.
DREW AND WALKER
96

As Heritage and Clayman (2010) note, this ﬁve-phase structure is organised around a
request for assistance embodied in the caller’s report in line 4. That request deﬁnes the
business of the call (Heritage and Clayman 2010: ch. 4). The research literature focuses
on a range of aspects of this structure or sequence of phases, including the signiﬁcance of
how calls are opened (Zimmerman 1992b) and closed (Zimmerman and Wakin 1995);
and the ‘interrogative series’ in which call-takers ask callers a series of questions designed
to assess whether the call is genuine, the nature and urgency of the incident, and other
necessary details (including descriptions of those involved – information that has become
increasingly signiﬁcant as emergency calls come to be used as evidence in criminal cases).
One kind of diﬃculty that can arise during this interrogative series is callers’ resistance to
being questioned, often quite closely (Tracey 1997), especially when callers are often
quite emotionally disturbed, even hysterical (Whalen et al. 1988).
Reporting an incident as ‘requesting’ police assistance
Although calls to the police are understood as being organised around requests for assis-
tance, callers generally only report an incident, without making a formal or explicit
request (Whalen and Zimmerman 1990). For instance, in example (1), the caller reports
that ‘somebody just vandalized my car’ (line 4), without explicitly asking the police to
attend; however this is treated by the 911 call-taker as having been a request for assis-
tance, in ‘We’ll send someone out to see you’ (line 14). As Heritage and Clayman (2010)
show, callers report incidents through a wide variety of formulations or constructions –
reports that are treated, from the outset, as reports of ‘actionable problems’, for which
police assistance is sought.
In a study conducted for the (London) Metropolitan Police Service (Drew 1998), in
the majority (a little under 80%) of calls callers only reported an incident without overtly
requesting police assistance, leaving it to the call-taker/dispatcher to respond to the
request that is embedded in that report (Whalen and Zimmerman 1990). This is illu-
strated in example (2), from the beginning of an emergency call; in this and subsequent
examples callers are shown as Ca and call-takers as CT.
(2) [Police Emergency call 29]
1 CT:
Hello police
2 Ca:
Yeah hello (becca) uh I live at (address)
3
(.)
4 CT:
Y[eah
5 Ca:
[Right and I’m (not home) my daughter was there (who is
6
thirteen) and she’s home and somebody has broken into the
7
house
8
(.)
9 CT:
((repeats number)) (.) what’s the address you want police
10
to go to.
In lines 5–7 Ca gives a brief report of the incident about which she is calling; she does
not explicitly ask the police to go round to her home to check on the safety of her
daughter. Instead she relies on her report of a potentially dangerous – and therefore
urgent – situation to elicit the dispatch of police oﬃcers to the scene. Although CT
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
97

formulates her turn as ‘the address you want police to go to’, Ca has not used such a
construction. She has merely reported that ‘somebody has broken into the house’. It is
particularly clear from CT’s response in lines 9–10 that she understands Ca’s report to be
an implicit request for police action, simultaneously indicating that she is dispatching
police to the scene, just as the CT/dispatcher did in example (1).
So the majority of instances of ‘requests’ for assistance are of this rather implicit or
indirect kind. Callers do not overtly or explicitly formulate a request, but instead report
an incident, leaving it to call-takers to ﬁnd and act on the implied request. The mere act
of reporting such an activity (in example (1), vandalising a car, in example (2) breaking
in) can function as a request.
Explicitly requesting police assistance
Nevertheless, callers do on occasion explicitly request police assistance, using the kind of
request forms with which linguists are familiar. As we have said, explicit request forms
are used in perhaps a minority of calls – a little over 20% in the study referred to (Drew
1998), which as far as one can tell is probably consistent with other published studies.
However, calls in which callers explicitly request police assistance are of particular inter-
est, partly because of the extensive and inﬂuential literature in linguistics on request
forms (e.g. Brown and Levinson 1987; Curl and Drew 2008; Wootton 1981, 2005), but
especially because when callers have explicitly to ask for (i.e. request) assistance, they may
be doing some kind of special ‘work’ in making the call. They are not relying on a
simple report of the problem or incident to do the work of requesting; instead, callers are
orienting to the special or ‘marked’ nature of the call, or rather of the incident about
which the call is being made.
We know from previous work that the precise constructions of requests grammatically
encode speakers’ assessments of the contingencies that may be involved in granting (acting
on) the request, and of their entitlement to whatever is being requested (Curl and Drew
2008). These dimensions of contingency and entitlement are of central importance in
calls to the police. One way of thinking about this is to consider why callers generally do
not request police assistance by asking ‘I wonder if it would be possible for you to … ’ –
though we will show an instance of just such a form, and what that reveals about
something like the ‘strength’ of the case the caller believes he has for requesting police
assistance. At any rate, our focus here is explicit requests for police assistance of the kind
illustrated in (3).
(3) [Police emergency call 19]
1 CT:
Police eme:rgency can I help you?
2
(0.5)
3 Ca:
Yeah hi .hhh e:rm could we have uh police patrol car tuh
4
report to: (0.8) er Old Green House in Grayling.
Although the caller will go on subsequently to describe the incident (to be shown
later), his opening turn consists of an explicit request for assistance, using the modal form
of the verb ‘could we have … ’. In all the cases to be considered here, callers make such
explicit requests in their opening turns, the grammatical forms of which can have
DREW AND WALKER
98

interactional consequences for the ways requests are treated, in light of callers’ subsequent
descriptions of the circumstances and events for which they are seeking assistance.
Callers sometimes construct explicit requests by ﬁrst reporting and describing some
event, and then subsequently adding an explicit request. Ca does this in example (4). (In
all these examples, person and place names, telephone numbers and other potentially
identifying details have been omitted. In some examples, where indicated, pseudonyms
have been substituted, where that is necessary to follow what is being said.)
(4) [Police emergency call 14]
1 CT:
Hello ((police identity)).
2 Ca:
>Hello< un I’m calling from ((house number)) .hhh
3
((street name))?=[hhh
4 CT:
[(Thank-you).
5 Ca:
An’ the entrance is frum ((street name)) =that’s
6
where my father an’ my sister a:re.=.hhh
7 CT:
Ri:ght.
8 Ca:
hhh [(N(hh)o(hh))
9 CT:
[(What can I do for-)
10 Ca:
>.hh There’s a white geezer who’s got a kni:fe
11
ee’s tryin to attack my dad<.hhh
12 CT:
°Mm hm°
13 Ca:
>Please ‘elp him.< hhh .hhh hhh
14 CT:
Are you near ((names street))?
Ca’s request in line 13 follows her account of the incident (lines 2–11); her overt request
for help is done with an imperative (but an imperative softened by ‘please’) that might
best be described as a kind of pleading for assistance (without getting into the prosodic
details of how she speaks in line 13, Ca displays extreme distress). In response, CT begins
a line of questioning (in line 14) which culminates in his dispatching the police as
requested.
Our focus on the lexico-grammatical format of explicit requests in initial position, of
the kind illustrated in (3) (rather than the pleadings, in subsequent position, as in (4)),
arises from the continuum or cline of request forms to be found in requests in social and
‘institutional’ interactions (Curl and Drew 2008). We will not review that in detail, but it
will be worth giving a broad overview of that ﬁnding, as necessary background for
considering request forms in calls to the police.
Contingency and entitlement in request forms
A comparison of corpora of mundane, largely social phone calls with out-of-hours calls
to a doctor’s surgery revealed that modal verbs were the most common form for requests
in the former, and ‘I wonder if … ’ prefaces in the latter. Only about half of the callers
to the out-of-hours surgery used grammatically explicit request forms, but those that did
favoured ‘I wonder if … ’ prefacing above any other form. This distribution initially
suggested that the form of a request was tied to the sociolinguistic setting – ‘intimates’
use modal verbs to make requests of each other, while participants in service encounters
use ‘I wonder if … ’. However, closer analysis revealed that, rather than being
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
99

irrevocably linked to the sociolinguistic setting, request forms instead reﬂect a speaker’s
assessment of their entitlement to have a request granted; diﬀerent forms may be used to
display speakers’ knowledge of the contingencies surrounding the granting of a request.
Modal verbs, especially the construction ‘could you’, are used to display a high level of
entitlement, and/or to claim virtually no obstacles to the granting of a request (low
contingency; e.g. a request that a letter be brought along on an already-arranged
upcoming visit). Conversely, ‘I wonder if … ’ prefaces display an awareness of the con-
tingencies which might militate against the granting of a request, and are used in situa-
tions where a speaker’s entitlement to what is asked for is low, either by virtue of the
situation itself or of the situation as constituted by the sequence-so-far. Rather than
functioning as a static reﬂection of ﬁxed social roles, speakers’ deployment of particular
request forms is evidence of the grammaticalisation of certain dimensions of social rela-
tions – namely, contingency and entitlement. These forms, ranging from imperatives
through to conditional forms with ‘I wonder if … ’ prefaces, lie along a cline from those
which encode high entitlement and low contingency, to those which encode the
reverse, that is high contingency and low entitlement (Table 7.1).
Thus, for instance, customers asking for goods or services in shops may use imperative
forms, or ‘I need … ’, especially if having used that (kind of) shop before they are
‘experts’ in what that shop can oﬀer, as example (5) in which the customer clearly knows
about the service and ‘goods’ that shop provides (see also Heinemann 2006; Lindström
2005; Vinkhuyzen and Szymanski 2005).
(5) [Shop1]
1 Ass:
The poster size is eigh[teen by twenty four]
2 Cus:
[Well let’s do eleven] by seventeen
3 Cus:
And then I need four of them
4
(0.5)
5 Cus:
And I need them coated
Since the use of one or another form of request is something speakers can manipulate
(i.e. they are not forced to use a particular form in a particular setting), displays of
urgency or seriousness can override (or be used to exploit participants’ knowledge about)
concerns about contingency and entitlement. As mentioned above, the majority of
requests in the corpus of calls to the out-of-hours doctor’s surgery were constructed as ‘I
wonder if (you could X)’; what was striking was the skew away from the use of modal
verbs. Only in a small minority of cases, such as in example (6), do callers format their
requests using modal verbs instead.
(6) [Doctor’s out-of-hours calls:1:2:12]
1 Doc:
Hel:lo:,
2 Clr:
Hel:lo, is tha’ du- doctor
3 Doc:
Yes, Doctor (name) speaki:ng,
Table 7.1 A continuum or cline of request forms
High entitlement/
Low contingency
High contingency/
Low entitlement
Imperatives
I need you to ...
Modals (Could etc.)
I wonder if ...
DREW AND WALKER
100

4 Clr:
i:i:(Yeah) couldja’s (call’d) an’ see my wife please,.h[h
5 Doc:
[Yes:.
6 Clr:
She’s breathless. She can’t.hh get ‘er breath .hh
7
((9 lines omitted))
8 Doc:
No pain. Does she have a problem with ‘er chest, normally?
9 Clr:
Yeah, she’s been suﬀerin’ with this .hhh eh-for the last month or so.[.hh hhh
10 Doc:
[.hh Right.
11 Doc:
Eh-does she have any: treatment in the house? euh:
12 Clr:
(Wull) she takes (Prumil), .hh a:n:d e:h hh.hh her heart tablet, hh.hhh
13 Doc:
Ri:ght. Okey doke <.h How old is your: wife?
14 Clr:
hh .hhh hhhhh[hh!
15 Doc:
[Don’t worry, I’llb- I’ll com[e ( )
16 Clr:
[>uh-uh-uh!<Sorry, hh seventy ﬁve, .hhh=
17 Doc:
=Right.
18 Clr:
(eh-eh[h!) ((gasping/throat clearing sound))
19 Doc:
[Alright, sir. t.h I’ll be round in about ten minutes
Formatting their requests for the doctors’ out-of-hours assistance with ‘I wonder if … ’
indexes callers being unsure whether the patient’s condition is suﬃciently serious to warrant
a home visit by the doctor. By contrast, in example (6) the elderly caller uses the modal
verb when asking the doctor to visit his wife (line 4). The displayed sense of low con-
tingency/high entitlement reﬂects his portrayal of the seriousness and urgency of the case,
including his descriptions of her condition (‘she’s breathless. She can’t.hh get ‘er breath’,
line 6), that she’s been suﬀering with this for some time (line 9), that she’s being treated for
heart problems (line 12), and of course that she’s elderly (line 16). Notice that the doctor’s
assessment of the urgency of the case (line 19) matches the caller’s (if this doctor agrees or
oﬀers to visit, he more usually says something like ‘I’ll pop round a little later … ’).
Cases such as this, in which callers used a modal verb to request an out-of-hours home
visit by the doctor, were unusual; only four such cases occurred in a corpus of approximately
80 out-of-hours calls. Most explicit requests took the form of being prefaced by ‘I wonder
if … ’. In calls to the police, by contrast, the reverse was the case; the formats of almost all
of the instances of explicit requests were positioned towards the left ‘high entitlement/low
contingency’ end of the cline, with the use of modal verbs most frequent; whilst ‘I wonder
if … ’ was never used in requesting assistance in emergency (999) calls. We now turn,
then, to examining the request formats generally used in calls to the police.
Modal verbs in calls to the police
The emergency call from which the request in example (2) was taken illustrates the most
common format for requests to the emergency number, and a longer extract is
shown in (7).
(7) [Police emergency call 19]
1 CT: Police eme:rgency can I help you?
2
(0.5)
3 Ca: Yeah hi .hhh e:rm could we have uh police patrol car tuh report to: (0.8) er Old
4
Green House in Grayling.
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
101

5 CT: Old Cream House.
6 Ca:
Old Green House,
7
(0.8)
8 Ca:
In Grayling.
9
(1.8)
10 Ca:
((To someone oﬀphone)) (name) get tuh thuh do:or. (1.1)
11 Ca:
Shut this [do:or. [Shut the door don’t Shut the door
12 A:
[( ) [Please (name) don’t don’t don’t (.) don’t.
13 Ca:
Don’t open thuh door (name).
14 A:
Don’t op- (.) open thuh door [(name)
15 Ca:
[Can we have uh
16 CT:
Yeah what wa[s-
17 Ca:
[( )
18 CT:
Yea[h sorry=
19 Ca:
[Thi-
20 Ca:
=There’s uh woman here thut’s (0.5) claims she’s
21
bin raped she’s panicked. Thuh bo:yfriend’s
22
outside .hh[h
23 CT:
[Right [okay-
24 Ca:
[This is thuh security lodge here.
25 CT:
Right okay hang on a se[con-
26 Ca:
[The boyfriend’s outside un
27
want[s tuh come in.=
28 CT:
[>Yep.<
29 CT:
=Alright so it’s Old Green House
It is characteristic of such requests that they are in initial position, preceding the report or
description of the incident for which assistance is being sought. The caller opens with his
request (line 3), made with the modal form of the verb, ‘could we have … ’ (he uses
another modal form of the verb when he ‘repeats’ his request in line 15, after there’s
been some audible disturbance in the background, associated with the ongoing incident).
Ca only subsequently describes the incident for which assistance is sought (lines 20–27),
when asked about it by CT (see the curtailed enquiry in line 16).
Ca’s use of the modal form in example (7) displays the presumption of high entitle-
ment and low contingency associated with his request; in other words, the modal verb is
a conventionalised request form that presumes the grantability of a request (Watts 2003).
There are further features of Ca’s account which convey his entitlement to police assis-
tance; particularly that he is a security guard (line 24). Ca’s institutional identity is evident
earlier, when in line 3 he uses the institutional ‘we’ (Drew and Sorjonen 1997), and
requests that a police car ‘report’ to the address given. In addition, and as in previous
cases, the presumed entitlement encoded in the request form is commensurate with the
accountable gravity and urgency of the incident – an alleged rape (lines 20–21), poten-
tially an ongoing assault (lines 21–22) and the disturbance audible in lines 10–14. That
match between the degree of entitlement encoded in the modal form of the request, and
the ‘seriousness’ – therefore urgency – of the incident reported, should be kept in mind.
We will see how, in some other cases, that match can become compromised.
The way in which modal request forms encode high entitlement, in contrast to more
conditional forms, is nicely illustrated in example (8), a call to a local police station (not
DREW AND WALKER
102

the emergency number). This example also illustrates the precise congruence between
the form in which the request is done, and the ‘outcome’ of the request (i.e. whether or
not it is granted). Calls to local police stations in this city are handled by a call centre,
which, if the reason for calling is deemed somehow appropriate, then connects the caller
to the relevant department or section within a police station. So in (8) Ca ﬁrst speaks to
the call centre’s call-taker (Op), who then connects the caller, as requested, to the
Controls Room of the police station (Con).
(8) [Call to police station 27]
1 Op:
‘erator can I help you?
2 Ca:
!
Yes can I have (Name) Police Station
3
please
4 Op:
Nature of the call?
5
(.)
6 Ca:
Er:m this is (Name) School one of our deputy
7
heads has just come in and said we ha:ve (.)
8
quite a la:rge group of Asian la:ds who (.)
9
wouldn’t move o:n (.) from the school and
10
he suspects then that it may be drug related
11 Op:
Right I’m gonna put you through to the control
12
room you’re not gonna hear a ringing sound
13
but stay on the li:ne o[ka:y?
14 Ca:;
[Right okay
15
(0.4)
16 Op:
Thank you.
17
(5.0) silence
18
(1 min 18 sec) ringing
19 CALLER IS TRANSFERRED TO CONTROL ROOM
20 Con:
Hello police station (Name)
21 Ca:
!
Oh I wonder if you can help me it’s (Name)
22
School here the deputy head has just come in
23
from: (.) lunch time
24 Con:
Mm hm
25 Ca:
And he’s gone back out again but at-at one
26
of our school gates in (Name) Road we had a
27
la:rge group of Asian lads that were being
28
very persistent and wouldn’t move o:n.
29 Con:
Right.
30 Ca:
They have moved on now but they may be wandering
31
round to another one- nother exit we’ve got in
32
(Name) Road .hh er::m and he seems to think
33
they could be drug related or just being a plain
34
nuisance
35
(0.5)
36 Ca:
wou[ld somebody like to come and (.) ‘ave a
37 Con:
[Right.
38 Ca:
little drive round and see [if they could
39 Con:
[Yeah
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
103

40 Ca:
see and do something about it.
41 Con:
Well there isn’t anything they can do if they’re
42
not causing any problems
Ca’s requests in lines 2 and 21 (then in line 36) have been highlighted; it will be plain
that the point of interest in (8) is Ca’s use of diﬀerent formats for the requests ﬁrst to the
call centre’s operator, and then to the police call-taker in the Control Room. Ca ﬁrst
requests to be put through to a named police station (line 2), rather than questioning
whether (or assuming that) he is already there (as most ‘inexpert’ callers to the non-
emergency number do); so he already displays a certain expertise in calling the police.
Furthermore, his request form, ‘can I have’, asserts a high degree of entitlement. In
constructing a response to Op’s inquiry about the nature of the call, he provides several
pieces of evidence that are commensurate with this presumed entitlement. He ﬁrst
identiﬁes himself as a representative of an institution (‘this is (Name) School’, line 6),
thereby having an institutional identity, as did the caller in example (6). Secondly, he
uses the present tense ‘we have quite a large group … ’ (lines 7–8), emphasising the
ongoing nature and hence urgency of the incident. Finally, he asserts the seriousness of
the problem – ‘it may be drug related’ (line 9). Op’s assessment of the ‘police-worthiness’
of the reported incident is reﬂected in his immediately agreeing to connect Ca to the
police station requested (line 11).
When Ca is connected to the Control Room – to the person who will assess the
urgency of the incident and the appropriate police action, if any – Ca abandons his
claims of entitlement and employs a diﬀerent request form. He now selects ‘I wonder
if … ’, a form that, as we have seen, allows for contingencies that might prevent the
granting of his ultimate request (to have the potential troublemakers moved away from
the school). In the ﬁrst part of the call, the combination of request form and supporting
information about the urgency and seriousness of his request resulted in having his initial
request granted; but that request was merely to speak with a particular police station.
Now that he has reached that station, he employs an ‘I wonder if … ’ prefaced request
(see line 21). The ‘I wonder if … ’ request displays a lower level of entitlement and a
higher level of awareness of the contingencies surrounding his request. In what follows,
the description of the incident that he gives to the police in the Control Room is
diﬀerent, in certain key respects, from the one he gave the call centre operator.
Initially, Ca again identiﬁes himself ‘as’ an institution. However, this is followed up not
with a description of an urgent situation, but rather a situation that has mostly resolved
itself: ‘we had’ (past tense, line 26 – compare ‘we have’, line 7), ‘they have moved on
now’ (line 30). The problem is also now described as less serious than before: what was
previously ‘quite a large group’ (line 8) is now only ‘a large group’; they had congregated
at ‘one of our school gates’ (line 26), a formulation minimising the extent of the dis-
turbance; the purported troublemakers ‘may be wandering’ (line 30), a verb which avoids
attributing any particular goal or direction to its agent. Finally, the deputy head who pre-
viously had a suspicion (line 10, ‘he suspects it may be drug related’) now only ‘seems to
think’ that, but also allows they may only be ‘just [being] a plain nuisance’ (lines 33–34).
When Ca redoes the request at line 36–40, ‘would somebody like to come and have a
little drive round and see if they could see and do something about it’, the diﬃdence of
his request is consistent with the form he used in line 21. Although he does not re-use
the ‘I wonder if … ’ preface, the request is tentative and vague (‘somebody’, ‘little drive’,
‘do something’) and minimises the amount of work that is needed to be done in spite of
DREW AND WALKER
104

using a modal verb – a modal that orients mainly to the contingencies attendant on
granting the request and makes little or no claim to entitlement.
Until now, we have seen a kind symmetry, or congruence, between the form in which
the request is constructed, and the ‘outcome’ of the request. In each case when speakers
used the modal form in examples (6) (from a call to the doctor), (7) and (8), their requests
were granted (the doctor agrees to call immediately, the police are dispatched immediately
and the call is put through to the Control Room, respectively); and when in example (8)
Ca uses the form conveying greater contingency and lower entitlement, ‘I wonder if … ’,
the police do not agree to attend (lines 41–42, ‘there isn’t anything they can do if they’re
not causing any problems’). In other cases this congruence begins to break down, revealing
that callers may make stronger claims to entitlement than – in the police call-taker’s view,
is warranted. In other words, callers may claim a strong sense of being entitled to a service
which the police are unwilling – on the ‘facts of the case’ – to provide.
The ﬁrst instance to be shown is relatively benign (9). Ca has been put through by the
call centre operator to the police station.
(9) [Call to police station 37]
1 Con:
Police ((station name)) good afternoo:n
2
(2.0)
3 Con:
((Station name)) good afternoo:n
4
(0.4)
5 Ca:
Oh good afternoon e:r could I speak to
6
Dick Greaves* please
7 Con:
Dick:,
8
(.)
9 Ca:
Grea:ves (.) G-R-E-A-V-E-S
10
(0.2)
11 Con:
G-R-E-A-V-E-S do you know where he works sir
12
(0.4)
13 Ca:
E:r Oxley I believe in the control room
14
(0.2)
15 Con:
E::r is it Gea:veser or Grea:ves
16 Ca:
Grea:ves (.)-Dick Greaves
17 Con:
Hang on a mi[nute sir]
18 Ca:
[thank you]
19
(9.0)
20 Con:
Do you know if he’s a police oﬃcer or a civilian sir
21
(0.4)
22 Ca:
Police oﬃcer (.) I believe=
23 Con:
=Do you know his shoulder number
24
(0.4)
25 Ca:
No idea
26 Con:
No idea
27 Ca:
He rung me yesterday at work
(*‘Dick Greaves’ is an entirely ﬁctional pseudonym; we’ve used these to show the details
of the diﬃculties they have establishing the name of the person to whom Ca wishes to
speak and where he works.)
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
105

Ca asks to speak to a named police oﬃcer, using the form that displays his conﬁdence
in his entitlement to speak to him, and the absence of any contingency that might pre-
vent him doing so; that is, he asks ‘could I speak to … ’ (line 5). Right from the start the
control room call-taker evidently has diﬃculty ‘placing’ the named police oﬃcer. First he
does not, apparently, recognise the name (lines 7–11); he then asks Ca where the police
oﬃcer works, implying that he may not (be recognised) as working at this police station
or this department of the station (lines 11–13); when the control room call-taker comes
back on the line, he asks for more information about the person requested (lines 20–26).
When in line 27 Ca mentions that the person to whom he’s requested to speak called
him at work yesterday, he reveals that he is returning a call from the named oﬃcer; he is
not ringing on his own initiative, but complying with a request from the oﬃcer, clearly
entitling him to have his request granted. In short, Ca has good grounds for supposing
that he is entitled to speak to the person requested (he has been asked to call back), and
for not expecting any contingencies to intervene. However, there turns out to be a
mismatch between that conﬁdence, encoded in his use of the modal ‘could I … ’, and
the ability of the police call-taker to comply, to grant the request. That mismatch, or
lack of congruence between the request form, and the ‘outcome’ – at least up to this
point – is benign in the sense that the contingency which prevents granting the request is
an inability to do so; the police oﬃcer asked for is not recognised as one who works at
this police station, in this department.
In other cases, the mismatch between the caller’s conﬁdence and the outcome is much
less benign. In these cases, it appears that callers make strong claims to entitlement (and,
concomitantly, claims to there being a low level of contingency in granting their
requests), through request forms that indicate that the incident is serious and urgent.
These claims, however, turn out not to be matched by the call-takers’ assessments of the
‘actual’ seriousness or urgency of the incident. So that instead of dispatching police to the
scene, the outcome is instead ‘no action’ – or in the call shown in examples (11) and
(12), an (implicit) assessment that the caller is wasting police time.
In example (10), Ca has called the emergency number to report an ongoing incident,
preceding which is the explicit request ‘could we have … ’.
(10) [Police Emergency call 11]
1 CT:
Hello there this is the police?
2 Ca:
Hello (0.5) er: could we have somebody to: .hh (street name + apartment
3
building) er: urgently please. =I’m the porter in uh block uv ﬂats there in
4
(apartment building name)
5 CT:
S- Sorry what’s the name of the cuh- court.
6
((15 lines omitted, checking the address)
7 CT:
What’s the problem?
8 Ca:
>Well we’ve got somebody< we got a trespasser
9
here we’re detaining ‘im at the moment we need
10
somebody ((swallow)) quite quickly.
11 CT:
What’s he bin doing?
12 Ca:
hhh Well he’s come on private property with a
13
bi:cycle we don’t know what he’s done.
14
(0.8)
15 Ca:
But he shouldn’t be o:n here. =He’s on private property.
16
(0.7)
DREW AND WALKER
106

17 CT:
Could you not just tell him to go:?
18
(.)
19 CT:
What do yuh-Why do you need the police tuh
20
go: there.
Having used a modal verb, and stated explicitly that his problem is urgent (line 3), Ca
identiﬁes himself as an ‘institutional’ person, ‘I’m the porter in a block of ﬂats’. Once the
CT asks for a description of the problem, however, Ca’s claims of entitlement begin to
unravel. He fails immediately to establish the seriousness of the situation, ﬁrst stating
‘well we’ve got somebody’ (line 8), a vague pronouncement which doesn’t ascribe any
seriousness to the problem. His self-repair upgrades the transgression to ‘trespassing’ (line
8), but still falls short of an emergency. Additionally, the caller himself downgrades the
urgency of the problem; having initially stated that he needed assistance ‘urgently’, he
now says that he ‘needs somebody quite quickly’.
As the control room call-taker did in (9), CT here begins asking a series of ‘forensic’
questions, which seems to question – that is, be sceptical about – the claimed urgency or
seriousness of the incident, about which Ca has made an emergency call. CT ﬁrst asks
‘what’s he been doing?’ (line 11), to which Ca provides an account which lies behind or
‘supports’ his claim to have detained a trespasser. His description of the problem is that
the ‘trespasser’ has ‘come on private property with a bicycle’ (lines 12–13), but that ‘we
don’t know what he’s done’ (line 13). It is perhaps the evident ‘weakness’ of that claim
to which Ca himself orients, when he adds that, whatever he’s done, the trespasser
‘shouldn’t be o:n here. =He’s on private property’ (line 15). In his questions in lines 17
and 19–20, ‘could you not just tell him to go’ and ‘why do you need the police to go
there’, CT treats the incident as not one for which police attendance is appropriate (i.e.
not police-able). Indeed, the police are not dispatched to this incident. So there is a
mismatch between the conﬁdence of Ca’s claims about the urgency of the incident –
displayed through the request form, and explicitly by his adding ‘urgently’ to his
request – and CT’s treatment of it as not requiring police assistance. It seems as though
Ca’s use of the modal form of the verb in requesting was strategically designed to
contribute to his portrayal of the incident as urgent.
We do not mean to claim that the caller himself does not believe that this event
requires or deserves police assistance; there’s nothing in the talk to indicate that he is
consciously attempting to deceive the police (see his attempt to clarify the problem
in line 15 – ‘but he shouldn’t be on here he’s on private property’). So we are not
making any cognitive or other psychological attribution by referring to his use of the
modal verb form as strategic. Rather, what seems ‘strategic’ here is the employment
of a request form that is used in other situations to successful eﬀect, when coupled with
other descriptive components which portray the seriousness of an incident requiring urgent police
assistance, but which fails here because it is not supported by the provision of such
information.
One further instance will have to suﬃce to illustrate the less benign, more ‘strategic’
use of verb forms in requests in emergency calls. In this case (11), Ca uses the form
‘I need … ’, which displays ‘conﬁdence’ in the request (see Vinkhuyzen and Szymanski
2005 on the use of ‘I need’ in American service encounters) – again, high entitlement,
low contingency – to an even greater degree than modals, according to the continuum
outlined earlier.
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
107

(11) [Police Emergency call 70]
1 CT
Police emergency can I help you?
2
(0.5)
3 Ca:
>.hh Yeah I need thuh police right now (police/please)?<
4 CT:
Yeah what’s thuh ^problem?
5
(0.8)
6 Ca:
I-I’ve bin hh >I’ve bin hit by a taxi dri:ver?<
7
(0.5)
8 Ca:
.hh Un he’s >punched me on thuh face.<
9
(0.4)
10 CT:
U:h where a:re you. What’s-
11
((15 lines omitted re caller’s location))
12 CT:
Okay are you badly injured. Do you need [un ambulance
13 Ca:
[Yes I am.
14 Ca:
.hh Yes (.) I do.
15 Com:
Okay what’s the nature of your injuries sir?
16
(0.4)
17 Ca:
.hhh >My nose is bleedin,<
18
(0.7)
19 CT:
You’ve got a no:se bleed.
20
(0.5)
21 Ca:
Yeah (he head but[ted me)
22 CT:
[(With) with a:ll due respect I don’t think (.).hh er:m
23
much can actually be done for a no:se bleed but if you=
24 Ca:
=Okay.
25 CT:
D’you wa:nt un ambulance or wha[t.
26 Ca:
[>Er no I don’t
As Ca did in example (10), the caller here too not only uses a request form conveying
high entitlement/low contingency, but he ‘supports’ that – hence warranting his call to
the emergency number – with an explicit expression of the urgency of the case, when
he adds ‘right now’ in line 3. Ca then describes the incident in relation to which he’s
requesting police assistance, ‘I’ve been hit by a taxi driver’ (line 6). There might be an
ambiguity in this account, since the co-occurrence of ‘hit’ and ‘taxi’ might conspire to
indicate that the caller is reporting being knocked down, or that his car has been struck
by another (‘hit’ being a term which can refer to being struck by a car, as well as
striking someone with one’s hand or ﬁst). However, Ca’s continuation in line 8 clariﬁes
matters.
Although there is an obvious diﬀerence in the potential seriousness of one’s injuries
when being hit by a car versus being punched by a person, being beaten up is as much a
policeable oﬀence as being involved in a motor accident. However, when the caller is
asked about the nature of his injuries (in order to inform the ambulance service), he
again downplays their seriousness – whether he intends to or not. Although he has
claimed to be badly injured (the ‘yes I am’ response to CT’s question, lines 12–13), he
describes his injury simply as ‘my nose is bleeding’. By this time, it is becoming apparent
to CT that the caller’s claims about the seriousness of his injuries are, while not neces-
sarily bogus, not entirely accurate – CT’s assessment being clearly evident in his response
to Ca’s continuing account of the attack which caused his injuries (line 21), ‘with all due
DREW AND WALKER
108

respect I don’t think much can actually be done for a nosebleed’ (lines 22–23). The
upshot is that Ca agrees to not needing an ambulance (lines 25–26).
However, in this instance, CT does dispatch the police to the incident, telling Ca at
the end of the call ‘Alri:ght we’ll get police back down to you as soon as we can sir’ (this
closing occurs 40 lines after line 26, in data not shown) – thereby complying with Ca’s
original request for police action. In this respect, then, the (high entitlement) request
form and outcome are congruent. In another respect, though, they are not – and that is
in relation to CT’s assessment of the seriousness and urgency of the incident. In the 40
lines not shown here, CT ascertains that Ca has ‘had an accident’ with the taxi driver; a
traﬃc accident, with a possible injury, is suﬃcient to require police presence – and CT
acts on the basis of that requirement (it is also evident from his accent that Ca is a
member of a racial minority, which the police may regard as an aggravating factor in
such an incident). But CT does not dispatch police to the scene on the basis of his
assessment of the seriousness of the incident. Example (12) shows the ﬁnal turns in
the call.
(12) [Police Emergency call 70]
1 Ca: He’s ruh-right behind me,=
2 CT: =Alri:ght we’ll get police back down to you as soon
3
as we can sir. =Okay?=
4 Ca: =Okay.
5 CT: Bye bye.
6 CT: ((makes a loud snoring sound))
After the call has closed, CT displays what he really thinks about the request for police
assistance by making a loud, stereotypical snoring sound, which indicates ‘boredom’ –
and thereby, that this is a waste of police time. In other calls, CTs variously display
their ‘true’ assessment of the call, of the seriousness of the incident reported, of the (un)
helpfulness of the caller and such like, by adding – after the call has oﬃcially closed (but
as the receiver is being put down) – sounds or remarks which express, implicitly or
explicitly, their disapprobation of the caller’s request for assistance. The grounds for their
scepticism with callers’ requests seem generally to be that they regard the call as a waste
of police time, because the incidents are too trivial. At any rate, whilst Ca’s use of the
(highly) entitled request form is vindicated by the dispatch of police to the scene, there is
nevertheless a mismatch between that request form and CT’s assessment of the seriousness/
urgency of the incident.
Conclusion
Previous research (Curl and Drew 2008) has shown that in selecting a given lexico-syntactic
form of a request, speakers grammaticalise or index their estimation of the degree of
entitlement and the likely contingencies involved in granting the request. If speakers
regard themselves as entitled to whatever is being requested, and regard the con-
tingencies involved as likely to be minimal, they use request forms towards the left hand
of the cline described earlier – that is imperatives, I need … , and modal forms of the
requesting verb. If, on the other hand, they are uncertain about their entitlement to
the service, or are unsure what contingencies might intervene, thereby aﬀecting the
CITIZENS’ EMERGENCY CALLS
109

possibility of the request being granted, they select forms expressing low entitlement and
high contingency, i.e. those to the right hand end of the cline – especially conditional
forms such as I was wondering if … .
In this chapter, we have shown how the request forms selected by citizens calling for
police assistance, either on the emergency (999) line or to their local police station,
similarly encode varying assessments of their entitlement to the service, and the possibility
of contingencies inﬂuencing or preventing that service being granted. Callers display
their conﬁdence in the seriousness and urgency of the incident they are reporting, and
for which they would like police assistance, by using the modal verb form; and even, in
rare cases, by saying (as Ca does in example 11), I need … . This accounts for callers
always using modals (or, more strongly, I need, or imperatives, as in example (4)) in calls
to the emergency number – at least, when they make explicit requests. Those calling
their local police station, by contrast, tend to use conditional forms, as Ca did when he
spoke to the police CT in the control room (in example (8)) – displaying that they are
less sure of the urgency, and policeability, of what they have to report. In emergency
calls, there can be a mismatch between Ca’s perception of the seriousness/urgency of the
incident, and therefore of their request, and the assessment of CT; callers can seem to
claim a great degree of entitlement, and a concomitant lower level of contingency, than
may seem to be warranted by ‘the facts’ – or rather, their account/descriptions of the
facts, circumstances, etc., of the incident.
Further reading
Curl, T. and Drew, P. (2008) ‘Contingency and action: A comparison of two forms of requesting’,
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 41: 1–25.
Heinemann, T. (2006) ‘“Will you or can’t you?” Displaying entitlement in interrogative requests’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 38: 1081–1104.
Tracey, K. (1997) ‘Interactional trouble in emergency service requests: A problem of frame’, Research on
Language and Social Interaction, 30: 315–43.
Whalen, M.R. and Zimmerman, D.H. (1990) ‘Describing trouble: Practical epistemology in citizen
calls to the police’, Language in Society, 19: 465–92.
DREW AND WALKER
110

8
Miranda rights
Curtailing coercion in police interrogation: the
failed promise of Miranda v. Arizona
Janet Ainsworth
Miranda v. Arizona is without a doubt the most famous American criminal law opinion of
all time—it is hard to imagine any American who does not recognize its famous warning:
You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can be used against you in a
court of law. You have the right to the presence of an attorney during any questioning.
If you cannot aﬀord an attorney, one will be appointed for you.
In fact, thanks to the worldwide reach of American television and movies, the Miranda
warnings are familiar even to citizens of countries in which they have no legal eﬀect.
Considered as a vehicle to promote widespread public awareness of law, Miranda is
perhaps the most successful educational project of all time. But despite that superﬁcial
success, it has failed to achieve its original aim of protecting suspects in police custody
from coercive interrogation. As a result, scholars and commentators have called Miranda
a “spectacular failure” (Thomas 2004: 1091), a “mistake” (Stuntz 2001: 975), a “farce”
(Garcia 1998: 497), an “empty ritual” (Uviller 1996: 124), and a “hoax” (Slobogin 2003:
309). Most scholars agree that Miranda has had little impact on the outcome of police
interrogation. Just as before Miranda, the vast majority of arrested persons still make
incriminating statements to police under interrogation (Schulhofer 1996: 516–38;
Thomas 1996: 957; Donahoe 1998; Leo 2001: 1006–9; cf. Cassell and Hayman 1996;
Cassell 1996a). Best estimates put the number of arrestees who answer police questions
after receiving Miranda warnings at approximately 80% (Leo 2001: 1009). More to the
point, the Miranda-endorsed interrogation regime still permits the police to conduct
lengthy incommunicado interrogations in which they are free to lie to the suspect, fab-
ricate “evidence” of his guilt, and alternately browbeat him with exaggerated threats of
punishment and cajole him with implied promises of leniency, as long as the Miranda
warnings precede the ordeal (White 2001).
Whether or not the Miranda safeguards are eﬀective in constraining coercive practices
in police interrogation is a question with serious implications. DNA technology has now
111

conclusively proven that signiﬁcant numbers of people are convicted for crimes they
didn’t commit. Although it is impossible to obtain completely reliable statistics on how
many innocent people are convicted, best estimates (Thomas 2004: 546; Gilvelber 1997:
1336–46) suggest that at least 6,000 and possibly as many as 40,000 persons are
erroneously convicted of serious crimes every year in the United States. Of those that
have been ultimately exonerated due to DNA testing, one in four had confessed under
police grilling despite being given the Miranda warnings (Drizin and Leo 2004: 905).
Psychologists studying the phenomenon of false confessions have identiﬁed a number of
ways in which police interrogation can sometimes lead innocent people to confess to
crimes (Wrightsman and Kassin 1993: 123–39). Once a confession is obtained, convic-
tion is almost inevitable. Even when a coerced confession bears signiﬁcant indicia of
unreliability, a confession is nevertheless powerfully persuasive evidence to juries (Kassin
and Sukel 1997). What this means is that, despite the panoply of constitutional con-
straints on police questioning imposed by Miranda and its legal progeny, problems in
police interrogation are still a major contributor to miscarriages of justice in which the
innocent are erroneously convicted of crimes.
So, what went wrong? Much of the blame for the failure of Miranda can be laid at
the feet of the Supreme Court itself through subsequent cases when it interpreted and
ﬂeshed out the mandate of Miranda—cases resting on ﬂawed assumptions about the
nature of language and human communication. To understand the failure of Miranda
as a public policy initiative, one must ﬁrst understand why the Supreme Court felt the
need to curtail unfettered police interrogation and what they hoped to achieve by
implementing the Miranda framework.
Coercion and confessions
The understanding that abusive police interrogation of suspects could result in false
confessions is certainly not a new one. In the early twentieth century, the Supreme
Court was faced with a series of high-proﬁle cases in which patently abusive, even
brutal, police interrogations had led to the conviction of probably entirely innocent
defendants based on little more than their extorted confessions (see e.g. Brown v.
Mississippi 1936). The Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause
prohibited the introduction into court of any supposed confession that was obtained
through coercive police behavior in the course of interrogation. Only voluntary
confessions were to be admissible, because confessions that were procured through
violence or threats pose an unacceptable risk that they might have been forced from an
innocent person. As this voluntariness requirement developed, the Court expanded its
reach beyond cases involving physical abuse to include confessions derived from other
oﬀensive police practices that might overbear the free will of the suspect. Whenever
the conduct of the police interrogation was deemed to be manifestly unfair and over-
reaching, the resulting confession was held to be inadmissible, even in cases in which
there was no serious doubt that it was in fact truthful (see e.g. Rogers v. Richmond
1961).
One diﬃculty with this voluntariness test for the admissibility of confessions was that it
required a contextually sensitive assessment of all of the characteristics of the suspect and
of the conditions of the interrogation in order to determine whether the suspect’s free
will had been overborne. Doing this on a case-by-case basis hamstrung police agencies in
JANET AINSWORTH
112

developing practical regulations and policies to govern interrogations and likewise put
immense strain on the courts as a source of judicial oversight. Applying the voluntariness
test on a consistent basis proved virtually impossible.
Miranda v. Arizona—an attempt to prevent
police over-reaching and to promote reliability
of confessions
The Miranda opinion represented an admission by the Court that the due process
voluntariness standard was inadequate to prevent abuses in police interrogations that
could lead to untrustworthy confessions. In an exhaustive sixty-page opinion, the Mir-
anda Court recounted the long history of abusive interrogation, beginning with the days
in which physical abuse and threats of abuse were the order of the day and ending with
contemporary law enforcement practices that, while less brutal than earlier interrogations,
were in the Court’s view equally problematic. Interrogation of suspects behind closed
doors, with no witnesses except the interrogators and the suspect, invited coercive tactics
that were designed to pressure, trick, intimidate, coax, and cajole arrestees into incrimi-
nating themselves. Detailing the many tricks and psychological ploys recommended in
police interrogation manuals, the Miranda Court was deeply skeptical that those in police
custody could meaningfully resist the psychological pressure inherent in incommunicado
interrogation.
The disapproval expressed in Miranda of the current state of police interrogation came
close to suggesting that it should not be permitted at all. The Court, for all its jaundiced
view of custodial interrogation, did not take that step, however. Instead, it sought, in its
words, “to dispel the compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings” (Miranda v. Arizona
1966: 458) by giving the suspect information about the legal rights he could interpose to
protect himself from police over-reaching. Above all, the arrestee would now need to be
explicitly told that he had the right to refuse to answer police questions, and that, if he
did choose to do so, he should be conscious that any answers he gave could later be used
as evidence against him. Even that advice was in the Court’s judgment inadequate as a
counterweight to the power of the police who had total domination over the arrestee.
After all, the same coercive environment that might compel a person to respond to
police questions might also make it diﬃcult for him to make a reasoned decision about
whether or not to cooperate, even if he knew that he had a right to remain silent. For
that reason, the Court interpolated the requirement that the arrestee be additionally told
that he would be permitted to consult with an attorney, if he wished, before deciding
whether to answer police questions.
The Miranda majority apparently was convinced that the ability to consult with
defense counsel would change the one-sided dynamics of police interrogation from a
setting in which the overwhelming power of the state could overbear the will of the
arrested person to one in which there was a more level playing ﬁeld between the suspect
and his accusers. Suspects armed with information about their legal rights could then
choose whether it was in their best interests to answer police questions. If they were
unsure of what their best choice might be, the Miranda warnings informed them that
they had the right to consult with an independent agent, an attorney, who was com-
mitted to protecting their interests. Understanding their rights and options, arrestees
could make rational and informed decisions about how best to respond to police
MIRANDA RIGHTS
113

interrogation. At least, that was the world optimistically anticipated by the Supreme
Court in its Miranda decision. Reality was, however, to fall far short of this.
Miranda as implemented: no remedy for police coercion after all
The language of warning
The Miranda opinion is predicated on the assumption that, as long as an arrested person
understood that he had the right not to respond to police interrogation and that he had
the right to have a lawyer assist him in dealing with the situation, the coercion inherent
in being in police custody would be dispelled. This could only be true, however, if the
language of the Miranda warning were suﬃciently clear and comprehensible that
the suspect who is given that information actually understood the nature of his rights and
the choices that he could make. There is good evidence, however, to suggest that many
who are given Miranda warnings do not have that requisite level of understanding.
The language of the warning itself is in places insuﬃciently clear to adequately inform
suspects of their rights. The ordering of the rights within the standard Miranda warning is
illogical and confusing, beginning with information about the right not to answer ques-
tions, skipping ahead to the implication of deciding to answer questions, and only then
going on to inform the suspect about the availability of legal counsel. Syntactically, the
warning is couched in a highly embedded structure. For example, note the embedded
series of clauses in the warning on the right to have a lawyer:
You have the right
(to have a lawyer present)
(during questioning)
(to advise you)
(prior to questioning)
It is well known that the more highly embedded the language, the more diﬃcult a text is
to understand (Shuy 1998b: 56–58).
Sometimes variations on the canonical Miranda warning are given, and in many cases
these variations are even less understandable. In a landmark study (Rogers et al. 2007),
a team of researchers collected 560 variations on Miranda warnings used in state and
federal jurisdictions throughout the United States and analyzed them for comprehensi-
bility, using the Flesch Reading Ease test, the Flesch-Kincaid test, and the SMOG
readability scale. What they found was that some rights—for example, the right to
remain silent—tended to be articulated in language classiﬁed as “fairly easy reading
material,” or language that would be understood adequately by 80% of the general
population. Other parts of the warning, however, particularly the warnings involving
waiver of rights, were phrased in such complex and convoluted ways that they were
classed as “post-graduate reading level.” For example, the right of a suspect to have
counsel present during questioning and to have counsel appointed in the case of an
indigent was presented in such a fashion that only 11% of the general public would likely
understand it (Rogers et al. 2007: 186).
Consider one version of the warning on the right to counsel that the Rogers team
assessed for comprehensibility: “You have the right to consult with, and have present,
JANET AINSWORTH
114

prior to, and during interrogation, an attorney either retained or appointed” (Rogers et
al. 2007: 184). Note ﬁrst that the verbs articulating the nature of the rights in this
warning are conjoined, so that the hearer must process each of these rights separately.
Further, note that the conjoined verbs “consult with” and “have present” are presented
without an immediate direct object, which is not a typical feature of spoken English. In
spoken English, hearers expect the direct object to closely follow the verb, whereas in
formal written English, the reader can be expected to parse the sentence even when its
elements occur in atypical positions. Intervening in this warning between those twinned
verbs and the direct object is another doubled element—this time a doubled preposi-
tional phrase, “prior to and during.” Even when the direct object “attorney” ﬁnally
makes an appearance in the warning, it is immediately followed by the doubled adjec-
tives “retained or appointed.” English syntax almost always inserts adjectives before
modiﬁed nouns, but in this case adjectives constructed from verbs are placed in the
highly unusual slot after the modiﬁed noun “attorney.” In addition, the verbal adjectives
“retained or appointed” are used in specialized senses rather than in their ordinary
meanings. “Retained” generally means “kept” or “held in,” not in the meaning used
here “hired with one’s own funds.” Similarly, “appointed” usually means “oﬃcially
chosen” and not “provided with public funds.” Only someone already conversant with
the practices of obtaining lawyers would likely understand the specialized meaning of
these two verbal adjectives. As a spoken utterance, this sentence violates most of the
norms of spoken English and would be challenging to parse even in formal written
English and it would be a diﬃcult utterance to understand fully even in the best of cir-
cumstances. Needless to say, the context of a high-pressure, anxiety-ridden interrogation
room only adds to the diﬃculty of making sense of such verbiage.
In addition to poorly framed, vague, and circuitous expressions, the Miranda warnings
analyzed by the researchers were typically too dense in information for adequate com-
prehension and recall. Based on their analysis, the researchers concluded that, as used in
many jurisdictions, much of the Miranda warning would not be properly understood by
a considerable percentage of the general public and would be inadequately understood
by an even larger percentage of arrestees, given their statistically lower educational
attainment.
As this research shows, it is questionable whether the language of the Miranda warnings
suﬃces to make clear to the average person what their constitutional rights are and what
options are open to them in the course of police interrogation. When, however, the sus-
pect is not the average person, the situation is evenly bleaker. Many of those arrested and
subjected to custodial interrogation—for example, juveniles, the mentally retarded, and the
mentally ill—could well be less capable than the average person of understanding their
rights (Solan and Tiersma 2005: 77–82). Empirical research has borne this out. A study
looking at the comprehension of the Miranda warnings by mentally retarded individuals
concluded that they fail to understand the rights as articulated and that they therefore are
not capable of making voluntary and intelligent decisions to exercise or to waive them
(Cloud et al.: 2002). In fact, that same study demonstrated that even non-retarded indivi-
duals with merely slightly lower than average IQs—in the 70s and 80s—have dramatically
lower rates of comprehension than do persons of average intelligence (Cloud et al. 2002:
571–72). Similar research shows that juveniles, too, have more limited comprehension
of the rights than do adults, with markedly lower degrees of understanding by those
under the age of ﬁfteen (Grisso 1980). Not surprisingly, perhaps, analysis of cases in
which innocent persons were known to have confessed under police interrogation includes
MIRANDA RIGHTS
115

disproportionate numbers of those especially vulnerable groups—the young and the
cognitively impaired (Drizin and Leo 2004: 963–69, 971–73).
The language of waiver
Assuming that a suspect actually does understand the rights given in the Miranda warn-
ing, there is still the question of under what circumstances his responses to subsequent
interrogation should be considered legally admissible. The Miranda Court recognized
that an arrestee might legitimately want to cooperate with the police and voluntarily
respond to questioning, but it maintained a healthy skepticism about the likelihood of
any purported waiver of rights, putting what it called “a heavy burden” on the prose-
cution to demonstrate the validity of any such waiver (Miranda v. Arizona, 1966: 475)
and cautioning that “a valid waiver will not be presumed simply from the silence of the
accused after warnings are given or simply from the fact that a confession was in fact
eventually obtained” (Miranda v. Arizona, 1966: 475).
Soon enough, however, the Supreme Court retreated from this position. Despite the
Miranda Court’s presumption against the voluntariness of waiver of rights by arrestees in
police custody due to the oppressive atmosphere of incommunicado interrogation, in
subsequent cases the Supreme Court has been far more willing to ﬁnd that suspects have
waived their Miranda rights. Even when the police reports of the words by an arrestee
purporting to show waiver instead display frank incomprehension of the rights outlined
in Miranda, courts have nevertheless counted them as valid waivers. For example, in
North Carolina v. Butler (1979), the arrestee being questioned while in police custody
agreed to answer questions orally but would not put anything in writing or sign the
waiver form. The obvious implication of that statement is that the suspect must have
erroneously believed that written statements and signed waiver forms would be harmful
to him in ways that merely answering oral questions would not be. In short, the only
reasonable construction of the suspect’s behavior is that he failed to understand that oral
statements were every bit as binding on him as written statements and would be fully
admissible in court. Yet the Supreme Court allowed the admission of his statements,
ﬁnding that he had made a knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights on these
facts. Wisely, the Court did not even try to attempt to articulate a credible reason why
someone would agree to incriminate himself by answering police questions orally but
not in writing, despite knowing all along that the oral statements were binding and
admissible. Perhaps any such attempt would have strained credulity to the breaking point
and beyond (Kamisar 2007: 180–81). Instead of requiring aﬃrmative waiver by the
defendant in that case, the Supreme Court noted that his silence in the face of
the warnings, coupled with his incriminating responses to police questioning, qualiﬁed as
“a course of conduct indicating waiver” (North Carolina v. Butler, 1979: 373).
After Butler, it was no longer necessary for the prosecution to prove that a suspect had
articulated either an understanding of his rights or of his desire to waive them and answer
questions. Assuming that Miranda rights were read and that the suspect eventually
responded to police questions, what the Miranda Court had once called the “heavy
burden” on the prosecution to show a knowing, voluntary, and intelligent waiver of
rights was satisﬁed. Having signaled to lower courts that the “heavy burden” on the State
to prove waiver was in fact almost no burden at all, the Supreme Court in eﬀect sanc-
tioned lower court inquiry into waiver that was perfunctory at best. Once judges ﬁnd
that the defendant has waived his Miranda rights, moreover, the resulting confession is
JANET AINSWORTH
116

nearly always then admitted into evidence with no further meaningful examination as to
whether it was the product of police over-reaching or coercion (White 2001: 1219–20;
Klein 2001: 1070).
Because the making of incriminating statements has come to be treated as itself proof
of waiver of Miranda rights, the law fails to protect the most vulnerable arrestees from
police coercion and manipulation. A representative example of this occurred in Miller v.
State (2002). In that case, a defendant, whom the trial judge found to be mentally
retarded, was taken into custody and questioned by the police about a homicide. During
that interrogation, the police lied to him about his having been seen just outside the
victim’s oﬃce before his death. The police also fabricated a computer printout and ﬁn-
gerprint card purporting to be those of the defendant, and told him falsely that his ﬁnger-
prints had been found at the death scene. They went on to show him a copy of a report
that falsely stated that the victim had died of natural causes, and to suggest to him that
the death could have been accidental. Despite the blatant use of lies by the police to a
suspect who was arguably particularly vulnerable to such tactics because of his low cog-
nitive capacity, the Indiana Supreme Court had no trouble concluding that his confes-
sion was admissible, ﬁnding that “beyond a reasonable doubt the defendant had
voluntarily waived his rights, and that his incriminatory statements … were voluntarily
given” (Miller v. State, 2000: 768).
In another case involving an especially vulnerable arrestee, a Vietnamese-speaking
suspect with limited English competence was read an error-ﬁlled Vietnamese language
version of the Miranda warnings. When the police lied to him, telling him that he had
been seen at the crime scene, he made incriminating statements. Despite the defective
warnings and the fact that he never aﬃrmatively waived his rights in any way, he, too,
was held to have validly waived his rights simply by responding to police questioning
(Thai v. Mapes, 2005). In yet another such case, the reviewing court found a knowing
and intelligent valid waiver of Miranda rights, by arguing that the suspect’s ability to
write his name and answer questions was suﬃcient proof that he had adequate intelli-
gence to understand the Miranda warnings, and by citing his record of prior convictions
as proof that he must have had “at least a rudimentary understanding of his rights” (U.S.
v. Cuevas-Robledos, 2006). This opinion directly contradicts the Miranda Court’s express
insistence that evidence of past encounters with the police were inadequate to show
appropriate knowledge of one’s rights, since what if anything a suspect learned about the
constitutional rights in any earlier experience could “never be more than speculation”
(Miranda v. Arizona, 1966: 471–72).
Not only may the police lie to suspects about the evidence in the case, they may also
actively mislead the suspect about the nature of his rights (White 2006). Take, for
example, the case of Soﬀar v. Cockrell (2002). In that case, the arrestee asked the inter-
rogating detective how he could get a lawyer. The detective responded by asking Soﬀar
if he could aﬀord to hire a lawyer, knowing that he could not and also knowing full well
that the Miranda rules mandate telling arrestees that, if they cannot aﬀord to retain
counsel, a lawyer will be appointed for them. The detective’s implied assertion that only
those with money had the right to counsel was unsuccessful in persuading Soﬀar to talk,
however, because Soﬀar then asked the detective how he could get a court appointed
lawyer and how long it would take to procure one. The detective knew that the law
required that suspects must be charged and provided with counsel within 72 hours of
arrest, but that is not what he told Soﬀar. Instead, he lied to him and told him that he
didn’t know how long it might take, but that he “guessed it could take as little as one
MIRANDA RIGHTS
117

day or as long as a month” (Soﬀar v. Cockrell, 2002: 591). Given this discouraging—and
untrue—news about the unavailability of legal counsel, Soﬀar then replied, “So you’re
telling me I’m on my own.” The detective’s response, according to his own testimony at
two hearings on the issue, was either “Yes, you are,” or silence. Either way, the detective
succeeded in discouraging Soﬀar from exercising his right to have a lawyer’s assistance by
intentionally giving him misleading and false information about his rights. Nevertheless,
the 5th Circuit Court of Appeal, in an en banc opinion, held that Soﬀar’s waiver of his
rights was a knowing, voluntary, and intelligent one, and Soﬀar’s death sentence was
aﬃrmed.
Even explicit statements by an arrestee that he is refusing to waive his rights are often
of no avail. In one such case, the suspect refused to sign a Miranda waiver form and, in
addition, twice explicitly told his interrogators that he was not waiving any rights. When,
despite his insistence, the police continued to question him and he made incriminatory
responses to police questioning, the reviewing court ignored his explicit assertions that he
did not intend to waive his rights and held that the fact that he eventually answered
police allegations was enough to prove a valid waiver of his rights (U.S. v. Acosta, 2006).
As courts began to treat any response by suspects as evidence of waiver of his rights,
police naturally sought to provoke suspect responses. Professor Richard Leo, who has
observed hundreds of police interrogations in the course of his research, has detailed
various tactics and stratagems adopted by the police in order to get suspects to respond to
questioning (Leo and White 1999: 433–35). He notes, for example, that they inten-
tionally undercut Miranda in many ways. Oﬃcers minimize the suspect’s attention to the
signiﬁcance of the warnings by reciting them in perfunctory, unanimated tones, speaking
quickly without making eye contact, and referring to the warnings, often jokingly, as a
mere formality to be quickly dispensed with in order to get to more important matters
(Leo and White 1999: 433–35). In one such interrogation, the detective began his reci-
tation of the Miranda warnings by saying, “Okay … let me go ahead and do this here
real quick, like I said, so don’t let this ruﬄe your feathers or anything like that, it’s just a
formality we have to go through, okay” (Leo and White 1999: 434). In another case, the
oﬃcer joked, “You’ve probably seen it on TV a thousand times. I know I’ve said it
about ten thousand times.” In a similar vein, a detective in another case preceded the
warnings with the following:
In order for me to talk to you speciﬁcally about the injury with [victim], I need to
advise you of your rights. It’s a formality. I’m sure you’ve watched television with
the cop shows, right, and you hear them say their rights and so you can probably
recite this better than I can but it’s something I need to do and we can get this out
of the way before we talk about what’s happened.
(Leo and White 1999: 435)
Discourse analyses of the required British cautioning of interrogated suspects show that,
like their American counterparts giving Miranda warnings, British police administer
cautions in a ritualistic, “hyperﬂuent” manner, minimizing both their signiﬁcance and
their comprehensibility (Rock 2007: 156–57).
Once the Miranda warning is given, the police often emphasize to the suspect how
much they want to hear his side of the story, encouraging him to respond by a variety of
framings, such as exaggerating the cruelty or magnitude of the crime as they now
understand it without the beneﬁt of the defendant’s version, or suggesting that
JANET AINSWORTH
118

cooperating with the police will result in leniency or even dropping any charges (Leo
and White 1999: 437–48). In one interrogation of a juvenile suspect recorded by Leo,
the oﬃcer framed the Miranda warnings as giving the child the opportunity to conﬁrm
that he was not guilty of the crime, saying “Uh, we’re gonna give you the opportunity
to clear this whole matter up, and that’s gonna entail you answering some question to us.
Okay? You feel comfortable with that?” (Leo and White 1999: 445). Having framed
the interrogation as a positive beneﬁt to the suspect, the perfunctory recitation of the
Miranda rights is hardly calculated to eﬀectively warn the suspect about the very real
potential of interrogation to provide incriminating rather than exculpatory evidence.
As long as the suspect eventually responds to interrogation, most courts will ﬁnd an
implied waiver of the Miranda rights despite deﬁciencies in the manner of the warnings
and despite lack of any aﬃrmative statement by the accused explicitly waiving his rights.
Far from being what the Miranda Court called a “heavy burden” on the prosecution,
waiver has become the default presumption whenever the suspect ultimately succumbs to
police questioning. Whatever responses a suspect makes to police interrogation are held
to constitute conclusive proof that he understood and chose to waive his rights, unless he
explicitly takes speciﬁc steps to invoke his rights.
The language of invocation
One weakness in the speciﬁcity of the Miranda warnings is that they do not provide any
guidance to suspects on how to claim their rights if they choose that option rather than
waiving them. Given that, it would seem appropriate that courts would liberally construe
attempts by suspects to invoke their rights as eﬀective. Instead, the Supreme Court has
held that, unless attempted invocations of Miranda rights are made using clear, unequi-
vocal, and unambiguous language, they are legally void (Davis v. United States, 1994).
Without such a clear and unambiguous invocation, the police can continue their inter-
rogation without restrictions and need not even attempt to clarify whether or not the
suspect is trying to assert his rights.
Examination of post-Davis case law shows the ways in which courts have bent over
backwards construing arrestees’ attempts to exercise their Miranda rights as fatally unclear
or equivocal, thus denying them the protection of Miranda. Suspects must navigate a
veritable linguistic mineﬁeld of disqualifying language in trying to exercise their Miranda
rights. Some arrestees made the mistake of asking for their right to a lawyer using an
interrogative syntactic form instead of an imperative:
 “Could I call my lawyer?” (Dormire v. Wilkinson, 2001).
 “May I call a lawyer? Can I call a lawyer?” (State v. Payne, 2001).
 “Do you mind if I have my lawyer with me?” (U.S. v. Whitefeather, 2006).
 “Can I speak to an attorney before I answer the question to ﬁnd out what he
would have to tell me?” (Taylor v. Carey, 2007).
These requests were all rejected as invocations because they were interpreted as merely
theoretical questions about the availability of counsel rather than as actual requests for
counsel. Reviewing courts here seemed to be under the mistaken impression that
interrogative forms can never be meant as imperatives, despite the frequency in
ordinary human interaction in which speakers do just that (Solan and Tiersma 2005:
54–62).
MIRANDA RIGHTS
119

Other suspects were unsuccessful in their attempts to assert their rights because they
used softened or indirect imperatives or they phrased their assertion of their rights with
polite hedges:
 “I think I would like to talk to a lawyer.” (Clark v. Murphy, 2003).
 “I think I will talk to a lawyer.” (State v. Farrah, 2006).
 “It seems like what I need is a lawyer … I do want a lawyer.” (Oliver v. Runnels,
2006).
 “Actually, you know what, I’m gonna call my lawyer. I don’t feel comfortable.”
(People v. McMahon, 2005).
Preceding a demand for a lawyer with an initial subjunctive clause doomed the invoca-
tion of a suspect who said, “If I’m going to jail on anything, I want to have my attorney
present before I start speaking to you about whatever it is you guys are talking about”
(Kibler v. Kirkland, 2006). Despite that fact that the suspect in this case was indeed going
to jail, the mere existence of the initial qualifying clause disqualiﬁed this invocation.
Sometimes arrestees need the cooperation of the police in order to get an attorney to
be present during questioning. Asking for police assistance in obtaining counsel, how-
ever, could render their attempted invocation invalid. For example, the suspect who
responded to the Miranda warnings by asking that the police retrieve his lawyer’s busi-
ness card was held not to have invoked his right to counsel (US v. Tran, 2006). Similarly
unsuccessful was the hospitalized arrestee who asked police, “Could I get a phone in
here so I can talk to a lawyer?” (Jackson v. Commonwealth, 2006).
Attempts to invoke the constitutional right to remain silent are likewise disqualiﬁed if
they are deemed to be insuﬃciently direct and precise. The following responses to the
Miranda warnings were all held too ambiguous or equivocal to count as successful
invocations of the right to silence:
 “I don’t want to talk about it.” (Owen v. State, 2003).
 “I don’t have anything to say.” (State v. Hickles, 1996).
 “I don’t wanna talk no more.” (U.S. v. Stephenson, 2005).
 “I just don’t think I should say anything.” (Burket v. Angelone, 2000).
 Oﬃcer: “Do you want to make a statement to us?” Arrestee: “Nope.” ( James v.
Marshall, 2003).
Simply remaining silent during interrogation has also been held to be insuﬃcient as an
attempt to claim the Miranda right to remain silent. Apparently, a suspect has to speak up
in order to exercise his constitutional right not to speak (State v. Ross, 1996).
Even when the suspect tries to claim both the right to remain silent and the right to
counsel, lack of suﬃcient precision often dooms the attempted invocation of Miranda
rights:
 “I don’t even want to talk unless I have me a lawyer and go through this shit.”
(Harper v. State, 2001).
 “I don’t feel like I can talk with you without an attorney sitting right here to give
me some legal advice.” (Baker v. State, 2005).
 “I’ll be honest with you. I’m scared to say anything without talking to a lawyer.”
(Midkiﬀv. Commonwealth, 1995).
JANET AINSWORTH
120

 Suspect responded to police questioning with, “Fuck you, talk to my lawyer.”
(People v. Varnum, 2004).
 Arrestee responded to police oﬃcer saying, “Having these rights in mind, do you
wish to talk to us?” with “Can I put ‘no’ ‘til I get my lawyer?” (State v. Jackson, 2001).
These cases are among the most compelling for ﬁnding an invocation, in that they
exemplify the very concern that led the Supreme Court in Miranda to interpose a right
to counsel in the police interrogation context. As the Court saw it, a legally naïve
arrestee might well not be in a position to determine how to respond to police
questioning, or indeed whether to respond at all, without the assistance of legal counsel
to advise him about how best to protect his interests. Those suspects whose attempts
at invocation expressly articulate their need for legal advice before answering police
questions thus ought to be cases deserving the most generous construal of the adequacy
of rights invocations.
A telling indication of the bankruptcy of the Miranda framework as currently imple-
mented is the ﬁnding by criminal justice scholars that, once a purported Miranda waiver
has been given and questioning begins, almost no suspects ever attempt to end the
interrogation by invoking their rights (Stuntz 2001: 998). Yet it must be more the rule
than the exception that an interrogation increases both in intensity and focus over time,
with more pointed questions, more speciﬁc accusations, and a greater adversarial tone as
it unfolds. One would expect, then, that suspects who originally waived their Miranda
rights under the mistaken impression that they could explain away the case against them
would recognize as the heat was turned up that continued participation in the inter-
rogation was no longer in their best interests. The fact that suspects seldom if ever
attempt to terminate oppressive interrogations regardless of how onerous they become is
strong evidence that they do not think that they have the power to do so.
Questioning “outside” Miranda
Almost immediately after announcing the Miranda framework for police interrogation,
the Supreme Court began backpedaling from its underlying logic in a series of cases that
permitted the admission of evidence obtained through police interrogation that violated
the constraints of Miranda (see e.g. New York v. Harris 1971; Michigan v. Tucker 1974;
Oregon v. Elstad, 1985). In permitting expansive use by prosecutors of evidence obtained
in violation of Miranda, the Court—wittingly or not—provided a positive incentive for
police to ignore the Miranda rule. The primary mechanism for enforcing constitutional
constraints on police investigatory practices is, after all, the knowledge by police and
prosecutors that illegally procured evidence cannot be admitted in court. Knowledge that
intentional violations of the constitution in the course of police investigation will result
in no usable evidence thus acts as a positive deterrent to police over-reaching.
It was not long before the police came to appreciate that there were substantial
beneﬁts in violating Miranda’s strictures. In a process that came to be known as
“questioning outside Miranda,” some agencies actually instructed their oﬃcers on the
advantages of intentionally violating Miranda, and instructed oﬃcers on how to take
advantage of circumstances that would allow the evidence into court notwithstanding a
purposeful violation of Miranda. For example, some police agencies recommended to
oﬃcers that they consider violating the constitutional Miranda requirements in order
to get a confession, and then, after getting incriminating statements, quickly Mirandizing
MIRANDA RIGHTS
121

the suspect and having him repeat the just-procured confession. Even if the suspect
refused to repeat the confession, oﬃcers were reminded that the illegally obtained con-
fession could still be validly used as impeachment if the defendant testiﬁed in his own
defense at trial (Leo and White 1999; Weisselberg 2001). In this way, Supreme Court
cases permitting the use at trial of evidence acquired through violation of the Miranda
framework actually appear in some instances to promote intentional police violations of
the law (Leo and White 1999: 448–50).
The Supreme Court reconsiders the Miranda framework
Although the Supreme Court has, in the years since the Miranda opinion, signiﬁcantly
weakened its reach through its subsequent rulings, it has not abandoned it altogether.
In 2000, the Court was asked to reconsider the constitutional status of Miranda and
overrule it, and to the surprise of many court-watchers, it instead re-aﬃrmed the con-
stitutional validity of the case (Dickerson v. United States, 2000). What remains of the
Miranda framework, however, is in a real sense an empty shell. Its doctrinal framework
has remained in place; however, as a practical matter, Miranda rights are dangerously easy
to waive and nearly impossible to invoke successfully. Worse yet, courts have been
disinclined to look carefully at whether a confession meets the minimal standards of
voluntariness and reliability as long as an initial Miranda waiver can be inferred (White
2001: 1219–20). Far from being a bulwark against coercion in police interrogation, the
Miranda requirements, once satisﬁed, have instead shielded interrogation from the kind
of searching judicial inquiry that could expose instances of police over-reaching and
undue pressure. To quote Yale Kamisar, widely recognized as the leading legal scholar
on Miranda, the Supreme Court is “unwilling to overrule Miranda … and also unwilling
to take Miranda seriously. That is the sad reality” (Kamisar 2007: 230).
The role for linguists in preventing miscarriages of justice
While it is apparent that the Supreme Court has no plans to scrap the Miranda framework
in the near future, whatever its deﬁciencies, within that framework many issues occurring
in individual cases present factual questions involving language usage and the appropriate
interpretation to be accorded to that language. From a practical perspective, linguists could
be extremely helpful in analyzing the discursive structure and linguistic content of inter-
rogations. As Roger Shuy, one of the most experienced American forensic linguists, put it,
(L)inguists know what to listen for in a conversation. They listen for topic
initiations, topic recycling, response strategies, interruption patterns, intonation
markers, pause lengths, speech event structure, speech acts, inferencing, ambiguity
resolution, transcript accuracy, and many other things. Scientiﬁc training enables
linguists to categorize structures that are alike and to compare or contrast structures
that are not.
(Shuy 1993a: xvii–xviii)
Linguistic evidence could be brought to bear on the question of whether a particular
defendant likely had an adequate understanding of his rights from the warnings given to
JANET AINSWORTH
122

him. Such testimony would be especially pertinent when special reasons exist to be
skeptical of whether the defendant had full understanding of the Miranda warnings—for
example, when the defendant had diminished cognitive capacity, or was not a proﬁcient
English speaker, or was deaf, or was a juvenile, and so forth (see Solan and Tiersma 2005:
77–87). Whether a suspect’s language showed that he knowingly and intelligently
waived his rights; whether a waiver appeared to be coerced; whether a confession is
credible evidence of guilt or instead only acquiescence to overbearing authority; whether
the police deceptively promised leniency in return for an admission of involvement;
whether a purported confession was of questionable reliability, because all of the perti-
nent information about the crime was fed to the suspect by the police—all these are
issues lending themselves to discursive analysis by linguists, and in a number of instances,
linguists have done useful analyses on just such cases (see Shuy 1998b: 17–33, 33–40,
122–39, 174–85). Many diﬀerent sub-ﬁelds of linguistic expertise could be brought to
bear on these questions, ranging from interactional discourse analysis (Watson 1990) to
Gricean pragmatic analysis (Lakoﬀ1996) to phonetic analysis of intonation patterns (Shuy
1998b: 70–71) to analysis of topic and response sequences (Shuy 1998b: 33–40).
One factor frequently limiting the ability of linguists to assist in assessing the reliability
of confessions in these cases can be the lack of an objective record of the course of the
interrogation. The text of the written and signed confession admitted into evidence is
the end product of a lengthy process of questions and answers in which multiple, com-
peting, and conﬂicting narratives of the crime are created. During the interrogation
process, details of the facts and attributions of motive and criminal responsibility some-
times originate with the interrogators and other times with the suspect, but by the time
the confession is reduced to writing, it can be impossible to determine exactly who was
responsible for word choice and narrative sequencing (Heydon 2005). Where there is
neither a tape recording nor a transcript of the questioning, the linguist may be forced to
reconstruct the interrogation from the memories and notes of the police and of the sus-
pect. This admittedly partial and inaccurate record may stymie the linguist in drawing
any valid conclusions (see Shuy 1998b: 58–68, 140–52, 154–73). In addition, written
records lack features such as the intonation and phonetic reduction in articulation of the
original oral statements, features which provide important clues to the proper inter-
pretation of the meaning of the utterances (Shuy 1998b: 68–72.). Pauses, hesitancy,
emotional emphasis, and the like are all key indexes of meaning that are eliminated in
the reduction of a purported confession to a written narrative.
If the primary policy concern in regulating police interrogation is in preventing abu-
sive and oppressive interrogations that could result in unreliable confessions, the best
remedy to both prevent and detect such practices would be to insist that all custodial
police questioning be videotaped. Across the political spectrum, nearly all legal com-
mentators on police practices—both those opposed to Miranda and those who approve
of it—agree that videotaping these sessions is highly desirable (Cassell 2001: 486–92;
Kamisar 2007: 188–91; Slobogin 2003). In fact, when the Police and Criminal Evidence
Act of 1986 made taping of all signiﬁcant police interrogations mandatory in Great
Britain, police administrators themselves found that audio taping their interrogations has
been beneﬁcial in promoting eﬀective police investigation (Rock 2007).
Currently American police understand that, when courts come to determine what
happened during an interrogation, it is their word against that of the suspect, and in
such “swearing contests,” the suspect will always be disbelieved (Kamisar 2007: 191).
Knowing that the sessions were being taped would likely discourage the police from
MIRANDA RIGHTS
123

adopting abusive and unfair tactics in their questioning in the ﬁrst place. In any event,
taping would provide an objective record of what transpired that could later be closely
examined to determine exactly what was said, when, and by whom. For example, since
the Supreme Court has held that the precise language used by a suspect in attempting to
invoke his rights is dispositive in whether he has eﬃcaciously done so, there have been
frequent contests over exactly what language was used by the invoking suspect (Shuy
1998b: 58–68). A taped record would eliminate such disputes. The experience of
forensic linguists such as Roger Shuy in reconstructing and analyzing police interroga-
tions clearly shows that if taping were required more generally in the United States,
linguists could be of inestimable use in preventing miscarriages of justice resulting from
unreliable confessions.
Further reading
Leo, Richard A. (2008) Police Interrogation and American Justice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press [probably the last word on what goes on behind closed doors in police stations in the US].
Leo, Richard A. and Thomas, George C. (eds) (1998) The Miranda Debate: Law, Justice, and Policing,
Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press [a very good and eclectic survey].
Rock, Frances (2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan [a good comparative discourse analysis of the police caution in the UK].
Shuy, Roger W. (1998) The Language of Confession, Interrogation, and Deception, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage [Roger’s greatest “hits” regarding police interrogation].
Solan, Lawrence M. and Tiersma, Peter M. (2005) Speaking of Crime: The Language of Criminal Justice,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press [they include a signiﬁcant chapter on Miranda].
Weisselberg, Charles D. (2008) “Mourning Miranda,” California Law Review, 96: 1519–1600 [a more
legally focused examination of why Miranda has failed].
Legal cases cited
Baker v. State, 214 S.W. 3d 239 (Ark. S. Ct. 2005).
Brown v. Mississippi, 297 U.S. 278 (1936).
Burket v. Angelone, 208 F.3d 172 (4th cir. 2000).
Clark v. Murphy, 317 F.3d 1038 (9th cir. 2003).
Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452 (1994).
Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 428 (2000).
Dormire v. Wilkinson, 249 F.3d 801 (2001).
Harper v. State, Tex. App. LEXIS 7497 (2001).
Jackson v. Commonwealth, 187 S.W.3d 300 (Ky. S. Ct. 2006).
James v. Marshall, 322 F.3d 103 (1st cir. 2003).
Kibler v. Kirkland, U.S. Dist. LEXIS 55719 (D. N.Car. 2006).
Michigan v. Tucker, 417 U.S. 433 (1974).
Midkiﬀv. Commonwealth, 462 S.E.2d 112 (Va. S. Ct. 1995).
Miller v. State, 770 N.E.2d 763 (Ind. 2002).
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
New York v. Harris, 401 U.S. 222 (1971).
North Carolina v. Butler, 441 U.S. 369 (1979).
Oliver v. Runnels, U.S. Dist. LEXIS 50704 (E. D. Ca. 2006).
Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U.S. 298 (1985).
Owen v. State, 862 So. 2d 687 (Fla. S. Ct. 2003).
JANET AINSWORTH
124

People v. McMahon, 31 Cal. Rptr.3d 256 (Cal. App. 2005).
People v. Varnum, 2004 Cal. App. LEXIS 5189.
Rogers v. Richmond, 365 U.S. 534 (1961).
Soﬀar v. Cockrell, 300 F.3d 588 (5th Cir. 2002).
State v. Farrah, Minn. App. Unpub. LEXIS 984 2006).
State v. Hickles, 929 P.2d 141 (Kan. S. Ct. 1996).
State v. Jackson, 19 P.3d 121 (Kan. S. Ct. 2001).
State v. Payne, 833 So.2d 927 (La. S. Ct. 2001).
State v. Ross, 552 N.W.2d 428 (Wisc. S. Ct. 1996)
Taylor v. Carey, U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12686 (E.D. Ca. 2007).
Thai v. Mapes, 412 F.3d 970 (8th cir. 2005).
U.S. v. Acosta, 363 F.3d 1141 (11th cir. 2006).
U.S. v. Cuevas-Robledos, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 76300 (D. Oregon 2006).
U.S. v. Stephenson, 152 Fed. App’x. 904 (11th cir. 2005).
U.S. v. Tran, 171 Fed. App’x. 758, U.S. App. LEXIS 5068 (11th cir. 2006.)
U.S. v. Whitefeather, U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17239 (D. Minn. 2006).
MIRANDA RIGHTS
125

9
Witnesses and suspects in interviews
Collecting oral evidence: the police, the
public and the written word
Frances Rock
Introduction
Imagine a police interview. What is the main thing going on? Whether your imagined
interview was between men, women or was mixed sex; involved adults or a child; a
witness, victim or a suspect; a group or only two individuals; whether it was conducted
monolingually or through an interpreter; whether it was in a cramped police interview
room or a state-of-the-art rape crisis unit, it probably had one key feature: instant,
interpersonal interaction between a police oﬃcer and lay person. Sure enough, the Code
of Practice which regulates detention in England and Wales (Code C) deﬁnes interview as
‘the questioning of a person regarding their involvement or suspected involvement in a
criminal oﬀence or oﬀences’ (Home Oﬃce 2008: 37). So, your imagined police inter-
view probably centred on two main participants, one seeking to elicit information from
the other. At the very least, your interview participants, however numerous they are, are
probably orienting to talk, even if the interviewee might be trying to avoid doing it.
Other chapters of this book have shown the inﬂuence of the talk of participants with
particular characteristics (Aldridge), the implications of spoken descriptions (Benneworth)
and the potential of spoken questions in forming consensus (Holt and Johnson). Talk is
obviously crucial to interviews but it is not the only or, I argue, the most important
linguistic activity which shapes them. Let’s look a little more closely at the interview you
had imagined. The other linguistic activities that you might have called to mind are
reading and writing. This chapter will focus on the place of reading and writing in police
interviews, showing how these activities ﬁgure, how they are oriented to and how
inﬂuential they are on the structures, practices and outcomes of police interviews.
How do reading and writing ﬁgure in interviews?
Other chapters of this book have shown the potential for written texts which are created
before interviews and ‘taken in’ to the interview to oﬀer protection, or to fail to do so
126

(Ainsworth) and the potential for written texts created during interviews to be ‘brought
out’ and inﬂuence later parts of the legal system (Ehrlich; Haworth).
These chapters illustrate that reading and writing impinge on interviews as both an
input to and an outcome from interviews. The inﬂuence of such reading and writing
on interviews has increased in those countries which adopt the PEACE method of
interviewing. These include England, Wales, Australia and, increasingly, parts of the
USA. This model was devised by a British Government Steering Committee (Home
Oﬃce 1992) and introduced to police personnel in England and Wales through train-
ing during the 1990s. The model’s inﬂuence has been entrenched in Great Britain
through its central position in the Association of Chief Police Oﬃcers’ Investigative
Interviewing Strategy which introduced a ﬁve-tier interview-training programme
designed to classify interviewing skills and train oﬃcers across the policing organisa-
tional structure. PEACE is also integral to recent moves to professionalise the Police
Service through an investigative skills training programme which is being implemented
at the time of writing by the National Policing Improvement Agency (2008). The
PEACE model, based on techniques from cognitive interviewing and conversational
management, proposes that investigative interviewing, as opposed to interrogation, depends
on a very speciﬁc set of activities and skills. The concepts denoted by the acronym
PEACE are not intended to highlight the importance of reading and writing but as my
summary below shows reading and writing are integral to those concepts and thus to
contemporary interviewing methods:
Planning and preparation: Takes place before the interview begins and involves
both ‘legal and logistical issues of interview preparation’ (Williamson 2006: 172).
This includes activities like making notes about legal topics such as points to prove
and identifying practical needs, for example, an appropriate adult to help those
interviewees who are unable to read.
Engage and explain: Describes the opening phases of an interview during which
the oﬃcer will explain the upcoming interview procedure, for example, why
someone in the room might be writing during the interview, and the legal issues
which relate to the interviewee, such as the right to legal advice.
Account: Denotes the main ‘questioning’ sequence and therefore has obvious
relevance to texts produced during planning and preparation. During the account
phase, the oﬃcer will both use notes written before the interview and make notes
for further questioning or subsequent investigation.
Closure: Provides both formal termination of the interview, as the oﬃcer explains
legally required matters such as what will happen to recordings which might have
been made, and informal termination, as the oﬃcer explains what might happen
next.
Evaluation: Post-interview assessment at this stage provides both a platform for the
oﬃcer’s personal and professional development and, in relation to the investigation
itself, the incentive to review the interview records and, if necessary, generate further
investigative activities.
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
127

PEACE, if followed correctly, requires that oﬃcers see the interview not as an isolated
activity, clearly delimited from the world outside the interview room, but as part of a
chain of activities which are intended to improve interview outcomes in police terms.
Inherent in this chain of activities are chains of written and spoken texts; texts created in
one setting and used in innovative, and even surprising, ways in another. Inherent too in
investigative interviewing and PEACE is the notion that reading and writing are not
bounded activities quietly undertaken in solitude then ﬁled away, but part of the tapestry
of linguistic activities of everyday life. These notions require further exploration to equip
us to move on.
Intertextuality and literacies in police interviews
As Bauman points out, social life is ‘discursively constituted, produced and reproduced in
situated acts of speaking and other signifying practices that are simultaneously anchored
in their situational contexts of use and transcendent of them, linked by interdiscursive ties
to other situations, other acts, other utterances’ (Bauman 2004: 2). Metaphors have been
usefully employed to describe such interdiscursive ties: signifying practices such as texts
are seen to become part of a ‘web’ with other texts (Seebohm 2004), being formed
through ‘sedimentation’ of texts and practices (Pahl 2002; Silverstein and Urban 1996);
recycled (Aronsson 1991) and being ‘shipped around’ creating complex trajectories
(Blommaert 2005: 76, see also Maryns 2006: 14–199). This process, frequently, although
not exclusively, referred to as recontextualisation, was brought to prominence by
Bauman and Briggs. They point out that texts can be decontextualised or treated as ‘self-
contained, bounded objects, separable from their social and cultural contexts of production
and reception’ (Bauman and Briggs 1990: 72) having ﬁrst become extractable through
entextualisation (1990: 73). Decontextualisation implies that a text will be recontextua-
lised in a diﬀerent context (1990: 74) – this recontextualisation, our focus here, will
create changes in ‘form function and meaning’ (1990: 75). Recontextualisation involves
both shifting and changing something of a text, discourse, genre or style by slotting it
into another text, discourse, genre or style and, crucially, altering its use and environment
and creating new meanings (Linell 1998: 145). As this suggests, this process is not ‘neu-
tral’ but an ‘act of control’ (Bauman and Briggs 1990: 76). Fairclough points out that
speciﬁc choices in the way that events are represented and transformed depend ‘on the
goals, values and priorities of the communication in which they are recontextualised’
(Fairclough 1995: 41). Thus research which recognises the way texts develop from,
through and into other texts, contexts and discourses gives insight into both
the backgrounds or ‘secret lives’ of texts and, importantly in legal settings, into how
particular versions of events, people, places and things get presented and given primacy
(Mehan 1996: 253).
Many people tend to think of reading and writing as a set of skills which are taught
and tested at school and, if learned well, can be used for a lifetime. This conception has
been dislodged by the New Literacy Studies which instead works with a notion of
literacy practices – ‘the general cultural ways of utilising written language which people
draw upon in their lives’ (Barton and Hamilton 2000: 7). These practices are taken up
in varied ways and for varied purposes under the inﬂuence of discursive practices, so
that literacy itself is seen as situated in cultures and ideologies (Street 1984). This per-
spective makes it possible to recognise literacies (multiple realisations of literacy) as
‘located in particular times and places’ and therefore ‘indicative of broader social
FRANCES ROCK
128

practices’ but also ‘positioned in relation to the social institutions and power relations
which sustain them’ (Barton et al. 2000: 1). In turn, this facilitates perspectives on
individuals, identities, social processes, social events discourses and broader institutional
structures, which are inaccessible through blander, skills-based views of literacy or
through the examination of only the traces of literacy events: texts. For example, a
skills-based perspective on a police interview with someone who has been categorised
as unable to read would assert that that person should be provided with a helper, an
appropriate adult, to read written material to them when necessary before and during
interview. A more productive alternative would involve investigating issues such as the
implications of ‘unable to read’ here; how texts, reading and writing inﬂuence the
interview and its socio-legal signiﬁcance; how the prioritisation of particular forms of
knowledge and practice inﬂuence the activities and identities of each participant; and
through the analysis of both texts and literacy practices, what the presence of the
appropriate adult accomplishes.
This chapter uses naturally occurring data from British police investigations to show
both how writing which feeds into the interview process inﬂuences the content and
eﬀect of talk (in the next section), and how writing which comes out of the interview
process is created through the interview itself (in the following section).
Writing which is brought into interviews
In the process of the Engage and Explain phase of a PEACE interview with a suspect,
one important task for the interviewer is to present the legislation which will apply
throughout the interview. In England and Wales, this is accomplished through the
statement and, if necessary, explanation of several rights. You might remember that in
the ﬁrst paragraph of this chapter, I noted that the detention rulebook, Code C of the
Codes of Practice, deﬁned interview as meaning questioning about a criminal oﬀence or
oﬀences. The full deﬁnition importantly adds that this questioning ‘must be carried out
under caution’ (Home Oﬃce 2008: 37). So, in the eyes of the legal institution, for an
interview with a suspect to be an interview, it must be preceded by a particular form of
words, a ‘caution’. The caution is thus a constitutive, formal mechanism which frames
the interview, marking and delimiting it for the legal institution. The caution is also an
important component of the interactional work undertaken by interview participants to
accomplish what has been called ‘intertextual framing’ or framing within an interaction
through which text-types are related to one another (MacLachlan and Reid 1994: 13).
Oﬃcers themselves recognise this framing function describing reciting the caution as
being like putting a ﬂag up and saying ‘right now the investigation starts’ and they use the
caution along with a range of linguistic and paralinguistic measures to accomplish framing
throughout the interview (Rock 2007: 287–92). This form of words will have been read,
recited and heard repeatedly by the interviewing oﬃcer. Knowing the caution is seen by
police oﬃcers as an important marker of their professional identity, as one oﬃcer put it, a
tool of the trade. You might like to consider how you would memorise this written
formulation:
You do not have to say anything. But it may harm your defence if you do not
mention when questioned something which you later rely on in Court. Anything
you do say may be given in evidence.
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
129

The caution inﬂuences interviews most obviously by imbuing words and silences with
signiﬁcances which diﬀer dramatically from those attached to them in other settings
(Ainsworth 2008; Shuy 1997). Readers who know something of the legal system in the
USA will note that this form of words expresses similar content to the ‘Miranda warnings’
(see Ainsworth, this volume), which, like the Caution, convey a right not to self-incriminate,
but they also state the right to an attorney. This right to legal advice is not missing from
the British criminal justice system – suspects should be oﬀered free, independent legal
advice repeatedly throughout pre-interview detention (Police and Criminal Evidence Act,
1984: S.58) – but it is not expressed through a formulaic wording. Miranda warnings,
along with cautions in most other jurisdictions, are also diﬀerent from this ‘caution’ in
oﬀering an unqualiﬁed right of silence. The qualiﬁcation provided in England and Wales
by the middle sentence above was introduced in the mid 1990s, intended to deter suspects
from being silent in interview but then fabricating a story in time for any court attendance.
Whether it has been successful is a legal matter, although police oﬃcers’ reported scepti-
cism about this is unlikely to be insigniﬁcant to their speech activities in interview. From a
linguistic, sociolinguistic and pragmatic perspective, we can usefully investigate what hap-
pens to the caution when it enters police interviews and how it aﬀects those interactions
and the participants involved, as I will illustrate below.
As well as the meaning and function of the caution, the form of the wording is also
inﬂuential (Gibbons 2001b; Cotterill 2000). When the wording was ﬁrst debated in the
House of Lords, one peer remarked, ‘I ask the house to consider very carefully whether
this is a comprehensible set of words’ (Hansard, 23 February 1995, in: Woods 2006: 103).
Procedure enshrined in the Codes of Practice acknowledges potential shortcomings of the
wording by informing oﬃcers that ‘If it appears a person does not understand the caution,
the person giving it should explain it in their own words’ (Home Oﬃce 2008: 37). In this
way, oﬃcers are taken out of the role of animator, i.e. of simply uttering the words
authored by the Government, and put into the author role, as they ‘take the local envir-
onment and the local hearership into consideration’ (Goﬀman 1981a: 255). Police oﬃcers’
explanations of the caution exemplify literacy practices through which they work on
written information in relation to the task at hand. Some always explain it in the same
way; others innovate, tailoring their explanations to the suspect in front of them. Thus
these explanations also illustrate recontextualisation – oﬃcers transfer meaning from the
written text into a new context which they come to constitute by establishing expecta-
tions, commenting on the source text and conﬁrming or challenging it. Contextualisation
cues or ‘surface features … by which speakers signal and listeners interpret what the activity
is, how semantic content is to be understood and how each sentence relates to what precedes
or follows’ (Gumperz 1982: 131) ﬁgure here too as we will see.
The police oﬃcers in the two extracts below, both speaking at the beginning of
separate interviews – one in England, one in Wales – recontextualise the caution in ways
which illustrate how the shift in participant roles, from animator to author and the shift
from reciting a monologic, written wording to delivering a lesser- or un-scripted dialo-
gue (we cannot be sure which) allow the police oﬃcers to accomplish a great deal
beyond oﬃcial cautioning work:
(1) Oﬃcer 1
1 IR:
before we go any further (.) I must caution you (.) that is I must tell you
that you do not have to say anything [states whole caution] do you
understand that caution (then)
FRANCES ROCK
130

2 IE:
yeah
3 IR:
I don’t wish to be awkward but can you just explain to me what it means
to you so that I know you understand it
4 IE:
it means (.) if I don’t (.) ur open my mouth at court and say something I
didn’t say (.) previously they’ll want to know (.) why (.) I haven’t uh
given them this new piece of information (.) and why-why it wasn’t
mentioned before
5 IR:
yeah that’s (.) that’s the majority of it (.) good as- good an explanation as
I’ve heard so far
6 Both:
laugh
7 IR:
just- just to remind you =
8 IE:
= consider I’m coming up for the-
9 Both:
((laugh))
10 IR:
just to reiterate and re-emphasise the ﬁrst bit you do not have to say
anything alright (.) so what you said there (.) anything that you later m-(.)
mention (.) could go against you if you don’t mention it now but bit the
ﬁrst bit-it’s a right and entitlement you don’t have to say anything I’m
going ask you a few questions (.) it’s up to you whether you answer them
or not the second bit as you say (.) spot on and the third bit is: anything
you do say may be given in evidence anything you say it’s on this tape (.)
we know it’s you speaking it can be played in court as evidence
11 IE:
yeah
(2) Oﬃcer 2
1 IR:
before I’m allowed to ask you any questions Darren I’ve got to caution
you and the caution goes like this you do not have to say anything
((states whole caution)) um I’m going to explain what that means to you
and that means this (.) the questions that I’m about to ask you during this
interview (.) you have Darren a legal right not to answer those if you
don’t want to I can’t make you answer those questions if you wanted to
you could sit there and jus-just stare at the walls I don’t personally advise
that you do that but that’s your right
2 IE:
yep
3 IR:
okay do you under-you understand that
4 IE:
I understand yeah
5 IR:
okay the second part of the caution Darren means this but it may harm
your defence if you do not mention when questioned you’re only going
to get questioned by me once and that’s now okay? something which
you later rely on in court and what that means is this if you tell me nowt
((i.e. nothing)) during this interview now which has been indicated by
Mr Harris ((solicitor)) and then if this matter went to court you decided
to tell the court something diﬀerent the court might be less inclined in
certain-certain circumstances to believe you they might think to them-
selves well why didn’t he say that to the police at the time do you
understand that
6 IE:
I understand
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
131

7 IR:
now anything you do decide to tell me (.) is obviously recorded on that
interview tape and I can tell the magistrates if it goes to court what
you’ve said alright
8 IE:
yeah
In both oﬃcers’ talk we can see evidence of a cautioning routine which is typical of this
explanation activity. This routine involves stating the oﬃcial wording, providing an
explanation and seeking to assess comprehension at various stages. Both oﬃcers begin
similarly in that they contextualise the caution as part of police procedure and a felicity
condition of interview. In extract (1), this is accomplished through before we go any further
where pronoun choice and the journey metaphor (Lakoﬀ1988: 435–40) combine to
convey that the oﬃcer and interviewee are, to some extent, in things together. Extract
(2) on the other hand sees oﬃcial procedures invoked and problematised as a prelude to
cautioning as the oﬃcer asserts before I’m allowed to ask you any questions … I’ve got to
caution you. These opening orientations, I suggest, develop throughout each explana-
tion – the explanations are not simply neutral regurgitations of ‘facts’ presented in the
caution, rather through them the oﬃcers orient to the upcoming interview and to the
suspect and, potentially, establish context and relational positionings for the interview.
Oﬃcer 1, whose opening was broadly conciliatory, apparently recognises that asking
someone to explain something just said is inherently threatening to both the positive face
want to be viewed as competent and thus approved of and the negative face want to be
unimpeded by requests for talk (Brown and Levinson 1987). He therefore mitigates his
request or plays down its face threat (Fraser 1980). He does this throughout turn 3,
explaining that his request is not mischievous, but rather in the suspect’s interest. Further
mitigation follows in turns 7 and 10 when the oﬃcer’s own explanation is presented as a
reminder (turn 7) and reiteration (turn 9) and minimised, in both cases, through just. In
turn 5, the oﬃcer develops his presentation of self and cooperative orientation to the
suspect by delivering an extremely positive graded evaluation (Hunston and Sinclair
2000: 92) of the suspect’s words, through a comparative adjective group, as good … as
which compares the suspect’s explanation to all others that the oﬃcer has ever heard.
The oﬃcer’s explanation, though it might be felt to be a little incoherent in places, also
attends to the suspect by acknowledging him and anaphorically referring to his con-
tribution (what you said there), foregrounding the suspect’s autonomy by presenting
choices about the exercise of rights as up to you and providing further evaluation of the
suspect’s explanation as spot on. The integration of the evaluation into the oﬃcer’s
explanation heightens the sense that the oﬃcer is attending to the suspect.
Oﬃcer 2, on the other hand, seems to develop the rather confrontational stance he
had established through his ﬁrst turn’s orientation to rules and restrictions on interview-
ing. After stating the caution, he does not query the suspect’s comprehension, implying
that the suspect is unlikely to understand completely or at all. This implicature is devel-
oped by the oﬃcer’s bald on record (Brown and Levinson 1987: 94–101) statement that
he will explain and his failure to seek to establish whether this is required. Maintaining
silence during a police interview is extremely diﬃcult due to the pressure of the second
part of the question and answer pair that is so central to interviewing. This oﬃcer appears
to alleviate this diﬃculty for the suspect by suggesting a way to be silent sit there and …
stare at the walls. However the choice of just here, along with the personal criticism of this
strategy casts perhaps the only viable way to be silent in a police interview (say nothing
and look away from the interviewer) extremely negatively. The use of the suspect’s ﬁrst
FRANCES ROCK
132

name early in turns 1 and 5 does not appear motivated by a need to establish recipiency
as the addressee is clear from the interview context and co-text. Darren indeed appears
multifunctional indexing power relations through its position and stance through its
selection in preference to a V form, possibilities usefully discussed in relation to political
interviews by Rendle-Short (2007: 1521–22). Through what might be seen as a marked
address term (Jaworski and Galasin´ski 2004) the oﬃcer can be said to assert his position
in relation to the suspect and his orientation to the information which follows. The
details of the explanation are also telling. In turn 5, the oﬃcer stresses that questioning is
a unique opportunity (you’re only going to get questioned by me once and that’s now) with the
implication that this is an opportunity worth taking. This possible encouragement to
talk is supported later in the same turn by the oﬃcer’s placement of reference to the
solicitor’s advice which implies critique of that advice.
The existence of a right to silence inﬂuences police interviews with suspects because it
establishes discourse rules about how silence and speech should be interpreted and
formalises ways of resisting cooperation with the police, through an explicit rights invo-
cation in the USA or the use of silence in the UK. However, as I have shown, the way
that oﬃcers deliver the right during the Engage and Explain phase is also inﬂuential. In
the UK, the opportunity for the interviewing oﬃcer to engage in exchanges ostensibly
aiming to explain the caution allows space for some innovative and apparently helpful
explanation of a crucial right, but, as the extracts above show, also provides for powerful
discoursal work. Aﬃliation in cautioning can be just as potent as disaﬃliation. This
illustrates Bauman and Briggs’s point that examining recontextualisation can reveal
‘diﬀerential legitimacy in claims to and use of texts, diﬀerential competence in use of
texts and diﬀerential values attached to various types of text’ (Bauman and Briggs 1990: 76).
Furthermore cautioning sits uncomfortably in the Engage and Explain phase. In turn 8 of
extract 1 the suspect says ‘consider I’m coming up for’, indicating shared knowledge
about the suspect’s legal situation and the place of this interview in that situation,
knowledge which cannot be acknowledged within the cautioning procedure.
Writing which is taken from interviews
Moving from the passage of texts into interview during the Engage and Explain phase of
the PEACE structure, the Account phase sees crime narratives elicited and processed so
that words can be entextualised and pass out of interview. This places serious cognitive
demands on both interviewers and interviewees. Interviewers will undertake a range of
activities including listening, devising questions, delivering questions, reacting to answers,
writing notes on points for clariﬁcation, writing a statement, holding in mind prior
utterances, imagining a crime context, reading texts produced by them and others before
and during the interview. They will also engage in a range of identity-related activities,
such as showing empathy and encouraging disclosure, and in procedural activities, such as
ensuring that the interview complies with legal requirements in terms of its duration.
Interviewees too will potentially listen and respond to questions, deliver narratives, write
or draw (for example mapping a crime location) and undertake a range of strategies for
activating short- and long-term memories sometimes with the interviewer’s help. In
addition, the interviewee may have to work with a range of emotions during the inter-
view such as fear, anger and guilt. Ultimately, both participants share in the reﬂexive
capacity of entextualisation as they ‘render stretches of discourse discontinuous with their
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
133

discursive surround, thus making them into coherent, eﬀective and memorable texts’
(Bauman and Briggs 1990: 74). I will now investigate this account phase as it occurs in
interviews with a witness. I focus on a witness rather than a suspect interview, as in the
previous section, because these involve fewer participants. This makes it easier to main-
tain the current foci, transformation and literacies. Note that witnesses, unlike suspects,
are not cautioned. The caution is a protection against self-incrimination and therefore
assumed unnecessary unless demonstrated otherwise.
The extracts below are from an interview with a ‘signiﬁcant’ witness. This is a category
of witness identiﬁed by the police as needing a particularly thorough, highly proceduralised
interview. This may be because they have seen a serious crime, such as murder, or
experienced one, such as rape, or because they might, in due course, become suspected of
the crime under investigation. The signiﬁcant witness interview has two key characteristics:
ﬁrst, it is likely to be conducted by a police oﬃcer with specialist training and, unlike other
witness interviews, it will be audio-recorded. In addition to the audio-recording, a written
statement will be produced to be signed by the witness as a true record of the event as is
routine in Anglo-Welsh witness interviews. Even in relation to signiﬁcant witnesses, the
written statement, rather than recording, may become the main reference text during sub-
sequent investigations, due to its brevity. Thus, written statements have the power to shape
investigations, court proceedings and beyond as they are recontextualised through use in
those settings. Recontextualisation of the witness’s story begins in the witness interview.
Through the interview process the witness’s experience of a crime event is mediated by
such factors as their selective accounting (for whatever reason) (Holmberg 2004), their
transformation of their experience into talk, as well as the interviewer’s mental representa-
tion of the witness’s words and entextualisation of the witness’s words as they convert talk
to text (Komter 2006; Gibbons 2001a). Most of these transformational processes are not
observable. We cannot study how objectively the witness encodes their experience, as we
did not observe the source event and, even if we had, we could not share their perspective.
Likewise, we cannot observe the interviewer’s mental processing of the words they hear.
We can, however, observe entextualisation. By comparing an audio-recording of a police
interview with the resulting written statement we can trace the intertextual processes
apparent in spoken negotiation. Comparison can also reveal diﬀerences between the spoken
interview and the written statement. Police interviews themselves are comprised of multiple
recontextualisations because during the interview the oﬃcer and witness talk through the
narrative several times thereby producing spoken versions which are each diﬀerent ( Johnson
2008b). Oﬃcers will typically seek to elicit an initial narrative and will subsequently probe
that narrative in order to expand on the initial account, to check and test details and to
construct a written version in real time using this talk. In the case of the extracts below,
four versions were produced (Rock 2001 elaborates):
Version 1:
The witness’s account, delivered with minimal intervention by the
police oﬃcer. The witness narrates the whole event as he sees it and
the police oﬃcer asks just three questions.
Version 2:
The interviewer asks 257 questions which elicit a more detailed but less
chronological account. The interviewer makes copious notes throughout
this version.
Version 3:
The interviewer feeds back information from his notes to the inter-
viewee, seeking conﬁrmation or expansion whilst expanding his notes
yet focusing them into a statement.
FRANCES ROCK
134

Version 4:
The interviewer reads the ﬁnal statement aloud, requesting conﬁrma-
tion and occasional extra details throughout (Stokoe and Edwards
2008).
This talk results in a written statement.
Using the notion of literacies as social practices, we can observe that this recontextuali-
sation is constitutive and purposive. The examples below illustrate details of transformational
processes in the police interview by presenting dialogic sections from interviews accom-
panied by the resulting written text. Line numbers indicate each extract’s position in the
original interview. Errors in the written statement are as in the original.
In extracts (3) and (4), below, the oﬃcer and witness discuss the layout of a house in
which a murder was committed. Extract (3) is from version 2 during which the oﬃcer
pursues details. Extract (4) is from version 4 when the statement is ﬁnalised:
(3) From version 2:
177 IR:
describe the man’s house and stuﬀinside
178 IE:
… ((description of objects in the house)) …
179 IR:
he owns the ﬂat
180 IE:
he owns the ﬂat yeah
181 IR:
okay um is it a house (.) or is it a like a ﬂat =
182 IE:
= it’s like it’s like a it’s
a house but it’s like put it like two (.) two houses sort of put it as a ﬂat
183 IR:
two ﬂoors yeah
184 IE:
yeah
185 IR:
okay and which ﬂoor is his house on =
186 IE:
= he’s he’s on the top
(4) From version 4:
751 IR:
when you get to the top of the stairs where are you
752 IE:
urm when you get to the top of the stairs you have to take (.) a right
753 IR:
(3.9) yeah
754 IE:
and then you have to-when you take a right there’s a (.) you got (.) got a
door-door on your left door on the right (.) and a door in front of you
but we went (.) in the door on the right
755 IR:
and what room was that =
756 IE:
= that was the living room
In extract (3), the oﬃcer seeks a description and provides prompts around ownership of
the man’s home, its status as ﬂat or house and its location within a larger building. The
oﬃcer and witness do not return to this until around an hour later in the statement-
making session, when the oﬃcer is drafting text during version 4. Then, as illustrated in
extract (4), the oﬃcer requests information about the ﬂat’s layout and receives not only
that but also an implicit description of the witness’s movement through the property.
Extract (5), below, shows how the information from extracts (3) and (4) was incorporated
into the written statement:
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
135

(5) From the written statement:
When we got to the mans [sic] house we went in [sic] it is a ﬂat on the 1st ﬂoor …
To enter the ﬂat you climb up the stairs turn right into the living room.
The witness’s suggestion to put it like two (.) two houses … put it as a ﬂat (Extract (3), turn
182) is a spoken answer to a spoken question. Yet the witness orients to the literate
dimension of the interaction. He does this by making a direct suggestion about how the
oﬃcer should formulate his text even though this was not the explicit focus of the
question.
As for the oﬃcer, his ongoing, attentive writing activities are apparent in the way his
written texts relate to the talk as he weaves information from the early and later parts of
the interview. Some of that information is introduced by the witness, the notion of a ﬂat,
a word which is incorporated into the statement, and the location of that ﬂat on the ﬁrst
ﬂoor, for which the witness uses the formulation top ﬂoor. Other information is provided
by the oﬃcer on the basis of inference. To illustrate, add the two extracts below to
extracts (3) to (5), above:
(6) From version 1:
4 IE:
we went to his house anyway and he (.) he invited us in and we was like
saw some girls and that and so (.) went up to the house which-(.) the girls
(knew) everybody-everybody else there (.) went to the house (.) started
having a laugh
(7) From version 2:
175 IR:
when you got to the house what happened
176 IE:
just talking (.) and laughing and all that and having a little mess about
In both of these extracts, the witness describes his arrival at the murder scene without
specifying how he entered the victim’s home or to the house’s layout, instead noting the
invitation to enter and activities inside. Indeed, throughout the interview there is no
direct mention of having got to the top of the stairs until the oﬃcer introduces this in
line 752 (extract (4)) very close to the end of the interview in the ﬁnal version of the
narrative. Thus, the oﬃcer has inserted details of location which will no doubt help
readers who are downstream in the criminal justice process but does not represent events
exactly as the witness did. The oﬃcer also shapes the description of the victim’s home
through the questions he asks (Cederborg 2002: 163). The witness might not have
identiﬁed the house as a ﬂat without the oﬃcer’s intervention because elsewhere he
recounts having used the word house to denote the property whilst at the crime scene on
the day of the murder. A ﬁnal feature of the transformational processes here is that some
of the information is lost in the ﬁnal version. The oﬃcer asked about ownership of the
ﬂat in line 179 but, despite the witness’s conﬁdent answer, this information does not
materialise in the ﬁnal statement.
What are the implications of this? Is there a cost, for example, to acting on the
witness’s voice (Maryns 2006; Trinch and Berk-Seligson 2002: 410–11)? Whilst the
transformational processes described above have inﬂuenced the formulation of the
written statement, it is not clear whether this inﬂuence will be adverse and if so for
whom (Hill 2003). The degree to which witnesses are represented in their statements
FRANCES ROCK
136

is, however, not just a triviality (Jönsson and Linell 1991; Hunt and Borgida 2001).
Witnesses’ statements can be presented to courts and form the basis of examination, with
any discrepancies being highlighted in court, potentially to the great detriment of the
witness’s testimony (Thornborrow 2002: 56–58). The extracts below illustrate just one
way in which this can become a problem. In extract (8), the oﬃcer and witness have
been discussing an encounter, at some shops, between the witness and the suspects
shortly after the alleged murder. The witness explains that he was talking to a local
woman when this conversation began:
(8) From version 3:
363 IR:
just tell me about the conversation you had at the shop
364 IE:
well I was talk-I was talking to ur (.) is this this woman (.) saying ur (.)
talking about what was it now urm (.) I can’t remember what I was talking
about properly (.) just come-was just one of those one-oﬀconversations
just (on like that)
365 IR:
which woman is this
366 IE:
um l-oh well local woman
In version 4 (extract (9)), as the oﬃcer is ﬁnalising the statement, he refers again to the
woman who was introduced by the witness in version 3, linking her to the presence of
the suspects:
(9) From version 4:
657 IR:
they caught up with you by the shops (.) and said look what he’s done to
my hand and you could see that Dave had a deep cut in the middle of his
right palm and it was bleeding =
658 IE:
= yeah =
659 IR:
= but it wasn’t bleeding that bad
you were talking to local woman at the shop you don’t know her name
This woman is potentially an important additional source of information and, according to
the witness, a feature of the events for him. Her presence in version 4 is therefore not
surprising as it indicates that the oﬃcer will incorporate mention of her into the ﬁnal statement.
However, in fact she is totally absent from the ﬁnal statement as extract (10) shows:
(10) From ﬁnal statement:
As I got down the stairs they were coming down behind me they caught up with
us by the shops the oﬄicence [sic].
David showed us his hand with a cut small but deep to the palm of his right
hand, he said look what hes [sic] done to my hand, it was bleeding.
This absence potentially loses an important evidential lead and leaves the witness vul-
nerable to confusion during cross-examination in any subsequent court appearance.
These processes are ubiquitous in witness statements and eﬀorts to understand them will
show how recontextualisation can impact on the experiences of victims and witnesses.
Interviewers are aware of and articulate about the inﬂuence of transformational pro-
cesses on police interviews, as Bauman and Briggs have observed ‘participants themselves
WITNESSES AND SUSPECTS IN INTERVIEWS
137

may be directly and strongly concerned with the social management of entextualisation,
decontextualisation and recontextualisation’ (Bauman and Briggs 1990: 74). Here an
oﬃcer describes how this aﬀects his work during investigations, when he uses statements
from police oﬃcers recounting their own experiences:
all you can go by I mean is what it says in statements obviously when you read a
statement it can be diﬀerent to what’s happened out on the street I mean when
they write a statement it’s detailed but what may have occurred and took maybe
10 15 minutes to sort out you’ll have in 2 pages well 2 pages in detail isn’t going to
cover 15 minutes so you don’t always realise exactly what’s gone on.
(Author’s data)
For him, even the ﬁrst person transformation of experience implies processes which act
on information. Interestingly, he added that his own literacy practices in using these
abbreviated texts might involve contacting the police oﬃcer to seek an extended verbal
account and thus, as an investigator, entering the transformational process himself.
Conclusion
The two ideas of chains of texts and of literacies provide a valuable perspective on police
interviews by highlighting their situatedness and their reliance on entextualisation
through negotiated talk. Police interviews are inﬂuenced by the texts which constitute
and deﬁne them and which constitute and deﬁne the linguistic and paralinguistic activities
which they comprise. Police interviews in turn inﬂuence legal practices and processes
both investigative and judicial yet the mechanisms through which many of those interviews
are converted into written format requires much further research.
Further reading
Aronsson, K. (1991) ‘Social interaction and the recycling of legal evidence’, in N. Coupland, H. Giles
and J. Wiemann (eds), Miscommunication and Problematic Talk, London: Sage, 215–43.
Gibbons, J. (2001b) ‘Revising the language of New South Wales police procedures: Applied linguistics
in action’, Applied Linguistics, 22: 439–69.
Jönsson, L. and Linell, P. (1991) ‘Story generations: From dialogical interviews to written reports in
police interrogations’, Text, 11: 419–40.
Shuy, R. (1997) ‘Ten unanswered language questions about Miranda’, Forensic Linguistics, 4: 51–73.
FRANCES ROCK
138

10
Sexual offences
Negotiating paedophilia in the
investigative interview: the construction
of sexual offences against children
Kelly Benneworth
Introduction
Signiﬁcant developments in police interviewing practice in the UK have been fuelled by
psychological research. Studies have acknowledged the coercive and oppressive features
of the traditional adversarial police interrogation (Shepherd 1991; Mortimer 1994;
Moston and Stephenson 1993; Williamson 1993) and given rise to the ethical PEACE
investigative interview, the rationale for which is outlined in A Practical Guide to Investi-
gative Interviewing (National Crime Faculty 2000). In addition to the PEACE protocol of
inviting suspects, witnesses and victims of crime to provide uninterrupted accounts of
their experiences using open and fair questioning (Clarke and Milne 2001; Griﬃths and
Milne 2005; Milne and Bull 1999), research has also informed the evolution of the
Cognitive Interview, which integrates psychological principles to aid witness accuracy
and recall (Fisher and Geiselman 1992; Fisher et al. 1989; Geiselman et al. 1986).
There is a penchant in psychology for examining investigative interviewing by
distilling interview data, cataloguing interview techniques and quantifying responses to
questioning. Few studies have adopted detailed, qualitative methods of enquiry to
explore how investigative interviewing is put into practice. Methodological approaches
such as sociolinguistics, ethnomethodology, conversation analysis and discourse analysis,
emerged in opposition to empiricist psychology and sociology and favoured the in-
depth, interpretative analysis of naturally occurring interactions. Discourse analysis in
particular has examined how competing versions of criminal oﬀences are negotiated and
co-constructed in the police interview. Watson (1990) examined the interactional struc-
ture of US murder interrogations and noted police interviewers asserting their inﬂuence
on suspect testimony. Through the use of knowledge claims, such as ‘we also know about
the gun in the Morris homicide’ (Watson 1990: 266), oﬃcers bolstered facticity and
ensured that simple denials were insuﬃcient to counter accusations. Linell and Jönsson
(1991) observed a clash between the ‘everyday life’ perspective of suspects and the ‘pro-
fessional’ perspective of the police in Swedish interviews with individuals suspected of
139

economic oﬀences. Their ﬁndings demonstrated how the professional perspective domi-
nated interactions as oﬃcers asked closed questions, narrowly deﬁned conditions for
answering, and provided reformulations of the suspects’ responses. In a UK police
interview with a suspect accused of violent assault, Auburn et al. (1999) explored the
discursive resources used by an oﬃcer to manufacture a ‘preferred version’ of events. The
oﬃcer in (1) indicates doubt following an account of a woman accused of seriously
injuring her partner:
(1) (Extract from Auburn et al. 1999: 51)
1 IR:
[suspect’s name] you are (.)
2
I believe ﬁrst that you’re not actually being
3
honest with your self and with us
4
in fact I don’t believe that you’re actually
5
telling the truth
6 IE:
I am telling you the truth
7 IR:
Now [name a] has been stabbed twice
8
and he’s been bitten on the nose
9 IE:
Yeah
10 IR:
He’s in hospital now
11 IE:
mmmh
12 IR:
I believe that you are the person who have
13
actually inﬂicted those stab wounds to [name a]
14
now think carefully (.) and answer the question
15
honestly
16 IE:
No I didn’t do it
Auburn et al. observed a three-part organisation of disbelief in the talk of the police
oﬃcer, ﬁrst indicated in lines 2–5, as the interviewer discounts the version of events
provided by suspect. The oﬃcer accuses the suspect of not only being dishonest with the
institutional ‘us’ but also engaging in self-deception. The oﬃcer then upgrades the
accusation by replacing the indirect ‘you’re not actually being honest with your self and
with us’ with an overt accusation of dishonesty, ‘I don’t believe that you’re actually
telling the truth’ (lines 4–5). The oﬃcer implies that an objective truth exists into which
the known facts ﬁt and that the accused and the accuser possess this information. Fol-
lowing the suspect’s denial in line 6, the oﬃcer instructs the suspect to reconsider, ‘think
carefully (.) and answer the question honestly’ (lines 14–15). The interviewer creates an
expectation that the discrepancy between the accounts of the suspect and police oﬃcer
should be resolved through an amendment of the suspect’s original account.
In Dutch police interviews with individuals accused of theft, Komter (2003) charts the
progression of an oﬃcer’s distrust in a suspect’s version of events, from questioning the
plausibility of the account with reference to commonsense notions of events and respon-
ses, to encouraging the suspect to admit to downgraded versions of the oﬀence. This need
for a detailed, explicit, institutionally preferred version of events has been explained by
Gibbons (2003) as a ‘pursuit of precision’. Due to the inﬂuential nature of legal formula-
tions, such as whether a killing is described as murder or manslaughter, Gibbons claims that
oﬃcers adopt a formal, over-elaborate vocabulary, such as ‘I was proceeding down the
highway in a south easterly direction’ rather than ‘I was walking down the road’ (Gibbons
2003: 85), to eliminate misinterpretation in the criminal justice system.
KELLY BENNEWORTH
140

Heydon (2005) claims that the formal communication adopted by oﬃcers in Australian
police–suspect interviews reﬂects the negotiation of power relations. The unwillingness of
the interviewers to deviate from oﬃcial language whilst maintaining the conversational
ﬂoor serves to constrain suspects’ responses. These observations are supported by Johnson
(2006: 666) who describes police talk as a clash between the legislative and the conversa-
tional, with interviewers moving between the two discourses. For example, the conversational
‘taken money’ is used in conjunction with the legislative ‘appropriates property’. Johnson
claims that oﬃcial terminology is necessary to conﬁrm the occurrence of a criminal oﬀence
and achieve the goal of the interview. More recently, Edwards (2008) explores the dis-
course of intentionality (or mens rea in legal terms) in UK police–suspect interviews.
Establishing intent regarding the consequences of a criminal act is an essential feature of
police interviewing and oﬃcers are required to conﬁrm whether intent represented pre-
meditation or ‘recklessness’. In one interview, a 16-year-old accused of damaging a car
admits that he ‘smashed the back window’ then revises his account by claiming that he
‘punched the window’. As ‘punch’ suggests an action without an eﬀect, the interviewer
needs to establish whether there was an eﬀect and what degree of intent the suspect had
regarding that eﬀect. The interviewer asks ‘What was y’r pur:pose when y’punched the
window,hhh’ and ‘Did you inte:nd to cause any damage to the window of the car’, to
which the suspect replies ‘No not really’. Edwards demonstrates that intentionality is a
social practice managed and negotiated over the course of an interaction and speakers
negotiate how a criminal oﬀence should be described.
In the investigative interview, what is at stake is a version of events which is negotiated
by a suspect and a police oﬃcer. The studies outlined previously have identiﬁed dis-
cursive devices used by oﬃcers to co-construct oﬀences in interviews with individuals
suspected of murder, violent assault, criminal damage and theft. Very few studies have
examined whether these resources are also evident in cases of child sexual abuse. Alle-
gations of sexual abuse often rely on the testimonies of two individuals, an adult and a
child, so obtaining thorough and accurate statements is vital for the progression of the
investigation. There is a need for a detailed understanding of how sexual oﬀences against
children are constructed in the investigative interview and whether qualitative analysis
can be applied to the talk of suspected child sex oﬀenders.
Investigative interviews with suspected sex offenders
The author’s research focused on a corpus of tape-recorded and transcribed police
interviews with suspected oﬀenders in relation to sexual oﬀences against children. Inter-
views had been tape-recorded as part of the requirements of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 (PACE). Analysis of the corpus revealed two distinct approaches
to the questioning of individuals suspected of sexual oﬀences against children, which I
have termed ‘closed’ interviewing and ‘open’ interviewing. These two approaches had
implications for how the relationships between the suspects and alleged victims were
constructed, how the interaction progressed and how the investigative interview was
concluded. To explore these approaches in more detail, the point at which the emo-
tional and/or physical relationship between the suspect and the alleged victim was ﬁrst
mentioned was identiﬁed. These descriptions and the surrounding talk were then
examined using discourse analysis to explore how the accounts evolved during the
interview.
SEXUAL OFFENCES
141

‘Closed’ interviewing
The police ofﬁcer’s narrative
In a selection of the police interviews there was evidence of questioning characterised by
the police interviewer (IR) generating a prolonged account of the oﬀence which
involved sexual and legal terminology and minimal suspect intervention, as in (2).
(2)
1 IR:
Okay, what Vicky is saying is that you went
2
towards her bed and started to push her out of
3
her bed which she landed on the ﬂoor on the
4
other side, to which then you went round and
5
she remembers banging her head on the wall, she
6
landed on her back umm and again she was
7
wearing knickers. She can’t recall what you
8
were wearing. And that you then proceeded to
9
take hold of her arms with one of your hands
10
and held them behind her head, before doing
11
that you got hold of her legs and put them over
12
your shoulders? With one hand holding h-her
13
arms behind her head you then took your penis
14
with your other hand and inserted it into her
15
vagina.
All of the prolonged police narratives share commonalities. They commence immedi-
ately after the interview preliminaries and produce an average of 64 words per turn. The
IRs construct ‘bodily’ accounts using graphic discourse, making the sexual nature of the
oﬀences explicit from the onset. For example: ‘you then took your penis with your
other hand and inserted it into her vagina’ ((2), lines 13–15); ‘you were masturbating
yourself you would be watching pornographic videos’; ‘your erect penis was clearly
visible’; ‘rubbing action from her knee upwards to her towards her thigh area’;
and ‘started to play with his genitals’. This provides further evidence of the language of
precision in police talk, also encouraged in the suspects’ versions of events (Benneworth
2009; Gibbons 2003; Heydon 2005; Johnson 2006; Komter 2003).
The narratives include detail relating to the level of sexual development and age of the
child, such as ‘this is going back to a time when she’s not developed properly’ and
‘Charlotte actually said it’s been going on since she was four or ﬁve’. The IRs conﬁrm
that there has been sexual contact and with a child, immediately rendering any account
of a relationship as criminal. One narrative also suggests that the alleged victim was a
fearful recipient of the suspect’s attention, ‘she said that she felt scared’. The narratives
feature accounts spoken ‘on behalf of’ the victims in the third person and often in the
present (progressive) tense, ‘what Vicky is saying is that you went towards her bed’ (1, lines
1–2), ‘What Sarah does describe is that umm she would regularly go into your house’, ‘Beth
describes umm an incident that she said happened some time last year’, ‘Matthew is saying
that umm on the ﬁrst occasion that he went round to your house’, and ‘Charlotte actually
said it’s been going on since she was four or ﬁve’. The IRs even attribute explicit and
legally precise sexual discourse to the alleged victims. For example, from the ‘account’ of
KELLY BENNEWORTH
142

a 13-year-old, ‘what Vicky is saying is … took your penis … ’ (1), from an 8-year-old,
‘she says you were masturbating … ’ and ‘she says … your erect penis … ’ and a
12-year-old, ‘he said … play with his genitals’.
The IR’s preference for speaking on behalf of the victim is frequently accompanied by
the use of ‘direct’ quotation, ‘he wouldn’t stop what he was doing he’d just carry on
masturbating’, ‘in her own words what she saw on the video in case he tried to do that
with me’, ‘he would cuddle me and kiss me on the mouth he would then try and get his
tongue into my mouth. I’d hold my mouth tight’, ‘he would try and undo my trousers
and I’d be shaking he’d start kissing me’, and ‘he’s been touching me and feeling me and
things’. Direct reported speech, in this case the IRs’ use of ‘he’ to denote the suspect and
‘me’ to denote the alleged victim, is interactionally salient. Edwards (1997) claims that
direct reported speech achieves a sense of perceptual re-experience to bolster the fac-
tuality of a claim and Clift and Holt (2007) consider direct reported speech to perform an
evidential function, enabling recipients to access utterances they would not normally
access. In this case, suspects are presented with the allegations of their victims. In a recent
study of a notorious Italian murder case, Galatolo (2007: 207) states that ‘the ability to
recall the exact proﬀered words is generally interpreted as being evidence of having
directly and eﬀectively heard those words’ and this gives the interviewer an advantage
over the suspect who is simply presented with these facts.
The suspect’s denial
Suspects do respond to these elaborate interviewer narratives, however, and when they
do, they consistently refute the accusations. Given the absence of explicit invitations from
the IRs, it is crucial to examine how and where the suspects take the opportunity to
deny the allegations and explore how the IRs negotiate the suspects’ (IEs) denials. The
provision of a prolonged account by the IR eliminates the need for the IE to negotiate
blame. However, on a number of occasions, denials materialise during the oﬃcers’
developing narratives, as in (3).
(3)
1 IR:
She said can’t really remember it’s been going
2
on for quite a while uh and she talked about
3
recently the Saturday the most recently the
4
Saturday before you went into hospital. So what
5
happened then. She says that you told her to go
6
go into the front room? You put your hands up
7
her top and you were messing about with her
8
boobs.
9 IE:
No, I’m sorry.
10 IR:
And she indicated actually under the clothing,
11
so you’re sort of inside, a vest or t-shirt or
12
whatever she was wearing.
The most frequent rebuttals are direct, succinct and lack elaboration, ‘No, I’m sorry’ ((3),
line 9), ‘That’s false’, ‘No way’, and ‘No’. Immediately before each of these denials, all of
the IRs had been describing the IEs involvement in sexual activity. In (3) the IE refutes
that he put his hands inside the victim’s clothing and was ‘messing about with her
SEXUAL OFFENCES
143

boobs’. In one interview, the IE denies forcing the child to perform a sexual act, ‘made
her suck your thingy’. In another, the IE disagrees with the allegation that he undressed
the alleged victim, ‘removed his trousers, and his-and his underwear’ and ‘started to play
with his genitals’. As demonstrated in (3) these denials are often not acknowledged by
the IRs, who proceed with their narratives often with the use of ‘And’ to retain the
ﬂoor. If we disregard the interjections of the IEs, the IRs’ adjacent turns represent con-
tinuous utterances, ‘You put your hands up her top and you were messing about with
her boobs//And she indicated actually under the clothing’ ((3), lines 6–10). The IRs do
not take the opportunity to pursue the denials with further questioning to establish
exactly which allegations the IEs are refuting.
The IEs also provide hypothetical denials, constructing a supposed account of normalised
behaviour to avoid explicitly admitting or denying the allegations. The denials utilise three
rhetorical devices: ‘would’, as in, ‘the ﬁrst thing I would do is cover up’, ‘I wouldn’t know
who it was’ and ‘If I did it would have been three or four years ago’; the ‘if-then’ structure,
for example, ‘if I was lying on or sitting in a chair masturbating and I heard my door go
(then) the ﬁrst thing I would do is cover up’ and ‘If I did (then) it would have been three or
four years ago’; and ‘because’, as in, ‘No ‘cos Simon was next door with the door wide
open?’ (4), ‘No. [because] If I did it would have been three or four years ago’ ((5), lines 1–2)
and ‘the ﬁrst thing I would do is cover up. Because I wouldn’t know who it was’. These
devices assert the implausibility of the allegations, undermining the logic of the IRs
account and subsequently the account of the alleged victim.
(4)
10 IE:
… and held them behind her head, before doing
11
that you got hold of her legs and put them over
12
your shoulders? With one hand holding her arms
13
behind her head you then took your penis with
14
your other hand and inserted it into her
15
vagina.
16 IE:
No ‘cos Simon was next door with the door wide
17
open?
18 IR:
She’s alleging that you inserted your penis
19
into her vagina and had sex with her.
The IRs are not deﬂected from telling the story by pursuing these explanations. The IR in
(4) repeats the previous allegation, ‘She’s alleging that you inserted your penis into her
vagina’ ((4), lines 18–19) and the IR in (5) simply continues the account, ‘She demon-
strates quite clearly the sort of a rubbing action from her knee upwards’ ((5), lines 1–2). In
another interview, the IR disputes the denial before returning to his narrative, ‘but she says
you do and that’s what the whole that’s what she’s saying’. The IRs do not permit the
hypothetical denials to become the focus of the interview. In each of the IRs’ subsequent
turns, the logical arguments of the IEs are terminated with an immediate switch from the
hypothetical to the observed, tangible actions of the IE, as in (5). ‘If’ and ‘would’ ((5),
line 1) are replaced by the categorical present tense ‘she demonstrates’ (line 3).
(5)
1 IE:
No. If I did it would have been three or four
2
years ago.
KELLY BENNEWORTH
144

3 IR:
She demonstrates quite clearly the sort of a
4
rubbing action from her knee upwards to her
5
towards her thigh area and she said when he did
6
that the skirt, sort of, came up higher toward-
7
towards her thigh. She said Mum was there and
8
she said Alice was there as well. And Mum had
9
shouted at you to stop being so rude. And told
10
you to get oﬀ. That you gave you-that you gave
11
her a kiss and it was on the lips she said that
12
she felt scared when you did this when you were
13
were rubbing her leg because of what she’d seen
14
on the videos that she’d watched with you uh in
15
her own words what she saw on the video in case
16
he tried to do that with me.
17 IE:
That’s not true.
The IRs conclude their narratives with statements addressing incidents of sexual contact
precipitated by the IEs, for example, ‘you inserted your penis into her vagina and had sex
with her’, ‘she recalled a number of occasions you would try and cover yourself up … but
she says soon as you realised it was her then you would carry on’, ‘you gave her a kiss and
it was on the lips … you were rubbing her leg’ and ‘he’d start kissing me … he’d then
undo my trousers in the hallway, he would start doing things, sucking my willy’. The
absence of a direct request for a response eliminates the need for the IE to provide an
explanation. Consequently, the IEs once again refute the IRs claims with outright denials,
‘That’s not true’ ((5), line 17), ‘No. I’m sorry no’, ‘No it didn’t happen’ ((6), line 20) and
‘No’. The IRs do not challenge the speakers or reintroduce the sexual allegations. Instead,
they seek to verify the denials by asking what I call ‘closing questions’.
The closing question
The closing questions permit the IRs to summarise the allegations and invite the IEs to
conﬁrm the IRs’ version of events, ‘I thought you were gonna say no hehh heh hehh.
So you deny that that took place’ ((6), lines 21–22), ‘Denying that that took place?’ ((7),
line 18) and in a further interview ‘So you’ve never masturbated yourself in front … of
Sarah?’.
(6)
18 IR:
She’s alleging that you inserted your penis
19
into her vagina and had sex with her.
20 IE:
No it didn’t happen
21 IR:
I thought you were gonna say no hehh heh hehh.
22
So you deny that that took place.
(7)
12 IR:
… she felt scared when you did this when you
13
were rubbing her leg because of what she’d seen
14
on the videos that she’d watched with you uh in
15
her own words what she saw on the video in case
SEXUAL OFFENCES
145

16
he tried to do that with me.
17 IE:
That’s not true.
18 IR:
Denying that that took place?
It appears that, for the ﬁrst time during the closed interviews, IEs are invited to con-
tribute to the interaction. However, the closing questions inhibit any forthcoming
response to a ‘yes/no’ conﬁrmation of the narrative and presuppose negative responses,
acknowledged in the responses: ‘thought you were gonna say no … so you deny … ’ ((6),
lines 21–22), ‘denying that took place?’ ((7), line 18), and ‘So you’ve never … ’. Johnson
(2006: 666) claims that the practice of ‘closing down’ an investigative interview high-
lights the diﬀerence between what the suspect considers important and what the police
require as evidence for prosecution. Johnson observes that, after questioning the suspect,
the oﬃcer ‘sums up’ the evidential facts of the interview by presenting the oﬀence,
which in the case of the interviews in (6) and (7) involves the declaratives: ‘you inserted
your penis into her vagina and had sex with her’ and ‘you were rubbing her leg’ for
veriﬁcation. Although some of these interviews appear ‘opened up’ to the suspect, the
ﬁnal questions close down the IRs’ opportunities to obtain the IEs’ version of events.
There is no need for the IEs to compromise themselves by telling their side of the story
and the IR narratives provide an occasion for the IE to deny the oﬀence. The IEs
provide negative responses and deny the IRs’ elaborate narratives, leaving them with
nothing to ‘work with’. The denials to closing questions are accepted by the IRs and
the interviews are terminated, as shown in ((6), lines 21–22) and ((7), 17–18), both
interviews closing after this point.
‘Open’ interviewing
The previous section demonstrates how a closed interviewing approach can shape
emerging descriptions of an oﬀence. A very diﬀerent style was also observed in which
the police interviewers used euphemistic language and encouraged prolonged accounts
from the suspects. This ‘opening up’ of the interviews to the suspects also had implications
for whether and how the oﬀences were described.
The opening question
When the open interviewing style was adopted, the IRs commenced by inviting the IEs
to contribute using open-ended preliminary questions (see (8) to (13)). These opening
questions occurred early in the interviews and represented the ﬁrst line of enquiry into
the dynamics between the IE and the alleged victim.
(8)
How did you view your relationship with Lucy as it developed?
(9)
Do you wanna tell me about what happened with Sam then?
(10)
Can you tell us about Emily then?
KELLY BENNEWORTH
146

(11)
Do you want to tell us about Danielle?
(12)
Could you tell me what happened with Tom?
(13)
Tell me about Andrew then.
The opening questions share commonalities in terms of how they were asked and
what information they conveyed. All of the questions commence immediately after the
interview preliminaries and produce an average of nine words per turn, considerably
fewer than the closed police narratives, an average of 64 words per turn. Rather than
inhibiting any forthcoming response to a ‘yes/no’ conﬁrmation, the questions employ
an open-ended ‘tell me about’ format, surrendering the ﬂoor to the suspect for an
unspeciﬁed period and resemble the kind of questions recommended in policy for
interviewing child witnesses to achieve ‘best evidence’ (see Aldridge, this volume).
Unlike the previous interviewing style which made the physical nature of the oﬀence
explicit from the onset, the opening questions evade the sexual and criminal components
of the allegations. There is no mention of bodily contact between the IE and the child
although (8), (9) and (12) suggest something occurred. The implications of this will be
discussed later. The IRs avoid terms which highlight the youthful or maltreated status of
the complainant, such as ‘the little girl’ or ‘the victim’, opting instead for ﬁrst names. The
IRs ask innocuous questions which could be inviting the IE to describe any individual,
not necessarily an underage victim of sexual abuse. The non-speciﬁc and non-threatening
opening turns encourage the IEs to provide equally innocuous accounts of the alleged
victims. The utterances ‘how did you view your relationship’ and ‘tell me about
Andrew’ encourage potentially elongated explanations and do not restrict the subsequent
turn to a ‘yes/no’ response. Other interviews commence with: ‘do you wanna’, ‘can
you’, ‘do you want to’ and ‘could you’, which risk a minimal ‘yes/no’ response from the
IEs, for example: ‘no, I don’t want to tell you’ or ‘no, I can’t tell you’. However, these
opening questions are all treated by the IEs as invitations to tell a story.
The suspect’s narrative
The responses to the opening questions also share a range of features, some of which are
demonstrated in (14), the response to (9).
(14)
1 IE:
Sam was a very good games tester. He used to do
2
a lot of games testing, umm I will admit I was
3
attracted to Sam, I think Sam was attracted to
4
me, we had a very close relationship with each
5
other but I was I tried to keep it as much as
6
possible at arms arms length until it then
7
happened in eighty four I’m not quite sure what
8
date the event was, in the ﬁrst part of
9
nineteen eighty four my business started to go
SEXUAL OFFENCES
147

10
certainly downhill and I started to suﬀer very
11
badly from depression umm and I became I used
12
to go about every two weeks to get the tablets.
13
During this time it had got to the point where
14
sometimes myself and Sam would be very close,
15
we would often kiss at that point I made it
16
very clear that we weren’t going any further.
In all of the interviews characterised by an open style, the opening questions yield
elaborate explanations, an average of 145 words per turn, in which the IEs employ
‘relationship’ discourse and a range of mitigating devices. In addition to ﬁrst names and
informality, emotional, positive and relationship terms are frequently used. For example:
‘attracted’, ‘close’, ‘relationship’, ‘kiss’, ‘friends’, ‘feel’, ‘enjoyed’, ‘rapport’, ‘encouragement’,
‘nurture’, ‘aﬀectionate’ and ‘cuddle’ (see Benneworth 2006).
It is interesting to note that, in response to the three opening questions which imply
that something ‘happened’ ((8), (9) and (12)), the IEs immediately attend to agency. In
(14) the suspect and the child are portrayed by the IE as equally responsible and active
partners: ‘I will admit I was attracted to Sam, I think Sam was attracted to me, we had a
very close relationship with each other’ (lines 2–5). The use of ‘we’ generates a sense of
mutual accountability which is also evident in other interviews. In response to (8), the IE
states ‘I mean we could we could we could go on, not bother about anything then other
times I said how d’ya feel and she said oh yeah’. One IE shares responsibility with the
mother of the alleged victim in response to (13) when a particularly salient incident is
portrayed as ordinary and acceptable, ‘I gave Tom a bath at my house, I don’t deny that.
I told his mother that I’d given him a bath’. On the other hand, the opening questions
which did not set an agenda ((10), (11) and (13)), were followed by narratives empha-
sising the accountability of the victim as an active agent. For example, in response to (10)
the IE states: ‘She was a girl who often used to come to me’; for (11): ‘she used to come
up to me just about every day and stand with me in the playground’ and in response to
(13): ‘he was talking about going into this sort of nightclub he was talking about uh
drinking. He was actually talking quite a bit about sex as well. So I actually uh got the
impression that he was about the uh late teens’.
All of the IEs use mitigation when describing the relationships between themselves and
the alleged victims, speciﬁcally involving minimisation, normalisation and victim blame.
Minimisation
The utterance ‘it then happened’ ((14), lines 6–7) is euphemistic and externalised. The
ambiguous pronoun ‘it’ is without prior referent and is used here to denote the indecent
assault of a 12-year-old boy. The suspect distances himself from inciting the physical
contact and diminishes his own accountability. The euphemistic and unspeciﬁc ‘any-
thing’ in the expression, ‘we could go on, not bother about anything’ represents the
gross indecency of a 9-year-old girl. The same IE uses the expression ‘the little sessions’,
a playful and child-like description which actually refers to the manufacturing of child
pornography. In the claim, ‘it took a long while to nurture her’ the term ‘nurture’ sug-
gests a caring, almost parental role for an individual arrested on suspicion of indecently
assaulting an 8-year-old. The utterance, ‘just for general consoling’ once again attends to
the notion of support and protection. The use of ‘just’ has a mitigating function which
KELLY BENNEWORTH
148

minimises the signiﬁcance of the act whilst excluding alternative accounts which
cannot be acknowledged. The IE avoids having to include the ‘as opposed to’ (Lee 1987)
leaving the criminal and sexual details of the oﬀence unsaid.
In the utterance ‘I simply gave him a bath’, the IE assumes responsibility for washing
a 13-year-old. However, the incident is minimised with the use of ‘simply’, which sug-
gests an absence of motive and intent (Lee 1987). In the utterance, ‘we used to cuddle
up. And everything’, the ambiguous ‘everything’ suggests physical contact located on a
continuum from innocuous acts of aﬀection to penetration. The IE also claims ‘sort of he
was cuddling we was kissing a bit and umm things got a bit further’. The use of ‘sort of’
and ‘a bit’ to minimise the oﬀence are coupled with the vague ‘things got a bit further’
to suggest a progression of bodily contact. This agency-neutralised description (‘things’
rather than ‘we’ or ‘I’) and the use of the delexicalised verb ‘go further’ (Sinclair and
Renouf 1988) contributes to a process of minimising accountability (cf. Wooﬃtt 1991,
who claims that the externalising device ‘got’ constructs events as unmotivated and
lacking individual accountability).
Normalisation
The IE in (14) constructs ‘ordinariness’ in terms of two individuals embarking on a
romantic companionship, ‘I was attracted to Sam, I think Sam was attracted to me, we
had a very close relationship with each other’ (lines 2–5) and ‘sometimes myself and Sam
would be very close’ (line 14). The IE describes the bond between himself and the child
as ‘very close’ and ‘a very close relationship’, utilising ‘we’ and ‘each other’ to enhance
the mutuality. The ambiguous use of ‘close’ avoids physical and emotional discourse.
However, the introduction of ‘attraction’ generates the possibility of desirability and a
sexual relationship, despite the fact that the individuals involved are a 49-year-old man
and a 12-year-old boy. Another interview employs the seemingly innocuous ‘just good
friends’ to normalise the relationship between a 52-year-old man and a 9-year-old girl,
despite them being inappropriate candidates for a sexual relationship or even a good
friendship (see Benneworth 2007).
Further attempts to normalise an unconventional bond between a 53-year-old man
and an 8-year-old girl include, ‘we seemed to develop a sort of rapport, and were on the
same wavelength and a sense of humour’ and ‘we did develop a sort of rapport’. The IEs
frequently claim that they and the alleged victims shared emotional connections more
typically associated with adult companionships. In the utterance, ‘we’d gone up to my
room. Andrew laid down on the bed umm I laid down next to him, sort of he was
cuddling we was kissing a bit and umm things got a bit further’, the 11-year-old is
imbued with such maturity and sexual awareness that he becomes a candidate for a
sexual partnership.
Victim blame
In response to the opening questions, the IEs also depict the oﬀences as resulting from
the victims’ actions. The victims are characterised as willing, enthusiastic tutees: ‘she quite
enjoyed being uh the little sessions’; deceptively mature and sexually aware: ‘he was
talking about going into this sort of nightclub he was talking about uh drinking. He was
actually talking quite a bit about sex as well’; and actively and persistently seeking the
company of the IE: ‘she used to come up to me just about every day and stand with me’,
SEXUAL OFFENCES
149

‘she was running up to me so often’ and ‘he got a bit upset there he wanted to carry on I
said we couldn’t and umm after that he came round a couple more times and I tried to
make a distance between us. Which he didn’t seem to like very much’.
The opening questions posed by the IRs permit the IEs to present elaborate self-
serving accounts which avoid sexual and criminal discourse and employ mitigating
rhetorical devices. These devices help characterise the bodily contact between the IE and
the child as either negligible, an acceptable ingredient of an adult relationship or victim-
instigated. However, rather than limit the IRs’ opportunities to establish accountability,
the IEs’ self-serving and more importantly, incomplete descriptions provide the IRs with
an opportunity to challenge the accounts.
The reformulating question
The initial information-gathering opening questions, which encouraged the IEs to con-
struct extended, mitigating narratives, are vital for acquiring potentially incriminating
information. However, these testimonies are insuﬃcient without the intervention of the
IRs who must move beyond these self-serving accounts to conﬁrm the occurrence of
sexual contact, as in the question in (15).
(15)
1 IR:
Right. As part of that consoling would you ever
2
cuddle her and put your arms round her.
The IRs’ interventions (as in (15)) occur immediately after the IEs’ prolonged narratives.
Once again, all of the questions are minimal, an average of 13 words per turn, and
commence with either ‘right’ or ‘so’, ‘Right. As part of that consoling … ’ (15), ‘Right
you mean … ’, ‘Right. How old’s Sam … ’, ‘Right. When you say … ’, ‘So you both in
the bathroom … ’ and ‘So. You took it in turns … ’.
The discursive markers ‘right’ and ‘so’ have been the subject of much language
research. Raymond (2004) described the stand-alone ‘so’ as simultaneously managing
activities internal to the current turn and that turn’s participation within a larger course
of action. The markers in the previous extracts perform a reformulating function,
indicating acceptance of the prior turn and a transition to a new agenda. In other
words, whilst the interventions make reference to the previous narratives, ‘Right. As
part of that consoling’ (15), ‘Right you mean the sexual sessions’, ‘Right. How old’s Sam?
When this’ happening’, ‘Right. When you say that you’ve touched on the knee’ and
‘So you both in the bathroom together’, the markers suggest that speciﬁc details require
clariﬁcation.
Heritage and Watson (1979) claimed that reformulations are designed to project
agreement from the original speaker whilst clearing the way for the reformulator’s
description going on the record. In an analysis of murder interrogations, Watson (1990)
described ‘so’ as an authoritative resource used by the police to reformulate the ‘gist’ of a
suspect’s preceding narrative. Indeed, the questions embody a discursive ‘switch’; a tran-
sition from the minimised, normalised accounts of the adult–child relationships. The
questions represent a move away from the IRs’ ‘opening questions’, which permit the
IEs to construct innocuous explanations, to direct requests for information. In an analysis of
so-prefaced questions in interviews with child victims of sexual abuse, Johnson (2002)
argues that so-prefacing enables the IR to focus questioning on important evidential
KELLY BENNEWORTH
150

detail (see Holt and Johnson, this volume). The questions serve to deconstruct the IEs’
self-serving narratives by exposing sexual activity and criminal accountability obscured by
the prior mitigation. For example, in response to the IE’s narrative in (16), the IR’s
question seeks an acknowledgment of the IE’s criminal liability.
(16)
14 IE:
sometimes myself and Sam would be very close
15
we would often kiss at that point I made it
16
very clear that we weren’t going any further.
17 IR:
Right. How old’s Sam? When this’ happening.
In (16), the IE constructs a normalised bond between two equal individuals. When the
IR asks, ‘How old’s Sam? When this’ happening’ (line 17), he seeks to conﬁrm the
child status of the IE’s ‘partner’ and formulate the relationship as criminal. Other
examples include, ‘When you say that you’ve touched on the knee and on the calf’
((18), lines 1–2) in which the IR switches from the innocuous ‘Can you tell us about
Emily then’ (10) and a normalised account of ‘rapport’ with an 8-year-old girl, to a
bodily reference. The IE is then invited to provide a further account of the physical
act, ‘can you just expand on that a bit for us’ ((18), lines 2–3). There is a switch from
the ambiguous, ‘Do you want to tell us about Danielle?’ (11) and the normalised
‘nurturing’ and ‘consoling’ of a young girl by a 53-year-old man, to a speciﬁc physical
act, ‘would you ever cuddle her and put your arms round her’ ((20), lines 1–2).
Another IR switches from an opening question devoid of criminal and sexual dis-
course, ‘Could you tell me what happened with Tom’ (12) and the IE’s normalised ‘I
told his mother … I simply gave him a bath’ to a description of physical activity with
sexual connotations, ‘So you both in the bathroom together then … Naked?’ ((20),
lines 1 and 3). This move towards speciﬁcity performs the core business of the police
interview: the conﬁrmation of detail speciﬁc to the criminal oﬀence for the purpose
of prosecution. To determine whether these reformulations conﬁrm the occurrence
of sexual contact and establish criminal accountability, it is vital to examine the
subsequent turns of the IEs.
The admission
In response to the reformulating questions ((17), line 17; (18), lines 1–3; (19), lines 1–2;
(20), line 1), all of the IEs admit the allegations.
(17)
17 IR:
Right. How old’s Sam? When this’ happening.
18 IE:
Mmm seventy uh seventy four uh he’s about
19
twelve.
(18)
1 IR:
Right. When you say that you’ve touched on the
2
knee and on the calf, can you just expand on
3
that a bit for us,
4 IE:
Umm just a hand on the knee shake the knee say
5
yes you can do it come on you can do it.
SEXUAL OFFENCES
151

(19)
1 IR:
Right. As part of that consoling would you ever
2
cuddle her and put your arms round her.
3 IE:
Umm I think probably yes I have.
(20)
1 IR:
So you both in the bathroom together then?
2 IE:
Yes.
3 IR:
Naked?
4 IE:
Uh at that point he was partially clothed. I
5
was still fully clothed. And I got out of the
6
bath. I put a dressing gown on. Which is pretty
7
well standard procedure cos I keep them behind
8
the bathroom door. And I gave him a dressing
9
gown. Had he of raised any objections I would
10
have left. And he certainly didn’t object when
11
he washed my back.
However, the admissions are accompanied by discursive devices which mitigate the
oﬀending behaviour. In (17) the IE acknowledges the allegations with, ‘Mmm seventy
uh seventy four uh he’s about twelve’, which attributes uncertainty to the child status of
his sexual partner. The disclosure of bodily contact in (18) ‘Umm just a hand on the
knee shake the knee say yes you can do it’ constructs the incident as inconsequential and
impersonal. The use of ‘a hand’ not ‘my hand’, ‘the knee’ rather than ‘her knee’, ‘say yes
you can do it’ not ‘I said yes you can do it’ and the detached gesture ‘shake the knee’
reframes the IE’s role in the oﬀence as one of support and encouragement. The use of
‘just’ in ‘just a hand on the knee’ again minimises both the signiﬁcance of the contact
and the need for an alternative account (Lee 1987). In (19), the admission of physical
contact, ‘yes I have’ is preceded by an attempt to cast doubt on the event in the mod-
alised ‘Umm I think probably’. One particularly interesting example is the admission in
(20). The initial ‘Yes’ is accompanied by further self-serving discourse which attempts to
justify the bathing of a 13-year-old boy. The IE manages the dilemma of confessing to
the allegation whilst mitigating his accountability by employing minimising discourse, ‘at
that point he was partially clothed. I was still fully clothed’, normalisation ‘which is pretty
well standard procedure’ and victim blame, ‘Had he of raised any objections I would have left.
And he certainly didn’t object when he washed my back’, implying that the child was
responsive to the act.
Conclusion
In this chapter I have identiﬁed two distinct styles of interviewing with implications for
how the relationship between the suspect and the alleged victim is formulated, how
police–suspect interactions progress, and how the investigative interview is concluded.
There is evidence of a ‘closed’ interviewing style which is associated with a likelihood
of the suspect denying the allegations. In the ‘closed’ interview, oﬃcers assume the role
of narrator and formulate an explicitly sexual and criminal narrative, often from the
KELLY BENNEWORTH
152

perspective of the victim. By employing discursive devices to hold the ﬂoor, the oﬃcers
restrict the suspects’ turns and even in the concluding ‘closing’ question, which appears
to invite a response from the suspect, the next turn limits the suspect to conﬁrming the
oﬃcers’ version of events. By providing no opportunity for the suspect to generate a
narrative, the interviewer permits the suspect to refute the allegations with a simple
denial. The ‘open’ approach to interviewing is, however, much more associated with the
suspect admitting the allegation. The ‘open’ interview is characterised by the oﬃcer
surrendering the ﬂoor to the suspect using an ‘opening’ question which encourages
the suspect to tell a story. The suspect is permitted to recount a mitigating narrative,
incorporating minimisation, normalisation and victim blame, but the oﬃcers then ask
a ‘reformulating question’ which conﬁrms the sexual and criminal aspects of the
adult–child relationship and enables the interviewer to elicit an incriminating disclosure
from the suspect.
The implications of this approach to analysing police interviews are that we can
challenge a number of criticisms directed at discourse analysis. Critics often claim that
discourse analysis lacks reliability and rigour, because of its reliance on case study and
qualitative analysis. However, the patterns of interactional practice identiﬁed in the data
oﬀer support for previous interpretations in both pure (Lee 1987; Raymond 2003, 2004;
Wooﬃtt 1991) and applied (Auburn et al. 1999; Edwards 2008; Johnson 2006) discourse
studies. In addition, rather than representing an abstract methodology lacking con-
temporary relevance, the ﬁndings demonstrate that discourse analysis has a signiﬁcant
practical application and can contribute to our understanding of interactions in forensic
settings. If discourse analysis can identify ethical methods of obtaining evidential,
unprompted and admissible accounts of sexual oﬀences against children, it has much to
oﬀer the study of investigative interviewing.
Although this chapter does not seek to evaluate current investigative interviewing in
the UK, it oﬀers a unique qualitative insight into the architecture of police interviews
which could inspire new methods of interviewing training and establishing ‘best
practice’. The ‘closed’ interview style identiﬁed, exhibits features reminiscent of the
traditional adversarial police interrogation, whilst the uninterrupted suspect narrative
found in the ‘open’ interview reﬂects the recent PEACE protocol (National Crime
Faculty 2000) and policy on achieving best evidence. These observations emphasise the
importance of ethical questioning and of the beneﬁts of discourse analysis for the
professional development of police interviewers in the UK and beyond. In terms of
practical recommendations for training, the terms ‘open’ and ‘closed’ interview, and
‘opening’, ‘reformulating’ and ‘closing’ questions provide a recognisable vocabulary for
police oﬃcers. This vocabulary can be used by skilled oﬃcers to reﬂect on their own
interviewing practices and could be communicated to less experienced oﬃcers.
A common assertion in police interviewing research is that oﬃcers are unable to
convince blameworthy individuals to admit their guilt (Milne and Bull 1999). Baldwin
(1993: 188) argued that ‘the great majority of suspects stick to their starting position –
whether admission, denial, or somewhere in between – regardless of how the interview
is conducted’. However the research discussed in this chapter suggests that, if an oﬃcer
can adopt an open interviewing style at the onset of an interview, with the suspect
reacting discursively to the style of questioning, this can make a diﬀerence to the
outcome of an interview.
SEXUAL OFFENCES
153

Further reading
Auburn, T., Lea, S. and Drake, S. (1999) ‘“It’s your opportunity to be truthful”: Disbelief, mundane
reasoning and the investigation of crime’, in C. Willig (ed.) Applied Discourse Analysis: Social and
Psychological Interventions, Buckingham: Open University Press, 44–65.
Benneworth, K. (2006) ‘Repertoires of paedophilia: Conﬂicting descriptions of adult-child sexual rela-
tionships in the investigative interview’, The International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2):
190–211.
——(2007) ‘“Just good friends”: Managing the clash of discourses in police interviews with paedo-
philes’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 42–62.
Edwards, D. (2008) ‘Intentionality and mens rea in police interrogations: The production of actions as
crimes’, Intercultural Pragmatics, 5(2): 177–99.
Griﬃths, A. and Milne, R. (2005) ‘Will it all end in tiers: Police interviews with suspects in Britain’, in
T. Williamson (ed.) Investigative Interviewing: Rights, Research, Regulation, Willan: Devon, 167–89.
Williamson, T.M. (1993) ‘From interrogation to investigative interviewing: Strategic trends in police
questioning’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 3: 89–99.
KELLY BENNEWORTH
154

11
Lawyers in interviews
‘I advise you not to answer that question’:
conversation analysis, legal interaction and
the analysis of lawyers’ turns in police
interrogations of suspects
Elizabeth Stokoe and Derek Edwards
Conversation analysis and legal interaction
Conversation analysis (henceforth, CA) emerged in the 1960s in the work of the
American sociologist, Harvey Sacks, and his colleagues Emanuel Schegloﬀand Gail
Jeﬀerson. CA’s roots are in ethnomethodology (henceforth, EM: literally, ‘the study of
people’s methods’), a programme developed by another sociologist, Harold Garﬁnkel
(1967). His basic idea was that people in society, or members, continuously engage in
making sense of the world and, in so doing, methodically display their understandings of
it:
making
their
activities
‘visibly-rational-and-reportable-for-all-practical-purposes’
(Garﬁnkel 1967: vii). Language was central to the EM project of explicating members’
methods for producing orderly and accountable social activities. Like Garﬁnkel, Sacks’s
aim was to develop an alternative to mainstream sociology: an observational science of
society and social action that could be grounded in the ‘details of actual events’ (Sacks
1984: 26).
CA employs technical transcripts of recordings of everyday and institutional talk of
various kinds, and its empirical projects now comprise over forty years of ﬁndings about
how conversation works. These projects include the analysis of how people take turns in
conversation, how turns at talk are designed, what it means to overlap with another
speaker or produce a delayed response, how people make reference to one another, how
actions (e.g. complaining, questioning, assessing, inviting) are accomplished, how people
develop and move through courses of action, how people solve problems in hearing,
speaking and understanding, and a range of other conversational phenomena (see Sacks
1992; Schegloﬀ2007; for introductions see ten Have 2007; Hutchby and Wooﬃtt
1998).
The various interactional contexts that comprise legal institutions (e.g. courtrooms,
police stations, emergency services, prisons, legal documents, lawyers’ oﬃces) have pro-
vided materials for EM and CA since their beginnings. For example, in his
155

groundbreaking book on EM, Garﬁnkel (1967: 105) examined jurors’ decision-making
practices in the allocation of blame and in ‘recommending remedies’ (see also Manzo
1996 on jury interaction; and see Bittner 1967; Cicourel 1968; Sacks 1972; Sudnow
1965; Wieder 1974, for other classic ethnomethodological studies of legal institutions).
A key conversation analytic study was Atkinson and Drew’s (1979) investigation of the
organisation of cross-examination in courtrooms, focusing on the design of lawyers’
questions – particularly those that were designed to allocate blame – and witnesses’
responses to such questions (see also Beach 1985; Bogen and Lynch 1989; Burns 2001;
Galatolo 2007; Komter 1998; Lynch 2007; Maynard 1984; Pollner 1974; Pomerantz
1987, on courtroom interaction of various kinds). Other sites of investigation include the
everyday workings of law ﬁrms (e.g. Travers 1997); the production of legal texts and
records (e.g. Komter 2006; Meehan 1986; Summerﬁeld and McHoul 2005); and
encounters between citizens and the police (e.g. Meehan 1989; Sharrock and Watson
1989; Whalen and Zimmerman 1990). Interaction in places such as courtrooms can
constitute some of the most highly consequential moments in people’s lives.
This chapter focuses on another potent site of legal interaction: the police interroga-
tion of suspects. More speciﬁcally, it focuses on the sorts of things that suspects’ lawyers
do in police interviews, which is a hitherto unexplored aspect of interrogation settings.
In presenting our analysis of lawyers’ interventions, we aim also to demonstrate and
showcase CA as a method for forensic linguistics.
Police interrogation of suspects
Analysis of ‘live’ (i.e. recorded) police interviews comprises a minority of work on the
topic in general. In contrast to numerous studies of suspects’ and police oﬃcers’ post-hoc
reﬂections about their interviewing technique, style and experience (e.g. Dando et al. 2008;
De Fruyt et al. 2006; Holmberg and Christianson 2002; Kassin et al. 2007), there are far
fewer studies of actual interactions between oﬃcers and arrested suspects.
Within the smaller body of work that does analyse real life police interrogations of
suspects, in linguistics and discourse analysis as well as CA, much attention has been paid
to oﬃcers’ questioning strategies, issues of power and coercion, and the elicitation and
design of suspects’ accounts (e.g. Benneworth 2006; Edwards 2006, 2008; Haworth
2006; Heydon 2005; Komter 2003; Johnson 2008b; Linell and Jönsson 1991; Shuy
1998b; Stokoe and Edwards 2008; Watson 1983; Wowk 1984). Some have analysed the
physical and embodied aspects of police interviewing, such as how the interview room
itself becomes a resource for interaction (LeBaron and Streeck 1997) or how gaze
direction between participants can play an important part in the emotionality of an
interview (Kidwell 2006).
Missing from both literatures are analyses of the role played by participants other than
oﬃcers and suspects who regularly attend police interviews. These other participants
attend in various capacities and include parents (of under-age suspects), lawyers or legal
representatives, appropriate adults (for ‘vulnerable’ suspects who have mental health or
learning diﬃculties) and interpreters. We found two notable exceptions. Nakane (2007)
discusses the problems of interpretation – and interpreters – that emerge when police
oﬃcers interview suspects with a diﬀerent cultural background (see also Komter 2005;
and English; Hale; Kredens and Morris, all this volume). Also Medford et al. (2003)
examined contributions made by ‘appropriate adults’, ﬁnding that although they say very
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
156

little, their presence increases the likelihood that a legal representative will also be present
(see also Aldridge, this volume). Medford et al. (2003: 253) also suggest that the presence
of an appropriate adult is associated with ‘less interrogative pressure’ from police oﬃcers
and more active involvement from the legal representative. Despite assumptions that
lawyers’ presence in interviews will beneﬁt suspects, no studies exist of their actual
contributions.
Data and method
We drew on a corpus of 109 British police interviews with suspects, recorded by oﬃcers as
part of standard police procedure and subsequently digitized, anonymized and transcribed.
We identiﬁed all cases in which lawyers are present, and focused closely on the sequential
placement, action orientation and design of their turns to establish the interactional cir-
cumstances of lawyers’ turns and their trajectory for the subsequent turns of both police
oﬃcers and suspects. In the data extracts that follow, the title (e.g. ‘PN-4’) speciﬁes the
source of the extract within a larger corpus (e.g. police interview number 4). Abbreviations
for participants include P (or P1, P2, etc.) for the interviewing police oﬃcer/s; S for the
suspect being interviewed; L for the lawyer, usually a solicitor, representing S; and A for an
‘appropriate adult’, where present, who is usually accompanying a child. Names that could
identify persons and places, including police oﬃcers, have been altered. Data transcripts use
punctuation and other symbols to mark prosody rather than grammar, according to the
conventions for conversation analysis (Jeﬀerson 2004).
Descriptive statistical analysis revealed that lawyers were present in 45% of interviews
and, of these 44 interviews, they make an intervention of some kind in 64% of cases.
The analysis focuses on those lawyers’ turns that occur outside the institutionally provided-
for ‘slots’ initiated by police oﬃcers. These ‘slots’ are the elicitation of identiﬁcation from
all present parties, under PACE (1984), at the start of each interview, and lawyers’
responses to oﬃcers’ questions at the end of interviews about whether they have anything
to add. Extracts (1) and (2) provide examples of each type of ‘slot’ respectively.
(1) PN-4
1 P:
I’m pee cee ﬁve two oh Inglewood from Packet
2
Road police station .hh there are no other police
3
oﬃcers present, could you state your (.) >full
4
name date o’birth< for the [tape] please.
5 S:
[Yeh]
6
(0.3)
7 S:
"Kay Lorna Phelps: (0.3) an’ fourteenth of the
8
sixth nineteen seventy.
9
(0.5)
10 P:
Okay. =Also present is your solicitor.
11
(0.4)
12 L: ! Jenny Carter #Miller Jones.
13
(0.3)
(2) PN-104
1 P:
‘S th’anythin’ you’d like to add uh (.) mister
2
Kanjeri:
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
157

3
(0.4)
4 L: !
No:.
5
(0.2)
6 L: !
°S’ ﬁne.°
In each case, the lawyers’ turns occur in a responsive ‘second’ position in an adjacency
pair. When one speaker takes a turn, they may do a ﬁrst action (a ‘ﬁrst pair part’ – e.g. a
‘question’) such that the recipient is expected to respond with a turn that delivers a second
action (a ‘second pair part’ – e.g. an ‘answer’) paired with the ﬁrst one. The examples
above show the general organization for such turns, although in a small number of
cases solicitors use these ‘slots’ as an opportunity to provide more than a basic self-
identiﬁcation (e.g. to formulate their role in the interview), or to re-open some aspect of
the interview.
In the analysis that follows, we investigate ‘interjections’ by lawyers; that is, turns that
are not responsive to police oﬃcers’ invitations to take an institutionally provided-for
turn. These include responses to questions from clients, spontaneous advice not to
answer oﬃcers’ questions, ‘repair’ operations on oﬃcers’ questions to, say, seek clariﬁca-
tion or make a legal point, and various ways of helping clients to give evidence by
eliciting evidence not asked for by oﬃcers, or by adding to clients’ evidence.
Lawyers’ contributions to police interviews with suspects
Outside of the interview’s routine beginnings and endings, we found that lawyers
respond to questions raised by their clients, or intervene to object to police questioning,
raise issues, or oﬀer advice to their client. We start with responses to clients’ questions.
Responses to clients’ questions
In extract (3), S has been arrested on suspicion of the racially aggravated harassment of
her neighbours, and here is claiming that any remarks made to them were provoked by
their harassment of her.
(3) PN-114a
1 S:
I’m being provoked by ""the:m.
2
(0.6)
3 P:
Prov[oked in-
4 S:
[Not the [other way round.=
5 P:
[P-
6 P:
=Provoked into doin’ what an’ saying wha:t.
7
(0.8)
8 S:
Callin’ them:: what they ""are.
9
(0.8)
10 P:
An’ what d’you mean by calling them what they a:re.
11
(1.7)
12 S:
Do I ‘ave to answer the (p’lice).
13
(0.4)
14 L:
No y’don’t ‘ave t’[answer ( ).
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
158

15 P:
[( )
16
(0.2)
17 P:
I’ve already explained ( ).
18
(0.4)
19 S:
ALL I said, (0.5) was about Muslims.=>Is that what
20
he’s on about?< Is that what you’re on about [ … ]
In response to P’s question at line 10, S asks L whether she has to ‘answer the (p’lice).’ In
reply, L tells S that she does not have to answer, and this is followed by a possible
reformulation from P at line 17. S then provides an answer of sorts, followed by another
question to L, ‘>Is that what he’s on about?<’ and one to P, ‘Is that what you’re on
about’ (lines 19–20). Her answer here, and these subsequent questions, construct P’s
questions as somewhat obscure and over-interpretative (‘ALL I said … ’). The turns
between 11–14 comprise an inserted sequence between S and L, establishing conditions
for answering P’s question at line 10.
This theme, of not having to answer questions generally, or some questions in parti-
cular, is a major preoccupation of lawyer–client talk within the interviews. In extract (3),
L tells S that she does not have to answer P’s question in response to S’s initiating action.
Note that despite being told this, S still continues to answer questions. In the next
section, we examine cases in which lawyers spontaneously advise suspects not to answer
oﬃcers’ questions.
Spontaneous advice not to answer
Lawyers sometimes spontaneously advise clients not to answer a question; that is, not in
response to a question from S, but triggered by some feature of P’s questioning. In such
cases, lawyers display suspects’ ‘rights-in-action’; that is, they invoke suspects’ rights to
‘not say anything’ that police oﬃcers discuss at the start of the interview, when cau-
tioning them. In extract (4), S has been arrested for the grievous bodily harm of his
neighbour. He has admitted assaulting the victim while ‘in a rage’, rather than in a pre-
meditated way. P has been asking S repeatedly whether he understands the sort of
physical injury that might result from S’s assault.
(4) PN-61
1 P1:
>Must say< (.) *y-* d’you realise that *it-* it can
2
cause serious harm.
3
(1.0)
4 L:
.pt I advise you not to answer that question.=
5
Mister Brown,
6 S:
hhhhhhhhh
In this case, the legal basis of L’s intervention is clear; it is addressed at preventing S from
admitting to a state of mind, or mens rea (Edwards 2008; Stokoe and Edwards 2008),
which could amount to recklessness with regard to the consequences of his actions. It
can be legally suﬃcient for such an accusation, that a suspect merely understands an
action’s likely consequences, rather than requiring premeditation of them (Richardson
2006). Notably in this case, L’s intervention is delayed by a full second gap (an inter-
actionally signiﬁcant amount of time: Jeﬀerson 1989), in which S does not respond; we
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
159

will return to that point shortly. Further, L fails to intervene when a second police oﬃ-
cer, P2, pursues the point, as in ((4) continued).
(4) PN-61 (continued)
7
(0.9)
8 P1:
(Anything t-)=
9 P2:
=What-what do-w’ll what d-what do you think.
10
(0.2)
11 P2:
I mean: (0.3) you’ve been advi:sed not to answer it
12
but-(0.2) I mean.hh (0.2) it is: (0.2) your chance
13
(0.6) to uh: y’know tell us your side o’the story,
14
if you wish to do so,.hh so: in your opinion, (0.7)
15
if someone gets kicked in the head, (0.5) three times:
16
quite hard, (0.3).hh <what injuries: d’you think that
17
person> is going to get.
18
(0.4)
19 P2:
As a result.
20
(2.0)
21 S:
.hhhhhh "well hhh I was um: (1.5) I was like- not in
22
me own body. =I was out- […]
Having intervened previously at line 4, L now fails to intervene at lines 18–21, including
the long 2-second gap at line 20 following P2’s re-formulation of P1’s question. P2 alters
the generic ‘do you realise that it can cause serious harm’ (lines 1–2) to asking ‘in your
opinion’ (line 14), given a speciﬁc formulation of S’s alleged actions (lines 15–16), what
injuries would ensue (lines 16–17). Although S is still not obliged to oﬀer self-damaging
opinion or speculation, L does not repeat the advice not to answer. At line 21, S himself
orients to the question as problematic; his reply is delayed, prefaced by a long in-breath
and the dispreference marker ‘well’, and other signs of ‘perturbation’ in the ﬂow of
speech (Schegloﬀ2007). The sense of L’s advice being delayed and then absent, is
enhanced when we compare it to other examples.
In extract (5), S is a juvenile who has been arrested for witness intimidation. Her
mother is also present as ‘Appropriate Adult’.
(5) PN-117
1 P:
( … ) Carla’s made an allegation (0.3) uh (0.6) kh-y-like
2
y’said (earlier) that you did have a fi:ght (0.5) on the
3
tuesday seventh december two thousand and four (1.7) u:h
4
but y’saying this ws over an argument uh (1.2) you’d
5
fallen ou:t. (.) The argument was about uh (0.5) Carla
6
not being a witness for you: for a pending court case.
7
(1.3)
8 S:
Wha:t (0.2) the fi:ght?
9
(0.2)
10 P:
Yeh. That was u-(.) the reason for it,=
11 L:
=Advi:se you not to answer
12
any questions about the ﬁ:ght itself (0.3) u:m my client has made
13
a statement of complai:nt, (0.2) believe it’s being investi[gat]ed.
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
160

14 P:
[Yeh.]
15 P:
O[kay.
16 L:
[Yeh.
17
.(2.8)
18 P:
Okay. ((P changes topic))
At line 11, L provides what we may describe as an eﬀective, ‘successful’, intervention. It
is successful in that P immediately (indeed in slight overlap, line 14) acknowledges and
accepts the intervention, and goes on to pursue an alternative topic. There are some key
diﬀerences between this intervention, and the less successful one in extract (4). First, the
intervention is immediate: the ‘equals’ signs between lines 10 and 11 mark the immediate
‘latching’ of one turn to the end of another (Jeﬀerson 2004), in contrast to the delay at
line 3 in extract (4). Second, in extract (5), L provides P with a legal basis for her advice,
that the topic concerns another complaint that is under separate police investigation. So
we can begin to specify what ‘success’ amounts to, and the kind of interactional features
that provide for it. The absence in extract (4) of any account by L for why S should not
answer, eﬀectively permits P2 to continue with the same troublesome line of question-
ing, albeit in reformulated terms.
There is another element in the ‘success’ or eﬀectiveness of lawyers’ advice not to
answer, that we can show with a further example. Extract (6) comes from an interview
prior to that of extract (5), with the same participants.
(6) PN-116
1 P:
.hhh It’s "been witnessed by other people.
2
(1.2)
3 P:
who’ve statemented to say they’ve actually hav- seen
4
this happen.
5
(0.7)
6 P:
Now why would they sa:y (.) that happened. If [it hasn’t.]
7 L:
[I would ad]vise
8
you not to answer that question.
9
(0.5)
10 S:
No comment,
11
(0.4)
12 P:
Have you got any: (.) quarrels with Rebecca= is any
13
animosity between you: that would say that she would
14
make these allegations u:p.
15
(0.6)
16 S:
Yeh,
17
(0.6)
18 P:
Why would she make them up.
19
(0.4)
20 S:
Becau:se I might have t’go t’court because her dad
21
assaulted my mate,
Again we can understand the basis of L’s objection, even though it is not spelled out.
P has posed a hypothetical question (line 6), asking S to speculate about other people’s
motives. Again, L’s advice comes without delay (line 7). But also, in this example,
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
161

S complies with that advice using the standard verbal format ‘no comment’ (line 10).
This provides a further contrast with extract (4). In extract (6) S’s ‘no comment’ is not
responsive to the immediately prior turn (L’s advice), but functions as a display of
complying with that advice, and as a response to P’s question at line 6. If S were to
signal no such compliance, as in (4), then P remains at liberty to continue the same line
of questioning, because S and not L is the interviewee, and a non-response from S
would leave the question still hanging. Notably, in (5) (lines 12–13), L addresses the
grounds of her objection directly to P, who then acknowledges the point, which has
the eﬀect of cancelling the troublesome question that was put to S. With no further
account by L as in (6), and in the absence of overt compliance from S, all that would
have happened (as in extract (4)) is that L has given some advice to S. Suspects need to
show that they are taking and acting on that advice, and ‘No comment’ is a standardised
way of doing that.
Note again that, in (6), L’s advice is successful, in that P does not pursue the question
concerning other witnesses. Instead, P starts a similar line of questioning, now inviting S
to speculate about why her accuser might invent a false accusation. This time L does not
object, across several turn-transition opportunities to do so (notably at lines 15 and 19),
and S answers. The absence of intervention by L here is presumably because this line of
speculation is helpful rather than damaging to S’s position.
We have noted that lawyers may explain to police oﬃcers, as in (5), the grounds for
their advice to their client not to answer, and that it can lead to the non-pursuance of
that line of questioning by P. We have also noted that, despite L’s advising S not to
answer, trouble may ensue whereby P continues to pursue the question, and S answers
it. One way of obviating that trouble is for L to deal directly with P. Rather than
advising S not to answer, L may object to P’s asking it. In extract (7), L is objecting in
this way to the same kind of issue that arose in extract (4). The suspect has been arrested
for assault.
(7) PN-100
1 P:
Um:: (.) d’you understand that if you hit him with
2
the bar (.) that’s the kind of injury that you’re
3
gonna: (0.2) cause.
4 L:
.pt ‘e-’e-’e can’t answer the question. = it’s:
5
that’s a medical issue.
6 P:
Okay.
7
(0.9)
((9 lines omitted here))
8 P:
.pt d’you understand that hitting someone with a bar
9
may cause injury though.
10
(0.3)
11 S:
Yeh.
As in extract (6), L’s intervention targets P’s invitation to S to speculate, this time about
possible eﬀects of S’s actions. Here, instead of advising S not to answer a particular
question, L objects to P asking it. One feature of getting suspects not to answer questions
in this way is that L’s intervention provides at least minimal grounds for not having to
answer: “e can’t answer the question. =it’s: that’s a medical issue’ (lines 4–5). Further-
more, by directing the objection at P rather than S, such turns may work more directly
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
162

at closing oﬀP’s pursuit of the question. That can be an eﬀective alternative where there
is a possibility that S may not heed L’s advice, which sometimes happens. However, in
the above example the respite is temporary: like P2 in extract (4), P reformulates the
question a few turns later. But this time he uses generalized and normative terms rather
than details speciﬁc to S’s alleged action, and L permits S to answer.
The next section considers another type of intervention from lawyers, again targeting
police oﬃcers’ questions, but a diﬀerent feature of them.
Repair operations on questions and answers
In conversation analysis, ‘repair’ occurs when a speaker alters something that they or
another speaker have just said or started to say (e.g. Drew 1997; Schegloﬀ1987). The
alteration may add something, delete something, or change something, and it may be
initiated by either party. Not only is repair a highly organized feature of interaction,
falling into systematic types and components, it is also signiﬁcant in displaying participants’
concerns.
In our police–suspect interviews, lawyers deploy repair procedures as a way of doing
actions such as objecting to P’s questions, seeking clariﬁcation, making a legal point, or
eliciting helpful evidence from S. In extract (8) at line 9, L uses a targeted repair initiator,
requiring P to revise or explain his question before S answers it.
(8)
PN-100
1 P:
U::m (0.3) where did you pick- (1.2) >what was it you
2
‘ad.<
3
(0.6)
4 S:
It’ws’jus’ like a piece of alumi:nium.
5
(0.5)
6 P:
Ri:ght what’s in tha:t.
7
(0.2)
8 S:
W’ll how d’y[(
)-]
9 L:
[What d’you mean] what’s in that.
10 P:
How- how heavy is it.
11 S:
Alumi:n[ium? ( ] )
12 P:
[Is it-] Is it solid or:
S has been describing events leading up to him assaulting a neighbour with a bar. As
we will discover in a subsequent extract, P’s line of questioning is to do with whether
the ‘bar’ can, in fact, be categorized as a ‘weapon’, and whether S possesses it for pos-
sible violent actions. Here, then, S’s answer to P’s ﬁrst question formulates the ‘bar’ as
‘jus’ like a piece of alumi:nium’, deleting its recognizability as a weapon and instead
formulating it as an innocent item anyone might have lying around their property. S
displays, maybe disingenuously, trouble with P’s follow-up question at line 6 ‘what’s in
tha:t’ and it is at this point, in overlap, that L initiates repair on P’s question: ‘What
d’you mean what’s in that.’ We can see that the sequence unfolds around whether or
not the bar is heavy or hollow, which is relevant to its being categorized as a dangerous
weapon.
Our ﬁnal section focuses on diﬀerent ways in which lawyers help clients to formulate
their testimony and accounts.
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
163

Helping clients formulate testimony
There are various ways in which a lawyer may assist their client to give evidence during
police questioning. We illustrate two of those ways here: (1) providing explanations of
the ‘subtext’ of P’s questions; and (2) supplementing S’s account.
Providing explanations
Lawyers occasionally intervene to explain things, often in ways that alert S to the legal
signiﬁcance of a question, in ways that may forestall S providing a self-incriminating
answer. In extract (9), we return to the case of the suspect arrested for assault with a
metal bar, also seen in extracts (7) and (8).
(9) PN-100
1 P:
D’you know why y’went into the garden >or was it
2
jus’ summat you did.<hh
3
(0.2)
4 S:
"I "jus’ "did "it. =I was-(0.5).pﬀI was ma:d,
5
(0.2) "fri:ghtened or- w’ll not frightened I was-
6
what distressed I’d ‘ave to call it?
7
(0.3)
8 P:
Righ’.
9
(0.5)
10 S:
>I d-< I "weren’t #thinking about° ooh let’s-°
11
let’s r- w- (0.2) [""why is it such a "pro:blem.
12 P:
[(W-)
13
(0.7)
14 P:
W’ll >what I’m getting at mate is-< I want t-jus’
15
wanna know why you’ve put that ba:r in the ga:rden.
16
(2.1)
17 P:
Why- why’ve y’put it in the ga:rden.
18
(0.2)
19 S:
>Yeh but-< *u-* (0.6) I don’t under-""why is he
20
asking [that question?
21 P:
[Cos y’keep it in the-y’keep it in the
22
(0.3)
23 S:
In my be:droo[m.
24 L:
[The "reason ‘e’s asking the question
25
is it seems to hi:m, t’the oﬃcer: th’t you were
26
trying to <concea:l the ba::r.>
27 S:
A:h.
28
(0.2)
29 S:
Why didn’t y’jus’ come out an’ sa:y that.
30
(.)
31 P:
.pt because I want to know why you’ve put it in the
32
ga:rden.
33
(0.4)
34 S:
Because I jus’ "di:d. =here’s no- (.) no (0.3)
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
164

35
reason, =I jus’ came in my hou:se, jus’ walked
36
through the hou:se an’ jus’ walked straight through
37
the house.
S has reported that following a ﬁght with his neighbours, he put the bar used to assault
them, in his garden, where the police later found it. P starts by asking S why he went
into the garden after the assault had taken place. P is pursuing S for an admission that he
deliberately tried to conceal the bar, which is articulated explicitly by L in the target lines
24–26. We can see that S struggles to answer P’s question in the delivery of his turn at
lines 4–6, with repair and reformulation of his reported emotional state ‘"fri:ghtened or-
w’ll not frightened I was- what distressed’. S’s orientation to the correct way to describe
his emotions, together with the halting of his next turn (lines 10–11) suggests a sense of
his diﬃculty with this line of questioning. He asks ‘""why is it such a "pro:blem’
(line 11), to which P reformulates the question with the preface ‘w’ll >what I’m getting
at’, and the reformulation asks more directly why S ‘put that ba:r in the ga:rden’. A long
gap develops, again indicating S’s trouble with, and possible recognition of, the legal
implications of answering this question. P re-issues the question at line 17, and it is at this
point that S addresses L with ‘""why is he asking that question?’. P provides an account
for asking, pointing out a possible inconsistency in S’s testimony (why put the bar in the
garden when he normally keeps it in his bedroom?).
L’s intervention at line 24, starting in overlap with the end of S’s prior turn, explains
what P is driving at, and does so in terms relevant to the legal implications of S’s possible
answer. L explains how P’s question is oriented to S’s possible intent to conceal evidence.
At line 27, S displays a new understanding (with ‘A:h’ – see Heritage 1984) of what L has
spelled out for him, and challenges P on not being so direct about it. It is not that S did
not necessarily understand the force of P’s question. If S had indeed been ‘trying to conceal
the bar’, then he surely did understand it. Rather, it is that accounts, understandings and
their legal relevance, are under display here, whether or not naïvely, and L’s action is to
make those understandings more public. There would indeed be some point for S in
behaving disingenuously at lines 4–6 and 10–11, with regard to P’s question, as a display of
innocence – that so far was he, from having strategically concealed the weapon, that he is
having diﬃculty understanding the point of the question. L’s explanation of that point, and
S’s ‘news receipt’ of it (‘A:h’), essentially co-produce S’s innocence on the matter.
Supplementing S’s account
There are also occasions when, rather than oﬀering explanations or eliciting evidence
from clients, lawyers will add more or less substantial details to S’s evidence. In extract
(10) we return to the case seen previously in (3), of the suspect arrested for racial har-
assment of her neighbours. The police oﬃcers have been playing audio tapes made by S’s
neighbours, that allegedly have caught S in the act of racial abuse (for extracts of these
recordings see Stokoe and Edwards 2007). Earlier, S denied that it was her voice on the
recording. Here, she is challenging the legality of her neighbours’ actions.
(10) PN-114c
1 P1:
[( )
2 S:
[But <does that give them the ri:ght to do
3
that>.
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
165

4
(0.2)
5 P1:
What t’ta:pe you.
6
(0.2)
7 S:
T’ta:pe me.
8
(1.5)
9 P1:
[( )-
10 S:
[Is that le:gal f’them t’tape me. =
11 P2:
Y’knew they were ta:pin’ you,
12
(0.5)
13 S:
Not at first I di:dn’t?
14
(0.4)
15 S:
I- (.) I don’t even know if ‘e’s "camcordered me.
16
(0.6)
17 S:
‘e come out the other day with a camcorder pointed
18
at me[.
19 L:
[The POint is ‘e did it.
20
(0.3)
21 L:
I mean there does appear t’ be a conspiracy against
22
you° but I’m not going to bring that up at this
23
point.
24
(0.2)
25 L
U:m,
26 S:
I know I don’t know if I’m on his camcorder.
27
(0.9)
28 P1:
There is a camcorder an a’ recording of you as well
29
you #yes.
30
(1.0)
31 S:
Ain’t that ille:gal.
32
(0.9)
33 S:
What’s he gonna [use "that for.
34 P1:
[( )
35
(1.3)
36 S:
[What’s he going to use "me for.]
37 P1:
[(
)]
38
(0.2)
39 P1:
If-if it does go to cou:rt there could be obviously
40
big arguments as t’whether that could be played in
41
court or not.
42
(0.8)
43 P1:
About how you sound and your general beha:viour.
Between lines 2–10, S asks whether her neighbours have the ‘ri:ght’ to tape her, and
whether it is ‘le:gal’. P’s responses throughout are somewhat hedged, and the absence of
interventions from L on the legality of such recordings suggests that they may indeed be
permissible in court. P’s response that ‘Y’knew they were ta:pin’ you’, does not answer S’s
question and instead takes the form of a proposition for conﬁrmation (with conﬁrmation
the strongly ‘preferred’ answer). S answers that at ﬁrst she did not know, but then adds that
she knew she was being ‘camcordered’. It is at this point, in overlap at the end of S’s
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
166

answer, that L intervenes and formulates the upshot of S’s previous turns: ‘The POint is ‘e
did it’ (line 19). In so doing, L directs attention away from S to the neighbour who made
the recording, and introduces a legally relevant implication of it (‘conspiracy against you’).
Concluding remarks
In this chapter we have used conversation analysis to examine the location, design and
action orientation of lawyers’ contributions to police interviews with their clients. The aim
has been to show the kinds of phenomena that may be revealed by close sequential analysis
using technical transcripts of actual interrogations, where lawyers’ work is being done. We
examined lawyer-initiated actions, responses and interjections including objections to
police questioning, advice to clients (both spontaneous and in response to requests), various
‘repair’ operations on oﬃcers’ questions, and actions such as questioning clients, and help-
ing them formulate their evidence. Some of those interventions invoked suspects’ rights, as
explained by police oﬃcers at the start of interviews (e.g. that suspects ‘do not have to say
anything’). One major advantage of lawyers’ dealing with such matters within the course
of the interrogation, is that not having to answer a question, and the advice not to do so, is
tailored to speciﬁc questions and their moments, rather than left as generalized principles
for clients to have to apply. As we noted, this advantage is all the sharper when lawyers
spontaneously interject rather than waiting for clients to ask for advice.
We also considered the ‘success’ of lawyer interventions – that is, where they halt or
deﬂect the trajectory of an oﬃcer’s questioning. Success was found to hinge on the
intervention’s immediacy, as displayed by features of the technical transcript (latching,
delays, etc.), and also on whether lawyers provided a rationale for their advice not to
answer. Another feature of successful interventions was the manner of suspects’ com-
pliance: the standard verbal format ‘no comment’ by which suspects could not only show
that they were acting on the advice not to answer, but also that they were adopting a
standard, recognized way of doing that. Another way of obviating an objectionable line
of police questioning, and additionally of forestalling suspects not heeding lawyers’ advice
(we have several cases of frustrated solicitors failing to silence their recalcitrant clients),
was for lawyers to bypass suspects and deal directly with oﬃcers.
Overall, the beneﬁts of a conversation analysis of legal interactions are only brieﬂy
illustrated in this chapter. They include the value of a close examination of the details,
often technically revealed, of transcribed talk. They include also a focus on the turn-by-
turn sequential actions being done, and the relevance of turn sequences to understanding
those actions. Features such as paired actions (e.g. question–answer sequences), and the
workings of conversational repair, reveal participants’ orientations to the matters they are
dealing with, including the relevance of speciﬁc verbal formulations to matters of incri-
mination and intent. By examining the content and sequential organization of lawyers’
turns, in recorded settings such as police interrogations, the nature of lawyers’ legal work,
and its impact on forensic procedures, is revealed in terms of their actual practices.
Further reading
Edwards, D. (2008) ‘Intentionality and mens rea in police interrogations: The production of actions as
crimes’, Intercultural Pragmatics, 5(2): 177–99.
LAWYERS IN INTERVIEWS
167

Heritage, J.C. (1984) ‘A change-of-state token and aspects of its sequential placement’, in J.M. Atkinson
and J. Heritage (eds), Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 299–346.
Kidwell, M. (2006). ‘“Calm down!”: The role of gaze in the interactional management of hysteria by
the police’, Discourse Studies, 8(6): 771–96.
Stokoe, E., and Edwards, D. (2007). ‘“Black this, black that”: Racial insults and reported speech in
neighbour complaints and police interrogations’, Discourse & Society, 18(3): 355–90.
STOKOE AND EDWARDS
168

12
Police interviews in the judicial process
Police interviews as evidence
Kate Haworth
Introduction
Police–suspect interview discourse has a vital function in the England and Wales (E&W)
criminal justice process. For the police themselves, the formal interview is a key part of
any investigation into a criminal oﬀence. The interview later goes on to have a sig-
niﬁcant further function as a piece of evidence in itself, exhibited and presented in court
as part of the prosecution case. Words spoken during the interview thus have a dual
context, being produced in both interview room and courtroom, and a correlating dual
function, being both investigative and evidential. Yet these contexts and functions are
very diﬀerent, and perhaps even conﬂicting, as we shall see.
In addition, interview data undergo several changes in format en route from interview room
to courtroom, each of which aﬀects the integrity of the evidence. This ‘contamination’ of
verbal evidence makes a stark contrast with the forensic treatment of physical evidence,
which according to long-accepted principle must be preserved as intact as possible.
This chapter will explore the inﬂuence of all these factors on police–suspect interviews,
and will demonstrate that there are potentially serious implications for their role as evidence.
It will also serve to illustrate that linguistics oﬀers a powerful set of tools for unpicking exactly
how something as socially signiﬁcant as criminal evidence can be discursively ‘constructed’.
The role of police–suspect interviews
The process begins when the police conduct an interview with someone suspected of
committing a criminal oﬀence. The interview is recorded, in the vast majority of cases,
onto audiocassette tapes. Some moves are now being made towards digital recording and
video recording is occasionally used, but only for the most serious cases. An oﬃcial
transcript known as the ‘Record of Taped Interview’ (ROTI) is then produced from the
audio tape and so from here on the interview interaction is available in two versions; one
spoken and one written. In practice, however, the written, rather than the taped version
is relied upon.
169

The interview forms an important part of the initial police investigation. The interviewee
may have admitted involvement, or pointed the investigation in a diﬀerent direction.
Witnesses and other suspects will also be interviewed at this stage, and information passed
on in any one of these interviews may be crucial in guiding the conduct of the others.
The decision about whether to charge the interviewee, and if so with what oﬀence(s), is
generally taken by the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), and the interview is a key part
of the information on which they base their charging decision. This decision can be a
delicate one: for example, the distinction between various levels of oﬀence may depend solely
on proving the intention, knowledge or awareness of the perpetrator (the mens rea element
of an oﬀence), but the consequences in terms of sentence length can be enormous.
Notable examples are the distinction between murder and manslaughter, and between
possession of drugs and possession with intent to supply. It is of course extremely diﬃcult
to get ‘inside the mind’ of the suspect in order to prove this element of an oﬀence, and
so their own words at interview can be an extremely important source of evidence.
If the CPS decide to proceed, the interviewee becomes a ‘defendant’ and the matter will
go to trial – unless, of course, a guilty plea is entered. The interview now becomes part
of the package of courtroom evidence against the defendant. In some cases, the transcript will
be edited further at this stage by agreement between the prosecution and defence, for
example to remove inadmissible or prejudicial material which should not be seen by the court.
The manner in which interview data are presented to the court is particularly interesting.
Technically, the actual piece of evidence is the audio tape, not the transcript (R v. Rampling
[1987] Crim LR 823), but transcripts are admissible as ‘copies’ of the original evidence
(s.133 & 134(1) Criminal Justice Act 2003). What happens in practice is that the audio
tape is rarely played, and reliance is placed solely on the transcript. The rather bizarre custom is
for the transcript to be read out loud or performed. Since the interview forms part of the
prosecution case, the normal procedure is for a police witness to act as the interviewer,
and the prosecution lawyer to take the part of the defendant interviewee. Although
copies of the transcript are also made available to the court, it seems highly likely that the
oral performance will become the predominant version in the minds of those present.
Lawyers for both prosecution and defence use the interview material in whatever way they
can to support their case. Comparisons are commonly made between what a suspect says
at trial and what they said (or at least are reported to have said) at interview. The defence will
seek to use the earlier interview as evidence of the defendant’s consistency; the prosecution will
point to any diﬀerences as a sign of inconsistency, and therefore dishonesty and potential guilt.
Further, an important legal provision – s.34 Criminal Justice and Public Order Act
(CJPOA) 1994 – allows the court to ‘draw inferences’ if a defendant seeks to rely on
something in their defence at trial which they did not bring up during earlier questioning,
including their police interview. As Bucke, Street and Brown comment with regard to
these ‘inferences’, ‘[w]hile the legislation does not specify that these need be adverse to the
defendant, the likelihood is that they would be’ (Bucke et al. 2000: 1). This provision is
predominantly aimed at those who invoke their ‘right to silence’ and make no comment at
interview, but it equally aﬀects every suspect who did choose to answer questions but, for
whatever reason, ‘failed to mention’ something which later becomes part of their defence case.
The evidential function of the police–suspect interview is therefore extremely
important. It can be observed in action in the following example, taken from the
trial of Dr Harold Shipman. Here, Shipman is being cross-examined by prosecution
counsel. (The transcription, including the punctuation, is that of the oﬃcial court
transcript.)
KATE HAWORTH
170

(1) Interview evidence in court
Pr: Now I am going to ask you please to look at what you told the police when they
interviewed you in relation to Mrs. Mellor’s medical history. Could you go please
ﬁrst of all to page 251. Page 251. Do you have it in front of you? We will just
wait until everybody has it in front of them. Page 251, a third of the way down.
{…} You are aware that this document is an agreed transcript taken from a
tape-recorded interview which is admitted to be accurate?
W: It reﬂects what was said on the day, yes.
Pr: Yes, and can be played if needs be. You don’t dispute the content, that this
accurately represents the interview do you?
W: No.
[Counsel reads long extracts from the interview]
Pr: {…} you were telling the police that she, page 251, ‘She came back 10 days later
to tell me about it again.’ That’s what it says page 251, ‘She came back 10 days
later to tell me about it again.’ That is completely at odds, isn’t it, with the evi-
dence you have given this morning?
W: No, I don’t think it is.
Pr: {…} Do you agree you gave one version to the police and a diﬀerent one today?
W: I agree that the version that was taken down in the police station is diﬀerent from
the one I said today, yes.
Pr: Well why did you give a diﬀerent version to the police to the one that you are
giving today?
W: Because today I am more sane.
Pr: Today and in the days preceding today you have had time to concoct a false story,
haven’t you?
W: No.
Pr: You had not thought about this line of defence, had you, when you saw the police?
W: I didn’t realise I had to have a line of defence when I saw the police.
(Shipman Trial transcript, Day 34, www.the-shipman-inquiry.org.uk/trialtrans.asp)
Aside from the many other fascinating elements of this exchange, this demonstrates the
importance of the interview as a piece of evidence in the criminal process. This is, in one sense,
the ultimate purpose for the interview – indeed Baldwin (1993) comments that ‘[i]nstead
of a search for truth, it is much more realistic to see interviews as mechanisms directed towards
the ‘construction of proof” (327). It can also be seen that the interview’s appearance here
in a courtroom as a physical exhibit (‘page 251, a third of the way down’) is completely
diﬀerent functionally and contextually from the site of its original production.
Some problems
The treatment of interview discourse just outlined will ring several alarm bells for anyone who
has studied spoken discourse from a linguistic perspective, as it is based on several questionable
assumptions.
Firstly, for interviews to be legitimately used as evidence, it is essential to be able to
establish exactly what was said during the original interaction. This is entirely dependent
on the adequacy of the format in which they are presented. The various diﬀerent
incarnations of the interview are treated by the legal system as if changes in format have
no eﬀect on the content, but this is surely not the case.
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
171

Secondly, direct comparisons between what was said at interview and at trial assume
that an honest person will give exactly the same version of events on two diﬀerent
occasions, even when elicited by a questioner with a very diﬀerent agenda, in front of a
diﬀerent audience, in a diﬀerent context and after the passage of some considerable time,
with no doubt several re-tellings in between. Again, it is erroneous to assume that these
factors will not have any eﬀect.
Thirdly, the current system presupposes an ideal scenario where a police interviewer
asks questions about an incident and the interviewee, in replying to those questions, has
every opportunity to say whatever they wish. However, given the nature of police–
suspect interview interaction, where one participant is prescribed the role of questioner
and the other that of respondent, combined with the highly unequal power relations
between participants, this ideal scenario surely cannot exist.
In order to challenge some of these assumptions we shall ﬁrst consider the ﬁndings of
research into the inﬂuence of format, context and audience on interaction, and then
illustrate the problems with examples from police–suspect interviews.
Format
The diﬀerences between spoken and written modes of language are long established in
linguistic research (e.g. Biber 1988; Halliday 1989). This therefore presents a particular
set of problems when attempting to convert any text from one format to the other. This
diﬃculty has been fully appreciated by those linguists who need to convert spoken data
to a written format to make them accessible to their readers, and hence has become an
important methodological consideration in this ﬁeld (e.g. Ochs 1979).
However, written transcriptions of spoken data are widely used in the criminal justice
process without any recognition of these challenges. This has been given some attention by
linguists with an interest in the legal system. Walker, an ex-court reporter, has highlighted
problems with the process of producing contemporaneous ‘verbatim’ transcripts of court-
room proceedings (Walker 1986a, 1990), an area also addressed by Eades (1996) and
Tiersma (1999: 175–79). Fraser (2003) considers the inherent challenges of transcribing
covert recordings such as intercepted telephone calls, while the serious consequences that
can ensue when such transcriptions are used as evidence are demonstrated by Shuy (1993a,
1998b), and Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 144–46). Finally, Gibbons (2003: 27–35)
describes the diﬃcult representational choices facing those transcribing spoken data for use
in legal contexts, highlighting the many inadequacies in current practice.
However, it must be acknowledged that current E&W practice is fairly unusual in
even attempting to produce verbatim transcripts of police–suspect interviews from audio
recordings. Prior to the introduction of mandatory tape-recording in 1992 (Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984), formal written records were produced by the interviewers
themselves from contemporaneous notes or even memory. Not surprisingly, these have
been shown to be poor representations of the interaction which actually took place
(Coulthard 1996, 2002). Worryingly, this is still the method used in E&W for obtaining
witness statements (see Rock 2001).
This practice is also still used for police–suspect interviews in other jurisdictions. In a
Swedish study, Jönsson and Linell (1991) highlight substantial diﬀerences between the
account produced orally by a suspect and the corresponding written report produced by
the interviewer, which they link with diﬀerences between spoken and written language.
Gibbons makes similar observations of witness interviews in Chilean audiencias, and
KATE HAWORTH
172

comments: ‘[t]he question we have to ask is whether the judicial process, and hence
justice itself, is threatened by the fact that the judge receives a digested version of the
evidence’ (Gibbons 2001b: 32). (See also Komter (2002, 2006) on the Dutch system, and
Eades (1995) and Gibbons (1995) on Australian cases.) It is signiﬁcant that the transfor-
mations and inaccuracies observed in all these studies nearly always assist the prosecution,
not the defence.
Taken together, these studies highlight serious deﬁciencies in the production of writ-
ten records of spoken interaction across various legal contexts and jurisdictions over a
considerable number of years. The current E&W system of recording and transcribing
police–suspect interviews is a signiﬁcant advance compared with previous practice and
with other jurisdictions, but unfortunately this appears to have led to an assumption that
problems no longer exist.
Further, in the E&W system the interview data are not only converted from spoken to
written format, but also from written back into spoken when the transcript is read out
loud in the courtroom. This process has received considerably less academic scrutiny, but
it is safe to assume that it is also highly unlikely to be a neutral, problem-free exercise.
This is especially true given that the oral presentation is performed only by representatives
of the prosecution.
We will now look at an example which demonstrates how the format changes
undergone by police interview data aﬀect their evidential integrity (Haworth 2006: 757).
It relates to a crucial point in the Harold Shipman trial. It must be acknowledged that the
data used here are certainly open to question for exactly the reasons just outlined, given
that we must rely on the oﬃcial trial transcript, but it is nonetheless a striking illustration.
Shipman was a doctor accused of murdering a large number of his patients, often by
administering fatal overdoses of diamorphine. In response to a speciﬁc question during
one of his police interviews, he denied that he kept any dangerous drugs, yet diamor-
phine was found at his home during a search. Not only did this give him the means to
commit the murders, but also this denial at interview proved that he had lied to the
police. This signiﬁcantly undermined his honesty and integrity, an aspect which was
relied on heavily by the defence during the trial, tapping into the image of trust and
respectability typically accorded to family doctors. This deceitful response at interview
was therefore hugely signiﬁcant, as emphasised repeatedly by the prosecution. However,
it appears that errors crept into the version presented in court. According to my own
transcription from the audio recording, the relevant exchange is as follows:
(2a) Author’s version
IR:er re the drugs, (.) you don’t keep drugs in er (.) your surgery, (.) is that correct
IE: I don’t keep any drugs (.) if you’re talking about controlled drugs
This is a very straightforward – and untrue – denial. Yet the oﬃcial police transcript puts
this diﬀerently:
(2b) Police transcript
IE: I’ve given your drugs. Are you talking about controlled drugs?
There is a crucial diﬀerence in meaning here. This version contains a clear implication
that Shipman has voluntarily handed over drugs to the police, when in fact he did
exactly the opposite: he hid them and lied about it. The oﬃcial police transcript, which
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
173

is the version presented to the court as evidence, thus seriously undermines an important
prosecution point.
But that is not all. Not surprisingly, during cross-examination the prosecution chal-
lenge Shipman about this point, and use exactly this part of the interview to do so.
However, the version ‘quoted’ by prosecution counsel is diﬀerent again:
(2c) Prosecution version
IE: I have given you all the drugs. Are you talking about controlled drugs?
(Trial transcript, Day 32)
Compared to the police transcript, this contains the signiﬁcant addition of ‘all’. This
version is much more helpful to the prosecution, in that this would still amount to a lie:
Shipman cannot have given the police all the drugs if more were then found at his
house. I am certainly not suggesting that this alteration was deliberate, but nevertheless it
is certainly helpful to the agenda of the person quoting the ‘evidence’.
This example clearly and concisely demonstrates the transformations which interview
data can undergo, stage by stage, from interview room to courtroom. It shows that by
the time the process reached the crucial stage where the jury were considering the
interview as evidence in deciding on their verdict, the content was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from what Shipman actually said in his interview.
Context
As we have seen, a signiﬁcant feature of police interview discourse is that it does not
simply occur in the interview room, but is reproduced and recontextualised from inter-
view room to courtroom (see e.g. Komter 2002). This recontextualisation is not unique
to police interviews, however, and has been investigated as a feature of some other
institutional, and especially legal, texts.
Walker considers a similar process of taking original data out of context and putting them
to a slightly diﬀerent legal use, namely by judges assessing transcripts of witness evidence
when determining appeals. This demonstrates the signiﬁcance of the chosen representation
of certain contextual language features in the transcripts (e.g. pauses, ‘ungrammatical speech’:
Walker 1986a: 418) and their inﬂuence on the judges’ decision-making process (see also
Coulthard 1996). In a rather diﬀerent take on the same underlying phenomenon, Aronsson
(1991) considers the ‘recycling’ of information in various institutional processes, and
highlights the resulting misinterpretation and ‘miscommunication’ which can result (see also
Jönsson and Linell 1991). There is, of course, a strong link between the recontextualisation
of the data and the corresponding changes in format just discussed.
This idea of ‘messages travel[ling] across sequences of communication situations’
(Jönsson and Linell 1991: 422) links with the concept of ‘trans-contextuality’, as devel-
oped in the work of Briggs and Blommaert. Briggs traces elements of a ‘confession
statement’ supposedly made by a young woman in an infanticide case, examining its
relation to statements made by others connected with the case and oﬃcial documents
produced in relation to it. He traces what is described as the ‘circulation of discourse’
(Briggs 1997: 538), in particular the way in which the statement was subsequently used
within the judicial process which ultimately convicted the woman. This highlights
the strong inﬂuence of the wider judicial sequence in which the relevant interaction
occurred over the content of the statement produced.
KATE HAWORTH
174

Blommaert addresses similar processes involving narratives of African asylum-seekers in
Belgium. He examines how the asylum-seekers’ stories, as given in their original
interview with immigration oﬃcials, are then institutionally processed: ‘[t]he story of the
asylum seeker is remoulded, remodelled and re-narrated time and time again, and so
becomes a text trajectory with various phases and instances of transformation’ (Blommaert
2001: 438). Blommaert shows that these processes go further than simply questions
of transcription and format change, emphasising the signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations of the
recontextualisations, while also raising important questions of ownership and control
over the asylum seekers’ stories. It is important to recognise the inequality in access to
the transformative processes undergone by such data. Just as with Blommaert’s asylum-
seekers, police interviewees lose all control over the subsequent ‘trajectory’ of their
words as soon as they have been uttered.
All these studies demonstrate the importance of looking beyond the immediate site of
production of institutional discourse, and of seeing such texts as just one part of much
wider processes. This is clearly true of police interview discourse and its important role as
criminal evidence. The next step is to consider the inﬂuence of those wider processes and
institutional functions over the interview interaction itself.
Audience
A useful starting point for such an analysis is a consideration of the eﬀect of audience on
interaction. It is a well-established principle, from sociolinguistic studies of speaker style
(Giles and Powesland 1975b; Bell 1984) to studies of the narrative construction of
identity (e.g. Schiﬀrin 1996), that speakers adapt their talk according to the intended
audience. Indeed Sacks, Schegloﬀand Jeﬀerson describe ‘recipient design’ as ‘perhaps the
most general principle which particularizes conversational interactions’ (Sacks et al.
1974: 727).
But the recontextualisation of police–suspect interview interaction means that it has
several diﬀerent audiences – from those initially present, to lawyers preparing their cases,
to the judge and jury of the courtroom – each of which has a slightly diﬀerent purpose
for it. Much depends on how successfully the participants meet the needs of all those
audiences during the interview itself. Failure to do so can lead to dire consequences for
an interviewee, but is it reasonable to expect them to cater for so many diverse needs?
By the same token, how challenging a task is this for police interviewers to manage
successfully?
There are some parallels with courtroom discourse, where interaction between ques-
tioner and witness is to a large extent a display for the ‘overhearing audience’ of the jury
(Drew 1992). However, although jury members are arguably also the most important
audience for police–suspect interview discourse, they are, of course, not present at the
original interaction.
It is therefore instructive to consider another context with parallels in this respect. In
broadcast news interviews, the presence of an overhearing, non-present and often tem-
porally remote audience is an essential feature, and hence has been the focus of some
research (e.g. Heritage 1985; Greatbatch 1988; Clayman and Heritage 2002). This has
shown that in that context the overhearing audience is by far the most inﬂuential in
discursive terms. News interviewers use strategies which position them not as the primary
recipients of the interviewee’s talk, but as conduits to the overhearing audience who are
the real intended target for the interviewee’s talk (Heritage 1985: 100).
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
175

However, despite the similarities between these contexts, there are some important dis-
tinctions. Firstly, Heritage observes of the news interviewer that their ‘task is to avoid
adopting the position of the primary addressee of interviewee’s reports’ (Heritage 1985:
115). Yet the police interviewer is an intended primary recipient: they are part of the team
investigating the oﬀence in question, and may be directly involved in decisions about
charging and detaining the interviewee immediately consequent to the interview. The
interviewee thus has more than one ‘primary’ audience to maintain, and they are situated
very diﬀerently in relation to the talk – physically, temporally and in terms of their purpose.
Meanwhile the interviewer has an extremely diﬃcult position to maintain, as both ‘con-
duit’ and primary recipient of the interviewee’s talk – stances which are eﬀectively mutually
exclusive. In addition, the role would seem to demand neutrality, yet the interviewer’s
institutional position as a member of the police force is clearly anything but.
Further, in broadcast interviews the participants are under no illusion regarding the
true purpose of the interaction or the primary intended audience. It is less clear whether
that can be said of police interviewees. They will be fully aware that they are being
recorded and therefore ‘overheard’, and will probably have a basic grasp of the legal
process which may ensue, but this is not the same as knowing the identity and purpose
of those who will listen to that recording. On the other hand, the interviewers’ rela-
tionship with the future audiences is completely diﬀerent. They belong to the same
institutional system, and it is part of their professional role to be aware of the subsequent
evidential use of the interview. This is therefore an important distinction between the
interviewer’s and interviewee’s positions.
Data analysis
We will now look at examples from police–suspect interviews to observe the inﬂuence
of all these aspects in the interaction itself, and how this may aﬀect its future role as
evidence. (Transcripts here are the researchers’ own.)
(3) Interview 5.11.2/1: Assault PC
IR: so the next question is would you agree that apart from meself and y-
yers- yourself, there is no-one else present in this [room.]
IE:
[mm.] yep.
The interviewer’s question here is entirely redundant for the purposes of himself and the
interviewee, but is a method of providing information purely for the future audiences for
the interview. It is reminiscent of a magician asking a person on stage with him to con-
ﬁrm, for the more distant audience, that there is no rabbit in his hat. It is, of course, an
example of exactly the same discursive phenomenon.
Stokoe and Edwards document similar ‘silly questions’ in police–suspect interviews,
especially in connection with ‘intentionality’ (Stokoe and Edwards 2008: 93), or mens rea.
For example:
(4) ‘Silly question’ (Stokoe and Edwards 2008: 90)
IR: Did Melvin give you permission to throw the hammer at his front door?
(pause)
IE: NO!!
KATE HAWORTH
176

Such questions have a clear evidential function, attempting to establish ‘on record’ an
essential element of the relevant criminal oﬀence. As Stokoe and Edwards comment,
‘[u]nder the guise of “silly” or “obvious” questions, police oﬃcers work to obtain, for
the record and for later use in court, something very serious indeed’ (Stokoe and
Edwards 2008:108).
These examples demonstrate interviewers’ clear awareness of, and accommodation
to, the future overhearing audiences and the future evidential value of the interview.
On the other hand, the following illustrate that interviewees often have no such
awareness.
(5) Interview 5.11.2/1: Assault PC
1 IR:
the oﬃcer’s received injuries that amount to, what we call ABH {…} and I’ll
2
tell you what they are, graze to the left right elbow, graze to the lar- left
3
right knees, graze to the left right rear shoulder, soreness, at bruising below
4
right breast and to the nip of his er nobe on his- node on his er on his chest.
5
(.) okay?
6 IE:
(there) look there I’ve got some
7 IR:
yeah, [(? what you) s-]
8 IE:
[from falling on] the ﬂoor [(?)]
9 IR:
[(I) hear] what you’re saying, but the
10
oﬃcer’s saying, that those (.) those (.) number of bruisings occurred, whilst
11
he was eﬀectively arresting you. (.) and during the struggle that ensued.
This interview concerns oﬀences relating to assaulting a police oﬃcer while being arres-
ted. But the circumstances surrounding the attempted arrest are confused, with a number
of diﬀerent people involved and the interviewee himself receiving injuries. Yet despite
the evidential importance of the information, there is a striking contrast between the
amount of detail provided about the oﬃcer’s injuries and those of the interviewee, who
merely invites the interviewer to ‘look there’ (line 6).
This use of context-dependent deixis displays the interviewee’s lack of recognition of
the interview’s subsequent audio-only format, and his failure to take into account the
needs of any non-present audience. It also demonstrates his focus on the interviewer as
sole audience for his talk: ‘look’ can have only one intended recipient here. It is not
even clear (to anyone not present) what he means by ‘some’ – the interviewer’s
previous turn could provide ‘grazes’, ‘bruising’ or even the general ‘injuries’ as the
intended referent. There is thus no evidential value whatsoever to the interviewee’s
response here.
Yet despite this, the interviewer fails to pursue or provide the missing information for
his future audiences. By not establishing evidence of the interviewee’s injuries here, the
interviewer leaves the defence potentially disadvantaged in any claim of self-defence at a
later stage, due to s.34 CJPOA 1994. However, it also leaves a potential gap in the evi-
dence available for future prosecution audiences, particularly in relation to the charging
decision.
The following is a further example of what can happen when an interviewee fails to
take the future audiences and their purposes into consideration. The interviewee has
been shown photographs taken from CCTV footage of the scene of a burglary, showing
the perpetrator. The interviewer is alleging that this is the interviewee, yet he fails to
make an adequate denial.
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
177

(6) Interview 2.26: Burglary
IR:
can you tell me whether or not you were involved in this oﬀence,
IE:
like I say I’m not saying anything at this time.
IE:
if it goes to court, or whatever the lawyer sees ﬁt, by looking at the evidence
that you’ve showed me, then I will decide on what to do then. in court.
IR:
okay.
…
IE:
t- to be honest, the photographs don’t look that good. er and, (???) show the
lawyer them.
IR:
right,
…
IE:
because to me, all as that shows is, someone who is an average build, looks
to me like between brown and black hair, face you cannae make out
because it’s blurred,
[there’s] (nae) eyes, (nae) nose, [(you can] see)
IR:
[okay,]
[cause]
because what we’re doing now
is arguing whether or not (.) erm whether or not you feel there’s enough
evidence to get you through a court. but I’m asking you a simple question,
which is, have you committed this oﬀence!
IE:
well like I say, I’m not saying anything at this time! I’ll let the lawyer decide.
What is striking about this example is that it shows an interviewee being explicitly aware
of the future court context, while simultaneously failing to consider that those who will
be present in that context are also an audience for his current talk. In other words, he has
overlooked the multi-purpose, trans-contextual nature of police interview discourse, and
is treating the interview as purely investigative, not evidential. His point here is that
the photos are not enough on their own to convict him, which may well have been the
case. Yet I would argue that for a later court audience attempting to reach a verdict, the
photos combined with these responses at interview are almost certainly enough, regardless of
the quality of the images. He has eﬀectively incriminated himself.
Prosecution v. defence
Thus far we have seen that interviewers do address the future audiences and their pur-
poses during interview interaction. I now wish to reﬁne this observation and suggest that
they are not addressing all future audiences, but that their professional position will make
them focus mainly on collating evidence for the future prosecution audiences – by which
I mean their fellow investigating oﬃcers, the CPS and courtroom prosecutors.
Meanwhile if interviewees focus only on the interviewer as their audience, they are
likely to take their cue from them in terms of tailoring the content of their utterances.
It is also the case that interviewers, with their more powerful institutional and discursive
role as questioner, have considerably more control over interview interaction than do
interviewees (e.g. Greatbatch 1986). Putting all these factors together, there is a strong
likelihood that the account elicited from an interviewee during an interview will end up
being tailored much more towards the future prosecution audiences, while their own
defence needs go unmet or even undermined. Indeed, research on police–suspect inter-
view discourse has shown that the prosecution version of events is privileged over the
suspect’s story (e.g. Auburn et al. 1995; Heydon 2005, esp. 116ﬀ.).
KATE HAWORTH
178

This has potentially serious ramiﬁcations for the assumption built into s.34 CJPOA
that an omission of supporting material for the defence at interview is an indication of
guilt. It can have other equally serious consequences in terms of the evidence produced
through interview interaction, as shown by the example below. As noted earlier, key
elements of a prosecution case often depend on the diﬃcult task of providing evidence
of a suspect’s knowledge and intentions. In the case already discussed above, relating to
assaulting a police oﬃcer, a more serious oﬀence is potentially available, namely
‘Assault with intent to resist arrest’ (s.38 OAPA 1861). This has a maximum sentence of
two years’ custody, compared to six months for a basic ‘Assault on a constable’ (s.89(1)
Police Act 1996). The interviewer’s questioning here is clearly designed to elicit –
indeed to create – evidence regarding this speciﬁc oﬀence element, in the form of the
interviewee’s response.
(7) Interview 5.11.2/1: Assault PC
1 IR:
right when he grabbed hold of yer,
2 IE:
yep
3 IR:
why- w- what did you believe he was doing when he grabbed hold of yer.
4 IE:
what, when he was- I thought he was trying to hurt me at the end of the
5
day- I was just angry, I didn’t know what was going oﬀ[(or)]
6 IR:
[no.] when the
7
oﬃcer, grabbed hold of yer,
8 IE:
yeah
9 IR:
cos earlier on you actually said at the beginning, that when the
10
oﬀ[icer grabbed hold of yer]
11 IE:
[I thought he was just getting me out of the garden.]
12 IR:
you thought that he was going to arrest
13
[yer. and you didn’t want to] be arrest[ed.]
14 IE:
[yeah at ﬁrst yeah.]
[I didn’t] wanna.
15 IR:
[(?)]
16 IE:
[cos] I hadn’t done owt wrong at the end of the [day.]
17 IR:
[so] am I right making
18
the assumption then, that at the point that he grabbed hold of yer, you
19
thought you were g- being arrested.=
20 IE:
=yeah.
21 IR:
and you didn’t want to be ar[rested so-]
22 IE:
[I’m not gonna lie] yeah.
23 IR:
right. okay th-
24 IE:
I did [r-]
25 IR:
[what] I’m asking you James, is to keep it straight.
26 IE:
yeah I did resist arrest cos I didn’t want to get arrested.
The sequence begins with the interviewer asking what the interviewee believed was
going on at the point that the oﬃcer grabbed him. The interviewee’s initial response
raises two signiﬁcant points for the defence. Firstly, he states he thought the oﬃcer
was ‘trying to hurt me’ (line 4), which supports a potential claim of self-defence.
Secondly, he says that he ‘didn’t know what was going oﬀ’ (line 5), which indicates
that he didn’t realise that he was being arrested, which would support a defence to
the s.38 oﬀence.
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
179

Yet the interviewer does not pick up on either of these aspects, instead interrupting
with ‘no’ (line 6), indicating that this is not the response he wanted. He then suggests
an alternative answer, which instead ﬁts a ﬁnding of guilt: ‘you thought that he was
going to arrest yer. and you didn’t want to be arrested’ (lines 12–13). Signiﬁcantly, the
interviewee does then agree with this proposition, actually echoing the interviewer’s
words (‘you didn’t want to’, ‘I didn’t wanna’: lines 13–14), despite the fact that this
contradicts his immediately prior utterance (line 11), and his original response to the
question (lines 4–5). Having received this preferable response, the interviewer moves to
a formulation which contains none of the elements of the interviewee’s own
unprompted utterances, but once again explicitly spells out the elements which
would support a prosecution case (lines 17–21). Again, the interviewee agrees with this
(line 22).
This sequence is rounded oﬀwith a very interesting exchange. The interviewer asks
the interviewee to ‘keep it straight’ (line 25). In response, the interviewee himself pro-
vides a form of summary (line 26), but includes only those points repeatedly stressed by
the interviewer, and none of those which he raised independently. He also notably uses
oﬀence terminology: ‘resist arrest’. It is eﬀectively a confession to the more serious
oﬀence. In the space of these few exchanges, then, the interviewee has gone from
making valid points supporting his defence, to making damaging admissions. What the
analysis shows is how this transformation from defence to prosecution evidence is
achieved discursively by the interviewer.
Interviews as evidence
This chapter has shown that police–suspect interviews have a signiﬁcant role as evi-
dence in the criminal justice process. We have also observed the tension created by
their dual role as both investigative and evidential. Interviewers are professionally
attuned to the subsequent evidential role of the interview, leading to an apparent
focus on the needs of the future prosecution audiences, and an inclination not to
pursue ‘on record’ evidence which may support a defence. At the same time, inter-
viewees appear to orientate more to its initial role as part of the preliminary police
investigation, and to tailor their account according to cues from the interviewer as
sole audience for their talk, often to their cost. Recent research (Haworth 2009)
indicates that this can lead to the interview simply conﬁrming whatever version of
events the interviewers are currently working on, thus undermining both its investigative
and evidential function.
We have also seen that interview data undergo various transformations in format,
raising serious questions about evidential consistency. As we move away from the
original speech event, the format of the data becomes more corrupted while the
uses to which they are put become more important. This is clearly not a desirable
correlation.
Overall, linguistic research suggests that, even with the many current safeguards,
police–suspect interviews as presented as evidence are still not accurate and faithful
representations of the interviewee’s words, nor do they present interviewees with a
neutral opportunity to put forward their own full version of events. And ultimately, the
rather unexpected and self-contradictory result is that the nature of the interview’s later
role as evidence actually adversely aﬀects its own evidential quality and value.
KATE HAWORTH
180

Further reading
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language in Society, 13: 145–204. (A useful model
for the inﬂuence of various audiences on interaction.)
Fraser, H. (2003) ‘Issues in transcription: Factors aﬀecting the reliability of transcripts as evidence in legal
cases’, Forensic Linguistics, 10(2): 203–26. (Detailed discussion of the challenges of transcription in legal
contexts.)
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: A Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
(Extended linguistic analysis of police–suspect interview discourse.)
Komter, M.L. (2002) ‘The suspect’s own words: The treatment of written statements in Dutch court-
rooms’, Forensic Linguistics, 9(2): 168–92. (Illustration of the evidential use of police–suspect interview
records in the Dutch (Roman Law) system.)
Legal cases cited
R v. Rampling [1987] Crim LR 823.
POLICE INTERVIEWS IN THE JUDICIAL PROCESS
181


1.3
Courtroom genres


13
The historical courtroom
A diachronic investigation of
English courtroom practice
Dawn Archer
Introduction
We can approach the study of legal English of the past in a number of ways. We can
trace the development of legal English in general, as Mellinkoﬀ(1963) and Tiersma
(2000) do (albeit from diﬀerent disciplinary perspectives). We can trace the development
of linguistic elements that are associated with legal English: for example, Moore (2006)
investigates the written discourse marker, ‘vidilect’, which appears to have developed a
genre-speciﬁc quotative usage in slander depositions (akin to using ‘namely’, followed by
a direct utterance attributed to the witness/complainant). We can also draw from English
extant trial records to investigate the discoursal strategies of the historical courtroom at
particular points in time: for example, Kryk-Kastovsky (2000) investigates the turn-taking
strategies of what she terms the ‘interrogators’ and the ‘interrogated’ in two 1685 trials,
The Trial of Titus Oates and The Trial of Lady Alice Lisle. In this chapter, I will also be
outlining the characteristics of courtroom interaction in the English courtroom – but
diachronically – so that I can document:
(i.) the way(s) in which courtroom interaction both shaped and was shaped by legal
legislation during this period, and
(ii.) the changing roles of the primary historical courtroom ‘players’, the judges, the
lawyers, the defendants and the witnesses.
The period 1640–1700 will be our initial focus, as defendants and judges seemed to be at
their most interactive at this time in English courtrooms (Archer 2005, 2006a). We will
then move on to the eighteenth and (to a lesser extent) nineteenth century – the period
when a decline in the interactivity of defendants and judges is mirrored by an increase in
lawyers’ interactivity. In eﬀect, we begin to witness a move towards adversarialism in its
modern form (Cairns 1998). Whether intentionally sought/desired or not, at this early
stage, the move towards adversarialism resulted in the increasing restriction of the verbal
185

activities of non-legal participants – so that, by the time of Palmer’s infamous murder
trial in 1856, courtroom interaction was strikingly similar to the interaction we might
hear in Anglo-American courtrooms today: lawyers deﬁned the dispute-in-question
between opposing parties, and investigated/advanced that dispute on their behalf, and
judges and juries played more of an adjudicative role (Archer 2005).
The English courtroom of the seventeenth century
The trials of 1640–1700 diﬀered from their modern equivalent in a number of ways:
(i) They were usually speedy aﬀairs, not least because several cases tended to be heard
at one time, by the same judges and jury, and the verdicts were given at the end.
(ii) When trials were lengthy, judges would often ﬁnd it diﬃcult to sum up satisfac-
torily, and jurors would have to retire without ‘meat, drink, ﬁre or candle’ until
they unanimously agreed on a verdict.
(iii) Many seventeenth-century jurists were ‘veterans’, having been involved in prior
jury service. Moreover, extant trial records reveal that jurists could intervene in the
courtroom process to make comments or ask questions of the judge and/or of the
witnesses as they gave their testimony.
(iv) What lawyers now do remained undone (i.e. there was no opening statement, or
assertion of what was going to be advanced against the defendant); instead, the
prosecution evidence tended to be presented directly/brieﬂy by the victim (of the
crime) and/or witnesses, with the judges keeping them to the narrow track of
evidence that related to the issue at hand.
(v) For a substantial part of the Early Modern English (EModE) period, defendants
accused of felonies (murder, arson, rape, robbery, burglary) or treason were
expected to defend themselves; defence counsel was not granted in treason cases
until 1696 and in ordinary criminal cases until the 1730s, after prosecution counsels
had become a more regular feature of the court systems.
(vi) The only exception to the rule prohibiting (defence) counsel was on points of law
raised by the judge, jurors or defendant. However, anything raised by jurors or
defendants had to be certiﬁed as constituting points of law by the judges before
they could be pleaded.
(vii) The defendants’ plight was further complicated as they did not know the precise
evidence that would be introduced. In addition, today’s presumption of innocence
was largely absent in practice. Indeed, the judges’ explicit role was to present
defendants with evidence that they would have to counter to maintain their
innocence. Finally, defendants could not compel the presence of their witnesses.
(See Archer 2006a: 184–85; Beattie 1986: 341, 345; 376–78, 1991: 222; Hostettler 2006:
11, 25–26; Langbein 1978: 274–76, 282; 1999: 315, 325.)
Virtually every jury trial in the second-half of the seventeenth century began with the
victim of the crime telling his or her story to the jury (Beattie 1986: 345). In ordinary
trials, the judges would then take these ‘citizen prosecutors’ (Langbein 1999: 325)
through their testimony section by section, acting as both examiners and cross-examiners.
The citizen prosecutor was usually followed by the witnesses for the Crown, often
including a constable who might testify about the circumstances of the defendant’s
DAWN ARCHER
186

apprehension – what s/he said, what was found, and so on – when this provided strong
evidence for the prosecutor. These witnesses gave their evidence under oath, and risked a
prosecution for perjury if they were found to have lied. In contrast, defence witnesses
and defendants did not testify on oath until 1702 and 1898, respectively (Langbein 1999:
315) – apparently for fear that it would lead to an unacceptable situation whereby
opposing parties each swore diﬀerent ‘truths’ to God (Hostettler 2006: 29). As a result,
defence witnesses’ and defendants’ testimonies were often regarded as being less credible
(Hostettler 2006: 11).
Interactions involving the judge and the defendant (1640–1700)
The prototypical judge was far more (inter)active in the seventeenth-century courtroom
than judges are today (see, e.g. Culpeper and Kytö 2000; Archer 2005, 2006a). Two
factors – the defendants’ need to prove that the (citizen) prosecutor was mistaken and the
lack of defence counsel – meant that seventeenth-century defendants were also more
actively involved than their modern equivalents.
The ‘no counsel’ rule for defendants came about following a ruling at a rape trial in
the reign of Edward I, where it was decided that, as the Monarch legally acted against
prisoners indicted for felony or treason, lawyers could not ‘speak out against the Crown’
on the prisoners’ behalf (Hostettler 2006: 22). That said, some (near-)contemporaries
argued that a defendant’s best defence was their own natural and unprepared response to
the charges as they were asserted in court. For example, Serjeant William Hawkins
(1721: 400) argued that it:
requires no manner of Skill to make a plain and honest Defence …; the Simplicity
and Innocence … having something in it more moving and convincing than the
highest Eloquence of Person speaking in a Cause not their own.
For Langbein (2003: 2), however, such attitudes masked a contemporary concern: ‘that
defence counsel would interfere with the court’s ability to have the accused serve as an
informational source’.
Oﬃcially, seventeenth-century defendants were expected to give their main defence/
explanation of the evidence adduced against them once the prosecution case was com-
pleted. But extant trial records reveal that judges would sometimes encourage defendants
to intervene during their own questioning of witnesses, so that they might ask pertinent
questions whilst the point at issue was in their minds. Thus Col. James Turner was
prompted by Lord Bridgman, one of the judges present at his 1663 Old Bailey trial, to
‘ask’ Sir Thomas Aleyn (Alderman) his ‘Questions’, in respect to evidence he had given
that implicated Turner in a burglary (please note that spellings here and in subsequent
quotes reﬂect the spelling convention(s) of the original trials). According to Sir Thomas
de Veil (1748: 81), it was an act of ‘benevolence’ to allow defendants to ask witnesses
questions in this way. In reality, however, a defendant’s ability to cross-examine
witnesses depended on a number of (inter-related) factors: ﬁrst, their physical/emotional
state, as most defendants were locked up prior to their courtroom appearance (and, as
such, were reliant on family/friends for food, clothing and news); second, their intellec-
tual and oratory abilities (i.e. being able to talk eﬀectively in this public setting); third,
their having objections of substance to oﬀer, which would be accepted by the Court.
These factors may help to explain why Archer (2006a) found that defendants interacted
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
187

more with judges than with witnesses in the seventeenth century: Archer (2006a)
investigated one ordinary (i.e. non-politically motivated) and ﬁve State (i.e. politically
motivated) trials from the period 1640–79, and discovered defendants’ interaction with
witnesses was minimal. Yet, those same defendants addressed their judges on 112 occasions.
The majority of these turns (i.e. 91) functioned as requests (as opposed to questions), and
were made by six men, all of whom faced treason charges. (1)–(5) represent ‘typical’
requests made by the six:
(1) ‘Will you hear me a word Sir?’ (Trial of Charles I 1649).
(2) ‘I desire to have Counsel assigned me’ (Trial of Sir Henry Slingsby 1658).
(3) ‘My Lord, I desire I may hear the Commission read by which you sit’ (Trial of
Mordant 1658).
(4) ‘I do humbly move, that I may have time allowed me by this court to send for my
Witnesses’ (Trial of Macguire 1644).
(5) ‘I shall crave that there may be nothing taken, in prejudice to my innocency [of the
‘niceties in the Law’], from words spoken in simplicity’ (Trial of Dr John Hewet 1658).
Defendants facing charges of treason were particularly disadvantaged, at this time, as
the Crown had enjoyed the representation of counsel in treason trials – usually the
Attorney and Solicitor Generals – since the Tudor period (Langbein 1978: 267). As
trials like that of Edward Coleman reveal, in all but name, treason trials also tended to
be show trials with only one possible outcome – a guilty verdict (and subsequent
execution): Edward Coleman (a practicing Catholic) was Secretary to the Duchess of
York when Titus Oates claimed he was involved in a ‘popish plot’ that sought ‘the
death of the king, and the subversion of the Govt. of England and the protestant
religion’. At the commencement of his trial, Coleman expressed concern that ‘the
violent prejudices that seem to be against everyman in England, that is confess’d to be
a Roman Catholick’ would mean that ‘Justice [would] hardly stand upright’ (i.e. pre-
vail). In response, Lord Chief Justice Scroggs informed Coleman: ‘we will not do to
you as you do to us, blow up at adventure, [and] kill people because they are not of
your perswasion’. Unappeased, Coleman requested Counsel. But Scroggs informed
Coleman that he would not need Counsel, as ‘the [prosecution’s] proof’ had to ‘be
[so] plain upon’ him that ‘the conclusion’ became impossible ‘to deny’. Scroggs was
also careful to inform Oates (the main prosecution witness) that he must tell the
‘downright plain truth, and without any arts either to conceal, or … to make things
larger then [sic] in truth they are’ when giving his evidence, so ‘that Mr. Coleman
may be satisﬁed’ that he was ‘condemned by plain Evidence of Fact’ (Trial of Edward
Coleman 1678). According to Hostettler (2006: 23), Scroggs’ ‘attempt to justify the
denial of counsel’ provides ‘an early example of the presumption of innocence, with
the burden of proof on the prosecution’. Unfortunately, however, the Court was too
easily convinced by Oates, and Coleman was found guilty. Some seven years after
Coleman’s execution, Oates was indicted for perjury, found guilty, ﬂogged and then
imprisoned.
The Coleman trial does not reﬂect the generally held attitudes and behaviour of judges
towards defendants of ordinary crime in the seventeenth century, for public records
reveal signiﬁcantly more acquittals in ordinary crime prosecutions than in treason trials
(Langbein 1978: 267). The judges’ role in ordinary trials involved protecting defendants
against illegal procedure, faulty indictments and the like, but what they did not do, in
DAWN ARCHER
188

the main, is ‘help the accused to formulate a defence or act as their advocates’ (Beattie
1991: 223). In fact, extant (felony and treason) trials from the seventeenth century are
littered with examples of judges not only commenting upon testimony as it was
being given, but also shaping it and, by so doing, inﬂuencing how the jurors received/
interpreted it in a way that disadvantaged defendants. Hostettler (2006: 23–24) provides
us with an example involving Hyde (one of Turner’s judges), this time at the Trial of John
Twyn 1663: although Hyde informed Twyn at the beginning of his trial that the Court
would act as his counsel so ‘that [he] suﬀer[ed] nothing for [his] want of knowledge in
matter of law’, he went on to inform the jury that he presumed ‘no man among [them
could] doubt but the witnesses have spoken true; and for answer [they] have nothing but
[Twyn’s] bare denial’. Mr Justice Kebel acted similarly in the Trial of John Lilburne 1649:
Kebel informed the jury that he hoped they ‘hath seen the Evidence so plain and so
fully, that it doth conﬁrm them to do their duty, and to ﬁnd the Prisoner guilty of what
is charged upon him’ even before Lilburn had been allowed to make his defence.
Fortunately for Lilburn, the jury went against the judge’s ‘counsel’ and found the
defendant not guilty (Hostettler 2006: 27).
Unlike today, seventeenth-century judges did not need to be concerned that they
might be criticised on appeal for browbeating defendants (or witnesses for that matter),
for there were no appeals at this time (Beattie 1986: 345). Yet, historians suggest judges
were themselves manipulated (some albeit willingly) so that those in power could
‘destroy political opponents’, using treason charges (Beattie 1991: 224). Ironically, it was
this political manoeuvring that eventually led to better treatment for defendants charged
with treason: when those that had suﬀered the most (i.e. the Whig political class) came
to power, they passed an Act – the Treasons Act (1696) – which gave defendants
the right to have counsel act for them in all respects, including addressing the jury on the
facts as well as on the questions of law (Hostettler 2006: 13). Some ﬁve years later,
the Act of Settlement (1701) was also passed, and eﬀectively secured the independence of
the judiciary (Beattie 1986: 246; Hostettler 2006: 34).
Interactions involving the judges and the witnesses (1640–1700)
As we might expect, seventeenth-century judges frequently interacted with witnesses
in felony and treason trials. Moreover, most of the witnesses’ turns (i.e. 84.3%–97%)
functioned as ‘answers’ (Archer 2005: 247), the majority of which explicitly provided
judges with the information they had requested (and usually no more than what had
been requested). Interestingly, Titus Oates provides us with an exception to this pattern
(Trial of Edward Coleman 1678): Archer (2005: 250) has found that, of ﬁfty witnesses to
appear in eight trials representative of the period 1640–80, Oates was one of only two to
answer judges’ questions using a ‘disclaim’ (i.e. to answer in a way that indicated he
‘could say little to this’). In one of his ‘disclaims’, Oates also ‘supplied’ information which
had not been explicitly requested: that Coleman had made copies of some important
instructions which ‘incourage[d]’ sympathisers to ‘gather … a Contribution about the
Kingdom’. When asked to cite those involved, he made a vague reference to gentry of
the Catholic faith:
Mr. Oates.
I know not any of the Persons, but Mr. Coleman did say he had sent
his Suﬀrages [= instructions] [...] to the Principal Gentry of the
Catholicks of the Kingdom of England.
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
189

In today’s courts, reports of what has been said out of court are kept from the jury on
account of the hearsay rule (i.e. the rule forbidding aural testimony or written documents
that quote persons not in court). So, too, is evidence of a past conviction (or convictions).
But this was not the case during the EModE period.
Although evidence of past convictions usually served to disadvantage seventeenth-
century defendants, the Trial of Elizabeth Cellier 1680 provides us with an example of a
defendant using such evidence against a witness: Cellier informed Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs that Thomas Dangerﬁeld had ‘been Indicted for Burglary’ and, as such, should
be regarded as an ‘unﬁt witness’ (see Archer 2005: 195–96, 251). Although asked to
conﬁrm or refute the claim, Dangerﬁeld opted to indirectly challenge Cellier: ‘I will
take it at [her] Proof’. Scroggs again addressed Dangerﬁeld, asking him ‘Have you
any more to say? Are there Waltham Men here?’ Dangerﬁeld’s response – ‘My Lord, this
is enough to discourage a man from ever entring into an honest Principle’ – occasioned
Scroggs’ third and ﬁnal question to Dangerﬁeld (which was more rhetorical than
information-seeking):
L.C.J.
What? Do you with all the mischief that Hell hath in you think to brave it
in a Court of Justice? I wonder at your Impudence, that you dare look a
Court of Justice in the Face, after having been made appear so notorious a
Villain.
Scroggs went on to release Cellier but committed Dangerﬁeld to the cells.
The infamous Judge Jeffreys
Archer (2005) found Scroggs’ treatment of Dangerﬁeld to be an exception in her trial
data (taken from the annotated version of the Corpus of English Dialogues 1640–1760).
However, other linguists (Culpeper and Kytö 2000; Jucker and Taavitsainen 2000; Kryk-
Kastovsky 2000, 2006) have documented similar treatment of a witness named Dunne,
by the infamous Judge Jeﬀreys, in the treason trial of Lady Alice Lisle (1685). Although a
baker by trade, Dunne was said to have acted as a messenger for Lisle. In the course of
his questioning by Jeﬀreys, Dunne contradicted himself. He also refused to answer eleven
of the questions put to him. Moreover, one of his ‘silences’ lasted ‘half a quarter of an
Hour’, according to a textual comment (Culpeper and Kytö 2000: 60, 62). Such beha-
viour was extremely unusual in the seventeenth-century courtroom. And an aggravated
Jeﬀreys responded with ‘abusive terms, aggressive questioning, irony … mocking, accu-
sations and strong threats’ (Jucker and Taavitsainen 2000: 87). For example, Jeﬀreys
likened Dunne to a ‘vile Wretch’ and showed disdain for his ability to oﬀer ‘horrid Lyes
in the presence of God and … Court of Justice’:
L.C.J.
Why, thou vile Wretch […] Dost thou take the God of Heaven not to be
the God of Truth, and that he is not a witness of all you say’st? Dost thou
think because thou precaviratest with the Court here, thou can’st do so
with God above, who knows thy Thoughts, and it is inﬁnite Mercy, that
for those Falsehoods of thine, he does not immediately strike thee into
Hell? Jesus God! there is no sort of conversation nor human Society to be
kept with such people as these are, who have no other Religion but only
in Pretence, and no way to uphold themselves but by countenancing
DAWN ARCHER
190

Lying and Villainy. Did not you tell me that you opened the Latch your
self, and that you saw nobody else but a Girl? How durst you oﬀer to tell
such horrid Lyes in the presence of God and of a Court of Justice?
According to Kryk-Kastovsky (2006: 238), this and similar utterances corroborate
Jeﬀreys’ ‘rhetorical talents’ whilst also illustrating his ‘predilection for attempting to
impress the audience, … by means of verbal cruelty’. Although more explicitly face-
threatening than we are used to in a modern courtroom context, the ‘intimidation’
strategy was eﬀective: Dunne did ‘not react in any way to the insults levied at him’ or
adopt a defensive counter-strategy. Instead, he ‘admit[ted] to events and knowledge that
he had previously denied’ (Jucker and Taavitsainen 2000: 89). Lisle (who ﬁrmly adhered
to her testimony throughout the trial) was found guilty, and beheaded.
Stephen (1991: 302) is even more scathing of Jeﬀreys than Kryk-Kastovsky (2006):
he describes Jeﬀreys as ‘a kind of demoniacal baboon placed on the Bench in robes and
wig, in hideous caricature of justice’. Yet, Jeﬀreys exhibited a ‘controlling’ strategy that
was not necessarily ‘judicially brutal’ nor ‘manifestly unfair’ (cf. Simpson 1984: 275)
when acting as Recorder in the Trial of John Giles 1680. Like many of his con-
temporaries, Jeﬀreys often resorted to wh-questions when questioning witnesses (see
Archer 2005: 185). Although wh-questions (particularly what-interrogatives) are regarded
as one of the least controlling of question-types in the contemporary courtroom (see, e.g.
Woodbury 1984), Jeﬀreys’ wh-questions mostly requested only that information which
he deemed to be appropriate to the case. For example, he utilised a string of wh-
questions (ten in total) to establish an itinerary of the witness’s and Giles’s where-
abouts/actions on the evening of the alleged attempted murder of the victim, John
Arnold. All were restrictive (e.g. ‘what time was that?’; ‘where did you go at that
time?’; ‘what did you spend there?’; ‘whether did you go from thence?’; ‘how long did
you stay in Drury-lane?’; ‘where after that?’; ‘who did you meet with all between X and
Y … ?’; ‘What did you drink there?’; ‘How long did you stay there?’; ‘What time of
Night was it that you went from thence?’). Such a strategy – carefully framing
questions so that they appear open-ended but, in reality, allow a tight control over
testimony – is similar to that advocated by Koskoﬀ(1983: 11) during the direct
examination of witnesses today, so as to ‘inﬂuence the answers’ without falling foul ‘of
the rule against leading’ (cited in Tiersma 2000: 175).
The Trial of John Giles 1680 also provides us with an example of defence witnesses
‘challenging’ each other’s recall (Archer 2005: 251–52): Elizabeth Crook (a chamber-
maid) initially disputed that William Richmond (friend to the defendant) came into his
room when she was making his bed but ultimately conﬁrmed that he had. Crook was
then asked (by Jeﬀreys) to state ‘What Time of night’ it was. She stated ‘about Ten a
clock’. As the time diﬀered from that given by Richmond, the King’s Counsel inter-
vened with a comment that implied she and Richmond were engaged in activities that
led to their losing track of time:
Kings Coun.
Time passed merrily away with you then.
Rich.
It was Twelve a Clock.
Crook
Why do you say so? Our house was all quiet presently after Eleven.
Rich.
Why will you say so? Were not we Singing and Roaring together?
Record.
Come don’t be angry, you were not angry when you were making
love together?
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
191

The defence witnesses sought to continue to debate the ‘time’ with one another rather
than attend to the face-threatening implicature. However, a seemingly bemused Jeﬀreys
was not as sensitive to their face-needs: he subtly manipulated the implicature so that it
became a structural presupposition – that Crook and Richmond had made love. And the
structural presupposition, in turn, became a means by which Jeﬀreys could oﬀer the
witnesses some ‘advice’.
Viewing witness evidence with bemusement was atypical. Indeed, contemporaries like
Henry Fielding tended to be suspicious of evidence given by defence witnesses, in par-
ticular: in his Increase of Robbers, Fielding (1751: 116) went as far as to claim defendants
usually ‘procured’ their alibis via their ‘Newgate Friendship[s]’. Fortunately, some within
the legal establishment looked on the defendants’ plight more sympathetically. For
example, Sir Robert Atkyns (1689) stated that it was:
a severity in our Law, that a Prisoner for his Life is not allowed the assistance of a
grave and prudent Lawyer, or some other friend, to make his defence for him …
to matter of fact, as well as to Law.
Atkins also shared Sir John Hawles’ (1689: 22–23) view that judges inevitably supported
the interests of ‘their better client, the king’ in treason trials. As noted earlier, the
Treason Act (1696) largely came about because of the continued misuse of treason
charges by those in power. As we will see in the next section, once introduced, the Act
transformed treason trials. However, advocacy practices within ordinary criminal trials
changed more slowly.
The English courtroom of the eighteenth century
The ﬁrst defendant to make use of defence counsel immediately following the
implementation of the Treason Act was Charles Cranburne. Although Cranburne was
ultimately found guilty at his 1696 treason trial, defence counsel (Shower and Phipps)
are said to have set a precedent during the trial that ‘was to be followed by other
members of the bar’ (Hostettler 2006: 36). Indeed, we see a very similar strategy –
pointing out ‘defects in the Indictment’, engaging in ‘lengthy legal arguments with
the Attorney-General’, cross-examining ‘prosecution witnesses throughout the trial,
questioning the credibility of witnesses and, on occasion, arguing with the judges’
(Hostettler 2006: 35) – adopted by Ward and Hungerford in the 1716 trial of Francis
Francia. And, on this occasion, the defendant was found not guilty, and discharged.
Ward and Hungerford’s construction of a counter-crime-narrative that corresponded
to the facts as they wanted the jury to perceive them – that is, from Francia’s
perspective – seems particularly modern (see, e.g. Hale and Gibbons 1999). One
aspect of this counter-crime-narrative was achieved via the questioning of two
witnesses – the then Secretary of State, Lord Townshend, and his employee, Buckley:
Ward initially questioned Buckley – but his question ‘suggested’ that Francia was not
permitted to read through his examination prior to signing it. Buckley’s response was
to state that he didn’t ‘remember’ the defendant desiring to read it (see Archer
2005: 254–56, for a detailed discussion of this interaction). Later in the trial, Ward
questioned Townshend.
DAWN ARCHER
192

Mr. Ward.
I desire to ask your Lordship whether you heard that Declaration
read over to him?
Ld. Townshend.
I dare say I did.
Mr. Ward.
Did he not endeavour to excuse himself from signing it, till he
had read it himself?
Ld. Townshend.
I don’t remember that, I don’t know that he made any Diﬃculty
of signing it; but I am sure it could not be because he was
refus’d to read it.
Townshend appeared to recognise the implication behind Ward’s questioning strategy –
the idea that Francia ‘was refused to read’ his examination – for he immediately refuted
the allegation (‘I am sure it could not be because he was refus’d to read it’).
Francia then addressed some questions to Townshend:
Prisoner.
Was not there any Reluctancy in me to sign it?
Ld. Townshend.
What do you mean? Have not I answer’d that already?
Prisoner.
Did not you oﬀer me some Money to sign it?
Ld. Townshend.
I hope you can’t say such a thing of so much Infamy […]
In spite of the conductivity of his questions – and his ‘right’ to ask questions of
witnesses – Francia obviously lacked the necessary power to achieve his goal: rather than
entering into a verbal duel with Francia, Townshend intimated that Francia’s accusation
(that he had attempted to bribe him) was too scandalous to be taken seriously. He then
addressed a 177-word utterance to the whole court – in which he signalled that Francia
was the sort who ‘begg’d so hard’ that good people like Townshend felt compelled to
give him ‘Charity’. In response, Francia framed Townshend as someone who was not
generous, but, rather, had ulterior motives for giving Francia the money, by asking (what
amounted to) a rhetorical question: ‘I desire to know who he ever gave ﬁve Guneas to
besides me?’ His comment prompted one of the judges to ‘answer’ for Townshend:
‘My Lord says it was out of Charity … he says, he never could refuse his Charity to
People that begg’d as you did’. At this point, Hungerford (the second defence lawyer)
intervened:
Mr. Hungerford.
I would propose to the Judgment of the Court, whether it is
proper to give Evidence of the Substance of a Letter without
oﬀering the Letter it self.
Mr. Just. Pratt.
This comes in Answer to Mr. Ward’s Question. He ask’d my
Ld. Townshend, whether there was not some Promise that this
Confession should not be made use of against the Prisoner? His
Lordship gives this Account, and justiﬁes himself, how he came
to make use of it, and gives this as the Reason.
Mr. Hungerford.
But to give an Account of the Substance of a Letter without
producing it, I apprehend, is not according to the Rules of
Evidence.
Note that, although Townshend was permitted to address the jury directly, the defence
counsel’s role was such at this time that his ‘interaction’ with the jury had to go through
the judges. Note, also, that Hungerford waited until Townshend had ﬁnished speaking
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
193

before asking ‘the Court whether it [was] proper to give Evidence of the Substance of a
Letter without oﬀering the Letter’ itself. By asking the question, he eﬀectively implied
his own belief (Townshend should not have been permitted to recount anything that
had not been previously submitted as evidence). However, a judge once again came to
Lord Townshend’s aid (for a more detailed discussion, see Archer 2005: 257–59).
Another important component of the defence counsel’s strategy was to suggest that
Francia was not native to England and, as such, could not be tried for treason. However,
Hungerford only managed to elicit one response from the witness, Simon Francia, before
the Attorney General intervened:
Mr. Hungerford.
Pray give an Account what you know of the Prisoner, what
Country Man he is, and where he was born?
Simon Francia.
He is my Brother, he was born in France at Bourdeaux.
Mr. Att. Gen.
Are you Elder or Younger than he?
Simon Francia.
I am Four Years Elder.
Mr. Att. Gen.
How then can you remember what was done when you was
Four Years Old.
Simon Francia.
I can’t remember the Day of his Birth, but I was bred up with
him at Bourdeaux, we were all born in the same House.
The interruption is extremely signiﬁcant, of course: the Attorney General was trying to
pre-empt the defence counsel’s attempt to have Francia acquitted. His (counter-)strategy
was to question the accuracy of Simon Francia’s recall, given his tender age, using a
disjunctive interrogative that asked Francia to state which brother was the eldest, and a
wh-interrogative that speciﬁcally asked how Francia was able to remember. Refuting an
argument/appeal before it is even presented is also seen as an eﬀective way of ‘inoculat-
ing’ the audience in today’s courts (Lloyd-Bostock 1988: 46, cited in Archer 2005: 162).
The Trial of Francia 1716 captures the fact that treason trials quickly became direct
disputes between defence and prosecution counsel following the implementation of the
Treason Act (1696). Yet, it also suggests
(i) examination-in-chief and cross-examination procedures were not as strictly
deﬁned at the beginning of the eighteenth century as they are today (see, e.g. the
Attorney General’s intervention at the beginning of Hungerford’s questioning of a
friendly witness), and
(ii) defendants and judges were still actively involved in courtroom procedure to some
extent.
The emergence of ‘advocacy’ in criminal trials
Legislation allowing defence counsel in felony cases was not immediately forthcoming
following the implementation of the Treason Act, but Old Bailey records indicate
judges were beginning to allow defence counsel ‘as a favour’ (as opposed to a right)
from the 1720s (Beattie 1986, 1991; Landsman 1990: 607). As one lawyer lamented in
1751, the involvement of counsel would diﬀer from one trial to the next: a defendant
could be ‘directed’ to ‘put his [or her] own questions’, for example, or be allowed
counsel ‘to examine and cross-examine witnesses’ on his/her behalf. Alternatively,
some counsel were told to ‘propose their questions to the Court’ as opposed to asking
DAWN ARCHER
194

them directly (State Trials, Vol. 17: 1022). Even so, the eighteenth-century courtroom
witnessed an important move away from the defendant having to prove his innocence
and move towards the defence counsel ‘probing and seeking to expose the weaknesses
of the prosecution case’ on their behalf (Hostettler 2006: 40). Put simply, defence (and
prosecution) lawyers were increasingly taking centre-stage (especially towards the end
of the century) and, by so doing, aﬀecting (the activities of) the other participants. For
example, Hostettler (2006: 40–41) cites a defendant who was silenced by his own
counsel, William Garrow, after he tried to interrupt him at his 1784 trial so that he
might ‘put another question’ to the alleged victim. The view that defendants should
not interrupt/intervene in (defence counsels’) arguments is in stark contrast to that
exhibited by defence counsel in the Trial of Francis Francia 1716. But what appeared to
matter some seventy years later was the pursuit of ‘professional advocacy’ (Cairns
1998: 3).
The ‘aggressive’ style of William Garrow
In the main, eighteenth-century defence lawyers were careful to attend to any possible
challenge implications of the questions they asked of the judges, but tended to be more
‘aggressive’ when questioning witnesses. Garrow’s cross-examination of witnesses
was particularly eﬀective, according to Hostettler (2006: 41), for he would use cross-
examination as a means of ‘comment[ing] on the evidence, refut[ing] or discredit[ing] the
prosecution case and aggressively battl[ing] for the accused’. As the latter intimates,
Garrow is best known for his work as a defence lawyer: he acted as defence counsel in
three-quarters of the 961 cases he undertook at the Old Bailey, according to the Old
Bailey Proceedings Online. However, in the Trial of John Elliot 1787, he acted as prosecuting
barrister. His well-documented ability to unnerve witnesses remains evident, nevertheless:
one witness questioned by Garrow (over the defendant’s apparent ‘insanity’) complained
that he felt ‘bullied’, adding ‘witnesses should be examined with candour, and not put
out of temper, and out of their senses, so as not to be able to understand what they say’.
In another trial, that of George Stevens and James Day in 1786, Garrow attacked the
credibility of a witness (Elizabeth Mason) by repeatedly asking her whether she ‘had
always told the same story’ (Mason had turned King’s evidence after being held in cus-
tody for several days). It would seem, then, that, during cross-examination, witnesses
began to face what defendants had been facing for some time: ‘they had to thwart an
opposing argument, justify their evidence and, in some cases, defend their character’
(Archer 2005: 257). Garrow’s behaviour at the Trial of John Taylor 1800 is also worthy of
brief comment, here, for Garrow apparently:
challenged every witness, prevented prosecution witnesses from answering key
questions by introducing points of law, and arrogantly told the court that
‘where the law of England does bear me out, I am not afraid of giving oﬀence
to any judge’. He also argued that defence counsel’s right to cross-examine
opened up an opportunity to address the court on all matters. ‘I had a right if I
could’, he maintained, ‘indirectly to convey observations to the fact; and
whatever other people may say, I shall certainly take the liberty of doing it; for
what the law of England will not permit me to do directly, I will do indirectly,
where I can.
(Hostettler 2006: 45–46)
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
195

Hostettler (2006: 46) believes Garrow provides us with ‘a clear example of how far
counsel had gone in dominating the courtroom’ by the end of the eighteenth century.
Hostettler also credits Garrow with ‘playing a prominent part in securing rules of evi-
dence for criminal trials’ Hostettler (2006: 73). However, the growth of evidential rules
was also due to Erskine and other legal contemporaries: together, they helped bring into
being the ‘best evidence’ rule, the rule against hearsay evidence, the inadmissibility of
previous convictions, the character rule and the corroboration and confession rules
(see Hostettler 2006: 117). Their increasing activity in the courtroom also inﬂuenced the
roles of the other courtroom participants, such that judges and juries tended to adopt
adjudicative roles from the mid-eighteenth century onwards, and defendants became
increasingly passive. As we have seen, they also aﬀected the witnesses (especially witnesses
for the prosecution), forcing them to become much more defensive (Archer 2005). Yet,
the adversarial system as we know it today did not fully come into being until the
nineteenth century, after the Prisoners’ Counsel Act (1836) removed ‘the felony counsel
restriction’ thus allowing defence counsels to make opening speeches (Cairns 1998: 4;
Langbein 2003: 93).
Advocacy post-1836
This ﬁnal section outlines the advocacy of Cockburn (Attorney-General) and (to a lesser
extent) Sargeant Shee (defence counsel) at the Trial of Palmer 1856. Fitzjames Stephen, a
leading nineteenth-century writer on the criminal law, attended the Palmer trial and
described it as exhibiting ‘the good side of English Criminal procedure’ (1890: 269; see
also Cairns’ (1998: 163) comment that Palmer marks the ‘com[ing] of age’ of ‘[t]he
adversarial criminal trial’).
Stephen was particularly impressed by Cockburn’s ability to present ‘the jury with a
picture of Palmer’s guilt in his opening which he [and his team] maintained and rein-
forced throughout the trial’ (Cairns 1998: 163, 176–77). Archer (2006b) has documented
the ‘key’ themes of Cockburn’s opening speech and the extent to which those ‘key’
themes are evident in/appear to have shaped subsequent lawyer–witness interactions, and
thus the prosecution’s crime narrative (Archer forthcoming: cf. Harris 2001; see also
Heﬀer, this volume), using key word analysis (i.e. the identiﬁcation of statistically-
frequent words/phrases). Archer’s (2006b) ﬁndings suggest Cockburn’s opening speech
was similar to the kinds of ‘criminal occurrence narrative’ (Gergen 1999: 69) commonly
utilised by prosecution counsels today: as well as frequently drawing the jury’s attention
to the victim, Cook, and how he suﬀered before he died, Cockburn was speciﬁc about
(i) the times/places in which the alleged poisoning took place (Talbot Arms),
(ii) the people who were involved in the crime itself (i.e. Palmer),
(iii) the people whose activities triggered the alleged crime (i.e. Cheshire), and
(iv) the people who treated/cared for Cook (i.e. women, chambermaid, Newton and
Bamford) (cf. Snedaker 1991: 134).
Criminal occurrence narratives tend to be interpretative as well as informative. The
interpretive element of Cockburn’s opening speech was most obvious at the point he
established a motive for Palmer’s ‘actions’: statistically-frequent words such as liabilities,
money, bills, forged, betted, debt and turf allowed Cockburn to propose Palmer had
DAWN ARCHER
196

initially forged his mother’s name to secure a gambling income. However, when that
source of funding dried up, and his debts began to mount, he resorted to murder (Archer
2006b). Predictably, the theme of gambling is more evident in the prosecution
counsel’s interaction with friendly witnesses than it is with non-friendly witnesses (i.e.
when the prosecution is constructing/consolidating as opposed to defending their inter-
pretation of events). For example, Cook’s betting book is mentioned by ﬁve friendly
witnesses as well as prosecuting counsel: Ishmael Fisher (wine merchant); Elizabeth Mills
(chambermaid at the Talbot Arms, where Cook died); Lavinia Barnes (maid); William
Henry Jones (surgeon); and William Vernon Stevens (step-father of Cook and
executor of Cook’s will). Even though witnesses’ discussions of the betting book were
not always occasioned by directly related questions, prosecuting counsel utilised the
testimony they gave to establish Cook’s betting book had been ‘in his hand at Shrewsbury’
‘on that Thursday’ (the day his horse won, ‘bringing its owner a considerable sum in
prizes and bets’ (Cairns 1998: 155)) and ‘in his [rented] room on the Monday night
before his death’. The ﬁve witnesses also conﬁrmed the book/prize money could not
be found following Cook’s death. Mills and Jones further stated/conﬁrmed they had seen
Palmer with Cook’s coat ‘in his hands’ after his death, and Stevens reported a con-
versation he had had with Palmer on discovering the betting book was missing:
William Vernon Stevens
Palmer said, “Oh, it is no […] use if you ﬁnd it,” […] I
said, “No use, sir! I am the best judge of that […] I am
told it is of use; I understand my son won a great deal
of money at Shrewsbury,” I am giving the words as
nearly as I can, […] Palmer said, “It is no use, I assure
you; when a man dies his bets are done with;
[…]
besides […] Cook received the greater part of his
money on the course at Shrewsbury” — I said, “Very
well, sir, the book must be found […]” Palmer then, in
a much quieter tone, said, “Oh, it will be found, no
doubt” […] calling to the housekeeper […], I desired
that everything in the deceased’s room might be locked
up, that nothing might be touched […]
This ‘dramatic’ re-enactment alluded to Palmer’s involvement (cf. Coupland et al. 1991:
219) – something that was ‘conﬁrmed’ when the prosecution later demonstrated ‘Palmer
had collected the bets and applied the proceeds to his own purposes’ (Cairns 1998: 155:
see Archer forthcoming for a detailed account).
In today’s judicial system, defence counsels can only address the jury once – and most
opt to make a closing speech. This was not an issue at the time of Palmer’s trial, as
defence counsels could not give closing speeches until 1865 (see the Criminal Procedure
Act). The Prisoners’ Counsel Act did allow defence counsels to give opening speeches, of
course. As we might expect, Shee sought to ridicule the idea that Palmer had poisoned
Cook for his money in his opening speech for the defence. He also argued that the papers/
correspondence (which had been introduced to ‘prove’ Palmer’s debt) actually proved
Palmer’s ‘innocence’, and intimated at additional letters that revealed (i) how Palmer had
helped Cook, who had helped him in return, and (ii) doctors had admitted to not ‘ﬁnd[ing]
strychnia, prussic acid, or any trace of opium’ in Cook’s remains – thereby alluding to the
prosecution counsel’s reliance on circumstantial evidence (for a more detailed discussion,
THE HISTORICAL COURTROOM
197

see Archer 2006b). Shee’s opening speech is best known for one thing, however: his
declaration ‘that there never was a truer word pronounced than the words which he
[Palmer] pronounced when he said “Not guilty” to the charge’. Shee’s comment was
controversial, even at the time: he was seen to have ‘press[ed] … his opinion’ rather than
‘his argument upon the jury’ (Lord Chief Justice’s summing up), and challenged ‘the
division of responsibility between the judge, witnesses and counsel’ (Cairns 1998: 155;
Watson 1952: 297–98). The Palmer trial therefore demonstrates another important feature
of nineteenth-century advocacy: lawyers were seeking to establish the limits of forensic
argument by challenging those limits. In so doing, they played a crucial role in the devel-
opment of the law of criminal evidence, and gave today’s (English) criminal system its
adversarial shape.
Further reading
The (social/legal) historians Beattie (1986), Cairns (1998), Hostettler (2006) and Langbein (2003) each
provide very readable accounts of the development of the English courtroom over time. Mulholland
et al. (2003), in contrast, detail the development of the English judicial system (between the thir-
teenth and seventeenth centuries) against the backdrop of the legal systems of European countries.
For (linguistic) accounts of: (i) speciﬁc trials, (ii) the development of the historical courtroom, and/or
(iii) linguistic features pertaining to the historical courtroom, see Archer (2005), Kryk-Kastovsky
(2009) and readings within the 2006 special edition of the Journal of Historical Pragmatics edited by
Kryk-Kastovsky (in particular, pages 163–263). Those interested in the development of legal English
more generally should consult Mellinkoﬀ(1963) and Tiersma (2000). In addition, there are a number
of works that have explored the Polish and Russian legal systems – and their diachronic
development – from a linguistic perspective (see, e.g. Collins 2001, 2007; Kwarcin´ski 2006) or
investigated the linguistic features of the Salem Witchcraft Trials (see, e.g. Archer 2002; Doty and
Hiltunen 2002, 2009; Doty 2007; Hiltunen 1996, 2004).
DAWN ARCHER
198

14
Narrative in the trial
Constructing crime stories in court
Chris Heffer
Introduction
Any case brought to court presents a story of wrongdoing (Tiersma 1999). Witnesses
expect to tell stories (Conley and O’Barr 1990), lawyers and jurors transform evidence into
stories (Pennington and Hastie 1986, 1991), and even judges deliberate with the help of
stories (Wagenaar et al. 1993). Yet the law as an institution has historically considered the
adjudication process as a matter of rigorously testing hypotheses rather than comparing
stories and so has introduced numerous anti-narrative checks to trial procedure (Keane
1996). The result is a fascinating tension between narrative and anti-narrative forces that is
both played out in the hybrid discourse genres of the trial (Heﬀer 2005) and is fundamental
to the interface between language and law more generally (Brooks and Gewirtz 1996).
Stories are constructed, and have been studied, in a wide variety of diﬀerent courtroom
contexts: in small claims courts (Conley and O’Barr 1990); in plea-bargaining (Maynard
1984); in magistrates’ courts (Harris 1984); in traﬃc courts (Cody and McLaughlin 1988);
in Islamic courts (Hirsch 1998); and in historical contexts (Archer 2005 and this volume).
This chapter, though, will focus on the most widely studied context, and the one
where the tensions between narrative and anti-narrative forces are perhaps at their greatest:
contemporary common-law criminal trials before a judge and jury.
I begin with an overview of the relevance of narrative to the trial process in general.
I then work in semi-narrative fashion through the linear sequence of trial genres (jury
selection ! preliminary instruction ! opening statements ! witness examination !
closing arguments ! summing-up ! deliberation and verdict ! sentencing) to show
how narrative in a variety of forms manages to emerge in the trial despite the evident
institutional anti-narrativity.
Narrative and the trial process
Narrative may be considered more central or more peripheral to the trial process according
to one’s deﬁnition of narrative and one’s theory of the trial. A narrow, clause-based
199

deﬁnition of narrative (Labov and Waletzky 1967) combined with a truth-testing view of
the lawyer’s task (Wigmore 1913) and a mathematical model of juror decision-making
(Hastie 1993) will lead to the impression that narrative is almost irrelevant to jury trial. On
the other hand, a broad approach to narrative based on participants’ situated understanding
of when ‘stories’ are involved (Georgakopoulou 2006) combined with a ‘storied’ view of
the lawyer’s task (Brooks 1996) and a ‘story model’ of juror decision-making (Pennington
and Hastie 1991) might lead to the impression that the trial is solely about narrative.
While the exceptionally a-chronological and non-linear nature of the trial make it
diﬃcult to sustain the claim that it is in the form of a story (Cotterill 2003: 23–25;
Gibbons 2003: 157–59), the trial can legitimately be seen as the construction of a story or
stories from at least two perspectives. Firstly, the most widely supported and empirically
tested theory of jury decision-making, the ‘story model’ (Hastie et al. 1983; Pennington
and Hastie 1991), holds that jurors decide cases by constructing their own stories from
the evidence and then considering the ﬁt between these stories and the legal charges.
Jackson (1988: 65–88) rightly notes that juries will also construct partial stories of the trial
they have experienced (‘trial stories’), which can aﬀect the plausibility of the putative
crime stories. Secondly, prosecutors – though not always defence lawyers (Dershowitz
1996) – see themselves as constructing a story for the jury. In their opening speeches,
they often make metadiscursive comment on the tale they are going to tell through their
evidence e.g. ‘Let’s tell a diﬀerent story’ (Harris 2005: 220). And when they lose a case,
they are likely to attribute it to the juries not ‘buying’ their story: ‘I had no idea what
was going to be the hole in the story that hung him’ (Engel 2000: 55).
Given that occurrences of narrative discourse in the trial, as we shall see, are very
restricted, the crime story must be conveyed through non-narrative as well as narrative
modes of discourse. It is useful to make an operational distinction, then, between the
‘crime story’, the cognitive template or skeleton structure conceived by lawyer, witness,
judge or jury, and instances of narrative discourse in which that story is narrated. Forensic
evidence, for example, usually provides support for the crime story but is very rarely
conveyed through narrative discourse. The distinction being made here is diﬀerent from
the one made in literary narratology between ‘story’ and ‘discourse’ (Chatman 1978),
where ‘story’ is a presumed (and debatable) ‘deep structure’ in the narrative text (Smith
1980). The crime story is pieced together during the investigatory stages of a case and is
not linked to any one telling.
In order to account for the fact that trials intimately involve stories but narrative dis-
course is comparatively rare, Heﬀer (2002, 2005) and Harris (2001, 2005) have both turned
to Bruner’s (1986, 1990, 1996) conception of narrative as a mode of thought. Reasoning
in the narrative mode means striving to understand the actions and intentions of humans
situated in place and time, while reasoning in the ‘paradigmatic’ or logico-scientiﬁc mode
means striving for context-independent logical and scientiﬁc descriptions and explanations.
The narrative mode is a search for verisimilitude, the paradigmatic mode a search for
veracity or veriﬁcation. While the narrative mode of thought is prototypically realised in
narrative discourse and the paradigmatic mode in scientiﬁc argument, they can become
strategic input to any form of discourse, thus creating the ‘hybrid’ forms of discourse (neither
clearly narrative nor non-narrative) that can be found in the trial.
One way of gaining a very broad initial understanding of the institutional and strategic
complexity of ‘forensic narrative’ (Heﬀer 2010) in jury trial – its ‘fragmentation and
contending multiplicities’ and its ‘special rules of narrative form and shaping’ (Gewirtz
1996a: 8) – is to see the trial process as a sequence of genres, each focused primarily on
CHRIS HEFFER
200

diﬀerent evidential goals (Maley and Fahey 1991; Gibbons 2003; Cotterill 2003).
Although the genre sequence in a trial is linear, the evidential goals are hierarchical: the
‘facts’ of the case need to be determined; these are woven into crime stories; the stories
are ﬁltered through the legal framework provided by the charges and rules of evidence;
and all this takes place within the context of the jury’s decision-making process (Heﬀer
2005: 70–72). In most jurisdictions, the trial genres seem to be paired up in terms of their
evidential focus (jury selection with deliberation, preliminary instruction with ﬁnal jury
instruction, opening statements with closing arguments). This creates a neat two-part trial
structure indicated in Figure 14.1.1
As the trial progresses, the focus moves from the ‘higher’ goal of decision-making to
the ‘lower’ goal of fact determination and then moves back up to decision-making.
However, the discursive work performed in early genres will necessarily inﬂuence later
ones. For example, both the legal framework and the story constructions will inﬂuence
the type of facts that counsel will focus on in witness testimony. Similarly, the closing
speeches will weave together the facts determined in the evidential phase into convincing
narratives but they will also anticipate the legal charge or summing-up by ﬁtting these
stories into a clear legal framework.
The following sections attempt to explore how narrative emerges, is implicated in and
takes on various distinctive forms through the course of the trial.
Jury selection and narrative scripts
All narratives must have one or more narrators to tell the story and one or more narratees
to listen. The primary narrators of the crime story are the lawyers representing the pro-
secution; the primary narratees are the jurors who will decide the facts of the case. In
Figure 14.1 A model of jury trial as complex genre (adapted from Heffer 2005: 71)
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
201

jurisdictions such as England and Wales where no information about prospective jurors
may be obtained and where there are no rights to challenge jurors without cause, lawyers
are only able to guess from appearance and body language the narrative inclinations of
the audience before them. In many jurisdictions, though, lawyers are allowed to actively
de-select jurors via questionnaires and interrogation, or voir dire (‘to speak the truth’). In
this case, lawyers are able to some extent both to pick an audience favourable to their
story and to design their narrative presentation to suit that particular audience (Giles and
Powesland 1975a; Bell 1984; Cotterill 2003).
One of the main objects of active jury selection, for which specialist ‘jury consultants’
are employed on many US cases, is to select jurors most likely to share the narrative
scripts closest to the party’s crime story. Narrative scripts – variously known in the
psychological and forensic literature as ‘scripts’ (Schank and Abelson 1977; Stygall 1994),
‘story’ or ‘narrative schemas’ (Mandler 1984; Heﬀer 2005), ‘plots’ (Johnstone 2002:
161–63), ‘master narratives’ (Bamberg 2004; Coulthard and Johnson 2007) and ‘narrative
typiﬁcations’ (Jackson 1995; Cotterill 2003) – are cognitive scaﬀolds for typical narrative
action. These scripts are not universal but tend to vary across communities of practice
(Lave and Wenger 1991). Scripts of police misconduct and bigotry, for example, are
more likely to be held by African-Americans than White Americans (Gates 1995; Hastie
and Pennington 1996: 972–73).
In the extreme case of the OJ Simpson criminal trial, which involved almost 1,000
potential jurors and six weeks of voir dire interrogation, Cotterill (2003: 17) notes that
many of the 293 jointly constructed questions on the jury questionnaire clearly tried to
gauge reaction to the parties’ proposed storylines. For example, jurors were asked to react to
the statement that professional athletes tend to be more aggressive towards women, which
linked with the prosecution’s story of the testosterone-charged, misogynistic celebrity
footballer. They were also asked the following question (with tick-box levels of ser-
iousness): ‘How big a problem do you think racial discrimination against African-Americans
is in Southern California?’
This was directly linked to the defence story of OJ Simpson being racially targeted by
the police, which evokes the narrative script of police bigotry favoured by African-
Americans. Since responses to this question were clearly divided on racial lines, when the
defence succeeded in empanelling eight out of twelve jurors of African-American origin,
Cotterill (2003: 13) notes that they eﬀectively managed to ‘design the audience’ in their
favour as well as being subsequently able to design their story for that audience.
Preliminary instruction and the law of narrative
After being empanelled, the jury receive some form of preliminary instruction on the law.
This can range across jurisdictions from, minimally and far from helpfully, the reading of
the formal indictment (as in England and Wales) to detailed instructions on the law
applying to the case. Preliminary instructions set down in one form or another the ‘law of
narrative’ regulating whether and how stories may be told at trial (Gewirtz 1996b: 136).
The indictment itself sets the conﬁnes of forensic narrative in the space delineated by
the charges.
On count 1 the defendant stands charged with theft, contrary to section 1, sub-
section (1) of the Theft Act 1968. The particulars of oﬀence are that the defendant
CHRIS HEFFER
202

on a day between the 15th day of January 1995 and the 13th day of May 1997
stole cash to the value of £8.58 belonging to a person or persons unknown.
(Author’s data)
Far from being a narrative, this is a ‘normative syllogism’ in which the major premise is
the legal rule, the minor premise the crime events and the conclusion is to be deter-
mined by the jury (Jackson 1988: 37–45). The legal rule is not actually stated but is
referred to intertextually (‘section 1, subsection (1) of the Theft Act 1968’), while the
crime event (‘stole cash’) is not narrated but stated as one of the ‘particulars of oﬀence’.
The rules of evidence more generally ﬁlter out potential narrative elements which are
either not considered relevant to the ‘facts in issue’ (those relating to the legal deﬁnition
of the oﬀence) or are considered to compromise the fairness of the decision-making
process. The exclusion can occur at all levels: from the silencing of entire crime stories
because they are not legislated against (as was the case until recently with marital rape
stories); through the ruling by the judge that a certain piece of evidence (e.g. an expert
report corroborating an element in the crime story) is inadmissible; to the retraction of a
witness’s answer following an objection that it introduces hearsay.
One form of narrative exclusion is the presumption that jurors come to court as legal
blank slates (Lieberman and Sales 1997). Yet lay people have narrative scripts for crime
categories and these often do not match those of the law (Smith 1991, 1993). For
example, the lay script for kidnap involves a ransom, which is not an ingredient of the
legal oﬀence. Smith (1993) notes that such ‘lay representations’ can be counteracted
directly in legal instruction by pointing directly to the mismatching elements between lay
and legal conceptions of crime.
Opening statements and the narrative point
The Opening Statement, at least in the US, is the trial lawyer’s main opportunity to
present their overall story of the crime to the jury. That story, as manifested in the
opening statement, has been described variously in the literature as a ‘kernel’ (Snedaker
1991), ‘macro-narrative’ (Cotterill 2003), ‘master narrative’ (Heﬀer 2005) or ‘core narrative’
(Gibbons 2003) which, respectively, the ‘satellite’, ‘micro’, ‘witness’ or ‘sub’ narratives of
the witness examination phase then ‘ﬁll out, elaborate, and extend’ (Snedaker 1991:
134). Harris (2005: 220) describes the opening statement as ‘the clearest instance of the
narrative mode in a trial’. However, this is narrative strictly at the service of argumentative
ends. According to US law, the opening statement is not meant to contain argument
(Garner 1999b: 1118), but narrative is a subtle form of argument which slips through the
paradigmatic net of the law.
Several researchers (e.g. Harris 2001, 2005; Heﬀer 2005: 75–77) have noted that the
structure of the master narrative text embedded into the opening statement often takes
the same form as the central elements of Labov’s personal experience narratives (PEN):
Orientation:
who?, when?, what? where?
Complicating Action:
then what happened?
Evaluation:
so what?
Resolution:
what ﬁnally happened?
(Labov and Waletzky 1967; Labov 1972, 1997)
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
203

Harris alters the framework in a number of ways to account for some of the speciﬁc
features of forensic narrative:
Orientation
as in Labov
Core Narrative
Labov’s “Complicating Action”, but including acts of saying
Elaboration
a distinctive forensic element providing further details, clariﬁcation
and explication of the core narrative
Point
Labov’s “Evaluation”, but speciﬁcally related to overall trial aims.
(Harris 2001)
In Labov’s model, evaluation occurs both as a structural–functional element that is
external to the narrative clauses and interrupts the narrative action to comment on its
signiﬁcance (Evaluation) and as an ongoing form of appraisal woven into the core nar-
rative clauses and conveyed through a variety of lexical, phonological, grammatical and
discoursal means (evaluation). Structural evaluation in courtroom narratives makes an
explicit evidential Point about the guilt or innocence of the defendant (Harris 2001).
Ongoing clause-internal evaluation, on the other hand, functions in a more holistic
fashion, gradually building up a certain impression of guilt or innocence (Heﬀer
2005: 77).
Given the argumentative aim of the opening statement, the Point often frames the
Orientation and Core Narrative (Harris 2005), as in the following extract from the pro-
secution opening of the Marv Albert sexual assault case tried in Virginia in 1997.
Ongoing evaluation (including that in non-narrative clauses) is indicated in italics; minor
Points are in [square brackets]:
Point
May it please the Court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen. On
February 12th, a coarse and crude abuse of a human being took
place. It took place at the hands of that man. And it took place
and was accomplished by his physical domination of a 41-year old
woman, a woman who had been his friend; a woman who had been his
lover; a woman who he knew for ten years; a woman who had
cared for him. But it was a woman whose human dignity he
chose to ignore on this night in his egocentric quest for sexual
gratiﬁcation.
Orientation
… At that time, Ms. Perhach was living in Florida, in Miami.
She was undergoing the stress and beginnings of the break-up of
a marriage. She had two children. And she began to try to get
herself back on her feet by seeking employment …
Core Narrative
… He called her again that day, about 1.30, this time on her cell
phone as she’s shopping, again trying to make arrangements for when
are we going to meet, got somebody to take the tickets, and, oh, by the
way, do you have somebody for the threesome? … [H]e grabs her and
he throws her on the bed and he jumps on her back. [She is
shocked.] He then begins to bite her back. [The ﬁrst bite is a
complete shock.] But as she realizes what is going on, she says, stop,
it hurts. But he did not stop. He continued to bite her on the back
in a painful way. [In fact, he mocked her.] He said, aw, come on,
you know you like this. …
CHRIS HEFFER
204

Point
It was a crude use of a human being. And the evidence will show
that it was done by this man for one purpose. He wanted a sce-
nario that night. And the dignity of the human being that was with
him did not matter. She was his property, and that’s a crime.
(Adapted from Harris 2005: 221–23. My analysis.)
In addition to the explicit indications of the probative Point at the beginning and end of
the statement (‘crude abuse of a human being’ points to the technical charge of sodomy),
we have other minor Points indicating the complainant’s lack of consent (‘The ﬁrst bite
was a complete shock’) and the defendant’s recklessness with regard to her lack of con-
sent (‘In fact, he mocked her’). The statement is also replete with Labovian categories of
ongoing clause-internal evaluation: intensifying repetition (‘a woman who’ … ‘a woman
who’); negative comparators (‘he did not stop’); correlatives (‘coarse and crude abuse’)
and explicatives (‘again trying to make arrangements … for the threesome’). The switch
to the conversational historic present (CHP) at dramatic moments (‘He grabs her and he
throws her … ’) is also, as noted by Schiﬀrin (1981: 45), an internal evaluation device
since it enables the listener to relive the drama as if it were present. So is the sudden
switch to direct speech (‘make arrangements for when are we going to meet … ’). As
Harris (2005: 222) notes, the prosecutor makes extensive use of ‘those very resources of
belief, opinion, intent and subjective evaluation which the rules of evidence prohibit’. It
is all these evaluation devices that transform a referential account into an ‘evaluated
point-laden narrative’ (Toolan 2001: 238).
The impression of guilt or innocence built up gradually through ongoing clause-internal
evaluation is strengthened through the strategic choice of words. Danet (1980a) found in an
illegal abortion case that the prosecution tended to use words such as ‘baby’ and ‘child’,
emphasising the potential future life, while the defence used detached medical terms such as
‘fetus’ and ‘embryo’. Cotterill (2003: 68–83) shows how the apparently neutral words
‘encounter’ and ‘control’, used by prosecutors in the opening statements of the OJ Simpson
criminal trial, take on negative semantic associations, or ‘semantic prosodies’ (Louw 1993),
through frequent collocation with negative words such as ‘prejudice’ and ‘problems’. In the
Marv Albert opening, the prosecutor appears to be using ‘human’ and ‘human being’ in a
similarly non-neutral way, perhaps to draw on the double meaning of ‘sodomy’ as both ‘bug-
gery’ and ‘bestiality’. In all of these ways, then, opening statement narratives may construct a
cognitive ﬁlter through which jurors will then view the subsequent evidence (Moore 1989).
Witness examination and story construction
Institutionally, the evidential phase of the trial is concerned with the determination, or
veriﬁcation, of the facts, which explains its thesis–antithesis structure:
Prosecution Case ! Defence Case
Examination (by friendly counsel) ! Cross-examination (by opposing counsel)
Despite the dialectic institutional structure, though, lawyers control the emergence of the crime
story during the evidential phase in two ways: by selecting and sequencing their witnesses and
by guiding those witnesses through their main examination (called ‘direct examination’
in the US and ‘examination-in-chief’ in British and Commonwealth countries).
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
205

In most everyday trials, lawyers have little choice in the selection of witnesses but
more choice in the sequencing of those witnesses. Advocacy manuals, which should be
taken as rough guides to what the profession considers to be good practice, rather than
surrogates for empirical observation, recommend following the chronological order of
events ‘unless other reasons prevail’ (Stone 1995: 90). But other reasons, such as the
availability of expert witnesses, usually do prevail. While there is some evidence that
lawyers in England do make an eﬀort to follow a chronological or at least ‘narrative +
support’ structure, as indicated in Figure 14.1 (Heﬀer 2005: 80), in the US context both
Stygall (1994: 123) and Cotterill (2003: 40) claim that the actual sequence of events is
simply ignored. (Clearly, it does not help when a trial involves over 120 witnesses testifying
over nine months, as was the case with OJ Simpson.)
Turning to individual witness examinations, at ﬁrst sight there appears to be very little
in the way of narrative discourse. Stygall (1994: 118) comments that the evidential phase
of a trial is ‘anything but a narrative’ and Harris (2005: 220) claims that witness exam-
ination follows a paradigmatic mode. Heﬀer (2005) provides empirical support for these
claims. Deﬁning a minimal narrative response, after Labov and Waletzky (1967), as one
in which reversing the order of two narrative clauses will lead to a diﬀerent interpreta-
tion (e.g. He fell in the pond so had a whisky v He had a whisky so fell in the pond), he
found that in examination-in-chief, where the story is meant to be elicited, only 15% of
complainants’ turns, 14% of defendants’ turns, 12% of other lay witnesses’ turns, 6% of
police oﬃcers’ turns and 3% of experts’ turns were minimally narrative (Heﬀer 2005:
116–17). The ﬁgures justify a distinction between ‘narrative’ (complainant, defendant,
other lay) and ‘support’ (police, expert) witnesses, but even so the narrative contributions
of ‘narrative’ witnesses appear few.
These ﬁgures, though, do not tell the full story. In the ﬁrst place, narrative turns tend to be
longer than the mean witness turn length in examination-in-chief of approximately 13 words
(Heﬀer 2005: 99), and they tend to be more salient. Extract (1) is from the examination-
in-chief of the lead narrative witness in a dangerous driving and assault case.2
(1) Examination-in-chief – dangerous driving and assault
23 Q:
… whilst you were riding along the road, both you and Miss Walters on
your horses, what happened around about noon?
24 A:
We heard a car approaching from behind on this road. Because it was a very
narrow road, we decided to trot up to get to the corner shown in photo-
graph No.1 to let the vehicle get past. He was impatient. He came up
behind us. He started honking his horn and shouting abuse at us.
In this simple exchange, we ﬁnd the three central elements of narrative discourse in criminal
trials as already found in the opening statements: orientation summed up in the barrister’s
question; a core narrative conveyed through a causally connected series of events relating to
the crime – (we) heard … decided, (he) came up … started (honking); and a set of evaluative
clauses (Point) and clausal elements (evaluation) which together allocate blame to the
defendant: it was a very narrow road … he was impatient … honking his horn and shouting abuse.
This minimal witness story demonstrates another point about the degree of narrativity
in witness examinations: while only 12–15% of ‘narrative witness’ turns provide core
narrative, narrative turns, as here, are often followed by a long sequence of turns teasing
out the orientation, evaluation and Point in more detail before returning to the core
narrative. When considered in this way, Heﬀer (2005), Harris (2001, 2005) and Gibbons
CHRIS HEFFER
206

(2003) have found that almost entire direct examinations can be seen as following a
Labovian-style story structure.
A third point which makes these ﬁgures deceptive is that at least some of the core
narrative is provided by the lawyers themselves in their own turns. Coulthard and
Johnson (2007: 102–3) note that of the ﬁrst 19 questions put to Dr Shipman by his
defence counsel, 15 required only conﬁrmation responses. Many of these provide core
narrative of Shipman’s life (see Extract (2)).
(2) Examination-in-chief in the Harold Shipman murder trial
5 Q:
Dr Shipman, you were born on the 14th January 1946 in Nottingham?
6 A:
That’s correct.
7 Q:
You grew up in the area, went to school in the area and thereafter went to
Leeds Medical School?
8 A:
That is also correct.
9 Q:
From there you studied medicine and qualiﬁed, obtaining your primary
medical qualiﬁcation in 1970?
10 A:
That’s correct.
Similarly, trial lawyers often repeat or reformulate a core narrative element the witness
has just related to mark it as salient for the jury and to encourage them to infer the
probative Point, as in (3).
(3)
95 Q:
… Did he get past you?
96 A:
… he forced us into the hedge so he could get past.
97 Q:
He forced you into the hedge so he could get past?
98 A:
Yes.
In terms of the turn-by-turn mechanics of narrative construction, early work on lawyers’
questions to witnesses (Danet and Kermish 1978; Woodbury 1984) tended to assume a
direct relation between question form and degree of control over the answers given. Thus
‘wh-’ questions were assumed to be open-ended and thus invite narration; polar (yes/no)
and either-or questions were considered restricting; and pseudo-declaratives and tag
questions were judged to be coercive. Later work (Maley and Fahey 1991: 110–17; Heﬀer
2005) has shown that question form in itself is not particularly indicative of function. For
example, polar questions, as in ‘Did he get past you?’ above, are often taken as requests for
narration while pseudo-declaratives, as in the Shipman examination, are not usually
coercive when used in direct examination. Maley and Fahey (1991) distinguish instead
between information-seeking and conﬁrmation-seeking questions. Heﬀer (2005: 110–14)
distinguishes two diﬀerent types of information-seeking ‘requests’: requests for narration and
requests for speciﬁcation. Requests for narration are linked to a set of grammatical and lexical
‘narrative cues’, such as wh-questions with the verbs ‘happen’, ‘do’ and ‘tell’ (e.g. ‘What
happened then?’) and polar questions with the verbs ‘do’ and ‘say’ and indeﬁnite pronouns
like ‘anything’ (e.g. ‘Did he say anything to you?’). However, narrative cues are by no means
always taken up since uptake depends considerably on individual witness style.
Running against the tide of narrativity in witness examination are the rules of evi-
dence, the mismatch between the witness and lawyer stories, the testimony style of some
witnesses and the dialectic structure of witness examination itself.
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
207

The rules of evidence mean that the witness is constrained in terms of telling her own
story. In particular, hearsay and speculation, which are staples of everyday narrative, are
(in principle at least) excluded from court (O’Barr 1982). The rules are applied, though,
at the discretion of the judge, whose primary concern is often to speed up proceedings.
This explains why leading questions, which are technically excluded from examination-
in-chief, are actually common in the initial phases of examination, as can be seen in the
case of Harold Shipman (2) above. There counsel covers the ﬁrst 24 years of Shipman’s
life in three narrative turns presented for conﬁrmation. That is possible simply because
the events are not in dispute.
The constraints on witness narration are more strategic than regulatory and derive in
part from a mismatch between the stories the witness and lawyer want and need to tell.
When examining their own witnesses, lawyers face a trade-oﬀbetween allowing them
to narrate ‘naturally, spontaneously and conversationally’ to enhance trust (Stone
1995: 95) and taking them through their evidence ‘by tightly framed questions, in
small steps’ to ensure that the story that emerges is legally adequate and eﬀective in
terms of the overall goal of securing guilt or innocence (Stone 1995: 94). Or, as
Jackson (1995: 400) puts it, ‘counsel must decide, in eﬀect, who can tell the story
better’ – witness or counsel. While the question–answer (Q/A) format is generally
considered to be the primary anti-narrative element of witness examination (e.g.
Stygall 1994; Cotterill 2003; Coulthard and Johnson 2007), it can also be seen as
precisely the feature which permits the lawyer to construct their crime story. By
assigning ﬁxed questioner/answerer roles, the Q/A format ‘constructs a turn-taking
organization that gives control of topical organization entirely to the questioner’
(Levinson 1992: 86). And topical control means narratorial control.
The testimony style of some witnesses can also run against the narrative tide. The
Duke Language and Law Programme in the 1970s identiﬁed both ‘powerless’ v ‘powerful’
and ‘narrative’ v ‘fragmented’ styles of testifying (O’Barr 1982). ‘Powerless’ witnesses,
unlike ‘powerful’ ones, used such features as hedging, hesitation, intensiﬁcation, mitigation
and honoriﬁcs. A witness with a ‘narrative’ style, like the one from the driving case
above, will take non-narrative requests as an opportunity to provide further narrative
detail such as an evaluative explanation, as in (4).
(4)
Q: What speed were you going on the horses?
A: We were trotting so we could get to the corner as quickly as we could to let the
car come past.
A witness with a ‘fragmented’ style (5), on the other hand, would oﬀer minimal responses
and require several exchanges to convey the same information as that in (4).
(5) [invented example]
Q: What speed were you going on the horses?
A: We were trotting.
Q: Why were you trotting?
A: So we could get to the corner as quickly as we could.
Q: Why did you want to do that?
A: To let the car come past.
CHRIS HEFFER
208

O’Barr’s team found that mock jurors rated powerless witnesses and those with a
fragmented style as very signiﬁcantly less convincing, truthful, competent, intelligent and
trustworthy than ‘powerful’ and ‘narrative’ witnesses. Although the powerful/powerless
distinction has been challenged (e.g. Kerr-Thompson 2002), it does seem likely that the
lawyer’s folk perception of powerlessness or enunciative weakness in a witness will
inﬂuence the degree of control she exercises over that witness. Furthermore, a perceived
need to control the witness tightly will, in turn, tend to lead to a ‘fragmented’ style from
the witness, who will tend to adapt to the style of friendly counsel.
Finally, the dialectic structure of witness examination can also disrupt the narrative
ﬂow in a number of ways. Objections by opposing counsel (for example for leading the
witness or calling for speculation) can interrupt a line of narrative questioning. Such
objections are fairly rare in English courts (Heﬀer 2005: 82–84) but appear common in
major US trials (Cotterill 2003: 95–97). More importantly, lawyers need to anticipate
cross-examination, as advocacy manuals constantly remind them (Stone 1995). Return-
ing to the lead narrative witness in the dangerous driving case, after making the strong
evaluative point about her being forced by the defendant into the hedge, counsel appears
to digress into material which clearly does not strengthen the narrative goal (6).
(6)
99 Q:
As he went past, did you have anything in your hand?
100 A:
Yes, I had my whip. I asked him to back oﬀand, as he drew so close, my
whip hit the side of his car.
101 Q:
Did you do that deliberately to try to get him to back oﬀor what?
102 A:
Yes, as an indication, like a reﬂex action. If someone is attacking you, you try
to defend yourself, don’t you?
Clearly, the rider hitting out with her whip detracts from the overall prosecution nar-
rative of blame, and would probably not be a part of the witness’s own favoured narrative,
but the lawyer is well aware that this will form the mainstay of cross-examination so needs
to mitigate the damaging eﬀect before passing the witness over to the opposition. Ehrlich
(2007) notes similar anticipatory questions in a Canadian sexual assault case.
Overall, then, trial lawyers do often construct narratives through examination of their own
witnesses but they are distinctively forensic narratives displaying considerable discoursal
hybridity.
Cross-examination and narratorial credibility
Once the examination of the witness is complete, the opposing side will generally (but
by no means always) cross-examine that witness. From a narrative perspective, there
are two objects to cross-examination: to dismantle the story co-constructed during
examination and to present alternative versions of the facts. Both these aims are achieved
primarily through the form, content and management of the lawyer’s questions. The
witness’s answers are, to some extent, irrelevant.
Lawyers are able to argue and narrate against the witness because they wield power in
the turn-taking process (Atkinson and Drew 1979; Danet and Bogoch 1980; Dunstan
1980; Harris 1984; Goodrich 1987, 1990; Drew 1990; Matoesian 1993, 1995; Stygall
1994; Eades 2000, 2008b; Cotterill 2003). In the ﬁrst place, they can control to some
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
209

extent the nature of the witness’s answers through the question form. Although, as we
have seen with regard to direct examination, there is no direct correlation between
question form and coerciveness, a preponderance of conﬁrmation-seeking questions will
clearly convey the message to the witness that this is not an opportunity for free narration.
Heﬀer (2005: 122) found that 44% of 24,000 ‘questions’ from 126 cross-examinations
were conﬁrmation-seeking declarative statements (‘You went there to have sexual
intercourse’) or tag-questions (‘You raped her that night, did you not?’), compared with
12% in examination-in-chief. A large proportion of the other questions were polar,
which, in the general coercive context of cross-examination, would also probably be
interpreted as conﬁrmation seeking.
Lawyers can also shape interpretation through the wording of their questions. Loftus
(1979, 1992) showed informants a ﬁlm of a traﬃc accident and asked ‘About how fast
were the cars going when they X each other’, where X was replaced by ‘hit’ or ‘sma-
shed’. Those asked the ‘smashed’ question estimated a much higher speed and were far
more likely to produce a false memory of broken glass when asked the question ‘Did
you see any broken glass?’ Furthermore, when the question included a presupposition, as
in ‘Did you see the broken glass?’, it would also lead to false memories. Presupposition of
some sort is almost inevitable in questions, and particularly leading questions. Negatively
evaluative presupposition, on the other hand, can be found in ‘loaded questions’: ones
which contain a presupposition the answerer would not want to commit to (Walton
1989: 31). Bülow-Møller (1991) cites the following example:
Q:
It is perfectly understandable that the witnesses were confused as to the origin
of ﬁre.
This unfairly presupposes that the witnesses were confused. Hickey (1993: 101) notes
that even where the witness rejects the presupposition, the cross-examiner can presuppose
the rejected answer in the following question:
Q:
(suggests that the witness’s colleague gave a certain reply to his employer)
A:
No, he didn’t say anything like that.
Q:
And that reply didn’t suit you, did it?
Given that cross-examiners control the turn-taking process, they can use silence (see
Aldridge, this volume, on the use of silence in cross-examining children) and interruption
strategically. Matoesian (1993) notes that a silence following the question, along with an
emphatic restatement of the question, can suggest to the jury that the witness is unwilling
to answer the question rather than just taking their time to do so.
Q: Then they’re not in substantially the same condition, are they?
(2.5)
ARE THEY?
(Matoesian 1993: 144)
On the other hand, the cross-examiner may interrupt where the witness replies in an
undesired way, although this strategy appears to alienate jurors (O’Barr 1982: 90).
Clearly, it is in the interest of the witness to resist the line the cross-examiner is taking.
Cross-examiners can regain control of the topic under discussion by repeating or
CHRIS HEFFER
210

reformulating questions that have failed to get the desired answers (Conley and O’Barr
1998: 26–27). Lerm shows how, in one of his own cross-examinations, he manages to
turn a witness interruption into a damaging reformulation.
Q:
Good, but I am also …
A:
(interrupts) I did not tell them everything
Q:
Yes, we shall get to that. You did not tell them everything, did you, so you
concealed certain things, did you not?
Lerm (1997: 172)
Gibbons (2003: 112) describes the above attempts to dismantle the recently constructed
witness narrative as ‘idea targeted’ pragmatic strategies that target the veracity of the tale
itself. He also suggests that there are a number of ‘person targeted’ pragmatic strategies
designed to destabilise the witness as reliable narrator. These include: reducing the status
of the (particularly expert) witness (Gibbons 2003: 113–14); using forms of address to
depersonalise the witness (O’Barr 1982); using personal pronouns to create distance or
proximity (Jacquemet 1996); and identifying contradictory statements (Drew 1990). (See
also Tkacˇuková, this volume, for discussion of these pragmatic strategies in a libel trial.)
One person-targeted strategy is the evaluative use of deictic forms. Heﬀer (2005:
141–50) notes the ‘evaluative pointing’ that can occur through strategic choices of tense,
pronouns and demonstrative forms in counsel’s metadiscursive comments on the
witness’s narration. For example, the form you are telling the/this jury is frequently found
in the immediate context of words doubting or denying the truth of what the witness
has been saying. The act of telling is ‘put on stage’ through use of the progressive and the
marked selection of the/this jury ‘draws the fact-ﬁnders into sharing the cross-examiner’s
communicative intent’ (Heﬀer 2005: 145).
Another strategy that I would describe as ‘person-targeted’ (but which Gibbons
describes as ‘idea targeted’) is to subvert the natural order of narration, thereby disrupting
the witness’s prepared stories and their schemas of how stories should be narrated (O’Barr
1982). The purpose behind such disruption is not so much to attack the ideas (because
such disruption will be diﬃcult for the jury to follow too) but to destabilise the witness
so that they produce inconsistent answers that impeach their credibility.
In addition to disrupting and destabilising, though, cross-examiners can also narrate
alternative stories despite, rather than through, the witness. Wagenaar et al. (1993: 58–60)
suggest this might be a more eﬀective strategy than attacking the strength of the prose-
cution evidence even if, logically, all the defence need to do is prove reasonable doubt.
In England and Wales, cross-examiners can use the excuse that they need to put their
case to the witness if they want to claim that the witness is lying (Keane 1996: 153).
Counsel often use the metalinguistic markers I put to you and I suggest to mark this for-
mally, though this is not strictly necessary (7).
(7)
Q: Let me try again. I am suggesting that you knew perfectly well that King in October
began to name Jacobs as one of his attackers. Do you follow what I am putting to you?
Heﬀer (2005: 141) suggests that with put to counsel are primarily addressing and
attempting to intimidate the witness, while with suggest they are addressing primarily the
jury with the intention of presenting an alternative account of events. Thus, we see the
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
211

two main functions of cross-examination coming together in these two eminently
advocatory metalinguistic markers.
Closing arguments and the trial story
At one level, closing arguments, often considered by trial lawyers as their main perfor-
mance event in the trial (Walter 1988), provide an opportunity for a reiteration of the
crime story in the opening statements. However, the crime story now tends to be
viewed through the ‘story of the trial’ (Jackson 1995). In other words, the crime and
investigation stories are viewed through the evidence of the witnesses who gave testi-
mony during the trial. Both parties accept that the plausibility of their stories will depend
on the perceived credibility of their witnesses, so paramount to winning their case is
persuading the jury of the respective reliability and unreliability of the narrators. Hobbs
(2003a) points out that the jury’s impression of counsel, the protagonists in the story of
the trial, is also crucially important and that managing that impression is a key rhetorical
strategy in a US prosecutor’s rebuttal argument (one delivered after the defence closing
in some US jurisdictions).
No case can present an entirely coherent narrative since there will always be gaps of
one sort or another in the evidence. Closing arguments are often, then, about those
narrative gaps. Interestingly, lawyers frequently approach these verbal gaps with visual
metaphors. They often emphasise through lexical repetition that another version of the
crime story is merely a false ‘picture’ or ‘impression’ that the opposing party is trying to
convey (Heﬀer 2005: 86). Cotterill (2003: 208–17) shows how the prosecution and
defence in the OJ Simpson trial both use the ‘jigsaw puzzle’ metaphor to argue their
respective cases. While the jigsaw is visually eﬀective, it does have the weakness that
there are always missing pieces of evidence. Consequently, prosecutor Marcia Clark
attempts to persuade the jury, in anticipation of the defence closings, that those pieces are
peripheral to the central picture. ‘You miss a couple of pieces of the sky sometimes, you
do lose those pieces, no big deal. You’ve got the picture … you’ve got all the necessary
pieces of the puzzle’ (Cotterill 2003: 216–17).
On the other hand, the defence note that ‘the prosecution took a photograph or
picture of OJ Simpson ﬁrst, then they took the pieces apart’ (Cotterill 2003: 218),
essentially accusing the prosecution of ﬁnding the evidence to ﬁt the picture.
In many respects, though, the closing arguments are not centrally concerned with the
construction and evaluation of narrative but rather attempt to bridge the gap between
storytelling and the legal categories to which the jury will soon have to ﬁt the evidence.
Indeed, there is some empirical evidence to suggest that ‘legal-expository’ closing argu-
ments, in which legal elements are outlined along with the evidence that supports or fails
to support those elements, might be more eﬀective than narratively organised closings
(Spiecker and Worthington 2003). So far, this has only been tested on civil jury trials but
it may well also apply to criminal trials.
Jury instruction and narrativisation
In their closing speeches, counsel for the prosecution and defence will show the jury
how their evidence is linked with the legal charges, but they will do so in an overtly
CHRIS HEFFER
212

partisan fashion, giving weight only to those elements which support their own case and
employing a full armoury of persuasive rhetoric (Cotterill 2003). The only chance the
jury have, then, of receiving non-partisan guidance on how to decide the case is through
the judge during his ﬁnal ‘charge’ or ‘summing-up’ to the jury (Figure 14.1).
In most US jurisdictions, the judge is allowed only to guide the jury on the law in a
set of, usually prescribed and written, jury instructions (see Tiersma, this volume, on the
California jury instructions and their redrafting). Generally, these are written in fairly
technical and formal legal language and are poorly understood (Lieberman and Sales
1999). But even if they are understood, no help is given on how to apply these abstract
deﬁnitions of law to the particular facts of the case (Heﬀer 2008b). In British Com-
monwealth jurisdictions, on the other hand, judges tend both to instruct the jury on the
law with more discretion over wording and to review the evidence presented in the case
in light of that law. This introduces several opportunities for the narrativisation of an
otherwise highly paradigmatic genre.
In the ﬁrst place, given considerable discretion over wording, judges are able to
accommodate the language of their instructions to the narrative sensibilities of the jury.
In other words, the narrative mode of discourse can become strategic input into this
otherwise highly paradigmatic genre, as Heﬀer (2002, 2005: 17–35, 166–80) showed
with regard to 100 English judges’ directions on the burden and standard of proof. Sec-
ondly, some English judges narrativise their legal instructions by providing narrative
examples of legal distinctions (Heﬀer 2005: 177–80), such as that between knowing and
believing that goods are stolen:
If for example you were standing in Marks and Spencers and you watched a shoplifter
steal and then ten minutes later you took the goods from the shoplifter you would
receive them knowing that they were stolen. If on the other hand …
The third, and perhaps principal, way in which narrative can enter into the judge’s
summing-up is in the review of the evidence, which is included to a greater or lesser
extent in most Commonwealth jurisdictions (Wolchover 1989). The review is meant to
be as impartial as possible, and judges must present the defence case, however weak.
Nevertheless, judges are permitted to comment on both the weight of the evidence and
the credibility and plausibility of witnesses.
Henning (1999) analysed the summings-up by diﬀerent judges of the hung trial and
retrial (resulting in conviction) of the same rape and assault case in Tasmania. She argues
that the ﬁrst trial judge’s attempt to provide a ‘neutral account’ simply results in confu-
sion because it fails to ﬂag up the truly salient issues in the case. The second judge provides
much more assistance in ‘reading’ the case, and instead of a bare chronicle of the facts,
provides something much more like an evaluated narrative. In Extract (7) the defendant’s
arrival at the house where the assault took place is, unlike in the ﬁrst trial, described
clearly from the complainant’s perspective.
(7)
Well then the next question you might need to consider is why did he come down
from Y on the 31st July. You might think, and I’ll read her evidence in detail later,
you might think that she obviously thought that it was to harm her, having regard
to the reaction she said (sic, had) when she saw him at the door unannounced,
unexpected on a dark and wintry night, raining cats and dogs, holding a riﬂe and
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
213

having shouted through the door before he came in. I’ll remind you of that evi-
dence in detail, as I say, later. So she obviously thought he was there for no good
purpose.
The text has a great deal of internal evaluation, including intensiﬁcation and emphatic
repetition (‘she obviously thought’), allusive clichés (‘on a dark and wintry night … ’)
and colloquialisms (‘there for no good purpose’). The judge’s comment on the com-
plainant’s thought processes is formally attributed to the jurors through the standard
judicial formula ‘you might think’ (Stubbs 1996; Heﬀer 2005: 200–201; Henning 1999:
209) but use of the comment adjunct obviously normalises the comment, bringing it into
conformity with a standard of expectation of normal behaviour (i.e. a standard script)
(Heﬀer 2005: 190).
The passage has precisely the sort of ‘high rhetorical volume and intensity’ which
Robertshaw (1998: 182) severely criticises as a source of bias in English summings-up.
Henning (1999: 212–13), though, argues that, rather than oﬀering the ‘chimera of neu-
trality’, this narrative approach provides a ‘balanced’ review which reﬂects the relative
strengths and weaknesses of the case and guides jurors towards the legally relevant issues.
This might prevent them being swayed by the type of aﬀective evaluation we saw in the
prosecutor’s opening address in the Marv Albert trial, and which is the stock in trade of
the advocate’s art in closing speeches. At the same time, there is a very ﬁne line between
active assistance and undue inﬂuence.
Jury deliberation and narrative decision-making
Once the jury go out to deliberate, we have evidence in various forms that they reason
in a narrative fashion. Firstly, experimental psychological evidence suggests that jurors do
not weigh up the probability of each individual piece of evidence being true (as mathe-
matical models suggest (Hastie 1993)), but attempt to ﬁt that evidence into narratives
which they then judge as plausible or implausible. According to the Story Model
(Pennington and Hastie 1986, 1991), jurors integrate the trial evidence with their pre-
existing scripts for event sequences similar to those in dispute and their generic expectations
about what makes a coherent story. Generally, the adversarial nature of trial cases will
ensure that more than one story is constructed and jurors might have diﬀerent levels of
conﬁdence in those variants. The acceptability of a story is determined by its coverage and
coherence, while its relative uniqueness contributes to a juror’s conﬁdence in that story.
Cotterill (2003: 223) provides an example of how jurors in the OJ Simpson trial
integrated the trial evidence with their pre-existing scripts. One of the jurors re-enacts
one of the oﬃcer’s versions of the investigation story.
you go into the house and you spotted blood prior to going into the house. So
you scaled the wall and now you get into the backyard and get Arnelle to let you
into the house. No one ever goes upstairs. No one ever searches the house. … It
doesn’t make sense.
Cotterill (2003: 223–24) notes how the use of the historic present, reminiscent of the
prosecution opening in the Marv Albert trial, both brings the audience closer to the
crime events and evaluates the oﬃcer’s actions as a potential habitual action, thus
CHRIS HEFFER
214

measuring ‘the typicality and by implication the plausibility of the oﬃcer’s behaviour
against a media-created schema of what police oﬃcers are meant to do at crime scenes’.
Hastie and Pennington apply their Story Model to jury decision-making in the OJ
Simpson trial. They note that while the prosecution, as always, presented a single, linear
crime story, the defence presented a number of alternate stories. Two of these stories –
the police ‘rush to judgment’ story and the ‘bungling criminal investigators’ story (Hastie
and Pennington (1996): 966–67) – undermined central elements (and thus the unique-
ness) of the prosecution story, thereby reducing conﬁdence. The defence also successfully
ﬂagged up inconsistencies in the prosecution evidence, thereby undermining the coherence
of the prosecution story. Thus, contrary to the ‘popular view’ that jurors’ judgements in
the OJ case were merely ‘reﬂexive reactions evoked by ‘prejudice triggers’ in the evi-
dence’ (e.g. ‘Simpson is a black man who beat his white wife’, or, ‘Simpson overcame a
disadvantaged background to become successful in a racist society’), Hastie and Pen-
nington (1996: 969) hypothesise on the basis of the jurors’ own remarks that ‘most of the
jurors’ decisions were arrived at primarily through their inferences from the evidence
(mediated by the construction of a “story summary”)’.
Sentencing and beyond: a moral coda
The verdict, like the original plea, is delivered as a purely paradigmatic choice between
‘guilty’ and ‘not guilty’.3 However, once the verdict is in and the narrative ‘truth’ of guilt
has been established, the constraints imposed by the ‘law of narrative’ are loosened.
Firstly, counsels’ submissions on aggravating and mitigating circumstances broaden the
scope of the narrative to include elements previously excluded such as the defendant’s
criminal record and family circumstances and, in the US as we see in Schweda-Nicholson
(this volume), the convicted person may speak himself. Then the judge, in his or her
sentencing remarks, broadens the scope of the story further by ﬁtting the defendant’s
individual conduct within a more general moral sanction against certain behaviour in
society. Thus, the behaviour of the defendant in the dangerous driving case cited several
times in this chapter is, for the ﬁrst time, described in lay terms as ‘road rage’, which in
turn is described as a general negative trend in society. Finally, the constraints on the
evaluative dimension of narrative are lifted and the verbal intensity of judgment appears
to be calibrated with the severity of the crime and the length of the sentence handed
down (Heﬀer 2007). The sentencing of Dr Harold Shipman, for example, is quite unlike
any other form of legal text in terms of its evaluative intensity.
The time has now come for me to pass sentence upon you for these wicked,
wicked crimes. Each of your victims was your patient. You murdered each and
every one of your victims by a calculated and cold blooded perversion of your
medical skills. For your own evil and wicked purposes you took advantage of and
grossly abused the trust that each of your victims reposed in you. … The sheer
wickedness of what you have done deﬁes description and is shocking beyond belief.
(Shipman Trial, Day 58, www.the-shipman-inquiry.org.uk/trialtrans.asp)
In short, the violence of punishment that the words of sentencing represent (Cover
1986) needs to be motivated with more than a purely referential factual account of the
crime events.
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
215

Conclusion
This chapter has provided a taste of some of the complex issues involved in the
construction of stories in court. In particular, it has stressed the multitude of ways in
which narrativity of one form or another can emerge in the trial context through its
various hybrid genres. I have focused on describing how and why narrative is constructed
in the trial since I believe it is important to understand the ordinary mechanics of trial
communication before going on to critique it. Much work in this area has suﬀered from
a merely partial understanding of the trial context, and new readers need to be wary. At
the same time, there is now a rich body of socio-critical work on the various forms of
narrative inequality that can emerge in the trial. I would point readers, for example, to
Ehrlich (2001, 2002) and Matoesian (1993, 2001) on the suppression of rape complainants’
narratives, to Eades (1994a, 2008b) on the narrative disadvantage of Aboriginal witnesses,
and to Brennan (1994) and Eades (2002) on the narrative vulnerability of child witnesses.
I have no more than hinted here at the major cross-trial and cross-jurisdictional dif-
ferences in the degree that narrative is allowed to emerge in the various trial genres.
I have also ignored for the most part the historical emergence of those genres (see
Archer, this volume, for a historical perspective). Both diachronic and diatypic variation,
though, can tell us a great deal about the tension between narrativity and anti-narrativity,
and this is an area ripe for study. Narrative, in all its manifestations, remains ‘in issue’
throughout the trial since there is a constant tension between the narrative propensity of
the crime events and the legal desire to subject those narratives to scientiﬁc veriﬁcation.
Or, as Gewirtz (1996b) simply puts it, ‘Law is all about human life, yet struggles to keep
life at bay.’
Notes
1 Not all jurisdictions follow this structure. For example, many US jurisdictions have ﬁnal jury
instructions before the closing arguments. I have tried to incorporate many jurisdictional diﬀerences
by giving my own labels to the genres rather than the extremely diverse legal-professional labels.
2 I number according to turn in the full examination since the position of an extract in the examination
is often crucial to understanding its role and signiﬁcance.
3 Scotland has a third category of ‘Not Proven’.
Further reading
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual Consent, London: Routledge.
——(2002) ‘(Re)contextualizing complainant’s accounts of sexual assault’, Forensic Linguistics: The
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 9(2): 193–212.
Matoesian, G. (1993) Reproducing Rape: Domination through Talk in the Courtroom, Cambridge: Polity
Press.
——(2001) Law and the Language of Identity: Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith Rape Trial, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
(The above authors deal with the suppression of rape complainants’ narratives.)
Brennan, M. (1994) ‘Cross-examining children in criminal courts: Child welfare under attack’, in
J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman: 199–216.
Eades, D. (1994) ‘A case of communicative clash: Aboriginal English and the legal system’, in J. Gibbons
(ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman: 234–64.
CHRIS HEFFER
216

——(2002) ‘“Evidence given in unequivocal terms”: Gaining consent of aboriginal young people in
court’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave: 162–79.
——(2008) Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
(These authors deal with the narrative disadvantage of Aboriginal witnesses and the narrative vulnerability
of child witnesses.)
NARRATIVE IN THE TRIAL
217

15
Prosecution and defense closing speeches
The creation of contrastive closing arguments
Laura Felton Rosulek
Introduction
The closing arguments of trials in adversarial legal systems are important sites of
investigation both for discourse analysis in general and for forensic linguistics speciﬁcally.
During the closing arguments, two speakers take the same people, events, and evidence,
and create two opposing representations for the same audience. Understanding how this
occurs can reveal how speakers’ goals and belief systems aﬀect their use of language.
Additionally, these discourses are both persuasive and argumentative, thus providing a
prime opportunity to study how such discourses are linguistically created.
In addition to these aspects, closing arguments are especially interesting for forensic
discourse analysis for several other reasons. First, the closing arguments are the lawyers’
ﬁnal chances to convince the judge or jurors that theirs is the best account of what really
happened; the last chance to put together their most complete and coherent “master
narrative” (Gibbons 2003: 155) of the crime, investigation, and the trial. Second, the
lawyers produce their argument without having to interact with witnesses. Thus,
the arguments are free of outside inﬂuences which could aﬀect the lawyers’ discourses
and language use. Finally, unlike during the examination of witnesses, in the closing
arguments lawyers now get to speak directly to the people they are trying to convince.
Research into closing arguments has taken two general focuses: what information or
message is included, that is, the ideational content (Halliday 1978) and how lawyers
negotiate their interpersonal relationships, that is, the construction of the speaker’s role
through modality, person, voice (Bakhtin 1981), footings (Goﬀman 1981b), style, etc.
(Halliday 1978). Section two of this chapter presents a discussion of research on the
ideational content of closing arguments, speciﬁcally the work that has been done on the
ways in which lawyers create opposing discourses when starting from the same people
and events. The third section in this chapter discusses research that has shown that in the
closing arguments lawyers must manage multiple aspects of their identity: both their
position of authority and their similarities to the jurors. In section four, I then present an
analysis of lawyers’ use of quotations to show how a single forensic discourse analysis can
explore both the ideational and interpersonal aspects of closing arguments. The ﬁnal
218

section provides a summary of the results of this analysis and directions for further
research.
Ideational content of closing arguments
Several studies have begun to summarize what information is often included in the
closing arguments. Walter (1988) ﬁnds that lawyers tend to focus on emotional appeals,
intellectual issues, legal deﬁnitions and refutations. Heﬀer (2005) argues that trials are
about the crime, investigation and trial narratives, but in the closing arguments, the trial
narrative becomes the focus with the stories of what happened during the crime and
investigation being presented through the descriptions of the witnesses’ testimony.
While those studies show how prosecution and defense arguments are similar, others
have looked at their diﬀerences. They have shown that the two sides tend to focus on
diﬀerent topics. Walter (1988) observes that prosecution lawyers make more references
to good common sense and to evidence or facts while defense lawyers place more onus on
jurors and discuss reasonable doubt more frequently. Heﬀer (2005) describes a case in which
the prosecution foregrounds the violent behaviors of the defendant while the defense
constructs their narrative as being about the anger of the victim. This analysis is sup-
ported by quantitative results which show that the prosecution refers to the defendant
more than to the complainants while the defense does the opposite.
Other studies have shown that not only are the two sides focusing on diﬀerent topics,
but they are also often completely ignoring or silencing (Huckin 2002) those discussed
by the other side. In a case described in Felton Rosulek (2008), the two sides system-
atically discuss diﬀerent topics and ignore those important to the other side. For instance,
the prosecution foregrounds the sexual and violent details of the alleged abuse, the length
of time the abuse lasted, and the power of the defendant over the victim. The defense,
on the other hand, remains silent on those topics, focusing instead on the length of time
between the abuse and the victim’s report of it and the victim’s behaviors, which they
did not feel were consistent with those of a victim. In another case, described in Felton
Rosulek (forthcoming a), one of the victims is not referenced as an individual by the
defense. In this case, there were six victims of various crimes including rape, assault, and
robbery. The woman who was kidnapped and raped is the most frequently referenced
victim in the prosecution’s argument. In the defense argument, this victim was only
referenced six times and only as part of the group of victims during the investigation and
trial narratives as in (1). The lawyer never refers to her as an individual.
(1)
I submit to you that the photographic lineup was unduly suggestive to the
women who were shown the photographic lineup. The in-court identiﬁcation that
you had is this the defendant David Becker sitting in court, you’ve seen it a bunch
of times. The cops did it, the victims did it.
The defense lawyer ignores the crime that was committed against her and the details of
her personal identity. This constructs the most violent actions of the defendant against
this particular woman as irrelevant to the other charges against him.
Though not as severe as not including a relevant social actor, such as a victim, in an
argument, in some cases a side will exclude the defendant or the victim from either the
crime, investigation, or trial narratives, while including them in the others. In several
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
219

cases in Felton Rosulek (2009b), the defense completely omits the defendant from the
crime narrative. While they include what the victims were doing at that time, they
simply exclude any references to the defendant in this narrative. For example, in the case
from which (1) above was taken, the defendant is only referenced once in the defense’s
crime narrative, though he is referenced relatively frequently in the other narratives
included in the argument. In examples like this, the social actors are not completely
ignored, only their involvement in one of the narratives is.
While those studies have focused on the diﬀering thematic content of opposing closing
arguments, others have centered on the speciﬁc lexical choices lawyers make to reference
the actors and events that they do choose to include. For example, Cotterill (2003)
shows that in the OJ Simpson criminal trial, the lawyers for both sides used metaphors in
their closing arguments to emphasize certain people and events and to create diﬀerent
linguistic representations of them. For instance, the prosecution developed the metaphor
of OJ Simpson as a time bomb to try to force the jury to see him as powerful, explosive,
and volatile. The two sides used metaphors to foreground certain characteristics of the
defendant and to silence others.
Felton Rosulek (2008, forthcoming a) shows that it is not just through metaphors
that lawyers focus on diﬀerent characteristics of the victims’ and the defendants’ iden-
tities. Prosecution lawyers will background the unique identity of the person on trial
by simply using a functionalization (van Leeuwen 2002) or reference to his role in the
local context such as the defendant or the drug dealer. They will sometimes even refer to
him as this in the crime story, thus using his role in the here-and-now of the trial to
erase his identity during the time of the crime as in example (2) from an aggravated
robbery case.
(2)
The defendant approaches her, shoves a gun in her face, points a gun at her,
demands her money and jewelry, and robs her.
In some instances, the lawyers even use the defendant when recreating direct quotations
despite it being impossible in these particular quotations for that to have been the term of
reference used. In (3), despite the lawyer representing the victim as referring to her
stepfather as the defendant, she would not have used this term as he did not yet have this
identity in the context in which the quotation took place. Also, due to the participants’
relationships, it is unlikely she would have ever used this term when speaking to her
mother about him.
(3)
Lizzy would say, “I wish you would divorce the defendant.” It wasn’t because
something he had punished her, sent her to her room, and she was mad. The only
time Teri Tand could remember when Lizzy said that statement was when those
two were ﬁghting and the defendant was hitting her.
The importance of examples such as (2) and (3) is that the men being referenced were
not yet defendants in the context in which the described events took place. However,
the prosecution lawyers are applying this identity back in time and further silencing the
identities the men had in those contexts.
Additionally, the prosecution will foreground the unique identity of the victim by
using his/her name while the defense does the same for the defendant. The pattern
found in the sexual abuse case described in Felton Rosulek (2008) is particularly
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
220

interesting. When the prosecution referred to the victim by name, they used her
diminutive nickname, Lizzy, though in a few instances they added her surname. The
defense, however, only used the victim’s full given name, Eliza, and more often than not
her surname as well. This can be seen in examples (4) and (5), which are the ﬁrst reference
to the victim in each side’s argument.
(4) Prosecution: Those were words spoken by the defendant, believed by twelve-
year-old Lizzy Smith.
(5) Defense: Your heart goes out to a person on the witness stand like Eliza Smith
when she talked a couple days ago about these allegations.
The result was that the prosecution foregrounded her young age and created a sense of
familiarity while the defense silenced her youth, foregrounded the appearance that she
was the same as any other witness, and created social distance and formality. Overall,
through choice of terms of reference for the defendant and the victim, the lawyers create
certain identities for them and silence aspects that do not aid the lawyer’s case. These
results are consistent with other ﬁndings in forensic linguistics, regarding terms of refer-
ence and lexical choice; though these have not looked speciﬁcally at closing arguments
(cf. Danet 1980a, 1980b; Luchjenbroers and Aldridge 2007).
Secondly, lawyers will use the semantic properties of the verbs they select to
represent processes (Halliday 1994) or events to silence certain aspects of them while
foregrounding others. For example, as mentioned above, in the sexual abuse case
described in Felton Rosulek (2008), the prosecution includes many explicit details
about the abuse. The defense silences them by using generalized terms as in examples
(6) and (7).
(6)
He did not sexually abuse this young girl.
(7)
She testiﬁed a few days ago that my client sexually touched her.
By using sexually abuse and sexually touch even in their denials, the defense silences the
potentially more upsetting or oﬀ-putting details of the alleged crime. In another sexual
abuse case, the prosecution describes the victim’s sexual actions as well as his violent
behaviors that occurred in the same time frame in detail. The defense, on the other
hand, ignores the sexual abuse in their argument, referring to it only as incidents. They
also silence the speciﬁcs of the defendant’s violent actions as can be seen in (8).
(8)
… in response to Mr. Wilder’s acts of what he did in May of 2001
The lawyer did not deny that the defendant had done these acts. Instead, he ignored the
violent nature and the details of what he had done. As these examples show, lawyers use
their lexical choices in the closing arguments to control the information they include
about events as well as the identities they create for the defendant and the victim. As
with terms of reference, studies of other parts of the trial have shown similar results (cf.
Danet 1980b; Cotterill 2001; Aldridge and Luchjenbroers 2007).
To summarize, analyses of closing arguments have repeatedly shown that one way in
which lawyers in the same case present contrasting ideational content is by focusing on
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
221

and even silencing diﬀerent topics, and using lexical items that focus on diﬀerent
characteristics of the social actors and their corresponding processes. This is not to say
that lawyers do not try to refute topics raised by the other side. Studies such as Walter
(1988) show they do. The point is that an important means of creating opposing argu-
ments is simply presenting narratives with diﬀerent themes and lexical items. A further
demonstration of this will be shown in the data analysis presented below.
Negotiation of interpersonal relationships
In addition to the studies on the ideational content of closing arguments, there has also
been a focus on lawyers’ interpersonal negotiations, on how they manage their identities
and their relationships with the jurors or judge, the context, and the discourse itself.
One set of studies has examined how lawyers create a local identity for themselves.
According to Hobbs (2008) lawyers are given a level of respect simply by their role in
the proceedings, but they also put on a performance. They adopt a professional identity
while trying to create a certain ideal image or character for themselves (Trenholm 1989;
Hobbs 2003a). Through this identity, “lawyers must … convey power, authority, and
credibility to the opposing sides, to their clients, and where necessary, to juries as well”
(Bogoch 1999: 333). However, they also try to build rapport with the jurors or the
judge, to seem similar to them, like a friend (Stygall 1994). One linguistic strategy for
doing this has been code-switching among a standard code and a dialect that indexes a
shared culture or identity. For example, Fuller (1993) and Hobbs (2003a) both examine
how an African-American lawyer alternates between African-American English (AAE)
and a more standard variety of English, in part so that she can foreground her shared
identity with the jurors, many of whom are also African-American.
Other studies have examined the moment-to-moment negotiation of these identities
and relationships. One way in which lawyers portray themselves as similar to the jurors is
by using ﬁrst person plural pronouns to construct themselves and the jurors or judge(s) as
sharing the same opinions and evaluations. Danet (1980b) shows that an Israeli defense
lawyer used we to portray himself and the judges as all being in agreement. Felton
Rosulek (2009a) shows how lawyers in seventeen closing arguments use we to construct
the jurors and the lawyers as having had the same experiences during the trial and as
believing the same propositions (as in (9) and (10)).
(9)
And what we heard from the doctors is no, that’s not – that’s not the case
(10)
He is drugged. We know that.
In constructions such as this, lawyers silence any doubts or diﬀerences of opinion and
experience the jurors may have had.
Another tool for reducing the social distance between lawyers and jurors is to con-
struct jurors as equal participants in the creation of the argument. Pascual (2006) argues
that, while on the surface closing arguments appear to be monologues, they are in fact
what she calls “ﬁctive trilogues” among the lawyer, the opposing side, and the jurors.
Through the argumentative nature of closing arguments, the lawyers address and respond
to the points made by the opposing lawyer(s). Additionally, through constructions such
as questions, which Walter (1988) ﬁnds to be common in closing arguments, lawyers
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
222

portray the jurors as active interlocutors. Additionally, Felton Rosulek (2009a) shows that
lawyers also use ﬁrst person plural pronouns to construct jurors as co-constructors of the
discourse when really they are only the addressees, as in example (11).
(11)
The drug addiction, we’ll talk about that more later in terms of what
happens on this evening.
Through the creation of a ﬁctive trilogue and examples like (11), lawyers ignore the fact
that jurors are silent participants and not equal to the lawyer who has all of the control
over the information contained in the argument. Thus, active co-participation in the
‘talk’ is assumed, when it is not a fact.
Through these linguistic strategies, lawyers foreground the similarities among them-
selves and jurors and ignore or transform the diﬀerences. However, lawyers must also
appear to be authoritative and competent (Bogoch 1999). Just having the identity of a
lawyer, at least in the United States (and in many other countries), grants individuals a
position of power and competence within the courtroom that a person who lacks the
required education and training cannot achieve (Hobbs 2008). However, that status
alone is limited in its beneﬁts. Some of the work of creating a powerful identity is done
through ﬁrst person singular pronouns in which lawyers overtly refer to their role in the
context or state their opinions and wants, as in example (12).
(12)
I want to go through a couple of things in their statement.
While referring to themselves brings the lawyers’ authority and position to the forefront,
it does not completely create an authoritative persona. In the following section, I present
an analysis of data which shows that in the closing arguments lawyers utilize the
authority of others to try to increase their own believability for jurors.
Analysis of lawyers’ use of others’ authority
Lawyers use the authority of others by presenting their argument through the recreation
of discourses originally produced by those with more local authority. The process of
reproducing others’ discourses has been called direct/indirect reported speech (Holt and
Johnson, this volume), character voices (Koven 2002), and constructed dialogue (Tannen
2007 [1989]). In this chapter, the diﬀerences between direct and indirect quotations are
ignored. Either way, the discourse is still recontextualized when it is recreated (Tannen
2007 [1989]) and that gives it new meaning (Bakhtin 1981; Tannen 1986). Also, while
direct quotations may be seen as more accurate representations (Philips 1986), many
times they are not (Mayes 1990).
During closing arguments, lawyers spend a signiﬁcant portion of the time recreating
what the witnesses said during the trial (Stygall 1994; Heﬀer 2005) and the judge’s
instructions (Stygall 1994). Some of the reasons they do this include supporting or attack-
ing the credibility of the original speaker (Heﬀer 2005), producing evidence to support
their claims (Stygall 1994), and recontextualizing (Bauman and Briggs 1990) or reinter-
preting the meaning of what was said (Felton Rosulek forthcoming b). The focus in this
section is on when lawyers reproduce others’ voices in order to use the source’s authority
to legitimate (Berger and Luckmann 1966; van Leeuwen 2007) the lawyer’s claims.
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
223

The qualitative and quantitative analyses presented here were carried out by the author
on the closing arguments from seventeen felony trials (17 prosecution and 17 defense
arguments, 14 rebuttals) that took place in a state district court in the United States. The
arguments were ﬁrst divided into clauses (a clause was deﬁned as having a single verb
except for passive, progressive, and perfect markers and modals, as well as any accom-
panying noun, prepositional, and adverbial phrases). Each clause that was overtly attributed
to another speaker (or the lawyer at another time) was marked as a character voice, and
when the message the voice was conveying was a tenet in the speaker’s argument, it was
considered to be legitimation. For instance, when the crime story was presented in the
victim’s voice or when a medical conclusion that the lawyer was relying on was pre-
sented in the doctor’s voice, it was legitimation.
As can be seen in Table 15.1, slightly more than one in seven of the 30,012 clauses
produced in the prosecution and defense arguments and almost one in eleven of the
3,432 clauses in the rebuttal arguments were character voices that were legitimating the
lawyer’s argument.
Most of the character voices that served as legitimation were originally produced by
lay witnesses who had testiﬁed at the trial. In fact, 10.2% of the clauses in the prosecu-
tion’s arguments, 10.8% of the clauses in the defense arguments, and 5.4% of the clauses
in rebuttals were in the voices of lay witnesses whose authority was being used to legit-
imate the lawyer’s argument. The prosecution, on average, quoted 6.6 witnesses, and the
defense averaged 6.2. Often, these included the victim(s), the defendant, family members
of both, and eyewitnesses. These voices serve as what van Leeuwen (2007) calls “personal
authorities.” Their knowledge was achieved through personal experiences and their
status is only in the local context. They were allowed to testify about their sensory
experiences during the crime: what they saw, heard, felt, etc.; and their past interactions
with the defendant. However, they were not allowed to oﬀer their opinions. As some-
one who has ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the events and people involved in the case and as
someone who had pledged to tell the truth, they were considered to be authorities in the
courtroom, but only on this speciﬁc topic and in this particular context.
In example (13) the words of a lay witness are oﬀered as legitimation of the crime
story in an assault trial and are presented as a direct quotation from the victim who had
described during her testimony what the defendant had done to her.
(13)
We do have an eyewitness to this assault, however, and we do have direct
evidence. We do have direct evidence from the victim herself, from Sharon
Kinnison, from her statements. She told Deputy Norland, “I got beat up.” She told
Deputy May it happened, she said, “Nicky got mad at me.” She made a long dis-
tance call, international call. “He went oﬀon me and shoved me headﬁrst into a
furnace.”
Table 15.1 Frequency of character voices as sources of legitimation
Clauses in Legitimating
Character Voices
Total Clauses
Percent of Total
Clauses
Prosecution’s Argument
2514
15286
16.4%
Defence’s Argument
1987
14726
13.7%
Rebuttal
307
3432
8.9%
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
224

The lawyer refers to the quotations as direct evidence and presents the crime narrative
mostly in the voice of the victim, the local authority on what happened, rather than in
his own voice as he was not there.
In example (14), when the prosecution lawyer is discussing why the brother of a
sexual abuse victim was a credible witness, he indirectly quotes what the young man said
about his relationship with the victim and with the defendant, his stepfather. The lawyer,
who is not an expert on the relationships between the witness and the victim and the
witness and the defendant, uses the witness as an authority on his own relationships.
(14)
He testiﬁed that [he and the victim] have a good relationship, but he also
testiﬁed that he had an okay relationship with the defendant … Michael Smith has
no motive to lie.
In both (13) and (14), the lawyers could have presented the same information in their
own voices. However, the lawyer is not a ratiﬁed authority on the crime in (13) nor the
relationships in (14). The two people quoted, however, are. They have ﬁrst hand
knowledge of these speciﬁc situations. Despite the victim in (13) being an alcoholic who
had changed her story multiple times and the witness in (14) being a young child, they
have more status in this situation to make these particular claims than the lawyer does,
and in each case the lawyer uses that to his advantage by quoting them in order to add
legitimation to the information he is presenting.
Other than lay witnesses, lawyers also call experts to the witness stand and then quote
them in their closing arguments. In this corpus, 2.4% of the prosecution’s clauses, 1.3%
of the defense’s clauses, and 2.0% of the clauses in the rebuttals were in the voices of
experts who were legitimating the arguments. In the United States, according to Rule
702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, expert witnesses are those who are “qualiﬁed as an
expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education,” though the ultimate
decision on who qualiﬁes is left to the judge. These are authorities whose status comes
from their role outside of the courtroom and their being able to apply their knowledge
and skills when analyzing and interpreting evidence inside the courtroom. They are
allowed to present their opinions that are speciﬁc to the facts of the case or that are
generalities they have learned from their work. Lawyers quote both types of opinions to
add authority to their claims.
An example of an expert whose opinion on the particular case in question is quoted
can be seen in (15). It is an indirect quotation from a doctor who testiﬁed for the pro-
secution against a daycare provider who was charged with shaking one of her clients to
death. The defense’s argument is that the child had received the injuries by falling from
her highchair. The doctor had testiﬁed that that could not have been what happened in
this case. In the prosecution’s argument, the lawyer indirectly quotes her saying:
(15)
And she said it was impossible, that was her word, impossible for these
injuries to result from a short fall based on her experience.
An especially interesting part of this particular presentation of a character voice is that the
lawyer repeats the word impossible, and he foregrounds the fact that the expert witness, a
doctor, not the lawyer, had ﬁrst used the word. The lawyer thus overtly constructs
himself as not transforming the quotation for his own purposes. Instead, he, like the
jurors, relies on the authority of an expert on this topic, someone who has relevant
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
225

experience, to make this claim. Regardless of what the jurors think about the lawyer, as
long as they believed the doctor, they would accept that the defense’s claim could not be
true.
An example of an expert’s opinion being oﬀered as a generality is in (16), which
comes from a child sexual abuse case. The prosecution lawyer recreates what an expert
psychologist said about children who have been abused, and then he applies the opinion
to the speciﬁc case he is discussing:
(16)
He talked to you it’s very rare, ﬁrst of all, of false allegations. He also told
you that the norm is that kids don’t report. So what are some things that he looks
to? He said consistency of statements is important. The nature of the report. How
it comes about. How it ﬁts with other facts that are known to be true. And detail.
It’s actually much of what we are using to evaluate the testimony of witnesses here.
As far as consistency of [the victim’s] statement, it’s consistent … She testiﬁed very
consistently with it, in fact, gave even more details than that in 2001.
Here, the lawyer is using the expert to support his claims for how the evidence should be
examined. The jurors do not have to believe the lawyer that these parts of the case are
important, as an expert thought so as well. In this way, although the expert witness has
no personal knowledge of this particular case, the lawyer is still able to use the doctor’s
authority as an expert to legitimate his own claims that the victim was being honest.
The next set of voices presented as sources of authority are the law and the judge. The
judge is the human representative, interpreter, and enforcer of the law in the courtroom.
These are what van Leeuwen (2007) calls “impersonal authorities” in that they are the
rules that everyone must follow. Clauses in the voice of the law/judge account for 3.2%
of the clauses in the prosecution arguments, 1.2% of the clauses in the defense arguments,
and 1.4% of the clauses in the rebuttals. There are two main reasons that lawyers call on
these voices: to legitimate their claim that something is il/legal and to justify their
requests/commands of the jurors.
An example of a lawyer using a legal deﬁnition to justify their claim that what
occurred is illegal can be seen in (17). In this case, the defendant was charged with
second degree murder. The prosecution lawyer is going through the diﬀerent elements
of the crime that need to be present in order for the charge to be met. One is substantial
bodily harm; we can see what the prosecution says in (17).
(17)
Now substantial bodily harm has something of a technical deﬁnition.
Temporary but substantial disﬁgurement; temporary but substantial loss or impair-
ment of function of a body member or organ; or a fracture of any body member.
In this case you heard substantial medical evidence that Serena Hu suﬀered massive
brain injuries and injuries to her eyes. That is substantial bodily harm.
Example (17) is interesting for two reasons. First, in the ﬁrst half of the quotation, the
lawyer presents the legal deﬁnition instead of his own interpretation, to provide authority
that this really is the description the jurors have to follow. If he had presented it in his
own words, the jurors would have had to trust that his interpretation was correct. Here,
they can rely on the ultimate authority. Then, in the second half, he summarizes what
the medical evidence said, and then he applies the law to that evidence in his own voice.
As a lawyer, he is a legal expert in his own right, and in this instance, he uses his own
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
226

authority as such to make such a statement without needing to rely on the status of
others.
In other instances, lawyers use the voice of the law or judge to mitigate their poten-
tially face-threatening acts. In (18), the lawyer uses the authority of the judge to tell the
jurors that they cannot use the defendant’s prior bad acts as evidence in this case.
(18)
As the Court has instructed you, you should not simply conclude the
defendant’s a bad person and therefore should be convicted of this.
The judge has more authority to make requests and demands of the jurors. The lawyer
making a bald-faced demand or accusation of the jurors might have damaged his rela-
tionship with them. Thus, the lawyer uses the authority of the judge to instruct them,
instead of using his own voice.
The ﬁnal set of character voices that lawyers use are from socio-cultural sources out-
side of the local context of the courtroom. These however, are relatively rare in my
corpus, only accounting for 4 clauses in the all of the prosecution arguments (0.02% of
clauses), 28 or 0.2% of clauses in the defense arguments, and 2 or 0.06% of the clauses in
the rebuttals. When they are used, they often legitimate the lawyer’s claims about usual
human behavior.
An example of this type of voice occurs in a case in which an assault victim, once she
was sober, recanted her story that she had been beaten. The defense had claimed that
people are more likely to tell the truth while sober, while the prosecution argues that the
opposite is true, legitimating this claim by reproducing a Mexican proverb as in (19).
(19)
There’s an old Mexican proverb and it says, solo los niños y los barrachos dicen
siempre la verdad. That means only little children and drunks always tell the truth …
It gave her the courage to tell the truth …
The authority of such sayings comes from their representing a culture’s understanding of
the way things are (van Leeuwen 2007). The fact that many people have believed this for
a long time gives it a special status.
Overall, by using the authority of others, lawyers position their arguments as credible,
regardless of whether or not the jurors see the lawyer as personally authoritative. It puts a
distance between the lawyer and the claims and gives them a “reduced personal respon-
sibility” (Goﬀman 1986 [1974]:512) for the information. They do not have to be an
expert or even knowledgeable about these subjects. Instead, they can rely on the
authority of others who do have reason to know these things. Of course, by choosing to
reproduce these particular voices, the lawyers are not neutral participants. They are still
responsible for the words they animate. Still, the quoting of authorities, be they lay
witnesses, experts, the law/judge, and socio-cultural sources, is one way in which lawyers
negotiate interpersonal relationships between the argument they are presenting and the
jurors. This resource allows lawyers to use the authority of others, when their own
authority may be lacking, or when what they want to say may interfere with the
relationship they are building with jurors.
Additionally, this analysis of character voices as sources of legitimation can also be
taken a step further to add to our understanding of the ideational content of closing
arguments. This is accomplished by determining the response of the other side, when a
character voice was used in an argument as legitimation. To accomplish this, for each
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
227

character voice serving as legitimation, the corpus was analyzed to determine if the other
side referred to the same original utterance or even the same information but not in a
character voice. This analysis showed that the lawyers took four strategies.
The ﬁrst strategy was to recontextualize or give new meaning to the utterance so that
it no longer supported the other side’s claim. For example, this occurred in a case where
a father was charged with physically abusing his daughter. His statement that he might
have hurt her was used by the prosecution in (20a) to legitimate their claim that he did.
If he admitted that he could have done it, then he must have. The defense argued in
(20b) that the statement could be explained by the defendant not being aware of what
he would have had to have done to injure the child.
(20a)
He said and admitted, “I never ruled myself out as a possibility.” … That
reason is because he is the only person who could have, who had an opportunity
to, and in fact did commit this crime.
(20b)
And when he had stated, “I never ruled myself out as a possibility,” …
What he was saying is that I think – or the reason he’s stating that, he was an
inexperienced parent at the time that he’s being asked these questions he has no
idea what kind of force it would have taken to cause these injuries on [the victim].
The defense simply argued that the quotation did not have the meaning the prosecution
attributed to it, and therefore, it did not legitimate their argument. Overall, I found that
the prosecution recontextualized 8.1% of clauses in the defense arguments that were
character voices used for legitimation (often in the rebuttals but also pre-emptively in
their main arguments); and the defense recontextualized 5.9% of the clauses in character
voices that the prosecution used this way in their main argument and pre-emptively
recontextualized 14.0% of those used in the rebuttals.
The second strategy was to falsify the utterance, to claim that it was untrue and
therefore did not support the other argument. An example of this occurred in a child
abuse story in which the prosecution presented the crime narrative in the voice of the
victim. The defense then claimed the story must be false.
(21)
If you’re going to believe the story, you have to believe that Jennifer Mar-
gosian went for a ride on her bike in a cemetery at one o’clock in the morning in
the very heart of [northern US state] winter. I submit to you that that’s ludicrous,
unbelievable. Common sense dictates that it is not possible.
Their argument was that the victim must not have been telling the truth, so despite the
prosecution relying on her authority, their narrative was wrong. In total, the prosecution,
in their arguments or rebuttals, falsiﬁed 5.3% of the clauses in character voices that the
defense used as legitimation. The defense falsiﬁed 5.1% of those the prosecution used
in their main argument. Interestingly, in three cases, the prosecution reproduced a
quotation as legitimation in their rebuttal, despite the defense already having claimed it
was false.
The third strategy was to attack the authority of the original speaker. Several studies
have shown that expert witness status is constructed and deconstructed in the moment-
to-moment interactions of the trial (cf. Renoe 1996; Matoesian 1999). This analysis
extends those ﬁndings to the closing arguments and to lay witnesses as well. For example,
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
228

in example (22), the defense claims the victim was not honest and was only telling the
jurors what the police had told her to say.
(22)
[The victim] gave numerous conﬂicting statements … Although she did
indicate that she did not remember the incident and those facts were given to her.
Those facts were given to her that she related to the police. But who knows what
is true and what is false with regard to her.
They claimed that since she did not remember the events and was lying, she could not
be considered an authority. Overall, the prosecution attacked the authority of 14.3% of
the lay witnesses and 15.8% of the expert witnesses which the defense used as sources of
legitimation. The defense claimed that 23.0% of the lay witnesses and 36.4% of the
expert witnesses that the prosecution used in their main arguments should not be
accepted as authorities. Neither side attacked the status of the law or judge or referenced
the socio-cultural sources that the other side used.
The ﬁnal strategy the lawyers used was to silence (Huckin 2002) the character voice
used to legitimate the other side’s case. By not referring to the existence of the quo-
tations that supported the other side’s argument, they made them irrelevant to their
arguments and did not activate them in the jurors’ consciousness (though the jurors
could have been thinking about them on their own). In total, the defense silenced
89.2% of the clauses in character voices used to authorize the prosecution’s claims. The
prosecution silenced 87.0% of the defense’s utterances used as legitimation. If the
character voices were eliminated when the authority of the original speaker was
attacked, then 50.4% of clauses in the voices of personal authorities and 38.9% of the
clauses in the voices of expert authorities used to legitimate the prosecution’s closing
arguments were still completely ignored by the defense. The prosecution still silenced
49.8% of the clauses in the voice of a personal authority and 74.2% of the clauses in an
expert voice used as sources of legitimation in the defense’s arguments. Overall, most
of the quotations used to legitimate one side’s argument were silenced. Even in the
instances where the authority of the original speaker was attacked, what they had
speciﬁcally said was often ignored.
The ﬁndings here pattern much like other studies on the ideational content of closing
arguments discussed above. Rather than spending much of their arguments arguing why
the other side was wrong, the lawyer simply ignores the character voices or topics that
supports the other side’s case. In trials, each side will use diﬀerent quotations, topics, and
lexical items as one means of creating opposing arguments.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have shown how the closing arguments of trials within adversarial legal
systems are important sites for forensic discourse analysis. The work that has already been
done on the ideational content of arguments shows that prosecution and defense lawyers
create diﬀerent representations of the same events. This is often done, as we have seen,
by silencing, ignoring or transforming topics, information, character voices, and lexical
terms that support the other side’s case and instead focusing on what supports their own
argument. Studies of lawyers’ negotiations of interpersonal relationships show that they
try to balance an authoritative identity with appearing to be similar to the jurors. One
PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE CLOSING SPEECHES
229

way they accomplish this is through using quotations from authorities to legitimate their
narratives, claims, and commands.
Despite all that is known, closing arguments are still understudied. Not only does
more work need to be done in the areas discussed here, but future work could also try to
examine lawyers’ linguistic awareness as well as the eﬀects of these linguistic strategies on
the jurors.
Further reading
Cotterill, J. (2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the OJ Simpson Trial, New York:
Palgrave MacMillan.
Felton Rosulek, L. (2008) ‘Manipulative silence and social representation in the closing arguments of a
child sexual abuse case,’ Text & Talk, 28(4): 529–50.
Heﬀer, C. (2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided Analysis of Legal-Lay Discourse, Basingstoke,
Hampshire: Palgrave MacMillan.
Hobbs, P. (2003) ‘“Is that what we’re here about?” A lawyer’s use of impression management in a
closing argument at trial,’ Discourse & Society, 14(3): 273–90.
Stygall, G. (1994) Trial Language: Diﬀerential Discourse Processing and Discursive Formation, Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Walter, B. (1988) The Jury Summation as Speech Genre, Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
LAURA FELTON ROSULEK
230

16
Sentencing convicted murderers
Convicted murderers’ allocutions or leniency
pleas at sentencing hearings
Nancy Schweda Nicholson
Introduction
In a detailed analysis of The People v. Orenthal James Simpson (State of California (USA)),
Cotterill (2003: 3) identiﬁes “styles of testimony and their inﬂuence on juries” as an
important aspect of trial language. In addition, research has focused on power and
features of powerful and powerless language (Conley and O’Barr 2005; Fowler 1985;
Fairclough 1989; Gibbons 2003; O’Barr 1982). These two aspects of language can have a
signiﬁcant impact on juries’ ongoing perceptions and ultimate decision-making and, as
Fairclough (1989: 31) says, “The way in which orders of discourse are structured … [is]
determined by relationships of power in particular social institutions.” Power can be
found in many aspects of trial language, and studies that have focused on this aspect in
the legal discourse analytic literature include treatments of question and answer style
(Cotterill 2003); strategies in both direct and cross-examination (Conley and O’Barr
2005); turn-taking protocols (Stygall 1994); interruptions (Heﬀer 2005); silence (Kurzon
1998b); and jury instructions (Charrow and Charrow 1979; Dumas 2000a). In terms of
extended narrative that is not primarily read (like jury instructions), analysis techniques
have been primarily applied to lawyers’ opening and closing arguments (Cotterill 2003;
Felton Rosulek, this volume; Heﬀer 2005; Stygall 1994). This chapter adds to the list of
trial components and characteristics covered by linguistic analysis, as it investigates a
monologic discourse event of a diﬀerent type: the “leniency plea” or “allocution,” which
may occur during the sentencing phase of a trial in the US judicial system.
Allocution provides the person who has been found guilty as charged with an
opportunity to speak. In allocutions, the researcher has access to real, naturally occurring,
unedited data, which is preferred over formal interviews (Gubrium and Holstein 2009).
The linguistic approach to such data involves applications of elements of discourse
analysis and oral narrative (Cameron 2001; Eakin 2008; Halliday 1989; Nunan 1993;
Sinclair and Coulthard 1992; van Dijk 1997, 1985) as well as speech act theory (Austin
1962; Searle 1969). In addition, allocutions often contain much autobiographical
231

information, so the literature in this domain is highly relevant (Eakin 2008; Linde 1993;
Spence 1997), as is awareness of the role of identity (Eggins 1994; Halliday 1994; Kress
1976). The “social-constructionist” approach to narrative focuses on the ability of the
narrator to make sense of his/her experiences and construct “the self” (Wood and Kroger
2000:104). Sabat and Harré (1992: 445) contend that “selfhood is publicly manifested in
various discursive practices such as telling autobiographical stories.”
The forensic linguistic and legal literature contains many references to the “story-
telling” aspect of the courtroom (Cotterill 2003; Heﬀer 2005 and this volume; Spence
1995). Spence (1995), a noted American lawyer famous for his unconventional approa-
ches to advocacy, provides advice to attorneys with respect to legal strategy options.
Many of these are relevant to the current allocution analysis (and to extra-legal situations
as well), although the “voice” is not that of an attorney. Spence lists ten elements that
constitute the “great power argument”. One of these is:
Give the argument in the form of a story. [W]e are genetic storytellers and listeners
to stories. … So, do not forget what you have learned already: jurors … are
conditioned to listen to stories.
(Spence 1995: 203)
He considers the story as the “strongest structure” to be used in the formulation of legal
argument (Spence 1995: 113). Moreover, Daley and Daley-Caravella (2004: 164) agree:
“The most persuasive evidence used in support of your belief is a human-interest story.”
Kintsch (1995: 140) describes the role of the listener in discourse comprehension “as
constructing a mental representation of the information provided by the text that is
integrated with his knowledge, beliefs and goals.” Textual coherence is a result of many
factors, and plays an important role in autobiography, both from the speaker’s and listeners’
perspectives (Gernsbacher and Givón 1995; Linde 1993).
Finally, the element of persuasion is evident. Oliver (1957: 7) deﬁnes “persuasion” as
“any form of discourse that inﬂuences thought, feelings or conduct.” He emphasizes the
“particularity” of every persuasive event: “There is a particular type of speaker addressing
a particular type of audience, on a speciﬁc occasion, to achieve a goal that is … special”
(Oliver 1957: 62). Phoenix (2008) and van Dijk (2008) examine the important inﬂuence
of context in constructing a narrative, and Fairclough (1989) discusses the social condi-
tions of production and interpretation. Brazil (1993) also stresses the goal-oriented nature
of oral narrative. In the data examined in this chapter, the convicted murderer must
attempt to convince the jury that his life is worth sparing or that a lesser sentence is
warranted. The elements of persuasive discourse that can sway a jury include telling the
truth (Spence 1995; Storey 1997); connecting with the listeners through examples/
illustrations to which they can relate (Bedell 2000); making a logical, reasoned argument
(Simons 2001); and using “everyday speech” (Minnick 1968:103).
This chapter focuses on the allocutions of two convicted murderers, Rabbi Fred
Neulander and Michael Skakel (available at: http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/
timestopics/people/n/carol_neulander/index.html and www.trutv.com/library/crime/
notorious_murders/famous/moxley/arrested_8.html).
Although their narrative styles are quite distinctive, each convicted person (CP) paints an
autobiographical picture of identity and strives to persuade a group of twelve to believe not
only his story, but that he is worthy of mercy. Before proceeding to the data analysis, the
term “allocution” is discussed, and background information on the cases is presented.
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
232

Allocution
In many jurisdictions in the United States, those who have been found guilty of capital
crimes have the right to allocute. Each state regulates the opportunity to make an
“allocution,” deﬁned by Black’s Law Dictionary as “a mitigating statement made by a
defendant in response to the court’s inquiry” (Garner 2004a: 83). There are additional
meanings of “allocution,” however. For example, in the popular television show, “Law
and Order,” the Prosecutor frequently makes plea deals. When he accepts a plea, he
often tells the defense lawyer: “I’ll expect your client to allocute.” In this context, the
Prosecutor often demands that the guilty party provide previously unknown details
regarding the crime. If a body and weapon have never been found in a murder case, a
condition of the plea agreement may be that the murderer must reveal how the person
was killed and the location of the body. Essentially, the individual has an opportunity to
speak to the judge and jury during “an allocution.” This statement occurs after the
person has been found guilty of the crime but prior to sentencing. In fact, allocutions are
often a plea for leniency directly before the sentence is pronounced. For example, if the
death penalty is a possibility, the guilty party may ask that the sentence be a term of life
in prison rather than death.
Judges frequently impose restrictions on the content of allocutions. For example, the
individual may not be permitted to dispute the evidence, present an alternative account
of the crime or deny guilt (although the latter does not always hold true, as the reader
will see in the case of Michael Skakel). The judge’s instructions dictate a focus on those
persons that have had a positive inﬂuence during his/her lifetime, why he/she is a
good person, a discussion of past and future good deeds and, of course, remorse for the
crime(s) of which he/she has been found guilty. In a 1961 landmark US Supreme Court
case (Green v. United States 365 U.S. 301), Green claimed that the trial court judge erred
when he did not ask him if he would like to speak before sentence was imposed. Green
further argued that, because he was not allowed to address the Court, his sentence was
illegal. The Supreme Court aﬃrmed the Appellate Court decision that there was no
error, and that the sentence was legal because Green’s appeal did not clearly demonstrate
that he had been denied the right to speak. The Court, however, did rule that “trial
judges before sentencing should unambiguously address themselves to the defendant,
leaving no room for doubt that the defendant had been issued a personal invitation to
speak prior to sentencing” (Myers 1997: 799).
Juries look for remorse as they consider the potential sentence. If the individual is, in
fact, innocent (or maintains that he/she is innocent), it is inconsistent to show remorse for
a crime in which they were not involved. In Shelton v. State of Delaware (744 A.2d 465
(Del. 1999)), Shelton argued that the trial court had unreasonably limited the content/
scope of his planned allocution. The Delaware Supreme Court rejected Shelton’s
argument. In a dissenting opinion, Justices Hartnett and Berger wrote: “allocution is so
fundamental to a fair trial in a capital case that deprivation of that right violates both State
and Federal Constitutional due process” (511 – original opinion; Feldman 2004: 869).
However, recently, the Supreme Court of California ruled that a defendant does not have
the right to make an unsworn statement in an attempt to lessen punishment (People v.
Blaine Allen Evans 2008). If the individual wishes to speak before sentence is pronounced,
he/she must not only be sworn in, but also be subject to cross-examination (Egelko 2008).
For someone who has not taken the stand to oﬀer testimony during the trial, an
allocution is the ﬁrst (and only) opportunity for the judge and jury to hear the convicted
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
233

person express himself in his own words, uninterrupted by his own lawyer (during direct
examination) or by an aggressive prosecutor shooting rapid-ﬁre questions (during cross-
examination). Some allocutions are extremely short, and consist of a simple “I’m sorry”
(Gruber 2007). Others, like those discussed here, are lengthy statements that encompass a
number of diﬀerent themes. Such testimony can be sworn (in New Jersey, for example)
or unsworn (in the State of Delaware). Defendants may or may not use notes as they
speak. They can also read a prepared written statement to the court if they so desire.
Moreover, victim impact statements (usually containing aggravating points) as well as
pleas for leniency from relatives and friends (characterized by mitigating information)
may also be heard at this point. After the CP and others address the court, the jury retires
to deliberate on a sentence.
The Rabbi Fred Neulander and Michael Skakel cases
Fred Neulander was a charismatic and beloved rabbi at the M’Kor Shalom Temple in
Cherry Hill, New Jersey. Much of the temple’s success was directly due to Neulander’s
popularity. There was a dark side, however, to Rabbi Neulander. At the time of the
murder of his wife, Carol, he was carrying on an aﬀair with Philadelphia radio person-
ality, Elaine Soncini. She gave Neulander an ultimatum in the late summer of 1994,
indicating that she would break oﬀthe aﬀair unless he divorced his wife of more than
twenty-ﬁve years. Neulander proceeded to hire Len Jenoﬀ, a reformed alcoholic whom
he was counseling at M’Kor Shalom, to carry out the murder. Jenoﬀ, in turn, recruited
Paul Daniels to assist in the killing. Carol was brutally murdered in her home on the
evening of November 1, 1994. Although Neulander was a suspect from the start in the
murder-for-hire, he eluded prosecution until October of 2001, when Jenoﬀconfessed
the entire story to a Philadelphia Inquirer reporter. Neulander vehemently denied any
involvement (and has never admitted his guilt). At his ﬁrst trial in 2001, where he testi-
ﬁed in his own defense, jurors were unable to agree on a verdict, resulting in a hung
jury. The Prosecutor immediately reﬁled the charges, and Neulander was re-tried in
2002, this time without testifying. In December of 2002, he was found guilty of felony
murder and conspiracy to commit murder. After listening to positive and negative
statements about the convicted felon (including a 24-minute allocution from Neulander
himself), the jury could not reach a decision regarding the death penalty, which was a
possibility because of the heinous nature of the crime. As a result, the judge imposed a
sentence of life in prison without parole eligibility for 30 years. Neulander’s attorneys
ﬁled several appeals on his behalf, but their attempts to secure a new trial came to an end
in April 2007 (Graham 2007). Neulander is currently serving his term in the New Jersey
State Prison in Trenton.
Michael Skakel’s story is quite diﬀerent. Growing up in Belle Haven, one of the most
exclusive neighborhoods in extremely wealthy Greenwich, Connecticut, Skakel was a
sixteen-year-old child of privilege in 1975. In fact, his father’s sister, Ethel, was married
to Robert F. Kennedy, US Senator, US Attorney General and 1968 presidential candi-
date. Martha Moxley, 15, a popular neighbor of Skakel’s, was found murdered close to
her home on October 30, 1975. She was beaten and stabbed with a golf club belonging
to a set that was found in the Skakel garage. Over the years, many people, including
Michael’s brother, Tommy, and Michael himself were considered suspects. The crime
went unsolved, however, for almost a quarter of a century. Michael Skakel fell under the
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
234

spell of alcohol and drugs and then spent time in rehabilitation facilities, including the
elite Elan School in Poland Springs, Maine. Former Elan “students” would testify at the
trial that Skakel had bragged about killing Moxley while there for treatment. The
investigation was reopened in 1991, and the prosecution team gathered additional evi-
dence for the next nine years. Skakel was formally charged with Moxley’s murder in
January of 2000, and his trial ﬁnally began in April 2002. Skakel did not take the witness
stand, so his August 29 plea for leniency was the ﬁrst opportunity the court had to hear
him speak. In an unfocused and emotional statement, Skakel swore that he did not
commit the crime. (In fact, after his arraignment in March 2002, he approached Dorthy
Moxley, Martha’s mother, and stated: “Dorthy, I feel your pain, but you’ve got the
wrong guy.” www.courttv.com/trials/moxley/background.html). Skakel was found
guilty, however, in June of 2002 and sentenced to 20 years to life in prison. All appeals
were exhausted as of October 2007; however, Skakel’s cousin, inﬂuential Robert
F. Kennedy, Jr., has become involved in an attempt to secure a new trial and prove
Skakel’s innocence (Brouwer 2007; Cowan 2007; Hewitt 2003).
The interconnectedness of identity and persuasion
Identity
Halliday’s (1994: 35) functional theory of linguistics states that the “analysis of lexico-
grammatical forms of utterances should be foregrounded as a resource for constructing
meaning,” and Galasin´ski (2000) also points out how grammatical and lexical choices have
particular functions when used by speakers. Listeners gain information about speaker
identity through observing language use, and speakers consciously and unconsciously
construct “self” when they speak. Eakin believes that “our practice of self-construction is
largely unconscious” (2008: 22) and
for the most part, we are not left to our own devices when we talk about our-
selves, for protocols exist for many of the kinds of self-narration we may need to
use—in churches, in courtrooms. … and so forth.
(Eakin 2008: 28)
Neulander, of course, is a product of the macroculture and microcultures in which he
lives (Andrews, Squire and Tamboukou 2008). These cultures exert inﬂuence on narra-
tive and identity construction. For example, prior to his arrest, Neulander was an
American living in upscale Cherry Hill, New Jersey. The “culture” of the Jewish faith
adds another layer to his personal make-up. Respected and popular (perhaps even adored
by some of his female congregants), Neulander wielded much power within his temple.
Eakin (2008: 22) writes: “we do not invent our identities out of whole cloth. Instead, we
draw on the resources of the culture we inhabit to shape them.” Neulander’s Pharaoh
story (2), for example, is replete with religious references in lexical items such as: “If
you give me this privilege to redeem, to atone.” Additional examples of Neulander’s
identity-building include (9): his references to good deeds (such as helping to found a
Ronald McDonald house and assisting a young man to obtain his General Educational
Development diploma (GED), a high school equivalency credential available to dropouts
who complete extra work and pass an exam without returning to a formal educational
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
235

setting). In sum, Neulander’s identity emerges through a largely positive statement illustrated
by anecdotes that revolve around religion, family, past good deeds, and a promised future
of constructive contributions in prison.
Michael Skakel portrays his identity for the jurors by oﬀering descriptions primarily of
a life of pain and sadness, addictions, and a loveless childhood. In developing the argu-
ment on the importance of culture, Linde (1993: 163) adds that culture furnishes
“‘coherence systems’ [which are] cultural devices for structuring experience into socially
sharable narrative.” Example (1) is representative of Skakel’s plea.
(1) Michael Skakel allocution (convicted person-Skakel – CP-S)
1 I say that as a man that was condemned by drugs and alcohol, condemned to
2 death from the addiction …
3 [God speaking to him] Michael … you can’t use reform school or your Dad
4 or your upbringing as an excuse anymore. …
5 Love was not something in my family. There was a lot of hardship and an
6 enormous amount of pain. …
7 Mr. Fuhrman wrote a book about me ﬁlled with lies.
In contrast to the negativity depicted in (1), which is reﬂected in the use of negation
(‘can’t’ plus ‘or’ and ‘or’, lines 3–4; ‘not’, line 5), one positive and bright moment in
Skakel’s plea is the description of his young son (treated in greater detail under the
“Family” theme). His allocution also includes numerous references to God (see “Reli-
gion” section), his encounter with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and how he traveled to
former Eastern Bloc countries with this group. However, when Fuhrman’s (1998) book
appeared and re-ignited interest in the case, Skakel’s job was “taken away” from him. In
sum, Skakel’s statement constructs an identity of a person who is troubled, fraught with
anguish, and reaching out to God for understanding and guidance. As with Neulander,
themes of religion and family dominate.
Persuasion
Closely tied to the construction of identity is the resulting persuasive impact (or lack of
it) of Neulander’s and Skakel’s pleas. A key element of an individual’s ability to persuade
is personal credibility. Oliver (1957: 13–14) discusses the “Good Man” idea, stating “that
a … speaker who wishes to convince others exerts inﬂuence based on his own reputation
and deeds. Moreover, one who is successful in this domain is ‘a good man trained in the
arts of speech’”. Given his dedication to a religious life as a career, it seems quite indis-
putable that Rabbi Neulander embodied good traits (as delineated in his plea). One
cannot help but ask if these remain part of his character, even after the commission of a
horrible crime. Michael Skakel also appears to have made positive contributions to
society in his life. He emphasizes his struggles with drugs and alcohol, but states that he
was reborn and is now free of these negative inﬂuences. Whatever their past and current
make-up, both men have been convicted of murder. Oliver (1957: 70) notes that
“deliberate wrongdoing is the shortest route to loss of public sympathy and esteem.”
This evaluation suggests that Neulander and Skakel would have minimally persuasive
force. Unlike many persuasive speakers who attempt to sell a product or obtain votes in a
political election, however, granting leniency requires no ﬁnancial outlay or ideological
commitment on the part of the jurors.
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
236

Neulander and Skakel were found guilty of their crimes before they made their state-
ments to the court. Inasmuch as allocutions can be powerful tools in an attempt to avoid
the death penalty, for example, one must consider the veracity of the statements they
contain. Whether under oath or not, convicted murderers are not generally regarded by
society as upstanding individuals to be believed and trusted. In other words, there is
nothing to stop them from fabricating a story to achieve their goal of a lesser sentence.
They really have very little to lose. Galasin´ski (2000) writes of a “truth bias,” a concept
related to Grice’s (1975) Conversational Maxim of “Quality.” In other words, unless
otherwise inclined/inﬂuenced, most people tend to believe what others tell them. We
must question if such a perspective holds true in a speciﬁc legal setting such as this one.
And Eakin (2008: 34) writes: “Telling the truth – this is surely the most familiar of the
rules we associate with autobiographical discourse.” In many ways, the content of an
allocution is autobiographical, as the judge instructs the guilty person to discuss his/her
past as well as prior inﬂuences that contributed to shaping identity. Fred Neulander, who
was eligible for the death penalty in the murder-for-hire of his wife, was forbidden by
the judge to claim innocence for the murder, whereas Skakel denied his guilt twice
during his plea.
Payne (2007), Petty and Cacioppo (1986) and Petty and Wegener (1998) discuss the
“elaboration likelihood model of persuasion.” This model suggests that there are two
ways in which to persuade: (1) an individual conscientiously considers the worth of the
argument (“central route”); or (2) the presence of a contextual cue (for example, a
handsome speaker or a celebrity endorser) results in an attitude change without con-
templation of the argument’s merits (“peripheral route”). In terms of Neulander, it does
not appear that peripheral cues would be at work, as he presents a cohesive and com-
pelling argument. One could suggest, however, that a negative peripheral cue could play a
role with Skakel. Although his argument is not coherent, his situation is a pathetic one,
and this may engender sympathy on the jurors’ part.
Without exception, the literature on persuasion focuses on the importance of
connecting with the audience (Gardner 2004; Koegel 2007; Luntz 2007; Nowak
2004; Simons 2001; Storey 1997). Among the salient features with respect to
inﬂuencing and judging the receptiveness of one’s listeners (in this case, the jury),
Oliver (1957) mentions that a speaker must consider factors like intelligence and
educational levels. In the United States, prospective jurors must submit to an information-
gathering process, which includes the completion of (often) lengthy questionnaires
and in-person interviews (voir dire) by both the defense and the prosecution in open
court. Consequently, all participants become very familiar with jurors’ backgrounds
(such as educational level, work history, family situation, and attitudes) before the
trial begins.
Oliver also states that a prior relationship with the speaker could inﬂuence an audience
positively or negatively. Of course, the Neulander jurors had much history with him, as
they were present in the courtroom for months, listening to testimony and weighing the
evidence. When I interviewed Neulander at the New Jersey State Prison in November
2008 and asked him how he “read” the jury as he pondered what he would say, he
stated that he knew they were from an upper middle class area and were likely to be
educated and sophisticated. One can, therefore, assume that he built this background
knowledge into his speech design. As Gitomer (2007: 195) says, “eloquence is delivering
your message in terms of the audience.” Issues of identity and persuasion continue to be
important in the analysis below.
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
237

Narrative and thematic analysis of Neulander’s and
Skakel’s allocutions
In terms of allocution organization and structure, Neulander subscribes to a classic piece
of rhetorical advice in terms of a beginning, middle and end: “Tell them what you’re
going to tell them, tell them and tell them what you just told them” Koegel (2007: 32).
Altman (2008:18) discusses the concept of “framing,” which gives a text a beginning and
an end, but does not ensure a particular type of internal structure. Neulander’s allocution
is fairly well-structured, as one would expect it to be, given his years of experience as a
teacher and preacher. He introduces his major theme “days of the years of your life” up
front and then references it again many times during his statement, as the reader shall see.
Finally, Neulander reprises it in his closing comments. He is clearly a polished public
speaker and hoped to use his oratory skills to his advantage. In (2), (which occurs near
the beginning of his plea, on page 2 of 12 transcribed pages) we see how he uses
rhetorical questions, for example.
Skakel’s plea, on the other hand, jumps from topic to topic in a disconnected fashion.
It is an emotional series of vignettes that include conversations with God. Skakel does
not have a recurrent theme like Neulander, but does repeat speciﬁc lexical items.
Discussion now proceeds to an examination of several themes that occur in both
Neulander’s and Skakel’s pleas, with an emphasis on religion and family.
Religion
“An essential strategy of human expression and thus a basic aspect of human life, narra-
tive commands our attention” (Altman 2008:1). Rabbi Neulander’s allocution does
command attention. His elegantly articulate statement draws the listener in (see lines 1–2
of (2)). The Rabbi clearly possesses “linguistic intelligence” (Gardner 2004: 31). (In the
extracts, bold is used to highlight sections to which I speciﬁcally refer in subsequent
analysis. These excerpts illustrate repetition, direct address, register, use of synonyms, and
his recurring phrase “days of the years of your life.”)
(2) Neulander Pharaoh Story (CP-N)
1 At the end of the Book of Genesis, there’s a wonderful, wonderful dialogue between
2 Pharaoh and the patriarch, Jacob. … I hope you’ll agree with me in a few seconds.
3 And the Pharaoh asks a question at the outset, the outset of this discussion. …
4 if you’re not careful, and not careful to read the Hebrew, it seems rather shallow
5 and ((SHAKES HEAD)) nothing very important
6 Pharaoh asks Jacob … he says: I’d like to know how old you are,
7 but it’s said in a very remarkable way.
8 Usually when there is a locution-when there is a statement,
9 the normal pattern in Hebrew … let me do it in translation.
10 Um-the normal pattern would be to say,
11 how many are the years of your life?
12 The question of how old are you, the quantity of your years.
13 Pharaoh doesn’t ask that. Not that way.
14 He asks ((FIST)) (2.0) how many … are the days … of the years … of your life?
15 That’s why you have to be careful.
16 (4) When he uses that word the days of the years of your life, our great
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
238

17 commentators, our great scholars, our great interpreters tell us ((FIST)) that
18 there is a message. That what’s critical is not the quantity,
19 but the question is: what did you do with the days of your life?
20 How did you ﬁll your days? How, how did you make a diﬀerence in the world?
21 Were you selﬁsh or were you generous with your time?
22 Were you (2.5) (TSK) using the best parts of your brain or were you lazy …
23 sloppy? Did you have a vision for the community or were you < SLOW
24 self deceiving SLOW > and looking only inwards?
25 That now is ((FIST)) not an issue of quantity of years.
26 It’s an issue of the quality of your experience.
27 And I would like to use that as a benchmark (2.0) for that which I speak to you
28 of myself in the past, in the present, and in the future.
29 The benchmark of a past, my past, my present and my future.
30 Which is in your hands and you know that.
It is only natural that a rabbi’s statement would contain religious references (“Genesis,”
“Pharaoh,” “Jacob,” lines 1–2). In fact, one might characterize his allocution as the
most important sermon of his life. Just before Neulander shares the story with the
jury, he tells them that he is going to “take something from my tradition and see if I can
make my request more understandable.” Within a minute of beginning his lengthy
statement, Neulander makes his pivotal argument to the jury—namely, that he plans
to use the days of the years of his [remaining] life to perform good deeds in prison and
improve the lives of his fellow inmates. In essence, his approach is embedding—a “story
within a story.” He also wants the jury to believe that he is someone who has lived
a good life. Note the parallel structures as Neulander compares a positive attribute
with a negative one (lines 21–24). The parallelism is inconsistent, however, in that he
mentions a negative trait ﬁrst in line 21, but the two subsequent comparisons (lines
22–24) position the positive element initially. Perhaps, stating “selﬁsh” ﬁrst is an
unconscious self-reference. It is clear that the parallel positive/negative comparisons have
autobiographical connections, ringing true for the disgraced rabbi himself. And, one
could suggest that Neulander exempliﬁed all of the characteristics (ﬂaws and attributes)
he cites. He was “selﬁsh” and “generous” at the same time, for example. Although he
did participate in the Ronald McDonald House and other charitable organizations,
ultimately Neulander was egotistically focusing on his own needs and desires, pre-
dominantly his wish to be with his mistress. He takes on the voice of Pharaoh as he
speaks to Jacob in this illustration, but also steps out of his story-teller role to address the
jury directly (lines 27 and 28). In line 2, Neulander attempts to connect to the jury,
explicitly stating that he wants them to ﬁnd the story as relevant and interesting as
he does. The end of line 7 serves to demonstrate that he has arcane knowledge (the
Hebrew language). Although this brief statement may not be perceived negatively by the
jury, it has the potential to distance Neulander from them, as they are probably not
Hebrew speakers. He may unconsciously be sending the message that he considers
himself to be more educated than they are. Possible evidence of a superior attitude is
also indicated in his desire to make his “request more understandable.” Shortly
afterward, Neulander also goes into his “teacher” mode in lines 4 and 5, once again
setting himself apart. In this instance, however, “you” is employed as an indirect
pronoun. Finally, at the end of the illustration, he ties the entire scenario to himself
personally (lines 27–29). In closing this segment of his plea, he also highlights the role of
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
239

the jury in terms of his fate (line 30). This ﬁnal line is an explication of something that all
in the courtroom already know to be true. Perhaps Neulander says this to show defer-
ence—that he is painfully aware of the power they wield.
Throughout the rest of his allocution, Neulander repeats the phrase “the days of the
years of your/my/his life” no fewer than 17 times as he speaks for approximately 25
minutes. “Repetition is useful for emphasis, but it should be used with care”, says O’Barr
(1982: 36). On the other hand, Minnick states: “Repetition … is eﬀective in stimulating
an audience to attend to a speaker’s statements” (1968: 63). Do the repetitions become
tedious for the jury? Or, do they serve to keep his theme in the forefront (Abbott 2008)?
The fact that much of Neulander’s plea revolves around religious themes, good works
and family, suggests that he attempts to create a non-culpable identity by constantly
reminding the jury that he is a rabbi, a religious leader. People listening to such a state-
ment might expect emotion (sadness, grief, tears, sorrow), but there is a clear disconnect
between Neulander’s demeanor (his “how”) and his language use (his “what”). Even
though found guilty of the murder-for-hire, Neulander contends that he was not
involved in the planning or execution of this crime.
Michael Skakel’s largely unstructured and rambling allocution is replete with reli-
gious references. In fact, he mentions “God” 20 times over the course of the
approximately ﬁve transcribed pages, and “Lord,” “Jesus” or “Jesus Christ” four
times. The following excerpted lines illustrate the relevant contexts in which “God”
occurs:
1
I owe everything to the God of my understanding
2
the addiction that, as God is my judge
3
to me, it was God clearly saying
4
the relationship I have with the God of my understanding
5
the God who stands with me today
6
Sometimes I ask, daily, I ask God every day in my cell
7
pain in a lot of people’s lives. But, God is …
8
I turned away from God for a long time
9
for a long time God has come back to my life
10
can’t take responsibility for. Only God can take
11
a lie in front of my God who I am going to be in front of
12
place in the whole world was God’s child
13
my life in your hands and the Good Lord tells me
14
you impose on me I accept in God’s name
15
if you don’t believe in God, have a child
16
have a child. God gave me that boy
17
Some people have a lot of God in them
18
to know anything about God so they don’t
19
to the prison systems, to the Godless countries
20
because that’s what God tells me to do
Skakel even goes so far as to suggest that God is on his side (lines 1 and 5). He talks about
“turning away from God” (line 8) and then ﬁnding God again (line 9). He contends that
God talked to him on several occasions (lines 3, 13, 20).
(3), (4) and (5) are examples of reported speech. In (4), Skakel explicitly tries to distance
himself from the crime, portraying himself as a victim.
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
240

(3) Conversation with God (CP-S)
1 I actually heard the good Lord say ‘Michael, do you want to keep doing it your way?’
2 And I saw blackness and death in an instant.
3 ‘Or do you want to try it my way?’
4 And I felt the spark of hope.
Note that Skakel’s “conversational turns” in (3) are not verbal responses to God, but
rather a description of his personal feelings as he surrenders to God’s will in terms of
getting on the right path.
(4) God addresses Skakel (CP-S)
1 You can no longer have any excuses, Michael …
2 You can’t use reform school or your Dad or your upbringing or being kicked out of
3 schools as an excuse any more.
(5) Skakel addresses God (CP-S)
1 Sometimes I ask, daily, I ask God every day in my cell why my life has come to this.
2 I scream to him sometimes and say, “Lord, I have done everything you wanted
3 me to do … why am I here?”
He discusses his connection with Alcoholics Anonymous (overcoming addiction), and
refers to Easter (the day that Jesus rose from the dead, which is commonly accepted as a
metaphor for personal rebirth). He stresses that he “owe[s] everything to the God of my
understanding, my savior Jesus Christ.”
At the end of his plea, Skakel repeats the word “pray” ﬁve times, stating that he prays
for the judge, the Court, the Moxley family, the prosecution, and the press. One could
suggest that making an explicit reference to praying for the judge may be a risky
undertaking. Skakel probably knows little or nothing about the judge’s religious persua-
sion, and it is certainly possible that he could be oﬀended by the convicted murderer’s
supplications on his behalf.
Family
Fred Neulander refers frequently to family members during his leniency plea. He speaks
about how proud he is of his three children, and what they have become. Most notably,
he spends 25% of his statement talking about his deceased wife, Carol. He oﬀers a
detailed description of her, in both dispassionate and loving terms. For example, he talks
about her skills as a businesswoman, creating and running Classic Cakes, the most pop-
ular bakery in Cherry Hill. He praises her business acumen, stressing that she had no
training or experience in marketing or the commercial world before she established the
company. Neulander says that Carol had “great grit,” was “balanced” and had “common
sense.” Some might suggest that painting this picture of Carol demonstrated a certain
detachment. He could have been talking about a mere acquaintance. On the other hand,
Neulander also states that Carol had “class,” was “remarkable,” “bright,” “gracious” and
“a lady.” He becomes emotional when he tells the jury how much he loves and misses
her. His depiction of life with Carol culminates in a reported speech dialogue that he
relates to the court. Neulander attempts to reach the jury by personalizing what he is
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
241

about to say. Note the occurrences of repetition, grammatical parallelism (“with your” +
noun) and direct address (“your,” “each and every one of you”), all characteristic of
powerful speech in (6).
(6) Reported speech dialogue between CP-N and deceased wife
1 We had a little dialogue that I’m sure each and every one of you … might have
2 with your close friend,
3 with your beloved,
4 with your husband,
5 with your wife,
6 with your partner.
7 One of us would say to the other: “I want to grow old with you”
8 and the other would lean over and whisper:
9 “I want to grow old with you, too, but let’s do it slowly.”
When one reﬂects on the parts of the allocution that are dedicated to Carol, it reads
more like a victim impact statement or a eulogy than a plea for leniency. If one were not
aware of the context and the circumstances of the Rabbi’s utterance, it would be very
easy to assume that Carol had been murdered in some mindless and senseless act of
random violence. Neulander’s insistence on his undying love is consistent with what an
innocent person would say, and the sheer volume of the statement dedicated to Carol
makes the listener think about the persuasive impact as well as the credibility of his story.
Does he spend so much time deifying her because it is an indirect way of demonstrating
innocence to the jury? Vinnie Politan, a longtime Court TV reporter who covered the
Neulander trial, was in the courtroom that day. After the plea, he described the jury’s
reaction when Neulander was speaking so glowingly about his wife. Politan said some of
the jurors were shaking their heads and looking down, and others had expressions
of disdain and disgust on their faces. “They weren’t buying it [his story]” (Court TV
Coverage 2003).
Family plays an important role in Skakel’s statement as well. Early on, Skakel describes
his life as a child in completely negative terms: “It’s true that I didn’t have love—love
was not something in my family. There was a lot of hardship [emotional, not monetary]
and an enormous amount of pain.” Springer (2008) faults Skakel’s famous defense
attorney, Micky Sherman, for not “humanizing” Michael enough. When we reviewed
the allocution together, Springer told me that none of the information about Alcoholics
Anonymous, his horrible family life as a child, or his wife’s hatred of him and his son
came out at trial. Since Skakel did not take the stand in his own defense, this was the ﬁrst
time the jury heard any of these details about his personal life. Of course, at this
point, Skakel had already been found guilty, so the only possible mitigation was a less-
than-maximum sentence. Skakel appears to love his three-year-old son, George, very
much, and it seems that he has played a major role in his upbringing. He often recounts
anecdotal conversations with his son during the allocution. An extremely negative char-
acterization, however, is reserved for Skakel’s ex-wife, Margot, from whom he was
divorced in 2001. The convicted murderer quotes his son: “Mom says that you are going
to prison and only bad men go to prison.” His son compares his mother to Skakel’s
scratchy beard by saying she is “rough.” Overall, the reader has the impression that, in
addition to pleading for a lesser sentence, he is also begging the court to have mercy on
his son, who will be raised by the mother when Skakel is sent to prison. As evidenced
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
242

in (15), line 10, Skakel does not, however, express strong negative feelings about his
ex-wife to his son. Notable are the deiﬁcation of Carol Neulander and the demonization
of Margot Skakel. In terms of the victims, Michael Skakel never mentions Martha
Moxley by name, although he refers to her family. Neulander, however, dedicates a
large portion of his statement to a description of his murdered wife, Carol.
Linguistic and rhetorical patterns
Register
Whereas Skakel uses simple, ordinary lexical items in his allocution, Neulander some-
times includes words that are uncommon, even archaic. McDonald posits “Eight Rules
for Good Writing.” Many of these apply to speaking as well. One of the Rules is to
avoid “inﬂated language – pedantic and high-sounding phrases” (McDonald 1986: 73).
Neulander breaks or, one could say, exploits this rule numerous times during his allo-
cution and at some risk, as O’Barr warns when he says: “[u]sing unfamiliar words to
make an impression may be seen as … insincerity” (1982: 32). Spence concurs: “Words
that are directed to the sterile intellectual head-place should be abandoned” (1995: 104).
(7) Neulander addresses the jury at the outset (CP-N)
1 It was very fortuitous that yesterday I did not have the opportunity to address you.
2 and I’m deﬁnitely sure that … I could not have spoken cogently …
3 (4) Mr. Riley and Mr. Lynch yesterday spoke to you of requesting your cogency,
4 your wisdom, your thought, your analytic gifts … in making this … very diﬃcult
decision.
In lines 3 and 4 of (7), Neulander begins by attributing desirable qualities to the jurors
and ﬂattering them, in essence, by telling them how smart he believes they are. Additional
examples include the following: “She [Carol] used it with skill … she used it adroitly”;
“I have acknowledged for the longest time my behavior that was reprehensible”; and
“the best congregation in the world. And that’s not just hyperbole”.
(8) Teaching plea (CP-N)
1 ((HANDS)) < PLEADING That’s all I want PLEADING > ..((HANDS)) is that
opportunity
2 to teach. And that’s why I’m here,
3 I beseech you,
4 I importune you..
5 I beg of you for that privilege.
What are the jurors’ possible reactions to words like those highlighted in (8)? Austin
(1962) and Searle’s (1969) discussion of “speech acts” is taken up by numerous scholars
(e.g. Wood and Kroger 2000). Within “locutions” (statements, utterances), speaker
intention (“illocutionary force”) deﬁnitely plays a role. Neulander’s goal in generating
the locution is to persuade the jury not to sentence him to death. However, the eﬀect of
a statement on its audience (“perlocutionary force”) may be diﬀerent from that which
was intended by the speaker. In this way, there may be a disconnect between the illo-
cutionary and perlocutionary. In Neulander’s case, as McDonald (1986) and O’Barr
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
243

(1982) suggest, the jury members could be alienated by his choice of words. Oliver
(1957: 111) writes: “When you come to the point of asking for a decision, don’t let an
active ego spoil what you have accomplished by insisting upon a triumphant display of
your own superior smartness.” On the other hand, they could also be impressed with his
command of English and view him as an intelligent person who could make some real
contributions in prison. Neulander’s choice of hyperformal lexical items (like “hyper-
bole” instead of “exaggeration,” for example) may also interfere with conveying the
intended message (Axelrod 2007). In other words, when jurors stop to focus on a word
that they do not understand, they may miss something important. The use of “language
that draws attention to itself” can distract the listener from one’s argument or message
(McDonald 1986: 220).
In terms of lexical choice and phrasing, none of Skakel’s words is representative of a
high register. He is very conversational and easily accessible. His focus on religion is very
diﬀerent from that of Rabbi Neulander, however. Neulander “comes by his religious
stories honestly,” whereas Skakel goes on and on about God and Jesus in a largely dis-
jointed manner. Skakel, I believe, attempted to elicit more sympathy from jurors than
did Neulander. The many references to his young son were heart-wrenching to hear.
On the other hand, much was made of the fact that Skakel had been living his life as a
free man for almost 30 years, while Martha Moxley went to an early grave.
Murder-for-hire, the crime of which Neulander was convicted, is a calculated and
premeditated oﬀence, one that is often associated with a cold and unfeeling heart. It was
alleged throughout both trials that Neulander intentionally had Jenoﬀand Daniels
commit the murder on a night when his son, Benjamin (a medical student), would be on
duty as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) in order to deﬂect any suspicion from
him. A juror might well believe it cruel and callous for a father not to care about how
his son would feel when, summoned to his own home on an emergency call, he found
his mother beaten to death on the living room ﬂoor. The contrast between this vision of
Neulander and how he presented himself in his leniency plea could not be stronger.
Grammatical parallelism, lexical patterns, tense shifts, repetition
and synonymy
The Neulander allocution includes a variety of rhetorical and linguistic strategies
designed to hold his audience’s interest. For example, “[p]arallelism helps satisfy …
[the] … ..innate craving for order and rhythm” (Garner 1999b: 184). In Neulander’s
case, (8) exhibits grammatical parallelism, repetition and tense shift. In (9), Neulander
talks about how he plans to help other inmates learn to read.
(9) Neulander as teacher (CP-N)
1 I’m a good teacher,
2 I was a good teacher,
3 I can be a good teacher, and I want to help
The tense shift reverts to his “past, present and future” comments in (2) lines 27–29,
although they do not occur in the same order.
In (10), Neulander talks about Carol’s accomplishments.
(10) Carol Neulander as businesswoman (CP-N)
244
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON

1 Carol Neulander, my wife, started a business with no background in business and no
2 training in business.
3 She started a bakery with no background in baking and no training in baking.
The grammatical parallelism in (10) foregrounds his point.
(11) Neulander closing (CP-N)
1 Ladies and Gentlemen, … (3) If you give me this privilege … to redeem, … to atone,
2 (1.5) what will happen is … the days of the years of your life will indirectly …
3 be made more rich because you’ve given me the privilege in the days of the
4 years of my life
5 to reach out and change for the better … (2.5) the days … of the years … of the life
6 of so many men I have yet to meet.
7 (5) Thank you, ladies. Thank you, gentlemen.
Within a persuasion framework, “personal relevance” appears to be signiﬁcant when
individuals believe that the issue will exert an important inﬂuence on their own lives
(Petty and Cacioppo 1986: 144). In (11), Neulander tries to persuade the jury that they
will feel good if they spare his life. In addition to repetition and direct address,
Neulander follows a classic piece of rhetorical advice—a strong ending: “Your job is to
tell a compelling story and make the audience think and react favorably by making your
point at the end” (author italics) (Gitomer 2007: 86).
In (12), Neulander cleverly places his declarations of undying love for Carol just before
and after a reference to his adulterous behavior. He buttresses the bad with the good.
This is his only reference to personal wrongdoing within the allocution. Also, note the
repetition, tense shift, and alliteration in (12).
(12) Neulander’s love for his murdered wife (CP-N)
1 That was her wonderful warm ability.
2 (9) ((LOOKS DOWN)) <(TREM) And-(TREM)> <(SOLEMN) And I miss her
3 and I loved her …
4 and I love her. Now there are those who I’m sure behind their hands who
5 would … (3.0) would
6 snicker. (TSK) I have acknowledged for the longest time my behavior that was
7 reprehensible,
8 and my behaviour that was (1) disgraceful (SOLEMN)> and note that that’s a
9 theological
10 word <(SLOW) disgraceful (SLOW)> <(SOLEMN) and yet (CLEAR THROAT)
11 you must believe I loved her-(TSK) and love her (SOLEMN)> .
12 (2) ((FIST)) and I wanted to spend the days of the years of my life,
13 (6) long days of long years of my life with her.
A cursory reading of (12) might leave the reader with the wrong impression about
Neulander’s reference to his “reprehensible” and “disgraceful” behavior. In this state-
ment, he refers to unfaithfulness in his marriage, not to the fact that he arranged to have
his wife killed. He has maintained his innocence all along, and continues to do so (Schweda
Nicholson 2008). And note, even as he pleads for his life, he cannot step out of the religious
instructional mode, as he highlights the “theological” meaning of the word “disgraceful.”
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
245

His usage of “love” in both the past and present tense reﬂects an attempt to persuade the
jury that he continues to love Carol even though she is no longer part of this world.
Skakel also uses the lexical item “love,” but in a very diﬀerent way in (13).
(13) Declaration of innocence (CP-S)
1 I have been accused of a crime that I would love to be able to tell them that I did so
2 they can sleep. I would love to be able to say I did this so the Moxley family could
3 have rest and peace, but I can’t, your Honor. To do that would be a lie in front of
4 my God.
From a linguistic point of view, Skakel’s repeated use of “love” in (13) seems incon-
gruous. Someone might “love” to go on an exotic trip, to be able to aﬀord a luxurious
car, or to meet a famous person, but “love” to say that you murdered someone? The use
of the word in this context is simply oﬀ-putting and bizarre. Shortly after this statement,
he reaﬃrms: “I am innocent as charged.”
Within reiteration, synonymy is a familiar rhetorical tool, generally used to make a
point stronger and direct audience focus (Nunan 1993). Neulander has a habit of pro-
viding multiple synonyms for verbs, nouns and adjectives when he talks, and especially
likes triplets, as in the case of (2), lines 16–17; (7), lines 3–4; and (8), lines 3–5. He further
states, “I have heard men sing with great power, with great beauty and with a gusto.”
He describes the days of his life between November 1, 1994 (Carol’s death) and January
16, 2003 (the day he was sentenced) as “dark, unproductive, diminished.” In (6), he
provides no fewer than ﬁve terms from the same semantic domain. Neulander also
employs a classic persuasive strategy in (6) in which he attempts to focus on “common
ground” between himself and the jurors. “Identiﬁcation” portrays commonality and
overlap, engaging listeners through shared experience and perspectives (Oliver 1957:
168). At times, he also provides a more accessible equivalent for a word that his audience
may not know, as in “when there is a locution … when there is a statement,” and “[t]he
portals of a library are gateways.” However, he also does this in the reverse, by pro-
viding the more common lexical item ﬁrst, followed by the more sophisticated term, as
in “she used it with skill, she used it adroitly.”
Finally, as Neulander discusses the diverse opportunities that reading provides, he
makes a request of the jury, extending it through use of near-synonyms (14).
(14) Teaching reading (CP-N)
1 and I would like very much the privilege,
2 if you will give it to me,
3 of helping people ﬁnd … (< 1) those worlds that enthuse, that excite,
4 that that that lift the spirit … (< 1) and lift the mind.
Reported speech
Reported speech is a common narrative rhetorical device in which the speaker takes on
the voice/role of another, often prefaced or followed by a third person statement such as
“she said” (Holt and Johnson, this volume; Tannen 1993; Wood and Kroger 2000). In
(7), Neulander describes what the attorneys said. Within (2)—his Pharaoh story—there
are numerous instances of reported speech. In an early example, Skakel has an assertion–
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
246

denial sequence: “The prosecution says … the fact of the matter is … .” Notable
in Skakel’s statement is reported speech of several conversations with his young son.
Skakel’s strategy is to depict himself as a loving father, who has participated in raising a
good and caring boy. It may also be suggested that Skakel singles out interchanges with
his son as a persuasive technique, hoping that the jury will be swayed by these portrayals
of loving interactions, that is, “How can Skakel be such a bad guy if he is a devoted
father and his son loves him deeply?” Perhaps the most compelling is (15), which illus-
trates a double level of reported speech (an embedding), as Skakel recounts what his son
said to him as well as what the mother said to the son.
(15) Reported conversation between CP-S and son, son and mother)
1 A week before he said, “Daddy”, he said, “Mommy says she hates me, Dad.”
2 And I [Skakel] said, “What did she say?”
3 She says she hates me … ”
4 And I said, “Does that make you sad?”
5 And he said: “And a little mad, too.”
6 He said “she said she hates you too.”
7 I said, “Well, that’s okay.”
8 Then he said: “Do you hate Mom? Do you hate Mom?”
9 I said, “No, kiddo, I don’t hate anybody … ” [lots of intervening text here]
10 I said, “I care about your Mom, I love your Mom, but I don’t like the things she does.”
Conclusion
This chapter has analyzed two convicted murderers’ pleas for leniency by employing
techniques taken from the linguistics, narrative, autobiography, identity, and persuasion
literature.
Who is served by these persuasive allocutions? Conger (1998: 43) points out that, if it
is the speaker that primarily beneﬁts, then he considers the statement to be “manipulative
persuasion.” Of course, in this particular setting and given this type of discourse, all
present understand the implications of the statement and the goals of the speakers. But,
does the jury itself gain from the plea for leniency? In (11), lines 2–3, Neulander expli-
citly suggests to the jury that they will indirectly beneﬁt by showing him leniency. One
could suggest that, by sparing Neulander’s life and by reducing the potential sentence for
Skakel, the juries show mercy and, in turn, experience positive feelings for being less
harsh than they might have been.
Returning to the notion of power in the courtroom, it can be said that, by providing a
forum for the CPs to speak uninterruptedly, the court cedes power to them. Neulander
and Skakel have been found guilty and face long prison terms, so these men are essen-
tially powerless in many ways (Fairclough 1989). What they say and how they say it are
crucial: the allocutions may result in a shorter, less severe sentence. As a result, the
pressure is on them to seize that power and to assert some inﬂuence over their fate.
Neulander’s description of his wife is “powerful” in the picture that it paints “because of
the vividness of the impression” (Minnick 1968: 103). On the other hand, one could also
suggest that it is simultaneously “powerless” as it further cements the idea in the minds of
the jurors that the victim was a wonderful person. In reality, the jury could not reach a
SENTENCING CONVICTED MURDERERS
247

unanimous decision on the death penalty issue, so the judge herself pronounced
sentence: life imprisonment without the possibility of parole until 30 years have passed.
The literature on forensic linguistics would beneﬁt from additional studies of leniency
pleas, as this subject has been largely ignored by the research community. In order to
shed further light on this very speciﬁc discourse type, it would be worthwhile, for
example, to examine whether allocutions vary signiﬁcantly depending on the nature and
severity of the crime. Moreover, research could investigate where leniency pleas are
permitted worldwide, as well as linguistic variations and their bases in diﬀerences among
cultures and legal systems.
Eakin (2008: x) says: “[L]ife stories are not merely about us but in an inescapable and
profound way they are us.” Inasmuch as allocutions provide an opportunity for the CP to
make a relatively brief statement (usually extemporaneously), the pressures to say just the
right thing and persuade the jury are enormous, particularly when the accused does not
testify during the trial. The leniency plea, then, may be the ﬁrst time the jury hears from
the individual that they have observed in the courtroom for many weeks or months. For
the CPs, choosing from many decades of formative experiences when deciding what to
say is a truly daunting task. Their lives pass before the jury, and the stories they choose to
tell frequently have life and death consequences. There is, perhaps, no more potentially
powerful use of language than one that has self-preservation as its goal.
Further reading
Conley, J. and O’Barr, W. (2005) Just Words: Law, Language and Power, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Cotterill, J. (2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the O.J. Simpson Trial, New
York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Coulthard, M. and Johnson, A. (2007) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence, New
York: Routledge.
Eakin, J.P. (2008) Living Autobiographically: How We Create Identity in Narrative, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Heﬀer, C. (2005) The Language of Jury Trial, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Storey, R. (1997) The Art of Persuasive Communication, Hampshire, England: Gower Publishing Limited.
Legal cases cited
Green v. United States 365 U.S. 301.
NANCY SCHWEDA NICHOLSON
248

1.4
Lay participants in the judicial process


17
Instructions to jurors
Redrafting California’s jury instructions
Peter Tiersma
Background
The function of a trial is to resolve disputes. Although some conﬂicts can be resolved
purely by the application of legal principles, most trials involve disputes about a state of
aﬀairs or occurrence that took place in the past. Thus, a court must typically decide
factual issues. Once it has done so, it can apply legal principles to the facts in order to
arrive at a judgment.
During the middle ages there were diﬀering methods of ascertaining the facts, or
determining which party was telling the truth. Sometimes the parties were allowed to
decide the matter by swearing an oath. Knights might decide a case by engaging in trial
by battle. Perhaps the most interesting procedure was trial by ordeal. The ordeal by
water, for instance, involved being thrown into a pond or other body of water. If the
party sank, she had told the truth and was quickly rescued. If she ﬂoated, the water
(being pure) had rejected her, exposing her claims as lies. All these methods of proof
relied on divine intervention and hence required the cooperation of the church. Ordeals
ended when a church council in 1215 declared that priests could no longer participate
and because God no longer spoke through these rituals, they became meaningless (Baker
1990: 5–6).
Without divine intervention, how can courts know which party is telling the truth?
Medieval English judges began to call twelve juratores (“persons who have been sworn”)
to court. They were summoned from the place where the dispute had taken place. The
jurors were expected to have personal knowledge of the truth. Eventually, jurors began
to decide what happened based upon evidence presented to them in court. In fact, today
jurors are required to determine the facts solely on the basis of admissible evidence; they
are generally disqualiﬁed if they have any prior knowledge of the facts or conduct an
independent investigation (Baker 1990: 88–89; Levy 1999).
For many centuries, judges would give no instructions to jurors, although they might
answer questions. Because the jurors were expected to reach a verdict, they would have
251

to decide whether a party was guilty or liable based largely on their own sense of justice.
This was true also in the English colonies of North America, which later became the
United States. The American revolutionaries trusted the common sense of citizens and
held that jurors should be able to decide not only the facts of a case, but also the rules of
law that ought to be applied to reach a verdict (Levy 1999: 69–76).
This state of aﬀairs began to change as the United States industrialized. Predictable
legal principles were important for the growth of commerce and industry. By the end of
the nineteenth century, the Supreme Court held that “it is the duty of juries in criminal
cases to take the law from the court and apply that law to the facts” (Sparf v. United
States, p. 102). This principle, which was later extended to civil cases, meant that judges
had to instruct jurors on the relevant legal principles.
Creating a set of instructions for every case took a great deal of time and eﬀort.
Moreover, each judge’s instructions would necessarily be somewhat diﬀerent from those
used by other judges. Soon cases began to be reversed because of errors in wording. Such
problems led to the establishment of a committee of judges and lawyers in California,
who in the 1930s and 1940s began to draft standard (also called pattern) instructions. The
idea spread. Most American state and federal courts currently use standardized jury
instructions (Nieland 1979).
Pattern instructions have indeed saved judges and lawyers time and money. Because
they are usually drafted by committees of judges and lawyers, rather than a single judge,
they tend to be accurate statements of the law, which has reduced the number of appeals
for instructional error (Schwarzer 1981). Yet for the most part, they have not proven to
be particularly comprehensible for the ordinary citizens who comprise the jury.
Developments in California
As mentioned, the state of California was a pioneer in the development of standardized
instructions. The initiative was carried out by committees of the Superior Court of Los
Angeles County, who created two sets of instructions. The civil version was originally
called the Book of Approved Jury Instructions (or BAJI) (Committee on Standard Jury
Instructions, Civil, 2004). The criminal instructions were known as California Jury
Instructions: Criminal (or CALJIC) (Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Criminal,
2003). Although not drafted by an oﬃcial statewide body, they were commonly used
throughout the state and generally regarded as accurate statements of the law. They were
sometimes criticized as not being easy for jurors to understand, but the BAJI and CALJIC
committees stoutly resisted any eﬀorts to make them more comprehensible, fearing that
use of ordinary English would make them legally less accurate:
It has been bruited that our instructions are written in English that is “too good”,
“too highbrow”; that they ought to be written in the “language of the street” …
In respect of this criticism, we ourselves have run into two diﬃculties: (1) the law
has not been written in “the language of the street”, and the one thing an
instruction must do above all else is to correctly state the law. This is true regardless
of who is capable of understanding it. (2) Jurors do not appreciate condescen-
sion … They want to look up to the judge, respect him as a learned man, and hear
him speak in reﬁned English.
(Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Civil, 1956: 44)
PETER TIERSMA
252

The problem of comprehension was addressed in a study undertaken by Robert and
Veda Charrow in the late 1970s. The Charrows recorded a set of 14 BAJI instructions on
audio tape (instructions, especially at that time, were often delivered orally by the judge).
They played the tape twice to 35 subjects, who consisted of people called to jury duty
but who had not yet served. Participants were then asked to paraphrase the instructions;
these paraphrases were recorded and analyzed. Roughly speaking, only about one-third
of the information contained in the instructions found its way into the paraphrases. Even
when the Charrows conducted a further analysis that concentrated on the legally most
important information, only about half of that information appeared in the participants’
paraphrases.
Next, the Charrows tried to isolate some of the linguistic features of the BAJI
instructions that appeared to make them more diﬃcult to process. They identiﬁed a
number of such features, including the use of technical terminology, convoluted word
order, excessive embedding, multiple negation, and the use of passive verbs in subordinate
clauses. They then rewrote the instructions to eliminate some of these troublesome linguistic
features and repeated their experiment.
For example, the Charrows replaced diﬃcult lexical items with more ordinary English.
Where BAJI told jurors that the actions of an agent “would be imputed” to the
employer or principal, the Charrows’ revision stated that actions of the agent “would
transfer” to the employer or principal. Cumulatively, this type of revision led to a 47%
increase in comprehension. Another illustration is that several passive constructions were
converted to their active equivalents. This produced an increased comprehension
rate of over 48%. Overall, redrafting the instructions increased comprehension by around
35–40% (Charrow and Charrow 1979).
Several studies since then have conﬁrmed the Charrows’ ﬁndings. The most recent
substantial research was conducted by Bradley Saxton (1998). Saxton gave questionnaires
to Wyoming jurors immediately after they were discharged from service in actual trials.
Ninety-seven percent of these former jurors believed that they understood the instruc-
tions either very well or completely. In reality, when participants were asked true/false
questions about speciﬁc legal rules on which they had been instructed, only about 70%
of their responses were correct. For example, around 40% of the participants who had
served in criminal cases believed that the fact that the state brought a charge against the
defendant was evidence that he or she had committed the crime, which is directly con-
trary to their instructions. And approximately 31% wrongly believed that once the state
produced evidence that the defendant had committed the crime, the burden shifted to
the defendant to prove his innocence.
The committee that drafted and updated the BAJI instructions ignored the Charrows’
research, even though it appeared in a prominent legal journal. This was true even after
the California Supreme Court cited the Charrows’ study approvingly and suggested that
the committee use its conclusions to improve the language of an “admittedly confusing
instruction” on causation (Tiersma 1993: 54).
The situation changed only after the state lost a famous murder case against former
football player OJ Simpson. Many people came to the conclusion that California’s criminal
justice system, and the jury in particular, was not working properly. The Judicial Council
asked a special commission to study the matter. One of its recommendations was that the
Council should appoint a task force to draft new instructions “that accurately state the law
using language that will be understandable to jurors.” They should be submitted to the
Judicial Council and the California Supreme Court for approval (Kelso 1996).
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
253

The task force was divided into two subcommittees, one civil and the other criminal.
They started their work in 1997. The committees consisted of judges and lawyers, two
members of the public, and a law professor (the author of this chapter) whom they
sometimes called their “linguistic consultant.” Each committee had the services of a staﬀ
attorney, who conducted research and did much of the preliminary drafting. Members
met in person several times a year to discuss proposed instructions. Typically, the proposed
instructions would be projected onto a screen from a laptop computer and would be
edited on the computer during the course of the meeting. Some were quickly approved,
while others led to extensive debate until satisfactory language was hammered out.
All of the new instructions were circulated to the state’s legal institutions (mostly
courts and bar groups) for public comment. The committees received a large amount of
feedback, which often led to improvements. In 2003, a full set of new civil instructions
(given the name CACI) was approved by the California Judicial Council for use in the
courts (Judicial Council 2003). The new criminal instructions (known as CALCRIM)
were approved a few years later (Judicial Council 2006).
Old v. new: some civil instructions
To better understand the linguistic diﬃculties posed by the old instructions, and to see to
what extent the new ones have improved the situation, it is useful to compare the two.
We will ﬁrst examine some civil instructions, beginning with the old (BAJI) instruction
and then comparing it to the closest equivalent in CACI.
As printed, the instructions typically have a great deal of material in square brackets,
indicating that certain language is optional or that the judge must choose between two
or more alternatives. When they are read to jurors, who these days generally receive a
written copy, the judge will have decided which language to include and the brackets
will have been eliminated. In the following, I have chosen what appears to be the most
common formulation and have deleted the brackets. Also, in some cases I have provided
only part of the instruction in order to facilitate comparison between old and new.
A ﬁnal preliminary comment is that in speaking of the “old” instructions I do not wish
to suggest that they are no longer used. Some judges, mostly in Los Angeles, continue to
read them to juries, either because they have been using those instructions for many
years, or because they are philosophically opposed to explaining the language of statutes
and judicial opinions in ordinary English.
BAJI 1.00. Respective Duties of Judge and Jury
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury:
It is now my duty to instruct you on the law that applies to this case. It is your
duty to follow that law.
As jurors it is your duty to determine the eﬀect and value of the evidence and to
decide all questions of fact.
You must not be inﬂuenced by sympathy, prejudice or passion.
BAJI 1.00 is obviously an introductory instruction and is not bad in terms of language.
It is, however, phrased in relatively formal terms, which was typical of the BAJI
committee’s approach. Informing jurors to “determine the eﬀect and value of the evidence”
is hardly ordinary English, although jurors probably know what it means.
PETER TIERSMA
254

There is no new instruction that parallels BAJI 1.00 exactly, but there is one which is
given at the end of trial and which covers the same ground:
CACI 5000. Duties of the Judge and Jury
Members of the jury, you have now heard all the evidence. It is my duty to
instruct you on the law that applies to this case. You will have a copy of my
instructions with you when you go to the jury room to deliberate.
You, and only you, must decide what the facts are. You must consider all the
evidence and then decide what you think really happened. You must decide the
facts based on the evidence admitted in this trial. You must not let bias, sympathy,
prejudice, or public opinion inﬂuence your decision.
Notice that instead of telling jurors to “determine the eﬀect” of the evidence, CACI
5000 advises them to “decide what you think really happened,” which is a far more
ﬂuent way of saying it.
The following old instruction is more problematic:
BAJI 1.01. Instructions to Be Considered as a Whole
If any matter is repeated or stated in diﬀerent ways in my instructions, no emphasis
is intended. Do not draw any inference because of a repetition.
Do not single out any individual rule or instruction and ignore the others.
Consider all the instructions as a whole and each in the light of the others.
The order in which the instructions are given has no signiﬁcance as to their
relative importance.
Although it is the judge who repeats an instruction and does not thereby intend to
emphasize it over the other instructions, BAJI has a strong aversion to the use of the
ﬁrst person. Instead, it prefers impersonal (often passive) constructions, such as “is
repeated” and “is intended.” Overuse of passives is a common feature of legalese
(Tiersma 1999). In the ﬁrst paragraph, the statement that jurors should not “draw any
inference because of a repetition” is a very awkward way of saying that just because the
judge repeats something, jurors should not assume that it’s more important than the
other things the judge may have said only once. The second paragraph is not too bad,
but the third is again horribly stilted.
The equivalent language in the new instruction (also part of CACI 5000) is much
more ordinary and understandable:
Pay careful attention to all the instructions that I give you. All the instructions are
important because together they state the law that you will use in this case. You
must consider all of the instructions together. …
If I repeat any ideas or rules of law during my instructions, that does not mean
that these ideas or rules are more important than the others are. In addition, the
order of the instructions does not make any diﬀerence.
American jury instructions typically address the question of what is, or is not, evidence
that jurors can consider in reaching a verdict, as in the following:
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
255

BAJI 1.02. Statements of Counsel—Stipulation to a Fact—Evidence
Stricken Out—Insinuations of Questions
Statements of counsel are not evidence; however, if counsel have stipulated to a
fact, accept that fact as having been conclusively proved.
Do not speculate as to the answers to questions to which objections were sustained
or the reasons for the objections.
Do not consider any evidence that was stricken; stricken evidence must be
treated as though you had never known of it.
A suggestion in a question is not evidence unless it is adopted by the answer.
A question by itself is not evidence. Consider it only to the extent it is adopted by
the answer.
One of the problems that legal language can pose for members of the public is its use
of technical vocabulary. The word “stipulate” in the ﬁrst paragraph has a speciﬁc legal
meaning (to conclusively admit or agree that something is the case), which BAJI does
not explain to jurors. The second paragraph not only contains several levels of
embedding, but also adds another legal phrase (to “sustain an objection”) that may not
be familiar to many jurors. The word “stricken” is also odd—usually it means that
someone got an awful disease (as in “he was stricken by malaria”). Finally, the notion
that answers “adopt” questions must seem very strange to most people. Below is the
equivalent language from the new instructions:
CACI 106. Evidence
The attorneys’ questions are not evidence. Only the witnesses’ answers are evidence.
You should not think that something is true just because an attorney’s question
suggests that it is true. However, the attorneys for both sides can agree that certain
facts are true. This agreement is called a stipulation. No other proof is needed and
you must accept those facts as true in this trial.
Each side has the right to object to evidence oﬀered by the other side. If I do
not agree with the objection, I will say it is overruled. If I overrule an objection,
the witness will answer and you may consider that evidence. If I agree with the
objection, I will say it is sustained. If I sustain an objection, you must ignore the
question. If the witness did not answer, you must not guess what he or she might
have said or why I sustained the objection. If the witness has already answered, you
must ignore the answer.
Sometimes an attorney may make a motion to strike testimony that you have
heard. If I grant the motion, you must totally disregard that testimony. You must
treat it as though it did not exist.
CACI 106 contains almost exactly twice as many words as the BAJI instruction. Often
the old instructions were simply too terse and cryptic. Plain language need not necessa-
rily be longer than traditional legalese, but in some cases a clear explanation inevitably
requires more words. I daresay that jurors who hear or read CACI 106 have a far better
understanding of what is happening during trial than would those who are confronted
with the BAJI equivalent.
One of the most important issues in any trial is the burden of proof. The standard
required in California civil cases was formerly expressed in BAJI 2.60:
PETER TIERSMA
256

BAJI 2.60. Burden of Proof and Preponderance of Evidence
“Preponderance of the evidence” means evidence that has more convincing force
than that opposed to it. If the evidence is so evenly balanced that you are unable to
say that the evidence on either side of an issue preponderates, your ﬁnding on that
issue must be against the party who had the burden of proving it.
You should consider all of the evidence bearing upon every issue regardless of
who produced it.
After explaining that the plaintiﬀhas the burden of proving their case by a “pre-
ponderance of the evidence” (which was omitted in the above), the instruction proceeds
to deﬁne the term. It begins well enough when it states that the plaintiﬀ’s evidence must
have more convincing force than the opposing evidence. But the next sentence is very
problematic, especially the use of the arcane verb “preponderate.” The new instruction
deﬁnes the burden of proof more clearly:
CACI 200. Obligation to Prove—More Likely True Than Not True
When I tell you that a party must prove something, I mean that the party must persuade
you, by the evidence presented in court, that what he or she is trying to prove is more
likely to be true than not true. This is sometimes referred to as “the burden of proof.”
After weighing all of the evidence, if you cannot decide whether a party has
satisﬁed the burden of proof, you must conclude that the party did not prove that
fact. You should consider all the evidence that applies to that fact, no matter which
party produced the evidence.
In criminal trials, the prosecution must prove facts showing that the defendant is
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. But in civil trials, such as this one, the party who
is required to prove a fact need only prove that the fact is more likely to be true
than not true.
The new instruction avoids “preponderate” and instead explains the burden in very
ordinary terms: whether something is more likely to be true than not true. The
instruction also confronts a possible area of confusion head-on by distinguishing the civil
standard from the criminal burden of proof. This is particularly important in modern
times, when criminal trials—and the reasonable doubt burden of proof—are commonly
depicted on television and in ﬁlm.
Many civil disputes involve vehicle accidents. This may produce a claim by the injured
party for negligence, a type of tort or delict. To win a negligence claim, the plaintiﬀ
must prove that the defendant violated a duty that he or she owed to the plaintiﬀ. This
duty is the subject of BAJI 5.50:
BAJI 5.50. Duty of Motorists and Pedestrians Using Public Highway
Every person using a public street or highway, whether as a pedestrian or as a
driver of a vehicle, has a duty to exercise ordinary care at all times to avoid placing
himself or others in danger and to use like care to avoid an accident from which an
injury might result.
A “vehicle” is a device by which any person or property may be propelled,
moved, or drawn upon a highway.
A “pedestrian” is any person who is afoot or who is using a means of con-
veyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. The word “pedestrian”
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
257

also includes any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tri-
cycle, or motorized quadrangle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise
unable to move about as a pedestrian, as earlier deﬁned.
The ﬁrst two paragraphs are not too bad, although the phrase “to use like care” is quite
formal. The deﬁnition of “pedestrian” in the third paragraph is a good idea, since it is an
ordinary word that is used here in an unusual way to include people in wheelchairs and
“motorized quadrangles” (whatever that might be!). The CACI equivalent is far more
straightforward:
CACI 700. Basic Standard of Care
A person must use reasonable care in driving a vehicle. Drivers must keep a look-
out for pedestrians, obstacles, and other vehicles. They must also control the speed
and movement of their vehicles. The failure to use reasonable care in driving a
vehicle is negligence.
A closely related instruction lays out in more detail the duties of both drivers and pedestrians:
BAJI 5.51. Amount of Caution Required in Ordinary Care—Driver and
Pedestrian
While it is the duty of both the driver of a motor vehicle and a pedestrian, using a
public roadway, to exercise ordinary care, that duty does not necessarily require the
same amount of caution from each. The driver of a motor vehicle, when ordinarily
careful, will be alert to and conscious of the fact that in the driver’s charge is a
machine capable of causing serious consequences if the driver is negligent. Thus the
driver’s caution must be adequate to that responsibility as related to all the sur-
rounding circumstances. A pedestrian, on the other hand, has only his or her own
physical body to manage to set in motion a cause of injury. Usually that fact limits
the capacity of a pedestrian to cause injury, as compared with that of a vehicle
driver. However, in exercising ordinary care, the pedestrian, too, will be alert to
and conscious of the mechanical power acting on the public roadway, and of the
possible serious consequences from any conﬂict between a pedestrian and such
forces. The caution required of the pedestrian is measured by the danger or safety
apparent to the pedestrian in the conditions at hand, or that would be apparent to a
person of ordinary prudence in the same position.
This instruction is an elaboration on, or explanation of, the general standard of care
relating to motor vehicles. The style is again formal and almost pedantic. It sounds like a
university physics lecture delivered in the days when professors read their notes to the
students.
It is usually a good idea for instructions to tell jurors why a particular rule
applies. People are more likely to comply with an order if they understand its
purpose, as opposed to obeying what seem to be arbitrary commands. Yet here the
explanation for the rule does not seem all that important. It’s perfectly obvious to
anyone who has ever ridden in one that a car is a far greater potential danger than a
pedestrian.
The new instruction assumes that the jurors have a certain amount of experience and
common sense. It is therefore much shorter than the BAJI equivalent:
PETER TIERSMA
258

CACI 710. Duties of Care for Pedestrians and Drivers
The duty to use reasonable care does not require the same amount of caution from
drivers and pedestrians. While both drivers and pedestrians must be aware that motor
vehicles can cause serious injuries, drivers must use more care than pedestrians.
Criminal instructions
As noted above, the original California instructions had a separate set devoted to criminal
law, called CALJIC, or California Jury Instructions: Criminal. The project to create new
instructions therefore also created a separate criminal set, which is referred to as CAL-
CRIM. The introductory instructions for both sets of criminal instructions (dealing with
evidence and trial procedure) are similar to the corresponding civil instructions, so we
will turn to what is often considered the most critical issue in a criminal trial, the burden
of proof. We once again compare the old instruction with the new one.
CALJIC 2.90. Presumption of Innocence—Reasonable Doubt—Burden
of Proof
A defendant in a criminal action is presumed to be innocent until the contrary is
proved, and in case of a reasonable doubt whether his guilt is satisfactorily shown,
he is entitled to a verdict of not guilty. This presumption places upon the People
the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
Reasonable doubt is deﬁned as follows: It is not a mere possible doubt; because
everything relating to human aﬀairs is open to some possible or imaginary doubt. It
is that state of the case which, after the entire comparison and consideration of all
the evidence, leaves the minds of the jurors in that condition that they cannot say
they feel an abiding conviction of the truth of the charge.
There are numerous problems with the old instruction. The language was copied
verbatim from an 1850 Massachusetts case. Note that it never deﬁnes what a rea-
sonable doubt is; it merely deﬁnes what it is not. It addresses the jurors in the
third person. And “abiding conviction” is not very ordinary language (Tiersma 1999:
194–96).
As a member of the CALCRIM committee, I advocated that we adopt language
used by many jurisdictions, simply telling jurors that their decision must be based on
the evidence and that they must be “ﬁrmly convinced” of the truth of the charge. It is
elegant in its simplicity and, in my view, says it all. California, however, long ago
adopted a statutory deﬁnition of reasonable doubt in Penal Code section 1096, which
formed the basis for the old instruction. The CALCRIM committee likewise felt
compelled to use the statutory language, although it did rearrange the wording to make
it more comprehensible:
CALCRIM 220. Reasonable Doubt
The fact that a criminal charge has been ﬁled against the defendant is not evidence
that the charge is true. You must not be biased against the defendant just because
he has been arrested, charged with a crime, or brought to trial.
A defendant in a criminal case is presumed to be innocent. This presumption
requires that the People prove each element of a crime beyond a reasonable doubt.
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
259

Whenever I tell you the People must prove something, I mean they must prove it
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is proof that leaves you with an abiding con-
viction that the charge is true. The evidence need not eliminate all possible doubt
because everything in life is open to some possible or imaginary doubt.
In deciding whether the People have proved their case beyond a reasonable
doubt, you must impartially compare and consider all the evidence that was
received throughout the entire trial. Unless the evidence proves the defendant
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, he is entitled to an acquittal and you must ﬁnd
him not guilty.
Besides some improvements in organization, the main change was to rephrase the standard
into a positive statement. Recall that the old instruction deﬁnes “reasonable doubt,” which
is almost inherently a negative concept. Instead, the new instruction deﬁnes “proof beyond
a reasonable doubt,” a seemingly minor change, but one that allows the standard to be
stated positively: “proof that leaves you with an abiding conviction that the charge is true.”
The deﬁnitions of crimes are also critical in a criminal case. The following is the pre-
vious instruction on murder. Alternatives relating to felony murder and killing of a fetus
have been omitted for clarity of presentation. The instruction begins by laying out the
basic elements of the crime:
CALJIC 8.10. Murder—Deﬁned
Defendant is accused of having committed the crime of murder, a violation of
Penal Code section 187.
Every person who unlawfully kills a human being with malice aforethought is
guilty of the crime of murder in violation of section 187 of the Penal Code.
A killing is unlawful, if it is neither justiﬁable nor excusable.
In order to prove this crime, each of the following elements must be proved:
1. A human being was killed;
2. The killing was unlawful; and
3. The killing was done with malice aforethought.
The organization of this instruction is bizarre. First it lays out the basic requirements for
murder, then it explains what “unlawful” means in the context of murder, then it repeats
the requirements of murder in virtually the same words, but arranged as elements in a
numbered list. There is no reason to repeat the requirements for the crime, and doing so
in slightly diﬀerent words has the potential to lead to confusion.
Jury instructions are traditionally highly impersonal and abstract statements of the law
that avoid naming the parties, referring instead to “a person” or “a human being.” Yet if
prosecutors accuse someone of murder, surely they must know in almost all cases who
the victim was. And the state is accusing a speciﬁc person or group of persons of having
committed the murder, so why set forth the elements in the passive voice? Perhaps the
reason is that the instruction was also intended for use with felony murder, where the
defendant did not himself kill the victim. It would be more sensible to have a separate
instruction in such cases.
On the positive side, the CALJIC committee did realize that “malice aforethought” is
not a phrase that jurors are likely to understand, so they deﬁned it:
PETER TIERSMA
260

CALJIC 8.11. “Malice Aforethought”—Deﬁned
“Malice” may be either express or implied.
Malice is express when there is manifested an intention unlawfully to kill a
human being.
Malice is implied when:
1. The killing resulted from an intentional act,
2. The natural consequences of the act are dangerous to human life, and
3. The act was deliberately performed with knowledge of the danger to, and
with conscious disregard for, human life.
The mental state constituting malice aforethought does not necessarily require any
ill will or hatred of the person killed.
The word “aforethought” does not imply deliberation or the lapse of consider-
able time. It only means that the required mental state must precede rather than
follow the act.
It’s not evident why the jury needs to master the distinction between express and
implied malice. Notice also that express malice in particular is deﬁned in abstract and
impersonal terms. Adding the last two paragraphs was a good idea, because both
“malice” and “aforethought” are used here in unusual ways. Misunderstanding is espe-
cially likely when instructions contain words which seem to be ordinary, but which have
a meaning that deviates from normal usage. The CALJIC committee was apparently
aware of this problem, but its deﬁnitions are not exactly paragons of clarity.
The new language on murder incorporates the concept of malice aforethought,
resulting in a single instruction:
CALCRIM 520. Murder With Malice Aforethought
The defendant is charged with murder.
To prove that the defendant is guilty of this crime, the People must prove that:
1. The defendant committed an act that caused the death of another person;
AND
2. When the defendant acted, she had a state of mind called malice aforethought;
AND
3.
She killed without lawful excuse or justiﬁcation.
There are two kinds of malice aforethought, express malice and implied malice.
Proof of either is suﬃcient to establish the state of mind required for murder.
The defendant acted with express malice if she unlawfully intended to kill.
The defendant acted with implied malice if:
1. She intentionally committed an act;
2. The natural consequences of the act were dangerous to human life;
3. At the time she acted, she knew her act was dangerous to human life;
AND
4. She deliberately acted with conscious disregard for human life.
Malice aforethought does not require hatred or ill will toward the victim. It is
a mental state that must be formed before the act that causes death is com-
mitted. It does not require deliberation or the passage of any particular period
of time.
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
261

The new instruction is an improvement in several ways. It is less abstract in that it states
that the People (i.e. the prosecution) must prove the elements. The CALJIC version
simply stated that the elements “must be proved.” And CALCRIM also makes it clear
that the defendant (not some unnamed person) must have committed the acts in question.
The same is true of the victim, who is referred to as “another person.” I would have
preferred inserting the defendant’s and victim’s names, but admittedly it should be
obvious to the jury who the defendant is and who the victim was. Finally, the new
instruction, like CALJIC, continues to refer to express and implied malice.
The instruction is much improved, but there clearly are limits to what can be
achieved, even by a committee of lawyers and judges committed to explaining the law in
ordinary English. Sometimes lawyers and judges are so accustomed to using a term that it
is unthinkable to use a plainer substitute (as was the case with “malice aforethought”).
On other occasions a word or phrase is in the penal code. In such cases, retaining and
then deﬁning the technical word or phrase may be the only option.
The problem of death penalty instructions
California, like the majority of American states, still has the death penalty, although it has
seldom been carried out during the past two or three decades. Nonetheless, dozens of
people are sentenced to death each year in California. It is a jury’s responsibility to decide
whether there are “special circumstances” that make a person convicted of ﬁrst-degree
murder “eligible” for the death penalty. If the jury ﬁnds that at least one special cir-
cumstance is true, it must then decide whether the defendant should be put to death, or
should instead be sentenced to life in prison. The jury is told that it must make this
decision by balancing the aggravating factors against any mitigating factors. If aggravation
outweighs mitigation, it should return a verdict of death.
As I have shown elsewhere, jurors do not seem to understand the concept of mitiga-
tion very well (Tiersma 1995). It is therefore critical to explain the legal meaning of
aggravation and mitigation in the clearest possible terms. Unfortunately, CALJIC did a
poor job in this regard. Its deﬁnitions of the terms “aggravating factor” and “mitigating
factor” are presented below:
CALJIC 8.88. Penalty Trial—Concluding Instruction
An aggravating factor is any fact, condition or event attending the commission of a
crime which increases its guilt or enormity, or adds to the injurious consequences
which is above and beyond the elements of the crime itself. A mitigating circum-
stance is any fact, condition or event which does not constitute a justiﬁcation or
excuse for the crime in question, but may be considered as an extenuating
circumstance in determining the appropriateness of the death penalty.
The deﬁnition of “aggravating factor” is turgid and borders on the ungrammatical. Do
facts really “attend” the commission of a crime? Moreover, does a crime have guilt?
Perhaps most importantly, the deﬁnition does not tell jurors that an “aggravating factor”
is not merely something that aggravates them.
The deﬁnition of “mitigating factor” is even worse. Amazingly, it begins in the
negative, solemnly intoning that a justiﬁcation or excuse is not mitigation. This is an
absurd statement. Obviously, a justiﬁcation or excuse, even if the jurors believed that it
PETER TIERSMA
262

did not forestall a conviction, could nonetheless function as a mitigating factor on the
penalty. How the statement found its way into California’s capital jury instructions is a
long story, but the language was copied virtually verbatim from a legal dictionary,
which was concerned with distinguishing mitigation from similar concepts (Tiersma
2005: 388–92). If this weren’t bad enough, the instruction proceeds to deﬁne a “miti-
gating factor” as an “extenuating circumstance.” This violates the basic lexicographic
principle that a word should be deﬁned using words that are more—not less—common
than the item being deﬁned.
Although not perfect, the new instruction is substantially more understandable:
CALCRIM 763. Death Penalty: Factors to Consider
An aggravating circumstance or factor is any fact, condition, or event relating to
the commission of a crime, above and beyond the elements of crime itself, that
increases the wrongfulness of the defendant’s conduct, the enormity of the oﬀense,
or the harmful impact of the crime. An aggravating circumstance may support a
decision to impose the death penalty.
A mitigating circumstance or factor is any fact, condition, or event that makes
the death penalty less appropriate as a punishment, even though it does not leg-
ally justify or excuse the crime. A mitigating circumstance is something that
reduces the defendant’s blameworthiness or otherwise supports a less severe
punishment. A mitigating circumstance may support a decision not to impose the
death penalty.
Because of the highly politicized nature of the death penalty, the CALCRIM committee
was extremely reluctant to make changes to these deﬁnitions. Thus, the word “enor-
mity” remains. The same is true for the statement about justiﬁcation and excuse,
although it has been reworded to avoid the false impression that just because something
might be a justiﬁcation or excuse, it cannot constitute mitigation. In addition, language
has been inserted in the deﬁnitions of both words to clarify their meaning. The average
citizen may not know what an “extenuating circumstance” is, but should have little
trouble understanding that mitigation “is something that reduces the defendant’s blame-
worthiness or otherwise supports a less severe punishment.”
Conclusion
The reason for instructing jurors is to promote the rule of law. All parties to a lawsuit,
particularly criminal defendants, have a right to have their cases decided by consistent
legal principles that are accessible to the public. With respect to jury instructions, the rule
of law has often been an empty promise. California’s revision of its instructions has
brought the promise closer to reality. One hopes that its experience will inspire other
jurisdictions to do the same.
Further reading
Heﬀer, Chris (2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided Analysis of Legal-Lay Discourse,
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
INSTRUCTIONS TO JURORS
263

Marder, Nancy S. (2006) ‘Bringing jury instructions into the twenty-ﬁrst century,’ Notre Dame L. Rev.,
81: 449.
Tiersma, Peter M. (2006) Communicating with Juries: How to Draft More Understandable Jury Instructions,
Williamsburg, VA: National Center for State Courts.
Vidmar, Neil and Valerie P. Hans (2007) American Juries: The Verdict, Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
PETER TIERSMA
264

18
Rape victims
The discourse of rape trials
Susan Ehrlich
Introduction
Feminist critiques of the law have often cited the rape trial as exemplifying much of
what is problematic about the legal system for women. Smart (1989: 161), for example,
argues that the rape trial is illustrative of the law’s juridogenic potential: that is, fre-
quently the harms produced by the so-called remedy are as negative as the original
abuse. Other legal theorists have created terms for the rape trial —“judicial rape” (Lees
1996: 36) and “rape of the second kind” (Matoesian 1995: 676)—in order to make
visible the re-victimization that women can undergo once their complaints of rape
enter the legal system. What is perhaps surprising about these kinds of claims is the fact
that sexual assault and rape statutes in Canada and the United States have undergone
widespread reform over the last four decades. For example, legislation in the 1970s
through the 1990s in Canada and the United States abolished, among other things,
marital exemption rules, which had made it impossible for husbands to be charged with
raping their wives; corroboration rules, which required that complainants’ testimony be
supported by independent evidence; resistance rules, which required that complainants
show evidence that they physically resisted their attackers; and recent complaint rules,
which obligated complainants to make prompt complaints in order that their testimony
be deemed credible. In addition, rape shield provisions were introduced, restricting the
conditions under which complainants’ sexual history could be admissible as evidence.
So, given this kind of reform, why do rape trials continue to defy the law’s statutory
objectives? Following Conley and O’Barr (1998: 3), I suggest that the rape trial’s failure
to deliver justice to rape victims lies not in the details of rape and sexual assault statutes
but rather “in the details of everyday legal practices.” And, because language has been
shown to play a crucial role in everyday legal practices, this chapter demonstrates how
linguistic analysis can reveal some of the discriminatory qualities of rape trials as well as ways
that such qualities have been contested.
265

The adjudication of rape cases
In her book-length study of well-known American acquaintance rape trials, Sanday
(1996) comments on the discrepancy that often exists between “law-as-legislation” and
“law-as-practice” (Smart 1986). On the one hand, Sanday praises recent rape statutes in
the states of New Jersey, Illinois, Washington and Wisconsin that deem sexual aggression
as illegal in the absence of what she terms the “aﬃrmative consent” of complainants. On
the other hand, Sanday (1996: 285) points to the failure of such statutory reform in the
context of sexist and androcentric cultural stereotypes: “although our rape laws deﬁne
the line [between sex and rape] … , these laws are useless if juror attitudes are aﬀected by
ancient sexual stereotypes.” Within the Canadian context, Comack makes similar
observations about judges’ attitudes: despite the widespread reform to Canadian sexual
assault law in the 1980s and 1990s, Comack (1999: 234) argues that “judicial decisions
continue to reﬂect traditional cultural mythologies about rape.” Comack’s claims are
supported by research on the language of sexual assault trial judgments (e.g. Coates et al.
1994; Coates and Wade 2004). For example, in investigating judges’ decisions in
Canadian sexual assault trial cases between the years of 1986 and 1992, Coates et al.
(1994) found judges to have extremely limited “interpretive repertoires” in the language
they deployed in describing sexual assault. In describing “stranger rapes,” judges
employed a language of assault and violence; however, in describing cases where perpe-
trators were familiar to their victims and often trusted by their victims, the language
judges used was often that of consensual sex. For example, the unwanted touching of a
young girl’s vagina was described as “fondling” in one trial judgment; in another, a judge
described a defendant as “oﬀering” his penis to his victim’s mouth. Thus, in spite of the
fact that 1983 statutory reforms in Canada explicitly reconceptualized sexual assault as a
crime of violence, many of the judges adopted a language of erotic, aﬀectionate and
consensual sex when describing non-stranger rape.
These kinds of results give empirical substance to Sanday’s and Comack’s claims about
the “ancient sexual stereotypes” and “traditional cultural mythologies” that inform the
adjudication of rape cases. They are also illustrative of the legal system’s diﬀerential
treatment of stranger rape vs. acquaintance rape—a phenomenon also documented
within the American legal system by legal scholar, Susan Estrich. Estrich (1987), in her
book Real Rape, makes the argument that the legal system takes the crime of rape ser-
iously in cases where the perpetrator is a stranger, and in particular, an armed stranger
“jumping from the bushes” and attacking an unsuspecting woman. By contrast, when a
woman is forced to engage in sex with a date or an acquaintance, when no weapon is
involved and when there is no overt evidence of physical injury, the legal system is much
less likely to arrest, prosecute and convict the perpetrator. One could argue that in these
latter kinds of cases, when there is no physical evidence and/or corroboration that rape
has occurred, it is much easier for judges and juries to invoke their own (potentially
problematic) ideas about male and female sexuality. As Tiersma (2007) points out, con-
sent can be communicated indirectly (e.g. through silence), with the result that, in
situations where a man has not physically hurt or overtly threatened a woman, judges
and juries must infer whether a woman has consented to sex or not. And, in line with
Sanday’s and Comack’s comments above, Tiersma (2007: 93) acknowledges that “these
inferences may rest on questionable or oﬀensive … assumptions.” For instance, Tiersma
cites a recent case “in which a Texas judge determined that a woman’s request that a
man use a condom was evidence of consent, despite the fact that he had threatened her
SUSAN EHRLICH
266

with violence.” In the words of da Luz and Weckerly (1993: 95), “caution [was]
construed as consent” by this particular judge.
The remainder of this chapter has two goals. First, I consider research that has inves-
tigated the discourse of acquaintance rape trials and demonstrated that the kinds of
questionable cultural assumptions discussed by Sanday, Comack and Tiersma (among
others) are not only evident in the attitudes of some juries and judges, they also circulate
within trials. In particular, defense lawyers in criminal rape trials have been shown to
strategically draw upon cultural mythologies surrounding rape as a way of impeaching
the credibility of complainants. Second, I consider research that explores the possibility
that the kinds of cultural mythologies drawn upon by judges, juries and defense lawyers
in rape trials can be contested. In fact, I suggest that, because of its adversarial nature, the
rape trial provides a unique forum for investigating ways that dominant notions of sexual
violence are reproduced discursively as well as ways they might be resisted and
challenged.
Questions in trial discourse
Adversarial dispute resolution, of which trials are a notable example, requires that two
parties come together formally, usually with representation (e.g. lawyers), to present their
(probably diﬀerent) versions of the dispute to a third party (e.g. judge, jury, tribunal)
who hears the evidence, applies the appropriate laws or regulations, and determines the
guilt or innocence of the parties. Lawyers have as their task, then, convincing the adju-
dicating body that their (i.e. their client’s) version of events is the most credible. Apart
from making opening and closing arguments, however, lawyers do not themselves testify.
Rather, it is through the posing of questions that lawyers must elicit testimony from
witnesses that will build a credible version of events in support of their own clients’
interests, in addition to testimony that will challenge, weaken and/or cast doubt on the
opposing parties’ version of events. Atkinson and Drew (1979: 70) note that while trial
discourse is conducted predominantly through a series of question–answer sequences,
other actions are accomplished in the form of such questions and answers. For example,
questions may be designed to accuse witnesses, to challenge or undermine the truth of
what they are saying, or in direct examination, to presuppose the truth and adequacy of
what they are saying. To the extent that witnesses recognize these actions are
being performed in questions, they may design their answers as rebuttals, denials,
justiﬁcations, etc.
Atkinson and Drew (1979) have called the question–answer turn-taking system
characteristic of the courtroom, turn-type pre-allocation, to indicate that the types of turns
participants can take are pre-determined by their institutional roles. In courtrooms, for
example, lawyers have the right to initiate and allocate turns by asking questions of
witnesses but the reverse is not generally true; witnesses are obligated to answer questions
or run the risk of being sanctioned by the court. An important dimension of this type of
asymmetrical turn-taking, according to Drew and Heritage (1992a: 49), is the fact that
it provides little opportunity for the answerer (typically a lay person) to initiate talk
and thus allows the institutional representative “to gain a measure of control over the
introduction of topics and hence of the ‘agenda’ for the occasion.” Within the context
of the courtroom, researchers (e.g. Conley and O’Barr 1998) have argued that
the interactional control of questioners (i.e. lawyers) is most pronounced during
RAPE VICTIMS
267

cross-examination when the use of leading questions allows cross-examining lawyers to
impose their (i.e. their clients’) version of events on evidence. As Gibbons (2003: 98)
points out, one way that cross-examining lawyers manage to construct a version of
events during questioning that serves the interests of their own clients is by “includ[ing]
elements of this desired version … in the questions.”
While a number of researchers have developed taxonomies of questions used in the
courtroom (e.g. Danet et al. 1980; Harris 1984; Walker 1987), for the purposes of this
chapter I elaborate on Woodbury’s (1984) taxonomy of question “control,” because it
categorizes questions according to questioners’ ability to “control” information, or in
Gibbons’ words above, according to questioners’ ability to include “elements of the[ir]
desired version of events” in questions. Indeed, for Woodbury (1984: 199), control refers
“to the degree to which the questioner can impose his [sic] own interpretations on the
evidence.” Thus, within Woodbury’s continuum of control, broad wh-questions, such as
And then what happened?, display little control because they do not impose the questioner’s
interpretation on the testimony: there is no proposition communicated to a judge and/or
jury other than the notion that “something happened.” By contrast, yes-no questions
display more control than wh-questions within Woodbury’s taxonomy. For example, the
yes-no question with a tag, You had intercourse with her, didn’t you?, contains a substantive
proposition—i.e. “the addressee had intercourse with some woman”—that is made avail-
able to a judge and/or jury, irrespective of the addressee’s (i.e. witness’s) answer. Indeed, for
Conley and O’Barr (1998: 26), controlling questions, in Woodbury’s sense, have the eﬀect
of transforming cross-examination “from dialogue into self-serving monologue.” That is,
even if a controlling question with damaging content is answered in the negative, Conley
and O’Barr argue that “the denial may be lost in the ﬂow of the lawyer’s polemic.”
In my own work (Ehrlich 2001), I have expanded Woodbury’s taxonomy of “con-
trol” to include questions with presuppositions—questions that I argue are even more
controlling than the kinds of yes-no questions exempliﬁed above. That is, on one ana-
lysis, a question always contains a variable or unknown quantity, which the addressee of
a question is being asked to supply (Lyons 1977). For example, the addressee of the yes-
no question with a tag exempliﬁed above, You had intercourse with her, didn’t you?, has the
ability to disconﬁrm the proposition (i.e. “the addressee had intercourse with some
woman”) contained within the declarative part of the question. By contrast, presupposi-
tions cannot be denied with the same eﬀectiveness or success. Consider, for example, the
question in (1), adapted from Atkinson and Drew (1979: 211).
(1) Lawyer: When you were having intercourse with her the ﬁrst time (3.5) did you
say anything to her then?
In uttering this question, the lawyer takes for granted (i.e. assumes) that the witness has
had intercourse with some woman and is asking about speech events that might have
taken place during the intercourse. What is important for my purposes is that this pre-
supposition continues to be taken for granted (i.e. remains in evidence) even if the
addressee answers the question in the negative. Thus, in contexts where cross-examining
lawyers attempt to include elements of their own client’s version of events in their
questions, presuppositions are even more powerful then the declaratives of yes-no
questions in controlling evidence. The contrast among the kinds of propositions made
available and/or presupposed by the question-types discussed here can be seen in (2) and
(3). The question-types are ordered from less “controlling” to more “controlling.”
SUSAN EHRLICH
268

(2) Yes-No Questions without Presuppositions, e.g. You had intercourse with her,
didn’t you?
Proposition made available (but denied if question answered in the negative): The
addressee had intercourse with some woman.
(3) Yes-No Questions with Presuppositions, e.g. When you had intercourse with her, you
said something to her, didn’t you?
Proposition made available (but denied if question answered in the negative): The
addressee said something to some woman when having intercourse with her.
Proposition presupposed: The addressee had intercourse with some woman.
The power of questions to control information
in acquaintance rape trials
A central argument of this chapter is that the problematic cultural assumptions typically
brought to bear on the adjudication of rape trials are also evident within the discourse of
rape trials; in particular, cross-examining lawyers have been shown to invoke cultural
mythologies surrounding rape as a way of undermining the credibility of complainants.
In this section, I demonstrate how these kinds of cultural myths are encoded within
the “controlling” questions of defense lawyers when cross-examining complainants, in
particular, within the presuppositions and declaratives of the lawyers’ yes-no questions.
The speciﬁc kinds of cultural assumptions discussed in this section (Ehrlich 2001; 2003)
involve what Sanday might call “an ancient sexual stereotype”—an outdated statutory
rule within sexual assault and rape law called the utmost resistance standard. Until the
1950s and the 1960s in the United States, the statutory requirement of utmost resistance
was a necessary criterion for the crime of rape (Estrich 1987); that is, if a woman did not
resist a man’s sexual advances to the utmost, then rape did not occur. While, as noted
above, this standard is no longer encoded in rape statutes in the United States and
Canada, it does circulate within the discourse of rape trials. The following examples
come from a Canadian acquaintance rape trial in which the accused, Matt (a pseudo-
nym), was charged with sexually assaulting two diﬀerent women, Connie and Marg
(pseudonyms), in their university residences three nights apart. (Matt was convicted of
sexual assault in the case involving Marg, on the basis of corroboration from witnesses,
and acquitted in the case involving Connie.) Although both complainants described their
experiences as sexual assault, in the examples that follow the defense lawyer represents
the women’s behavior as lacking in forceful and direct resistance. Because the complai-
nants’ actions do not seem to meet the standard of resistance deemed appropriate by the
defense lawyers, I suggest that these types of representations have the eﬀect of calling into
question the complainants’ allegations of sexual assault.
Many of the questions (shown in italics below) asked by the defense lawyer identiﬁed
options that the complainants could have pursued in their attempts to resist the accused;
moreover, these options were consistently presented as reasonable options for the com-
plainants to pursue. Examples (4) and (5), for instance, show the cross-examiner suggesting
that “seeking help” was a reasonable option for Connie.
(4) L:
And I take it part of your involvement then on the evening of January 27th
and having Mr. A. come back to your residence that you felt that you were
RAPE VICTIMS
269

in this comfort zone because you were going to a place that you were, very
familiar; correct?
CD: It was my home, yes.
L:
And you knew you had a way out if there was any diﬃculty?
CD: I didn’t really take into account any diﬃculty. I never expected there to be any.
L:
I appreciate that. Nonetheless, you knew that there were other people around who
knew you and obviously would come to your assistance, I take it, if you had some
problems, or do you know? Maybe you can’t answer that.
CD: No, I can’t answer that. I can’t answer that. I was inviting him to my home, not
my home that I share with other people, not, you know, a communal area. I
was taking him to my home and I really didn’t take into account anybody else
around, anybody that I lived near. It was like inviting somebody to your home.
L:
Fair enough. And I take it from what you told us in your evidence this
morning that it never ever crossed your mind when this whole situation
reached the point where you couldn’t handle it, or were no longer in con-
trol, to merely go outside your door to summon someone?
CD: No.
(5) L:
What I am suggesting to you, ma’am, is that as a result of that situation with
someone other than Mr. A., you knew what to do in the sense that if you
were in a compromising position or you were being, I won’t use the word
harass, but being pressured by someone you knew what to do, didn’t you?
CD: No, I didn’t. Somebody had suggested that, I mean, I could get this man
who wasn’t a student not be permitted on campus and that’s what I did.
L:
What—but I am suggesting that you knew that there was someone or a source or a
facility within the university that might be able to assist you if you were involved in a
diﬃcult situation, isn’t that correct, because you went to the student security already
about this other person?
CD: Yeah, okay. If you are asking if I knew about the existence of student
security, yes, I did.
The italicized sentences in examples (4) and (5) are “controlling” questions in Woodbury’s
(1984) sense. That is, in producing such questions the defense attorney communicates
certain propositions to the judge and jury in the declarative portion of the yes-no questions,
speciﬁcally, that Connie knew there were university resources available to women who
found themselves in diﬃcult situations. The italicized questions in (4) and (5) also contain
presuppositions. The predicate, know, is a factive predicate, which means that it presupposes
the truth of its complement. Thus, in uttering the three italicized questions above, the
defense lawyer presupposes that “there was a way out,” “there were other people around
who knew Connie” and “there were resources at the university to help those in diﬃcult
situations.” Indeed, due to the presupposed nature of these propositions, even if Connie
had denied her knowledge of the availability of help, what is communicated by lawyer’s
questions is the fact that help was available within the university. Note that the ﬁnal ques-
tion of example (4) not only identiﬁes an option that Connie could have pursued, it also
represents this option as an unproblematic one, given the presence of the word, merely – It
never ever crossed your mind … to merely go outside your door to summon someone?
So, what are the inferences that a judge and jury might draw from the information
communicated by the defense lawyer’s questions? If help was available, and if Connie
SUSAN EHRLICH
270

admits at certain points in the questioning that she was aware of its availability, as we see
in the last turn of example (5), then her failure to seek help suggests that she was not in
“a diﬃcult situation” and that she did not require assistance. Put somewhat diﬀerently,
Connie’s failure to seek help casts doubt on her credibility, speciﬁcally, it calls into
question her allegations of sexual assault.
Examples (6) and (7) show both the judge and the cross-examining lawyer asking
Connie and Marg, respectively, why they didn’t utter other words in their various
attempts to resist Matt’s sexual aggression. Again, we see an emphasis on the seemingly
reasonable options that were not pursued by the complainants.
(6) L:
And in fact just raising another issue that I would like you to help us with if
you can, this business of you realizing when the line was getting blurred
when you said “Look, I don’t want to sleep with you,” or words to that
eﬀect, yes, you remember that?
CD: Yes.
L:
Well, when you said that, what did that mean or what did you want that to
mean, not to have intercourse with him?
CD: Yeah, I mean, ultimately, that’s what it meant. It also, I mean –
The Court: You didn’t want to sleep with him but why not, “Don’t undue [sic] my bra”
and “Why don’t you knock it oﬀ”?
CD: Actually, “I don’t want” – “I don’t want to sleep with you” is very cryptic,
and certainly as he got his hands under my shirt, as he took oﬀmy shirt, as
he undid my bra, as he opened my belt and my pants and pulled them
down and I said, “Please don’t, please stop. Don’t do that. I don’t want you
to do that, please don’t”, that’s pretty direct as well.
(7) MB: And then we got back into bed and Matt immediately started again and
then I said to Bob, “Bob where do you get these persistent friends?”
L:
Why did you even say that? You wanted to get Bob’s attention?
MB: I assumed that Bob talked to Matt in the hallway and told him to knock it oﬀ.
L:
You assumed?
MB: He was talking to him and came back in and said everything was all right.
L:
Bob said that?
MB: Yes.
L:
But when you made that comment, you wanted someone to know, you
wanted Bob to know that this was a signal that Matt was doing it again?
MB: Yes.
L:
A mixed signal, ma’am, I suggest?
MB: To whom?
L:
What would you have meant by, “Where do you get these persistent friends?”
MB: Meaning Bob he’s doing it again, please help me.
L:
Why didn’t you say, “Bob, he was doing it again, please help me?”
MB: Because I was afraid Matt would get mad.
L:
You weren’t so afraid because you told Bob, “Where do you get these
persistent friends?” Did you think Matt would be pleased with that comment
because it was so general?
MB: I didn’t think about it but I thought that was my way of letting Bob know
what was going on.
RAPE VICTIMS
271

Connie reports saying Look, I don’t want to sleep with you at a certain point in the evening
and Marg recounts one of several incidents when she attempts to elicit Bob’s help (Bob is
the pseudonym for a friend of the accused) by saying Bob where do you get these persistent
friends. Yet, in the italicized questions above, these expressions of resistance are pro-
blematized by the judge and the defense lawyer, respectively. In example (6) the judge
asks Connie why she hasn’t said Don’t undue [sic] my bra and Why don’t you knock it oﬀ
and in example (7) the defense lawyer asks Marg why she didn’t say Bob, he was doing it
again, please help me. It is signiﬁcant that both of the questions that preface the words not
produced by the complainants are negative interrogatives (i.e. why not and why didn’t you
say)—interrogatives that Heritage (2002: 1432) argues are often used to “frame negative
or critical propositions.” This means that when the judge and the defense lawyer pro-
duce questions of the form “Why didn’t you say X,” not only are they calling attention
to utterances that were not produced by the complainants, they are also communicating a
negative and/or critical attitude towards the fact that such utterances were not produced.
Once again, then, the inferences generated by these questions serve to call into question
the complainants’ allegations of sexual assault: because they did not express their resis-
tance directly and forcefully, the judge and/or jury might wonder whether they had
really been threatened by the accused.
The examples above are illustrative of the way cross-examining lawyers (and, in one
case, a judge) use “controlling” questions to create a version of events that supports their
own clients’ case and undermines the credibility of the opposing side’s case. My argument is
that the information contained within the declarative portions and the presuppositions of
the defense lawyer’s questions created a powerful ideological lens through which the
events in question came to be understood. More speciﬁcally, by repeatedly posing
questions that represented the complainants as not pursuing “obvious” and “easily-
executed” strategies of resistance, the defense lawyer suggested that the complainants’
behavior did not meet the “utmost resistance” standard, thereby undermining the com-
plainants’ allegations of sexual assault. From my point of view, what is problematic about
the resistance standard invoked by the defense lawyer is the fact that it downplays and
obscures the unequal power dynamics that often characterize male/female sexual rela-
tions. In excerpt (6), for example, Marg reports enlisting Bob’s help in order to end
Matt’s sexual aggression because she feared that a more direct approach would provoke
Matt’s anger. The defense lawyer, however, suggests that Marg should have employed
more direct words in resisting Matt’s violence and characterizes her strategic act of resis-
tance as nothing more than a mixed signal. Thus, Marg’s act of resistance, which could
have been framed as an intelligent and thoughtful response to a man’s escalating
sexual violence, was instead characterized by the defense lawyer as an inadequate act of
resistance.
Syntactic repetition: intensifying the control of questions
in acquaintance rape trials
Like Ehrlich’s (2001) work described above, Matoesian’s (2001) analysis of the William
Kennedy Smith rape trial also focuses on the role of defense lawyers’ “controlling”
questions in undermining the credibility of complainants. Matoesian, however, not
only demonstrates how the referential content of “controlling” questions is involved in
this task, he also shows how such referential content is intensiﬁed and exaggerated
SUSAN EHRLICH
272

through “creative and improvisational poetic structures” (Matoesian 2001: 33) such as
structural repetition and parallelism.
The interactional means by which inconsistency is created in witness testimony is a
major theme of Matoesian’s (2001) analysis of the William Kennedy Smith rape trial.
William Kennedy Smith (the nephew of the late President John Kennedy and the
late Senators Robert and Edward Kennedy) was charged with, and subsequently
acquitted of, simple battery (unwanted touching) and second-degree sexual battery
(rape without the use of a weapon) in the state of Florida in 1991. In Part I of his
book, Matoesian focuses on some of the inconsistencies in “logic” imputed to the
testimonies of the complainant, Patricia Bowman, and her primary witness, Ann
Mercer, during their cross-examination by the defense attorney, Roy Black. While
Matoesian notes that the exposing of inconsistencies in witness testimony is a generic
trial practice designed to undermine the credibility of witnesses, in this particular case
he argues that the “logical” standard against which the two women’s testimonies were
measured—and rendered inconsistent—was not a gender-neutral standard, but rather a
male standard of sexuality, what he terms “the patriarchal logic of sexual rationality.”
In Matoesian’s words, “there is an inconsistency between the victim’s version of events
and the expectations of patriarchal ideology governing victim identity” (2001: 40; emphasis
in original).
In example (8) below, Matoesian (2001: 46) argues that Roy Black’s (RB) questions to
Patricia Bowman (PB) functioned to create an inconsistency “between the victim’s claim
of having been raped and her actions with the defendant before the alleged incident”
(emphasis mine).
(8)
1 RB: And you were interested in him as a person.
(0.9)
2 PB: He seemed like a nice person.
(0.5)
3 RB: Interested enough that tuh-(0.5) to give him a ride home.
(0.9)
4 PB: I saw no-(.) no problem with giving him a ride home as I stated because it was
5
up the street it wasn’t out of my way (.) he hadn’t tou:ched me (.) I felt no
6
threats from him and I assumed that there would be security at the home.
(0.5)
7 RB: You were interested enough (.) that you were ho:ping that he would ask for
8
your pho:ne number.
(0.7)
9 PB: That was later.
(0.7)
10 RB: Interested enough (.) tha:t when he said to come into the hou:se you went into
11
the hou:se with him.
(1.6)
12 PB: I (woul-) it wasn’t necessarily an interest with William (.) it was an interest in
13
the house.
(0.6)
14 RB: Interested enough that uh: at sometime during that period of time you took
15
oﬀyour panty hose?
RAPE VICTIMS
273

(1.2)
16 PB:
I still don’t know how my panty hose came oﬀ.
In this excerpt, Roy Black’s “controlling” questions (in Woodbury’s sense) make
available to third-party recipients (i.e. the jury in this case) a number of propositions
that are conﬁrmed by Patricia Bowman: that she gave the defendant a ride home, that
she went into the house with him, and that she hoped he would ask for her telephone
number. (Note that while Bowman acknowledges that her panty hose came oﬀ, she
doesn’t conﬁrm the proposition that she was the one to take them oﬀ.) And, as
Matoesian (2001: 47) points out, when these propositions are brought together,
Patricia Bowman’s actions begin to look more like precursors to a consensual sexual
interaction than to the crime of rape. For Matoesian, then, it was not just the propo-
sitional content of a series of questions like the ones above that functioned to con-
struct Patricia Bowman’s testimony as inconsistent; it was also the coherence created
by their juxtaposition. The defense attorney, Roy Black, had impressive oratorical
skills and, according to Matoesian, employed these skills to amplify and intensify the
“inconsistencies” in the complainant’s testimony. More speciﬁcally, Black fore-
grounded the referential content of his questions (and his talk, more generally) by
using “creative and improvisational poetic structures” (Matoesian 2001: 33), such as
structural repetition and parallelism. In excerpt (8), for example, an element of the
main clause of line 1—interested—is incorporated into the syntactic frame, interested
enough plus complementizer, and then this syntactic frame is repeated four times (in
lines 3, 7–8, 10–11 and 14–15), each time with a diﬀerent complement clause. In this
way, a semantic link is created between the referential content of the complement
clauses that are embedded within the syntactic frame, interested enough plus com-
plementizer. As Matoesian says, “incremental repetition … uniﬁes and organizes
otherwise disparate particulars of evidence into a coherent, gestalt-like pattern of
persuasive parallelism” (Matoesian 2001: 57). That is, the syntactic repetition in
example (8) functions to create a link among a series of events that might not other-
wise appear connected; and, the fact that these events are more compatible with
consensual sex than with the crime of rape intensiﬁes the inconsistency in Patricia
Bowman’s testimony.
Resisting the cultural mythologies surrounding rape
The power of answers to control information
A deﬁning characteristic of institutional discourse is the diﬀerential speaking rights
assigned to participants based on their institutional role. In legal contexts, as we have
seen, lawyers (and judges) have the right to initiate and allocate turns by asking questions
of witnesses but the reverse is not generally true; witnesses do not typically ask questions
of lawyers and, if they do, they risk being sanctioned by the court. While the claim that
“asking questions amounts to interactional control” (Eades 2008b: 37) is a pervasive one
in the literature on courtroom discourse, it is not a claim that has gone unchallenged.
Based on a study of Aboriginal witnesses in Australian courts, for example, Eades (2000)
argues that the syntactic form of questions has no predictable eﬀect on the form of wit-
ness responses. In a similar way, Matoesian (2005b: 621) has questioned the assumption
SUSAN EHRLICH
274

that “questions … are more powerful than answers,” suggesting that such an assumption
“risks the problem of reifying structure.”
Just as we assume questions do more than merely question (for instance in court
they may work as accusations, etc), why presume any less of answers (which may
recalibrate the question, produce a new question and so on)? A more detailed
consideration of answers and how they function in detail may demonstrate just
how powerful they are.
(Matoesian 2005b: 621)
Drew (1992) provides precisely this kind of “detailed consideration of answers” in his
analysis of a rape victim’s cross-examination. In particular, Drew shows how the com-
plainant (i.e. the rape victim) in this particular trial often produced “alternative descriptions”
in her answers—descriptions that contested the cross-examining lawyer’s version of
events. That is, rather than providing “yes” or “no” answers to the cross-examining
lawyer’s yes-no questions (what Raymond (2003) calls type-conforming answers to
questions), the complainant provided competing descriptions that transformed the lawyer’s
damaging characterizations into more benign ones. In (9) below, for example, (taken
from Drew 1992: 486) the cross-examining lawyer, through the use of “controlling”
questions, attempts to represent the events that preceded the alleged rape as precursors to
a consensual sexual interaction. (This is similar to the strategy adopted by Roy Black in
example (8).)
(9) 16 A:
Well yuh had some uh (p) (.) uh fairly lengthy
17
conversations with the defendant uh: did’n you?
18
(0.7)
19 A:
On that evening uv February fourteenth?
20
(1.0)
21 W:
We:ll we were all talkin.
22
(0.8)
23 A:
Well you kne:w, at that ti:me. that the
24
defendant was. in:terested (.) in you (.)
25
did’n you?
26
(1.3)
27 W:
He: asked me how I’(d) bin: en
28
(1.1)
29 W:
J-just stuﬀlike that
While the lawyer’s questions in lines 16–17 and 23–25 suggest that there was a
closeness or intimacy developing between the defendant and the complainant, Drew
argues that the complainant’s answers, although not containing any “overt correction
markers” (Drew 1992: 487), do not support this version of events. Rather, the com-
plainant provides answers that depict a lack of intimacy between the complainant and
the defendant, that is, a scene in which there were a number of people who were all
talkin and in which the defendant issued a greeting that was more friendly than inti-
mate. What is signiﬁcant about Drew’s analysis for the present discussion is the fact that
the answerer is shown to “control” evidence (in Woodbury’s sense) by resisting and
transforming the propositions contained in the declarative portions of the lawyer’s yes-
RAPE VICTIMS
275

no questions. In fact, Drew comments explicitly on the need to be attentive to the way
that competing descriptions from witnesses may inﬂuence juries: “the complainant’s
attempts to counter the lawyer’s descriptive strategies, and hence herself control
the information which is available to the jury, should not be overlooked” (Drew
1992: 517).
Direct examination
Given the adversarial nature of the English common law system, there are always (at
least) two competing versions of events put forward in the courtroom. Thus, in the
same way that answers may contest the version of events put forward by the questions
of cross-examining lawyers, it should also be possible for the question–answer sequen-
ces of direct examination to convey an alternative narrative to the one provided by
cross-examining lawyers. Indeed, in what follows, I provide examples from a Canadian
rape trial (Ehrlich 2006, 2007) where, I suggest, the prosecuting lawyer anticipated and
attempted to challenge another kind of defense strategy in acquaintance rape trials (and
one exempliﬁed above): that the complainant did not resist her perpetrator suﬃciently
and therefore engaged in consensual sex. This particular case involved a sexual assault
that took place during a job interview; the accused interviewed the complainant for a
job and subsequently invited her to see his work in the trailer attached to his van.
According to the complainant’s testimony, the accused sexually assaulted her in the
trailer for a period of approximately two hours. The accused was acquitted by the trial
judge and by the Alberta Court of Appeal (a provincial court). Upon appeal to the
Supreme Court of Canada, the acquittal was overturned and a conviction was entered
for the accused.
Atkinson and Drew (1979: 136), in their investigation of courtroom discourse, have
noted that witnesses often display their recognition that a series of questions is leading to
a “blame allocation” by producing “justiﬁcation/excuse components in answers.” In
other words, witnesses will provide defenses and justiﬁcations in their answers even
though the questions asked of them “do not actually contain any blame-relevant assessments
of witnesses’ actions” (Atkinson and Drew 1979: 138). Such defenses and justiﬁcations
will thus appear prematurely within the course of a trial, that is, before they are actually
elicited by a cross-examining lawyer. In the same way that witnesses may provide justi-
ﬁcations for their actions prematurely, I am suggesting that examples (10) to (15) show
that lawyers may also anticipate critical assessments of their witnesses’ actions from
opposing lawyers and will thus design their questions to elicit premature or preemptive
defenses and justiﬁcations for such actions.
In contrast to the adversarial, combative nature of cross-examination, direct examina-
tion, has been characterized by both legal practitioners and by scholars as supportive and
cooperative. In particular, open-ended questions, or questions that display little “control”
in Woodbury’s sense, tend to be more frequent in direct examination than in cross-
examination. This can be seen in the excerpts (10–14). In each of the examples, the prosecuting
attorney begins her turn by asking a broad wh-question, such as What happened then?, to
which the complainant responds by describing an event or a series of events. Immediately
following such an answer, the lawyer asks a narrower wh- question—a why-question that
attempts to elicit the complainant’s motivation for performing a particular action that she
has described. What is signiﬁcant about these why-questions, for the purposes of this
paper, is that they allow the complainant to represent herself as having actively pursued
SUSAN EHRLICH
276

strategies of resistance, either strategies meant to discourage the defendant’s sexual advan-
ces or strategies meant to avoid more intense and/or prolonged instances of violence from
the defendant.
(10) L: Was he inside the van or trailer when you ﬁrst got there?
A: I believe he was inside the van, but – he might have stepped out to meet me.
L: What happened once you got there?
A: I asked him if we could go inside the mall, have a cup of coﬀee and talk about
whatever
! L: Why did you want to go inside the mall to talk?
A: Because it was – it was a public place. I mean, we could go in and sit down somewhere
and talk.
(11) L: What happened then?
A: He said, Why don’t we just talk inside the van here. And he sat into his dri-
ver’s seat, and I opened the door, and I left the door open of the passenger
seat and I sat down there.
—> L: And why did you leave the door open?
A: Because I was still very hesitant about talking to him.
(12) L: What happened after you agreed to see some of his work?
A: He went around to – no, ﬁrst, he said, Okay, I’d like to pull the van into the
shade. It was a hot day, and there was cars that were parked under the shade … of
a tree, I believe, and he got out, and he went and he stepped inside, and he said,
Come on up and look. So I stepped up inside, took about two steps in, I didn’t,
like, walk around in it. And then he went to the door, closed it, and locked it.
(some intervening turns)
L: Had you expected him to lock the door?
A: Not at all. I left the door completely wide open when I walked in there for a reason.
! L: And what was that reason?
A: Because I felt that this was a situation that I shouldn’t be in, that I – with anybody to
be alone in a trailer with any guy with the door closed.
(13) L: Did he say anything when he locked the door?
A: He didn’t say anything about the door being locked, but he asked me to sit
down. And he sat down cross-legged.
L: What did you sit on?
A: Just the ﬂoor of the trailer.
! L: Now, why did you sit down when he asked you to sit down?
A: Because I ﬁgured I was in this trailer, the door was locked, he was not much more than
this stand is away from me here, probably only a couple of feet away from me. I felt that
I was in a situation now where I just better do what I was told.
(14) L: And what happened then?
A: He told me that he felt very tense and that he would like to have a massage,
and he then leaned up against me with his back towards me and told me to
rub his shoulders and I did that.
L: And up to the time he told you he was tense and wanted a massage, had the
two of you talked about you giving him a massage?
RAPE VICTIMS
277

A: I believe all he had said right before that is that he liked to have them, and he
was tense feeling and that was all.
L: Had you ever oﬀered to give him a massage?
A: No.
L: Did you want to give him a massage?
A: No.
(some intervening turns)
! L: If you didn’t want to give him a massage at that point in time, why did you
touch his shoulders?
A: I was afraid that if I put up any more of a struggle that it would only egg him on even
more, and his touching would be more forced.
(15) L: And what happened then?
A: Then he asked me to turn around the other way to face him, and he said he
would like to touch my feet or he would like to massage my feet, so I did
(sic). And he was just touching my feet.
L: Did you want him to massage your feet?
A: No.
! L: Why did you turn around?
A: Because I guess I was afraid. I was frozen. I just did what he told me to do.
In the italicized portions of (10) to (12), the complainant represents herself as
attempting to create circumstances that will discourage that accused’s sexual aggression:
she suggests going inside the mall to talk because it is a public place and she leaves the
doors open to the van and the trailer, respectively, because she is hesitant about talking
to the accused alone in a conﬁned space. In the italicized portions of (13) to (15), the
complainant represents herself as attempting to prevent more extreme acts of violence
from the accused: she complies with all of his requests (e.g. that she sit down, that she
massage him, that she turn around so he can massage her feet) out of fear that not
complying will egg him on even more. Indeed, such responses reﬂect strategies that many
victims of sexual violence employ to prevent more prolonged and extreme instances of
violence. As researchers on violence against women have asserted, submitting to
coerced sex or physical abuse can be “a strategic mode of action undertaken in pre-
servation of self” (Lempert 1996: 281). That is, if physical resistance on the part of
victims can escalate and intensify violence, as some research shows (e.g. Dobash and
Dobash 1992) and many women (are instructed to) believe, then submission to coerced
sex is undoubtedly the best strategy for survival. In a general way, then, what is
important about the prosecuting attorney’s questioning in examples (10) to (15) is the
fact that her why-questions served to elicit responses that highlighted and emphasized
the complainant’s active deployment of strategies meant to resist the accused’s escalat-
ing sexual violence. In this way, the lawyer can be viewed as anticipating, and
attempting to preempt, a certain kind of “blame allocation” from the defense—that the
complainant did not resist the accused “to the utmost” and thus engaged in consensual
sex. The preceding discussion is signiﬁcant because it shows that the cultural rape
mythologies often invoked by defense lawyers can be challenged in courtrooms by
alternative kinds of narratives. More speciﬁcally, in the direct examination of the sexual
assault trial just described, the complainant’s actions were contextualized within a
sense-making framework that acknowledged the structural inequalities that can
SUSAN EHRLICH
278

characterize male–female sexual relations and the eﬀects of such inequalities in shaping
women’s strategies of resistance.
Conclusion
According to Gibbons (2003: 98), the primary way that cross-examining lawyers con-
struct a version of events that supports their own clients’ interests is by including “ele-
ments of this desired version” of events in their questions. Drawing upon Woodbury’s
notion of question “control,” I have shown how cross-examining lawyers in acquain-
tance rape trials can incorporate “elements” into their “controlling” questions that are
strategically designed to undermine the credibility of complainants. More speciﬁcally, by
encoding damaging cultural mythologies (e.g. the utmost resistance standard; the patri-
archal logic of sexual rationality) into the declarative portions and presuppositions
of questions—and by repeating elements of these questions over extended sequences of
talk—I have argued that defense lawyers can cast doubt on complainants’ allegations of
sexual assault and rape.
I began this chapter by pointing to the cultural mythologies that often inform the
adjudication of sexual assault and rape cases in Canada and the United States in spite
of four decades of progressive statutory reform. What this chapter has demonstrated is
the way that these same cultural mythologies can make their way into rape trial
discourse, potentially reinforcing the problematic cultural assumptions held by judges
and juries. As Shulhofer says about the failure of rape law reform in the United
States,
social attitudes are tenacious, and they can easily nullify the theories and doctrines
found in the law books. The story of failed reforms is in part a story about the
overriding importance of culture, about the seeming irrelevance of law.
Shulhofer (1998: 17)
If it is true that culture is of paramount importance in the legal system’s treatment of rape
and sexual assault, then the rape trial becomes an important site for viewing this culture
“in action.” Cross-examining lawyers exploit damaging cultural narratives about rape as a
way of undermining the credibility of complainants; and, given the adversarial and dynamic
nature of the trial, witnesses, in their answers and prosecuting lawyers, in their questions,
have the potential to produce competing cultural narratives about rape, as I have
demonstrated. Put somewhat diﬀerently, if the rape trial provides a window onto culture
“in action,” then it not only provides a forum for viewing discriminatory narratives
about rape but also for viewing the potential for these narratives to be changed.
Further reading
Cotterill, J. (ed.) (2007) The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Conley, J. and O’Barr, W. (2005) Just Words: Law, Language and Power (second edition), Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual Consent, London: Routledge.
RAPE VICTIMS
279

Matoesian, G. (1993) Reproducing Rape: Domination through Talk in the Courtroom, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
——(2001) Law and the Language of Identity: Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith Rape Trial, New
York: Oxford University Press.
SUSAN EHRLICH
280

19
Youth and gangs
Sociolinguistic issues in gang-related
prosecutions: homies, hearsay
and expert standards
Mel Greenlee
Introduction
A decade ago Solan (1999) addressed the following question regarding the role of linguists
as expert witnesses: can the legal system use experts on meaning? His article examined
linguists’ expertise with regard to various types of legal texts (for example, contracts,
patents, jury instructions, interrogations) and reviewed the possible role of linguists
according to standards for expert scientiﬁc evidence in court. He concluded that linguists
can help the justice system in many instances where language is complex and/or ambig-
uous, serving as “tour guides” to the analysis of language and to how the range of possible
meanings is determined. Ultimately, the judge or jury decides which meaning ﬁts.
This chapter considers a potential role for linguists in legal proceedings related to
gangs, an arena in which the current “tour guides” are rarely specialists in sociolinguistics
or pragmatics, although criminal liability in these cases (and in the civil realm, injunctive
restrictions on basic civil liberties) may turn on the interpretation of language evidence in
context. The chapter takes a critical justice perspective, noting from the outset that
public rhetoric urging a “war on crime” in California may distort the perception of
youth and their behavior. Just as sociologists have shown that fear of youth gang crime
may be more driven by notions of moral panic than actual crime statistics (Greene and
Pranis 2007: 8–9; Nichols and Good 2004: 55–57), the characterization of language in
deﬁning a crime and youth involvement in it may also contradict the facts about youth
behavior and mask signiﬁcant sociolinguistic variation. In both instances, the work of
sociolinguists and ethnographers suggests that youth behavior is viewed as more uniform
(and more sinister) than it actually is. Teens who perform rap lyrics, use graﬃti on their
possessions, or adopt particular nicknames may do so to establish and maintain social
identity. Their use may make their elders nervous, but it does not deﬁne youngsters as
criminals, or make these ﬁxed characteristics of their users.
This chapter will ﬁrst address over-determination of meaning in characterizing certain
types of language behavior as gang-related, giving examples from California civil and
281

criminal case trial transcripts, court opinions, and other documents. Next, it will critique
current experts and examine the legal rules governing their testimony in gang prosecu-
tions. It concludes with suggestions, not for substituting linguists for current experts, but
for using information from sociolinguistic and ethnographic studies to provide a more
informed and nuanced view, avoiding inappropriate application of criminal stigmata.
Legal issues related to gangs
The legal issues that arise in California criminal trials involving gang activity generally
concern whether: 1) the defendant is a member of a gang, 2) the oﬀense charged is gang-
related, or somehow motivated by the accused’s connection to the group, and 3) the
oﬀense was carried out with the speciﬁc intent to beneﬁt or promote a gang’s alleged
criminal agenda (California Penal Code 186.22). These questions are complicated by
long-standing deﬁnitional debates (Bursik and Grasmick 2006: 3; Sullivan 2005: 171).
Esbensen et al. (2001: 122) note the deﬁnition of “gang” has been disputed for three
decades. In theory, the three questions are independent: a crime might be committed by
a gang member, but, for an individual everyday purpose completely unrelated to the
gang’s alleged criminal activities. For example, a young gang member might be arrested
for driving under the inﬂuence, unrelated to gang activities. However, in many Cali-
fornia cases, the three questions are linked, at least in prosecutors’ arguments, so if the
ﬁrst question is answered “yes,” the rest may follow. Aﬃrmative answers, especially to all
three questions (concerning membership, oﬀense, and intent) may result in a signiﬁcantly
enhanced sentence. If a defendant is found guilty of a homicide where these three con-
ditions are met, that defendant could face life in prison or even eligibility for the death
penalty (Caldwell and Fisher-Ogden 2004: 647).
What is a gang?
The deﬁnition of Criminal Street Gang (CSG), under the California Penal Code section
186.22, the STEP Act, passed in 1988 and subsequently amended (de Vries 2002: 204–
205), is:
1. An ongoing association of three or more persons, with a
2. Common name, sign or symbol
3. One of the group’s “primary activities” is criminal (based on a long list of oﬀenses)
4. Individually or collectively, members have engaged in a “pattern of criminal gang
activity”.
The deﬁnition above, like those used in other states, has been criticized for circularity; a
gang is made up of persons who engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity (Gomez
2004: 622). For linguists, it is worth noting the second deﬁning criterion refers to lan-
guage, and the list of oﬀences in the third criterion includes language-related crimes,
such as high-value graﬃti, and threats (California Penal Code §186.22(e)). In gang pro-
secutions, language evidence may include nicknames, slang, tattoos, gang signs, graﬃti,
and certain speech acts (among them “hit-ups”, often interpreted as a challenge or threat)
(Jackson 2004). The relationship between a criminal act and alleged motive to beneﬁt a
gang may also be established by what the defendant (or others) said. (See, e.g. People v.
MEL GREENLEE
282

Margarejo (2008) 162 Cal. App.4th 102: ﬂeeing from police while making gang hand
signs interpreted as intent to beneﬁt gang agenda.)
Nicknames
For gang membership, identifying information may come from ﬁeld interview cards,
police street contacts, and/or a statewide gang database. Along with descriptive infor-
mation about the person, the database contains the youth’s nickname or “moniker”
(Espiritu 2005: 190; People v. Castro (2006) WL459890, noting moniker of “Crow”).
Woe to the defence attorney whose client’s nickname is Bam-bam, Diablo (devil), or
Trigger. Although the client may have carried the nickname from childhood (Diablo was
a name given to one child because of the shape of his forehead, and another was called
Trigger because he ate like a horse), the state will likely use these nicknames to argue
that the defendant in a gang trial is violent by nature.
Argot and slang
Linguists and ethnographers have historically examined speech varieties of gangs and
marginalized communities, providing a wealth of information on vocabulary, etymol-
ogy and style-shifting (see, e.g. Ornstein-Galicia (1987) on Caló; Galindo (1993) on
conversational interchange and style-shifting between Chicanas). The lexical and
grammatical innovations in Caló, a popular variety of speech long used in Southwest
Latino communities, are heard not only on the street, but even in theatre productions.
(Sanchez 1983: 134). Yet police oﬃcers may characterize Caló as a mish-mash of
English and Spanish associated with prison inmates. (See People v. Zepeda, transcript at
592: “It’s just it’s an adopted language that the traditional Sureños gangs and Norte
gangs adopted … It’s kind of a conglomeration of Spanish and English. … You hear it
in the prison gangs a lot too.”) Popular expressions given this interpretation might
include: “letra” (letter), “calmontes” (a variant of “cálmate” (relax)), and even the word
“varrio” itself, a variant spelling of standard “barrio” (neighborhood). Although Caló
may have begun as an underworld argot, the present-day connection between this
form of speech and criminal motivation or membership is dubious (Sanchez 1983:
128). Like an allegedly sinister nickname, use of Caló is likely to be brought out when
its speaker is accused of being a gang member or having committed an oﬀense for a
gang’s beneﬁt.
Table 19.1 is a glossary of “gang-slang” terms distributed to parents by a local police
department (Redwood City Police Department 2007). Many parents of American teen-
agers know their children are familiar with these words and may use them, whether or
not they are involved in gangs. This is true in my area, where “Nut up” usually means
“to go crazy”, not “angry”. In living communities, speech styles and vocabulary descri-
bed as slang are highly variable (Bucholtz 2006); relying on them as gang indicators tends
to over-identify gang participation.
Tattoos
The images and writings in tattoos may also be over-interpreted. Police sweeping urban
neighborhoods may ask young men to raise their shirts to see if they have what police
consider to be gang-related tattoos. These marks are then prominently listed in oﬃcial
YOUTH AND GANGS
283

documents, such as ﬁeld identiﬁcation cards, police reports, and probation records
(Espiritu 2005: 190; Wright 2005: 121).
Like the unfortunate young man whose sweetheart is now Louise, but whose chest
still says “Rosie,” the tattoo may outlast the relationship (McGreevy and Banks 2006;
Curiel 2008). Community workers ﬁnd young men who are working fathers may keep
their tattoos, even though no longer active in street groups. Similarly, tattooed images of
ethnic or religious symbols (the Virgin of Guadalupe, praying hands, or the “laugh-now,
cry-later” of drama masks) may be over-identiﬁed with gang participation (López 2002:
48, 52–53). For this reason, urban groups who work with marginalized young people
(such as CARECEN in San Francisco or Homies Unidos in Los Angeles) oﬀer a service
of removing tattoos.
Gang hand signs
Hand signs such as Margarejo’s “HP” (meaning Highland Park), the “14” of the Nor-
teño group, or the “C” of Crips are so ubiquitous in the media that YouTube has
spawned countless spoofs and satirical take-oﬀs; on the internet one may view a baby
allegedly making gang signs, fraternity brothers imitating hand signs, and even geek-
blogger signs. Ethnographers have shown that among youth street gangs, hand signs are
used in greetings, to tell whether a newcomer is friend or foe, and to show solidarity,
among other purposes (Conquergood 1994). Police take signs made in the home
neighborhood very seriously, even when they ﬁnd them confusing or ambiguous – so
seriously that when civil injunctions are issued against gangs in a neighborhood, the ban
generally includes the gang’s hand signs. (See, e.g. People v. Norteño 2007: persons subject
to the injunction prohibited from “ﬂashing, meaning using one’s … hands or … ﬁngers,
to form the number[-] 14.”)
In Margarejo’s case, one oﬃcer testiﬁed that in making hand signs while driving away
from the police, Margarejo intended to “terrorize” the neighborhood, even though he
appeared to be laughing and there was no evidence of what, if anything, the bystanders
on the street understood from his gestures. The oﬃcer observed most bystanders “looked
like they did not belong to gangs.” Defense counsel at trial elicited the following (tran-
script at 917) in extract (1).
Table 19.1
Glossary of ‘gang slang’ terms distributed to parents in Redwood City, California
Safeguarding your child from gangs
Some common slang words gangs use
Gangbanger:
Active gang member
Home boy or home girl:
Gang member
Jump in:
Gang initiation
Nut up:
Angry
OG:
Original gang member
Packing:
Carrying a gun
Rag:
Color of a gang
Shooter:
Gang member who is carrying a gun
Tagger:
Someone who uses graﬃti
Wannabe:
Youngster who wants to be a gang member
284
MEL GREENLEE

(1) (D is Defense Counsel and W is Witness)
D: How can you be joking around and terrorizing people at the same time? You
agree that doesn’t make sense, does it?
W: Very few things about gang activity seem to make sense, sir.
Despite this concession, Margarejo received an enhanced sentence based on a gang-related
motive.
Prohibitions on signing may continue even after sentencing and release. A paroled gang
member most likely will be prohibited from associating with gang members or using
gang signs. In the movie Mi Vida Loca, a young woman recently released from prison is doing
her best to “go straight” when she sees friends who are active gang members. Seated in a
local café, they sign to her through the window with their neighborhood letters “EP”
and are puzzled when she only waves back.
Grafﬁti
Figure 19.1 shows a piece of graﬃti indicative of gang presence in a neighborhood. The
writers are recognizably associated with a Norte-oriented local group, by the incorporation
of the number 14 (X4) and by the cross-outs of the letter S, a symbolic representation of
rivalry with the Sureño group. The graﬃti also includes the gang nicknames of its
authors, Misterio and Sniper. Susan Phillips’s well-documented book, Wallbangin’ (1999),
includes a history, colorful examples, and explanation of much of the gang graﬃti in Los
Angeles neighbourhoods.
Karen Adams and Anne Winter’s survey of over 1,000 pieces of graﬃti (Adams and
Winter 1997) demonstrates that graﬃti has many functions, not only the ones frequently
mentioned in law enforcement testimony. Graﬃti may indeed delineate boundaries, but
it also honours the dead, sets out a roll call of group members, shows social networks,
and addresses emotional concerns. Matthew Hunt (1996: 88–89) considered graﬃti from
a structural point of view, examining the distinctive morphology in diﬀerent types of
Figure 19.1 Grafﬁti photo 1
285
YOUTH AND GANGS

graﬃti in Los Angeles. He observed, “Gang members regularly cross out the graﬃti of
other gangs, but such practices are certainly not always death threats.” (Hunt 1996: 144).
Table 19.2 shows representative examples of graﬃti messages.
Similar graﬃti syntax (with cross-outs) and roll-call lists have been observed in many
locales. Some of the writing conventions have also been observed in other media. In
People v. Miller (2007) 2007 WL 1229401, the prosecution argued that a letter containing
crossed-out names allegedly written by the defendant signiﬁed death threats against the
named individuals, one of whom was referred to as “That bitch Diablita”.
The broader meaning of cross-outs is simple enmity or rivalry. A good example comes
from high school data collected by Mendoza-Denton (2008: 52); in a girls’ bathroom,
she observed a graﬃti cross-out of the word NORTE with an inscription above, “Puro
Sur Mexico 100%” and an arrow below noting: “Putaaas” (whores). The southern
group’s cross-out of the northern one’s name (and the insulting comments) were an
expression of contempt, not death threats.
Speech acts
Language rituals are discussed in many California cases, and often mentioned in injunctions
against street gangs. Among the most complex is one called “the hit-up” (Docuyanan
2000: 114). In form, it is a question, such as “Where are you from?” Police oﬃcers consider
it a challenge to ﬁght, a provocation, and/or a threat of immediate harm (Valentine
1995: 17). One oﬃcer testiﬁed a shooting “always” follows these words (People v.
Gutierrez 2007 WL 3138384). Yet in the proper context this question is innocuous;
moreover, the hit-up ritual is subject to spooﬁng and playful use, like other seemingly
sinister utterances such as mock-threats and insults (Mendoza-Denton 2008: 67–73).
Thus, interpretation of any of these language features relies heavily on context. There is a
danger of overbreadth in associating them too exclusively with gang membership. With the
possible exception of the hit-up at its most sinister, these features and practices can be observed
in wider use among young speakers and as part of the language repertoire of particular
communities (like Caló). In determining meaning in context, the language analyst would seek
to gather more information about the common understanding of these conventions not only
by the speakers or writers but also of others in the speech community.
Was the offense gang-related?
The relationship between alleged gang membership and the oﬀense is an important
component of gang prosecutions; here again, the connection is often language-based.
Table 19.2 Common functions and examples of grafﬁti
Boasts:
“Rifamos” (we rule)
Challenges:
“¿Y qué?” (so what?)
Insults:
“Bitch”
Expressions of emotion:
“Mr. Solo y La Josie – BH”
(couple’s name was written above the initials of their gang name)
Memorials:
“Tank – RIP”
(nickname of member (Tank) written above his gang initials (BH)
MEL GREENLEE
286

A court may consider as signs of gang relationship, the fact that a gang name was shouted
when the crime was committed or a hit-up made, or that later a gang member bragged about
the crime in some medium. See People v. Albarran (2007) 149 Cal. App.4th 214, rever-
sing gang-related charge for lack of these indicia. The prosecution argued that a shooting
after a birthday party must have been gang-related because Albarran was a gang member,
and members of another group were present at the party, although not targeted. An
oﬃcer’s testimony about criminal activity committed by other persons aﬃliated with
Albarran’s gang took seventy pages of trial transcript, but no connection of this evidence
to the shooting at issue, or to Albarran himself, was established. The oﬃcer’s far-ranging
testimony even interpreted graﬃti by others as a threat to murder police oﬃcers.
People v. Chapman (2003) WL 1958893, an unpublished California case, also illustrates
how far liability for such crimes, based on aiding and abetting a gang member with intent
to advance a gang’s criminal agenda, may extend. Both sides acknowledged there was
little evidence Chapman was a gang member. Accused of aiding a necklace snatching
with an armed gang member co-perpetrator, Chapman was new to the neighborhood
and city, had no gang tattoos or initiation, and was of diﬀerent ethnicity from most
members of the gang. Because he allegedly made a hit-up to the victim in Spanish,
“¿Qué barrio?” (what neighborhood?), before his co-defendant snatched the chain, an
oﬃcer was allowed to give extensive testimony associating the co-defendant’s group with
a notorious, violent Latino prison gang, suggesting Chapman had assisted the gang’s
agenda by uttering those words as a challenge to an intruder, a challenge which would
only have been made by an actual gang member. Chapman’s 14-year sentence, with
enhancement under the STEP Act, was upheld on appeal.
Who is the gang expert? Two gang syllogisms
In California gang prosecutions, the usual witnesses concerning these issues are police
oﬃcers. Their testimony is admitted based on their perceived experience with gang
members. The evidentiary rules for such experts are discussed below. One basis for their
role may be syllogistic reasoning by the trial judge: “Gangs do crime; cops know crime
and gangs; therefore, gang cops are the experts” (Klein 1997: 521). Although most aca-
demics have less day-to-day familiarity with youth on the street than do police oﬃcers,
the nature of the experience may aﬀect the testimony’s quality and reliability, particularly
when the case turns on interpreting subtle questions of language and intent and the
witness is a member of the prosecution team.
Faigman et al. (2007) observed similar police roles (and voiced similar concerns about
reliability) in cases involving drug-traﬃcking: “We … believe … courts ought to provide a
more discriminating analysis of the methods underlying” experience-based testimony pro-
vided by police oﬃcers (see also Moreno 2004: 7–9, 54; Solan and Tiersma 2005: 193).
Federal courts have sounded a cautionary note where the “analytical gap” between the
oﬃcer’s testimony and the conclusion drawn is too great. Where an expert “testiﬁes as to
the meaning of seemingly innocuous activities”, the court must be alert to the possibility
that the expert’s opinion is based on impermissible speculation (U.S. v. Freeman (9th Cir.
2007) 498 F.3d 893, 903–4; U.S. v. Hermanek (9th Cir. 2002) 289 F.3d 1076). (See also
Gray, this volume, on the diﬀerential evaluation of expertise.)
A second syllogism commonly operative in these prosecutions relies on proﬁling: gangs
are criminals; defendant is a gang member; therefore, defendant is a criminal (i.e. guilty)
(Shoop 1994; see also People v. Robbie (2001) 92 Cal. App.4th 1075, 1084–85, critiquing
YOUTH AND GANGS
287

proﬁling in a diﬀerent context). Most large urban police departments have gang units, who
inventory groups on the street and testify as experts in gang trials (Webb and Katz 2006).
To establish the ﬁrst premise, the oﬃcers may provide information on crimes by other
persons or groups with whom the defendant is allegedly associated via gang ties. Since the
gang statute implies broad conspiracy liability (Mayer 1993: 972; Klein 1996: 865; De Vries
2002: 200), the evidence such experts introduce, as in the Chapman and Albarran cases
above, may be quite far-ranging, including actions even of persons unknown to the
accused. The description of gang behaviour in such testimony has been criticized as over-
inclusive (“if it walks like a duck”) as to who is a member, the relationship of the oﬀence
to gang membership, and the alleged perpetrator’s subjective intent (Burrell, 1990; Istra-
tescu, 2007; People v. Robbie (2001) 92 Cal. App.4th 1075, 1084–85).
This may also be true regarding language behavior. Unless care is taken in evaluating
testimony regarding language behavior in context, “guilt by linguistic association” may
result (Solan and Tiersma 2005: 194). Sinister meanings may be inferred due to an
expert’s preconception that the speakers are engaged in illegal activity. Recent psycho-
logical research has shown that perception may also be unconsciously inﬂuenced by
pervasive and long-standing social prejudice (Eberhardt et al. 2004).
One might compare the usual “gang expert” (in Solan’s tour guide analogy) to the tour
guide who delights in sending a frisson of fear through his charges by graphically describing
events at notorious crime scenes. In establishing the alleged connection between oﬀence,
group and intent, the oﬃcer may view ambiguous or even innocuous behavior as sinister,
and youth groups as more organized and predictable than they really are (Klein 1996: 866).
Yet because judges usually accept that law enforcement oﬃcers are the most knowledge
experts and capable of predicting behavior, their testimony is routinely admitted on all
three elements. (See Groscup and Penrod 2003: 1151: empirical study of expert evidence
in over 1,000 trials shows police oﬃcer testimony admitted over 80% of the time).
Standards for expert testimony
How well does such expert testimony ﬁt within the legal standards for expert evidence?
California’s threshold criteria for admitting such evidence refer to proper qualiﬁcation of
the expert, relevance vs. prejudice, and assistance to the decision maker, usually a jury.
Most important, they also refer to reliability of the methods used to arrive at expert
conclusions (California Evidence Code § 801; People v. Gamez (1991) 235 Cal. App.3d
957, 965–66; U.S. v. Hermanek (9th Cir. 2002) 289 F.3d 1076).
For scientiﬁc evidence, California uses the Kelly test, which requires that the reliability
of the method of analysis be established via an expert who is properly qualiﬁed, and that
correct scientiﬁc procedures were used in the particular case. In addition, the theory to
which the expert will testify must be one which has general acceptance in the scientiﬁc
ﬁeld (People v. Kelly (1976) 17 Cal. 3d 24).
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, requires that to be admissible, expert
evidence must be:
(a) relevant,
(b) based on materials generally relied on by experts in the ﬁeld, and
(c) less prejudicial than probative.
(Garcia v. Carey (9th Cir. 2005) 395 F.3d 1099, 1103)
MEL GREENLEE
288

For scientiﬁc evidence, the federal Daubert test has four threshold requirements (Daubert
v. Merell-Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (1993) 509 U.S. 579):
(1) The theory or technique can be and has been tested;
(2) it has been subjected to peer review and publication;
(3) it has a known rate of error; and
(4) it is widely accepted in the scientiﬁc community.
In addition, where expertise is technical or experiential, a trial court must ensure the
expert is qualiﬁed, employs reliable principles and methods and has applied these reliably
to suﬃcient data (Kumho Tire v. Carmichael (1999) 536 U.S. 137, 152–53).
Whether the testimony of law enforcement gang experts is subject to the standards –
federal or state – for admitting scientiﬁc evidence is a subject of debate (Agrimonti 1995;
Moreno 2004). California courts and case law on gang experts appear to focus most
heavily on the witness’s experience and assistance to jurors (see, e.g. People v. Gamez
(1991) 235 Cal. App.3d 957, 966), while permitting police oﬃcer expert testimony to
“slip[-] in under the gatekeeper’s door” (Hansen 2002: 34). This practice is in line with
Groscup and Penrod’s survey data: courts readily accept experience-based “expertise” of
police oﬃcers, but rarely consider the methods of the witness with respect to a scientiﬁc
reliability test (Moreno 2004: 4–6).
Gang experts arguably should be subject to a rigorous scientiﬁc evidentiary standard,
such as the Daubert or Kelly test, particularly regarding the speciﬁc intent element of
statutes such as the STEP Act (Gomez 2004: 604). If oﬃcers claim to use scientiﬁc
methods to predict behaviour and decipher intent (even for the “hypothetical person”),
the error rate of those predictions or analytic methods must be established (Burrell 1990:
771; Istratescu 2007). The methods of analysis for “Dr. Cop on the Stand” should be
subject to more exacting scrutiny. Hansen (2002: 34) and Moreno (2004: 54) have
questioned the over-willingness of trial courts to accept law enforcement experts’ testimony
on behavior, habits, and language codes of drug traﬃcking.
Hearsay
Experts, unlike lay witnesses, are allowed to rely on hearsay, even though the United
States Constitution entitles defendants to confront the evidence against them and a wit-
ness generally may not report in testimony a statement (or writing) as proof of the matter
stated if the statement was made outside of court by a “declarant” not subject to cross-
examination (Crawford v. Washington (2004) 541 U.S. 36; Yermish 2006: 16). Thus, a
statement by A that B is a gang member, overheard by C (who later testiﬁes) would
ordinarily not be admissible against B to prove that B is in fact a gang member.
These rules, however, are relaxed for expert witnesses. An expert witness may rely on
hearsay in forming his or her opinion, but the jury is instructed to consider that hearsay
only is the basis for the expert’s opinion, not for its truth (Yermish 2006). Let’s say that A
tells C that B shot at someone in a rival gang. At B’s trial, only C is available. A’s state-
ment to C is not admissible to prove B shot at someone. However, A’s statement could
be used as the basis for a gang expert’s testimony that, hypothetically, a person in B’s
circumstances would commit such a crime for the beneﬁt of a gang (see e.g. People v.
Gamez (1991) 235 Cal. App.3d 957, 968–69).
YOUTH AND GANGS
289

How hearsay works in a gang trial
The gang expert may bring in extensive information about other people, events, and times,
to establish the “CSG” has a primary activity of committing crimes and that the defen-
dant’s actions are consistent with an intent to beneﬁt the gang (see Albarran case above).
Often, the oﬃcer who testiﬁes as an expert is also involved directly in the case investiga-
tion. In People v. Zepeda (2008) 167 Cal. App.4th 25, three oﬃcers testiﬁed, including one
who seized incriminating material in a search, and another who gave a PowerPoint pre-
sentation covering seventy pages of transcript; the testimony encompassed hearsay con-
cerning numerous acts of other alleged gang members. As one prosecutor noted, the
expert may bring in the “juicy stuﬀ” by basing an opinion on “almost anything” (Jackson
2004: 25–27).
The expert’s testimony may be based on information from conﬁdential informants, a
local or statewide database (with information entered years before), or other sources not
subject to review or cross-examination (People v. Gardeley (1997) 14 Cal. 4th 605;
Mahoney 2004: 398–99; Gomez 2004: 618; Wright 2005: 123). Experts may rely on
out-of-court statements by gang rivals, or other persons who never testify. For example,
a police oﬃcer might testify that he spoke with members of a rival group, who claimed
that the defendant’s gang had committed the crime in question out of revenge for a prior
assault. Jurors at trial would be instructed, when the expert testiﬁed, that the rivals’
accusation could not be considered as evidence of defendant’s guilt. Instead, jurors would
be told to consider such evidence only as a foundation for the expert’s opinion (Jackson
2004: 26; People v. Gamez (1991) 235 Cal. App. 4th 957).
However, empirical studies have shown that such “limiting instructions” may have
precisely the opposite eﬀect on jurors’ consideration of hearsay evidence. Jurors may
actually pay greater attention to inadmissible hearsay highlighted by the limiting
instruction (Eichhorn 1989: 345; Fischoﬀ2005: 805).
It is the essence of sophistry and lack of realism to think that an instruction or
admonition to a jury to limit its consideration of highly prejudicial evidence to its
limited relevant purpose can have any realistic eﬀect. It is time that we face the
realism of jury trials and recognize that jurors are mere mortals.
(People v. Gibson 1976, 56 Cal. App.3d 119, 130, acknowledged)
When gang evidence forming the basis for the expert’s opinion is sensational and remote,
the defendant’s inability to subject it to reliability testing may amount to a denial of
fundamental fairness at trial.
Gang experts as language experts
Thus far, it is clear that gang experts may present hearsay evidence, (extensive and some-
times remote) evidence about other gang members and acts to establish gang membership,
gang connectedness of oﬀences, and “hypothetical” intent of the actors. One might well
ask: how good are law enforcement gang “experts” at deciphering language puzzles?
Consider a California case, tried several years ago and still on appeal, that turns on “the
writing on the wall”. The prosecutor argued that the 18-year-old defendant, “Victor”,
was one of a group who robbed and killed a marijuana dealer. A major piece of evidence
was, literally, the “writing on the wall” near a crime scene. The prosecutor’s theory was
MEL GREENLEE
290

that the Raymond Avenue Crips had taken credit for the deed and Victor was a Crips
member. The connection between the gang, the crime, and the defendant was estab-
lished by graﬃti on an arcade wall across the street from the victim’s house; Victor’s
“moniker” (“Trecherous”) and other names were written on the wall, along with
another phrase. The trial evidence photograph of the graﬃti in Figure 19.2, taken nearly
two years after the crime, shows the key phrase. The writing was “translated” by a
sheriﬀ’s deputy testifying as a gang expert. Based on his experience, he both deciphered
the writing and addressed its signiﬁcance or illocutionary force, stating that the wall said
“Do-re-me $” and the function of these words was a boast, meaning “to obtain money
in a robbery or a burglary”. Although he did not explain how he arrived at his inter-
pretation, he apparently took “do-re-me” and “$” to refer to money, and the nearby
roll-call list of names of the Raymond Avenue Crips (including Victor’s nickname) to be
part of the same utterance. Since the unknown graﬃti author did not testify, cross-
examination of the writer was not possible, and the graﬃti was hearsay. Moreover, the
timing of the writing (in whole or part) was entirely unclear. The jury saw only the
Figure 19.2 Grafﬁti photo 2
YOUTH AND GANGS
291

photograph and heard the expert’s interpretation, that it was an admission conﬁrming
Victor’s guilt.
Both parts of the oﬃcer’s opinion are open to serious unresolved questions. The
deputy’s method of analysing the phrase was opaque at best. Victor’s defence counsel
could have put up more resistance to this evidence than shown in the trial record.
Moreover, a close look at the lower right of the photograph reveals that, contrary to
evidentiary requirements, the expert’s testimony was not helpful to the jury, but quite
misleading. In accepting his “translation”, jurors ignored what was in front of their own
eyes, like parade viewers observing a naked emperor pass by. Although the expert
asserted that the wall says, “Do-re-me $”, it actually says “Do or Die”. After Victor was
convicted and sentenced, his defence team found the author of the graﬃti who con-
ﬁrmed his authorship, as well as his name (Lil Drac) and those of others on the wall. Lil
Drac said he had not written the $, and he conﬁrmed that the real phrase was “Do or
Die”, an expression of group loyalty. Victor’s new attorneys contend that without the
deputy’s testimony regarding this erroneous and unfounded admission of guilt, Victor
would not have been convicted of capital murder or sentenced to death.
Critiques
Testimony by law enforcement experts in gang trials has been criticized on several
grounds. One concerns oﬃcers’ dual role as investigators and experts, which may create
bias (Solan and Tiersma 2005: 193). Nevertheless, because jurors are told the oﬃcer is
“an expert”, they may be inclined to accept the testimony and ignore or discount con-
trary evidence before their eyes. Groscup and Penrod (2003, note 32) cite juror surveys
in which police witnesses are rated very favourably and as more honest than other wit-
nesses. Their favoured status and dual role is all the more reason a rigorous scientiﬁc
evidence test should apply to admissibility of their testimony. Expert testimony founded
on unreliable hearsay is “a house built on sand” – as unreliable as the hearsay on which it
is predicated (Mahoney 2004).
At least in Victor’s case, both the hearsay evidence and its interpretation were available
at trial. However, in other cases where the hearsay comes in via conﬁdential investigation
reports or statements of informants in ﬁeld interviews, the jury has substantially less
ability to judge the reliability of the basis for the expert’s testimony.
A second critique, and perhaps more relevant for linguistic purposes, is that law
enforcement witnesses hold and present an overly monolithic view of youth groups and
their behavior, including their language behavior. Yet because of the witnesses’ status,
jurors may accord more credence to them as language experts than they really deserve.
Crime statistics and surveys estimate that many of those accused under the gang statutes
are under 24, with a large number in the 16–24 range. Teenagers, regardless of alleged
gang status, are notoriously inventive, inclined to use language creatively and to follow
language fashion. Moje (2000: 669) found that many teenagers take on what adults
perceived as “gangsta dress” styles in an eﬀort “simply … not to stand out.” Language
rituals, including those literacy practices identiﬁed with gangs, serve these students as a
way to take a social position in the world (Moje 2000: 679).
A similar social indexing function for what law enforcement may regard as “gang slang”
has been observed among youth in other communities (Bucholtz 2006) and even among
recent English learners (Ibrahim 1999: 367). Sociolinguists have discussed the phenomenon
MEL GREENLEE
292

Figure 19.3 Over-representation of African American youth in gang databases
Figure 19.4 Youth sentence averages in days as a function of race

of “crossing” – where youth may adopt features of speech varieties they consider cool,
seeking to get the ‘pluses’ of sounding tough or trendy, without the minuses of that speech
variety and group (Reyes 2005). Just as everyone who wears baggy pants is not a gang
member, not everyone who says “Cuz” or “Nut-Up” is a gang participant, much less a
criminal. In fact, peer evaluations of such poseurs or “wannabes” can be scathing (Cutler
1999: 438): “You know they like practice in front of the mirror, pull their pants down to
their knees, I don’t know.”
Finally, statistics indicate gang charges, and gang prohibitions such as civil injunctions
in urban areas, are overly applied to minority youth (Beres and Griﬃth 2004; Espiritu
2005). In two representative cities, minority youth representation in these databases in
the early 1990s was clearly disproportionate to their percentage of the population (see
Figure 19.3: Information from Wright 2005). Furthermore, demographic studies of
youth have shown that for the same oﬀense, minority youth are more likely to enter the
criminal justice system and to receive lengthier sentences than their white peers
(Figure 19.4: Information summarized by Building Blocks for Youth).
Conclusions and suggestions
Studies of youth speech varieties have shown that styles and boundaries are more ﬂuid
and changing over time than recognized by the proﬁling of gang syllogism (Bucholtz
2006; Cutler 1999). Ethnographic and linguistic studies have the further advantage that
academics who are collecting the data in the community do not arrest their language
informants, and thus may be more likely to accurately separate the broader issue of lan-
guage behavior from the blanket notion that certain dress and language equate to crim-
inality (Mendoza-Denton 2008: 79–82).
Linguists and ethnographers have clearly demonstrated that when it comes to language,
youth is the vanguard of change (Trudgill 1988; Eckert 1997). Many phenomena iden-
tiﬁed as gang-related today are part of the ﬂuid communicative styles adopted for parti-
cular purposes and times. They will probably someday become as quaint as the
expressions “Daddy-O” or “Groovy”, and as classic as a zoot suit (see Madden 2007).
It would help defense lawyers challenging gang prosecutions to have access to
information about language practices, to refute the most common tenets of gang expert
testimony. For example, is “¿Qué Barrio?” used only by gang members? Do cross-outs
always or usually mean death threats? What are the additional functions of rituals like
“the hit-up” and graﬃti lists? To what extent, if any, is Caló criminally connected? As
Klein points out, in cases where gang membership is ambiguous, social science
testimony may provide accuracy and challenge errors in broad claims about youth
behavior (Klein 1997).
Sociolinguistic studies of youth groups who are and are not aﬃliated, in the context of
natural interactions, and as changing over time, could be useful counterexamples to
the law enforcement readiness to classify even random and innocent behavior of
minority community members as having criminal intent, and to brand membership
(and allegedly associated linguistic features) as a long-term ﬁxed trait. Oﬃcers are less
likely than communication experts or linguists to appreciate youth’s creative use of
language, which displays an “eﬄorescence of semiosis” (Conquergood 1994: 27). To
keep up with changes in what youth are doing and saying is a challenge (Towner
2008: 39; Cotter and Walking Turtle 2001: 127). The equation between language
MEL GREENLEE
294

and gang membership also fails because for the majority of youth who do join gangs,
membership is short-lived (Beres and Griﬃth 2004: 949–50). However, for the most
part, law enforcement databases do not recognize such changes in status (see Curiel
2008 and Winton 2008, acknowledging the need to revise such databases).
As Tiersma and Solan (2002) have shown, the real diﬃculty may be not in getting
the linguistic work done – ethnographic and sociolinguistic research has so far provided
a rich background for analyzing contextual meaning – but in overcoming a general
judicial hostility toward social science testimony (Groscup and Penrod 2003: 1145–46),
convincing the gatekeeper that such testimony is relevant and reliable, and permitting
juries to hear alternative theories of meaning where language forms such a core of the
group practices and intent ﬁgures so strongly in liability. At present, the tour guides to
meaning oﬀer only a limited range of options. Appropriate research and collaboration
between the legal and linguistic communities will make possible a knowledge base that
more accurately reﬂects community practices and the vibrant, innovative contribution
of its youth.
Further reading
Adams, K. and A. Winter (1997) ‘Gang graﬃti as a discourse genre’, Journal of Sociolinguistics 1/3: 337–60.
Bucholtz, M. (2006) ‘Word up: Social meanings of slang in California youth culture’, in J. Goodman
and L. Monaghan (eds) Interpersonal Communication: An Ethnographic Approach, London: Blackwell,
243–67.
Docuyanan, F. (2000) ‘Governing graﬃti in contested urban spaces’, Political and Legal Anthropology
Review, 23: 103–21.
Moreno, J. (2004) ‘What happens when Dirty Harry becomes an (expert) witness for the prosecution?’
Tulane Law Review, 79: 1–54.
Phillips, S.A. (1999) Wallbangin’: Graﬃti & Gangs in L.A., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Legal cases cited
Crawford v. Washington (2004) 541 U.S. 36.
Daubert v. Merell-Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (1993) 509 U.S. 579.
Garcia v. Carey (9th Cir. 2005) 395 F.3d 1099.
Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael (1999) 526 U.S. 137.
People v. Albarran (2007) 149 Cal. App.4th 214.
People v. Castro (2006) 2006 WL 459890 (unpublished).
People v. Chapman (2003) WL 1958893 (unpublished).
People v. Gamez (1991) 235 Cal. App.3d 957.
People v. Gardeley (1997) 14 Cal. 4th 605.
People v. Gibson (1976) 56 Cal. App.3d 119.
People v. Gutierrez (2007) 2007 WL 3138384 (unpublished).
People v. Kelly (1976) 17 Cal. 3d 24.
People v. Margarejo (2008) 162 Cal. App.4th 102.
People v. Miller (2007) 2007 WL 1229401 (unpublished).
People v. Norteño, San Francisco Superior Court Case No. 464492, Permanent Injunction, June 17, 2008.
People v. Robbie (2001) 92 Cal. App.4th 1075.
People v. Zepeda (2008) 167 Cal. App.4th 25.
People v. Freeman (9th Cir. 2007) 498 F.3d 893.
People v. Hermanek (9th Cir. 2002) 289 F.3d 1076 .
YOUTH AND GANGS
295

20
Vulnerable witnesses
Vulnerable witnesses in the Criminal
Justice System
Michelle Aldridge
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to review the linguistic experiences of vulnerable witnesses
within the Criminal Justice System. We focus on children and people with commu-
nication disabilities and examine how such witnesses cope linguistically with investigative
police interviews and court appearances. By looking at the way police oﬃcers interview
vulnerable witnesses and by analysing witnesses’ understanding of concepts and their
ability to develop a narrative and answer questions, we will evaluate whether or not they
are prejudiced linguistically. Focusing on court procedures – video-recorded interviews
and special measures such as intermediaries and communication aids for the witness – we
will assess whether enough is being done to enable these witnesses to tell their story.
While we will concentrate on the system currently in operation in England and Wales,
where appropriate we will compare this with how witnesses are interviewed and exam-
ined in other countries, in an attempt to determine what still needs to be done to
achieve justice for all.
In the ﬁrst section, we identify what is meant by vulnerable witnesses in England and
Wales and describe the legislation that has been passed to support them through the
legal process. The second section reviews the experiences of children and disabled
people in the initial police interview. Section three describes their experiences in court
and considers the impact of special measures. All the data used in this chapter are taken
from real video-recorded police interviews with child witnesses. All identities have
been removed.
Vulnerable witnesses in the legal system
Historically, children were considered to be the ‘most dangerous of all witnesses’
(Whipple 1911: 308). According to Goodman (1984: 2) they were viewed as ‘highly
296

suggestible, unable to diﬀerentiate fantasy from reality’ and possessing what today we
would call very ‘malleable memories’. Fortunately, over time, society’s attitudes have
changed and those concerned have begun to appreciate that ‘children’s apparent lack of
credibility may have as much to do with the competence of adults to communicate with
them as it does with their (in)ability to remember and relate their experiences accurately’
(Saywitz 1995: 115).
In the 1980s and 1990s, several inquiries into child protection occurred (e.g. The
Cleveland Report 1988; Pigot Report 1989; Clyde Report 1992) and it became
clear that children were not receiving a fair hearing. It was apparent that no allow-
ance was being made for their developing cognitive and linguistic abilities and that
they simply could not cope with interviewing procedures. In brief, their stories were
going untold. Changes to procedures were made through the Criminal Justice Acts
of (1991) and police interviews with child witnesses were encouraged to be video-
recorded and used as the child’s evidence-in-chief in court. At the same time, the
Home Oﬃce introduced The Memorandum of Good Practice on Video Recorded Interviews
for Child Witnesses for Criminal Proceeding (MOGP 1992) which was a set of guidelines
designed to assist interviewing professionals in the conduct of initial video interviews.
This encouraged a phased approach with four phases: rapport, free narrative, questioning
and close, which are compatible with and underpin the PEACE interview framework
advocated by the Association of Chief Police Oﬃcers (ACPO) (ABE 2007: 21). The
MOGP also made a number of recommendations about the planning and length of
the interview and oﬀered guidelines on talking with children, such as using age
appropriate language, listening to the child rather than directly questioning him or
her; never stopping a child who is freely recalling signiﬁcant events (MOGP 1992: 6)
and encouraging the child to provide an account in his or her own words and at his
or her own pace (MOGP 1992: 17). The introduction of the video interview
brought about substantial change and was accompanied by training days for police
oﬃcers specialising in child interviewing. For the ﬁrst time, police oﬃcers were
trained in how to talk with, rather than just to, child witnesses, and were encouraged
to ask children open narrative eliciting questions such as ‘please tell me what hap-
pened’ and ‘please tell me more about’ rather than more constrained agenda-focused
questions.
It soon became obvious, however, that children were not the only group to struggle
through the legal process and in 1999 the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Bill was
passed. Part 2 of this Bill embodied the legislative provision of Speaking Up for Justice
(1998) which included a number of special measures intended to address the problems of
vulnerable and intimidated witnesses within the court process (Burton et al. 2007: 1). To
support these changes the MOGP was replaced by Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal
Proceedings: Guidance for Vulnerable and Intimidated Witnesses, Including Children (ABE
2002). In 2007, ABE was up-dated, in part, to take account of the Code of Practice for
Victims of Crime (2005).
Since 2002, vulnerable witnesses in England and Wales have been deﬁned as:
Young people under 17 years of age and any witness whose quality of evidence is
likely to be diminished because they suﬀer from a mental disorder; or have a
signiﬁcant impairment of intelligence and social functioning; or have a physical
disability or disorder.
(ABE, Home Oﬃce 2007: 2)
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
297

Intimidated witnesses are those ‘whose quality of testimony is likely to be diminished
by reason of fear or distress at the prospect of giving evidence’ (ABE, Home Oﬃce
2007: 2). Witnesses (not suspects) who fall into these categories are entitled to
apply for conditions within the legal procedure known as ‘Special Measures’. These
include:
 Screening the witness from the accused
 Giving evidence by live link
 The removal of wigs and gowns
 Giving evidence in private
 Video recording of evidence-in-chief
 Video recording of cross-examination and re-examination
 Examination through intermediary
 Provision of aids to communicate.
An intermediary is someone who the court approves to communicate to the witness the
questions that the court, the defence and the prosecution teams ask, and to communicate
the answers that the witness gives in response. (For further information, see the Inter-
mediary Procedural Guidance Manual (Oﬃce for Criminal Justice Reform 2005)). Children
are also protected from cross-examination by the accused in person and there should be
no mention of their sexual history in court. Normally, children aside, ‘special measures’
are not automatic but have to be requested. The police and prosecutors must identify
vulnerability and apply to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) on a case basis. Elig-
ibility is determined at the pre-trial hearing. The CPS will be rigorous in its selection of
these special measures and may suggest any, all or none of the above. The measures are
designed to preserve the essentials of a proper challenge to a witness’s evidence and
should not alter the defendant’s position, but only those deemed necessary will be used.
The Judge will explain to the jury which measures are being used and why. The witness
can, of course, choose to opt out of the special measures.
Vulnerable witnesses in the police interview
Children
Since 1992, child witnesses have been interviewed under the recommendations
of MOGP and more recently ABE. For many children this means that they attend a
purpose-built interview suite and give their evidence to a specially trained police oﬃcer.
The witness can request a male or female interviewer but for ease, in this text, unless
otherwise stated, we will refer to the interviewer as ‘she’ and to the witness as ‘he’.
(We acknowledge fully, of course, that females can be child witnesses and interviewing
oﬃcers can be male.)
The interview is video-recorded in order to be used as the child’s evidence-in-chief
and, once recorded, is submitted to the CPS to determine whether it is adequate and
whether it is in the public interest to proceed with the case. If so, a copy is made avail-
able to the defence. We will now reﬂect on each of the phases of the interview to
consider the child’s linguistic competence and the interviewer’s linguistic performance
through these phases.
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
298

The phased interview – building rapport
Here the interviewer has a number of objectives including:
(a) describing, out loud, the environment, the layout of the room, including the
recording equipment, the persons present and the purpose of the interview for the
child;
(b) assessing the child’s cognitive abilities by getting him talking on neutral topics
through the use of a range of open questions, such as ‘I don’t know you very well
yet, so please tell me something about what you do after school’ or ‘What are
your favourite hobbies or television programmes?’
(c) exploring his understanding of truth and lie; and
(d) explaining the ground rules in order to shift social distance and empower the child
to interact.
The child is told that he may request a break if necessary and that to say that he doesn’t
remember is better than guessing an answer. It is important that, during this phase, the
interviewee gains some control of the process and content of his disclosure (Shepherd
and Milne 2006: 132). The interviewer should demonstrate that she is interested in what
the witness has to say and doesn’t know everything, so interviewer turns such as ‘Shall
we talk a bit about the things you like and your house cos I don’t know you very well
yet do I?’ are encouraged, along with turns that signal that she might have to repeat
questions: ‘Sometimes, I may say a question more than once, that may be because I
didn’t hear you very well.’ Failure to explain such repetition often leads to a breakdown
in the interview as we see in (1).
(1) Police interview with a child witness aged 3
IE: I’ve got a poorly bum
IR:Have you? Why?
IE: I have
IR:Why is your bum poorly?
IE: It is
IR:What do you mean by poorly? What’s it like?
IE: It’s poorly
IR:Does it hurt?
IE: No
IR:Why’s it poorly then?
IE: It isn’t poorly
IR:It isn’t poorly?
IE: Let’s do some jigsaws
Here, a talkative child gives up trying to explain his problem, as the interviewer seems to
be challenging what he is saying; he subsequently loses conﬁdence to talk through the
rest of the interview. This demonstrates the importance of the ABE guidance; listening
to the child and resisting questioning is crucial.
Although seemingly straightforward, getting a conversation going in this phase can be
a signiﬁcant challenge, if we consider that the child has probably been socialised not to
talk to strangers and certainly not about sex and, furthermore, has a fear of telling anyone
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
299

‘their secret’. Interviewers also have to overcome diﬀerences in shared understanding and
use of vocabulary. Our lexical understanding changes all the time. The author had a stark
reminder of this while listening to the radio and hearing: ‘The Ospreys have had triplets’.
This produced a mental picture of local rugby players holding up babies for a photo call.
The next line ‘And their nesting behaviour’ completely shattered this image and gener-
ated a bird frame. (For further reading on how the author uses terms such as ‘frame’ and
‘script’ see Luchjenbroers and Aldridge 2007; Aldridge and Luchjenbroers 2007.) The
importance of this example is: an interviewer cannot assume that her interlocutor’s
understanding of words is the same as her own. ‘Ospreys’ is the name of a rugby team in
South Wales and I regularly watched them play. Potential misunderstanding and mis-
communication can occur at any time in the interview, as we see in (2a) and (2b).
(2a) Police interview with a child witness aged 6
IR:What do you do after school?
IE: I like milkshake
IR:Do you! So do I! What’s your favourite ﬂavour?
IE: It’s on the telly
(2b) Police interview with a child witness aged 5 years
IE: My brother’s horrible to me
IR:Is he? What does he do?
IE: He don’t let me play on the Playstation
IR:Ooh, isn’t he wicked!
IE: (in distressed state) No! he’s not, he’s horrible
In (2a) the interviewer is unaware that ‘milkshake’ is a popular television programme and
in (2b) the interviewer uses ‘wicked’ without allowing for its more recent sense, widely
used among young people: meaning ‘very good’, ‘accomplished’ and having positive
connotations. The potential outcome of clashes of understanding is that children are less
likely to communicate, so interviewers must be trained to think as a child, to negotiate
understanding, to be sensitive to misunderstanding and attentive to repair.
Miscommunication can also occur when children do not understand the institutional
talk they may encounter during the investigation and where interviewers fail to take
account of the diﬃculties of using a professional register. Aldridge et al. (1997) asked
presumed non-abused children to describe roles and labels that they would hear in the
legal setting. (3) lists typical explanations by children of institutional vocabulary with
respondents’ ages in brackets.
(3)
A police lady gets people in prison (aged 6).
When you’re arrested, a policeman will come along and put you in chains (aged 8).
A court is a sort of jail (aged 5).
Witnesses whip people when they’re naughty (aged 7).
Witnesses are people who have done something naughty (aged 7).
Prosecution is when you die, you get hanged or something like that (aged 7).
Judges get money at pet shows (aged 7).
A judge judges people like when you go to jail and have to tell the judge what
you’ve done (aged 7).
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
300

Holding concepts such as these, we can only imagine a child’s potential fright when told
a police lady wants to talk with him, or he has to go to court. It is crucial, then, that the
rapport phase facilitates meaningful and reassuring understanding of institutional roles and
terms. A police oﬃcer might say: ‘my job means that I talk to lots of children, so there’s
nothing to worry about’, to ensure that the child doesn’t believe that being interviewed
by the police is an indication of wrongdoing. The child must also be given the oppor-
tunity for a court visit before he has to attend for his own case so that he can familiarise
himself with the setting, procedures and court personnel.
A ﬁnal place where the interviewer has to listen to the child’s vocabulary is when the
accused has deliberately given the witness what we might label ‘false friend vocabulary’.
For example, a four-year-old witness talked about ‘boxing with his grandfather’. Only
after substantial questioning did it become apparent that ‘boxing’ was being used to
describe anal intercourse. All these examples show us that the interviewer cannot assume
she shares knowledge and usage of vocabulary with her interviewee.
One ﬁnal area of important talk in the rapport phase is establishing the importance of
telling the truth, though there is no legal requirement to administer the oath. Interviewers
are ill advised if they ask a child for a deﬁnition as (4) illustrates.
(4) Police interview with a child witness aged 5
IR:Do you know what a lie is?
IE: Yes
IR:What is a lie?
IE: Tigers
Here, the child didn’t understand the question and or replied elliptically, perhaps, as if
the interviewer was asking about lions? (This suggestion was made by Professor John
Gibbons (pc).) Such exchanges show the child to be vulnerable in the courtroom pro-
cess. If the child can answer this way to a relatively straightforward question then the
defence lawyer could make the judge and jury wonder how credible a witness the child
is. It is now recommended (cf. ABE, Home Oﬃce 2007: 24) that rather than seeking a
deﬁnition, the child should be asked to judge from examples like in (5).
(5) Exploring the diﬀerence between truth and lies: example for younger children
IR:Let me tell you a story about John. John was playing with his ball in the
kitchen and he kicked the ball against the window. The window broke and
John ran upstairs into his bedroom. John’s mummy saw the broken window
and asked John if he had broken the window. John said ‘no mummy’.
IR:Did John tell a lie or the truth, or don’t you know?
IR:What should he have said?
Following the rapport phase and once the interviewer is conﬁdent that the child is as
settled as possible, she will move the interview on to the free narrative stage and then on
to questioning.
Free narrative phase
In the free narrative phase, the child should be encouraged to provide in his own words
an account of the relevant events. Here, the interviewer is a facilitator not an interrogator
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
301

and she should use open questions such as ‘please tell me what happened?’ and ‘please
describe what happened next?’ Davies and Westcott (1999) claim that this phase is crucial
to the outcome of the case, since juries ﬁnd free narratives persuasive, as they present the
child’s rather than the interviewer’s account and, in providing a monologue, children are
free from any suggestions that adult questions may oﬀer. The interviewer should provide
a framework for the child to build his own account around with lines such as ‘I want
you to start at the beginning, take your time and tell me what happened.’
This phase, though, is not without diﬃculty because young children can ﬁnd account
giving diﬃcult. We know, for example (e.g. Goodman and Melinder 2007: 12), that
‘open-ended questions typically elicit the most accurate, albeit often the most skeletal,
reports from children’. (6) is a typical account.
(6) Police interview with a child witness aged 10
IR:It’s ok to tell me.
IE: He said lie down for a minute and I said no and then I lied down and he got
it in and he put it in here and he turned me over and licked my bum and
that’s all of it.
An adult witness would be most unlikely to answer in this way; a lot of information is
missing and the interviewer will need to ask questions to supplement the very short
account given. Quality and detail relating to the alleged oﬀence are lacking (see also
Walker and Warren 1995: 159), as we can also see in extract (7).
(7) Police interview with child witness aged 6
IR:Can you tell me what happened? Can you do that?
IE: I came home, my dad sent me up to go in the bath. I got out the bath my dad
gave me the towel and said ‘go downstairs and get dry’. I dried underneath and
there was all blood on the towel.
How did the blood get there? A more mature witness would not give his narrative this
way. Thus, while the accuracy of what is reported does not vary with age, the omission
of detail does. However, it remains a fact that in most interviews the narrative phase will
have to be supplemented by questions and reassurance from the interviewer, which will
help elicit a full account, as in (8).
(8) Police interview with a child witness aged 9
IR:Please tell us as much as you can remember
IE: Well, I was in the bath. I was getting out of the bath. No, I had a quick bath, I
was getting out then my dad come up and he had a sweet wrapper and, em, I
dried myself and then no, he squeezed, no sorry.
IR:Take your time.
IE: I stayed in the bath for half an hour, I came out, had a quick bath, dried
myself, he squeezed my willy very tight and he smacked me for no reason.
In brief, the younger the child, the more the interviewer is likely to have to prompt. As
shown in (9a), a young child might oﬀer a single piece of information while an older
child (9b) can link events together.
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
302

(9a) Police interview with a child witness aged 5
IR:Tell me what happened?
IE: Jimmy put mummy’s tights on.
(9b) Police interview with a child witness aged 9
IR:Tell me what happened?
IE: I was sitting on the van and what he done, he touched my bum and then after
that he put his hand under my shirt, this shirt.
More ‘scaﬀolding’ (Bruner 1978) of the child’s narrative will be needed with young
children.
Problems with vocabulary occur in this phase too, simply because a young child will
not have the rich vocabulary necessary to re-count what has happened. Compare (10a)
with (10b).
(10a) Police interview with a child witness aged 4
IE: He touched my leg.
IE: Phil put his ﬁngers in my private.
(10b) Police interview with a child witness aged 9
IE: He rubbed my leg.
IE: He pushed his ﬁngers into my private parts.
Bell and Loftus (1985) report (amongst others) that juries are more inﬂuenced by vivid
and powerful language than by powerless language, so we might anticipate (10b) having
a greater impact on a listener than (10a), even though they are describing similar events.
The interviewer will therefore have to work harder to elicit the ﬁrst witness’s story.
Questioning
When planning questions to elicit details of the alleged oﬀence, the interviewer should
follow a step-wise approach, beginning with open questions and reserving direct/
leading questions until last. Interviewers are advised to ask wh-questions in the order
they are acquired by children, namely: what, where, who, when, how. Why should be
avoided as it tends to attribute blame. While the wh-form is important, the interviewer
must continue to think as a child. The correct wh-word in itself is not suﬃcient.
Consider (11).
(11) Police interview with a child witness aged 9
IR:You said he was kneeling down and one hand was doing what you described,
what was his other hand doing?
IE: Don’t know.
Syntactically, the interviewer’s style is appropriate (it is a straightforward initial what
question), but we assume she is basing her question on the adult script of masturbation.
The child, who is most likely unaware of this, cannot understand the relevance of the
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
303

hand not touching her. The interviewer’s lack of account of the child’s likely perspective
and world knowledge leads to trouble in the talk. Example (12), from a rapport phase,
also exempliﬁes the danger of assuming that straightforward syntactic form equals trouble-
free answering.
(12) Police interview with a child witness aged 6
IR:What did you do in the summer holiday?
IE: I played for Arsenal,
IR:Are you sure? Where?
IE: I did for two weeks.
This case failed because it was argued that the child was fantasising and therefore, his
account could not be reliable; at the age of 6 he could not have played for Arsenal. More
patient listening to and questioning about the child’s world would have revealed that he
had indeed been to an Arsenal football school over the vacation and had ‘played the
Arsenal way’.
With each new topic, an interviewer will ideally work through wh-questions from what
to how, but with consideration of whether all wh-forms should be used. How questions are
very diﬃcult for young children. Interviewers often ask how something felt, as in (13).
(13) Police interview with child witness aged 14 years
IR:How did you feel when he did that? [penetration]
IE: I felt, em, hurt and er terrible.
IR:How did you feel inside?
IE: Em, I don’t know, it’s sort of hard to say.
It is known (e.g. Aldridge and Wood 1997) that children ﬁnd it hard to articulate their
feelings. Indeed, the above question is ambiguous, even to an adult, as to whether the
child is being asked a physical or mental question. The problem children have in
understanding how-questions was illustrated in the following experimental setting (Javan
2009). Children had watched a cartoon and were then asked a series of questions; one of
them was (14).
(14) How did the duck come out of the closet?
The expected answer was ‘on a skateboard’. Although the questioner used ‘how’ to refer
to a physical action, nearly all the 20 children (aged 10) provided an answer that referred
to what the duck was wearing, indicating that they interpreted ‘how’ as referring to his
physical appearance. Likewise, very few children can express coercion or conﬂicting
emotions, so it is not surprising that in a real interview, when asked ‘do you like Daddy?’
(the accused), the child responds ‘yes’, because he doesn’t have the vocabulary to say that
he loves Daddy but hates what Daddy does. Saarni and Harris’s (1989: 85) data demon-
strate this conﬂict: “I couldn’t feel happy and scared at the same time; I would have to be
two people at once!” Our data also show how a young child’s emotional vocabulary is
semantically limited (15).
(15) Mother waiting with a 4-year-old child before an investigative interview (Child
kisses her support worker on the cheek.)
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
304

Mother:
Hey stop that, you’re embarrassing him.
Child:
I’m not embarrassing him, I’m kissing him.
Measurements are another diﬃcult area. Interviewers are often keen to establish detail of
time, manner and place, and yet such descriptions are often outside the linguistic competence of
a young child as in (16).
(16) Police interview with a child witness aged 4
IR:How long have you been staying at Mary’s house?
IE: Don’t know.
IR:How far away is it?
IE: Three miles or maybe thirty miles.
Interviewers are well advised to avoid such detail for as long as possible. The interviewer
should, however, avoid over-hasty transition from the free narrative phase into a speciﬁc
questioning phase as (17) illustrates.
(17) Police interview with a child witness aged 8
IR:Do you think you can tell me what happened?
IE: Silence.
IR:It’s ok to tell me about the things that happened.
IE: Yesterday night.
IR:Yesterday night?
IE: Nods.
IR:Where were you?
Here the child is rushed into answering a where-question, after a silent response to the
initial what-question, rather than being prompted again with a ‘what happened next?’
question. It is important that the interviewer divides the witness’s account up into man-
ageable topics and that they are systematically dealt with (to completion) before moving
on to something else (ABE, Home Oﬃce 2007: 29).
As well as planning the order of her questions from what through to how, the interviewer
must also be encouraged to listen to the type of responses the child is giving. For example,
apparently in order to please, children will often answer questions pragmatically in order to
maintain turn-taking, without either listening to the question or understanding it. The
interviewer should, therefore, be encouraged to listen for the strategies that children adopt
in answering wh-questions. In (18a) and (18b), for example, the young children do not
appear to understand when and why, so they reply as if the questions are where forms.
(18a) If you don’t understand a particular question, respond as if it’s in a form you do
understand (Ervin Tripp 1970).
IR:When did this happen?
IE: In my bedroom (child aged 4).
(18b) Interview with a child aged 3
IR:Why does Grandad smack you?
IE: [points] here.
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
305

In (19) he adopts another of Ervin Tripp’s (1970) strategies: If you don’t understand the
question, give a stereotypical response.
(19) Interview with a child aged 3
IR:Have you seen these before? Any of these people? (showing picture).
IE: Yeah.
IR:Where’s that?
IE: In Sainsbury’s.
IR:Is there anywhere else you play apart from at home?
IE: Yeah
IR:Where else do you play?
IE: In Sainsbury’s.
The inappropriate responses created through these coping strategies potentially
weaken the child’s account (see Haworth, this volume, on the interview as evidence)
and create doubt as to whether the child can give a reliable testimony. The inter-
viewer needs to be ready to re-phrase questions once these coping mechanisms kick
in. Similarly, interviewers need to be wary of using yes/no questions and tag ques-
tions, as young children (particularly under the age of seven) are vulnerable to
answering ‘yes’ to these question forms. This is particularly true in the rapport phase
where establishing ground rules (as in 20) can encourage the child to say ‘no’ and
resist answering from thereon.
(20)
IR:Is it ok to sit here and have a chat with you?
Likewise, alternative questions need to be asked with care as, adopting a recency strategy,
many young children will respond with the last option heard. Other question types to
avoid include passives (were you hurt by him?); negative questions (Did you not see him
in the room?) and multiple questions (Was it yesterday you went to the house and was
he there?) (see Walker 1999 for more on these aspects of questioning children). Once
detailed information has been gathered, the interviewer will move into closure.
Closure
Here the interviewer should take time to ask whether the child has any questions and to
answer them honestly and as accurately as possible. The child should also be thanked for
his contribution and will be told about what will happen next (see ABE, Home Oﬃce 2007:
30 for more detail). The video-interview then becomes the child’s evidence-in-chief. It
will be submitted to the Crown Prosecution Service who will decide whether to take
the case forward. A copy of the video is given to the defence. The child may now
receive therapy, but any counselling received must be disclosed to the defence.
People with disabilities
Much of what we have said above about children will apply to people with learning
disabilities, but we are reminded by Westcott and Cross (1996) and Marchant and Page
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
306

(1997) that both children and adults with disabilities are particularly vulnerable to
abuse.
Children who cannot communicate easily with others may be ‘ideal’ for abusers to
target, since they will face extreme diﬃculties in trying to tell someone – by
whatever means – of their experiences. Further, they may not even have been
given the necessary vocabulary (and by implication, permission) to describe abusive
activities or private body parts.
(Westcott and Cross 1996: 84)
The scales of justice are tipped against all child victims when the main evidence is
their oral testimony and they are undoubtedly tipped even further for children
whose impairments aﬀect their communication.
(Marchant and Page 1997: 78)
When planning to interview a witness with a disability, a range of issues need to be
considered, including:
(a) access: can the witness, for example, independently enter the interview room,
have a drink and use the toilet facilities? and
(b) communication needs: does the witness speak or does he use a non-verbal com-
munication system such as sign language or an augmentative communication
system? Is an intermediary needed?
Let us consider ﬁrst, the disabled witness who uses verbal communication but may have
some diﬃculties in speech understanding and production. It is assumed that the initial
interview will follow the same four stages as with non-disabled children, and that similar
issues may arise, as discussed above, but it may well be the case that even greater planning
is needed. Firstly, for example, the interviewer must know the mental age of the witness.
A forty-year-old man with Down Syndrome may present for interview, but he may have
the mental age of a six-year-old. It is also likely that someone with a disability will have a
shorter attention span than someone who is not disabled, so greater consideration must be
given to using props such as dolls, dolls’ houses, paper and crayons, and an intermediary.
Their speech may be less clear, so attention must be paid to make sure that the best quality
audio equipment is used. The interviewer must be trained, because the witness’s language
production and comprehension may be diﬀerent from that of a non-disabled person. These
diﬀerences include phonological, lexical, syntactic and pragmatic diﬃculties.
Phonological disabilities
Non-disabled children pass through a typical path in their acquisition of phonemes with
some, such as fricatives and aﬀricates, being acquired later than phonemes such as plosives
and nasals (cf. Vihman 1996 for detail). One in ten children in the pre-school years
experience speech diﬃculties (cf. Edelman 2009) and thus many witnesses may not have
particularly clear articulation. The interviewer, therefore, will need training about which
sounds to expect to be diﬃcult, about which substitution errors are likely to occur and
how to interview in a way that lip readers will follow. The interviewer will need to use
the rapport phase wisely in order to tune into possible substitution patterns and to try to
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
307

‘crack the code’ of the speech they are listening to. Witnesses with a hearing impairment
may have phonological diﬀerences and a ‘ﬂatter’ intonation. Witnesses with Down
Syndrome will have impaired phonological abilities as will some people with cerebral
palsy. Alternatively, some witnesses may have clear articulation but a diﬀerent delivery
because of a stutter. Witnesses with autism may have an idiosyncratic intonation pattern
and make use of ‘non-speech’ noises. Again, training will be needed to advise the
interviewer on how to deal with the stutter, when to wait and when to intervene.
Vocabulary
Witnesses with communication disorders may have diﬀerent vocabulary usage. For
example, people with Down Syndrome, will have a slower word retrieval, and so more
time will be needed for them to tell their story. Their vocabulary may be less rich, they
may make greater use of general purpose words such as do and put and so their account
may be less graphic and have less impact. Some conditions such as Williams Syndrome
may result in witnesses having an unusual vocabulary, rich in some areas, but pro-
foundly lacking in others. Other people, like those who have had a stroke and have
Broca’s aphasia, for example, will understand almost all that is said to them, but will
struggle to produce a sentence. Such behaviour could be misunderstood, interpreted as
if the witness doesn’t wish to cooperate and so those involved will need training.
Similarly, the interviewer can’t assume that she shares the same understanding of word
meaning as the witness so she must consider ways of understanding the witness’s
worldview.
Grammar and syntax
People with communicative diﬃculties are likely to have greater diﬃculty with
grammatical words (determiners, prepositions, etc.) rather than lexical or content words
(nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs). There are people with little productive grammatical
ability – especially witnesses with Down Syndrome, Broca’s aphasia and Speciﬁc Language
Impairment – but many people with communicative disorders ﬁnd grammar diﬃcult to
use and understand (cf. Fletcher and Ingram 1995). Children with autism may have pro-
blems with grammar and questions (Kremer-Sadlik 2004) and because of their tendency to
echo, they will make great use of pronoun reversals. Many witnesses will have problems in
dealing with location (prepositions), describing manner (adverbs) and time of events. Small
grammatical words such as determiners (a/the); modal verbs (e.g. will, can), complementisers
(e.g. that, whether) are also problematic for many, causing great productive diﬃculties and
comprehension issues when it comes to reporting past events. The interviewer will need to
keep the questions as straightforward as possible, avoiding past, negative and passive
constructions. In brief, sentences should be kept simple and in the present tense.
Pragmatic difﬁculties
Some people have an intact language structure, but still have problems with pragmatics,
which means that they use social language inappropriately. People with autism may have
diﬃculty with aspects of language use such as turn-taking, listener perspective and choice
of speech act. The impact of these pragmatic problems is that these witnesses may
mistakenly be taken to be anti-establishment, arrogant and potentially deceitful, so the
interviewer needs to know what to expect and how to deal with it.
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
308

To summarise, people with a communication disorder can have one or several of the
following general characteristics:
 limited cognitive skills;
 problems with understanding the nature of the events which constituted the
alleged oﬀence;
 problems with understanding the ensuing procedures, increased stress, diminished
performance;
 poor adaptation;
 poor memory;
 limited language production (phonological, lexical, semantic, syntactic and pragmatic);
 limited language comprehension (Sanders et al. 1997).
This means that to successfully complete an investigative interview with a witness with a
communicative disability, the interviewer must:
 ensure full understanding of the witness’s needs and abilities;
 have realistic expectations based on training and information;
 consider room access, comfort while there, scope of the video camera, etc.;
 consider the use of props;
 involve an intermediary and perhaps an expert witness;
 use top quality recording equipment.
Many witnesses with communication disorders are going to struggle to communicate
within the legal system. Many will beneﬁt greatly from the assistance of special measures,
especially the involvement of an intermediary, but, as we acknowledge below, such
support has its own diﬃculties.
Witnesses whose ﬁrst language isn’t speech – the deaf and those with alternative
communication systems – will also need considerable assistance to cope with the legal
system. In Britain, the deaf communicate using British Sign Language (BSL). This is a
language in its own right and gives its users the same opportunities to express creatively
their message in a way that is equivalent to speech. The BSL user then does not have a
communication disorder, but he is likely to need an interpreter to go through the legal
system. In order to make the legal process equal for all, a matter to which we return in
the ﬁnal section, a great deal of training needs to take place for interpreters, interviewing
oﬃcers and lawyers, judges and indeed the members of the public who will serve on the
jury in these cases. An even greater challenge to the system is presented by those wit-
nesses who use an alternative communication system, perhaps a recognised system such as
Makaton or a symbol or light system that may be unique to one witness. These systems,
while giving the individual communicative opportunities, are limited and will call for
new thinking within the Criminal Justice System. For example, witnesses may have only
a limited number of signs and/or symbols, so the investigation will need to be carried out
within those boundaries and an intermediary who is familiar with the system will need to
be involved. It is clear that there needs to be a great deal of public awareness raising, if
such cases are ever going to succeed in court. The following quote, from Mencap, illu-
minates the picture: ‘If we are on our own we’re not listened to, we should be listened
to, we should be heard, it’s not fair, people do things to us and we’re not heard …
action should be taken’ (Mencap 1999: 24).
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
309

Vulnerable witnesses in the court room
When a case goes to court, the police interview is shown in the courtroom as the wit-
ness’s evidence-in-chief. Unfortunately, however, the vulnerable witness still has to go to
court for cross-examination, although this will typically happen in a link room or behind
a screen. It has been suggested that this experience may, in fact, be worse for witnesses
than giving their entire evidence live because under this system ‘witnesses are plunged
directly into hostile cross-examination at trial without the “warm up” that examination-
in-chief arguably provides’ (Ellison 2001: 57) and Brennan (1994: 216) describe children’s
experiences in the court system as being ‘abused again’. In court, the witness is subjected
to the well-known linguistic strategies used by defence lawyers: coercive questioning and
intimidation tactics (Brennan 1994; Conley and O’Barr 2005; Ehrlich and Matoesian,
this volume) which distress the witness and potentially distort the evidence by discrediting
the prosecution case and diverting the focus of the jurors away from the central issues
(Ellison 2001: 111).
The work of Eades and Brennan is particularly notable in an Australian context in
relation to children and cross-examination. Eades’ research focuses particularly on
Aboriginal children and disadvantage in the legal system (see, for example, Eades 1992,
1995, 2000). In Eades (2002, 2003b, 2004) she discusses linguistic cross-examination
practices in the Pinkenba case, which involved three Aboriginal boys aged 12, 13 and 14
who alleged that six police oﬃcers had taken them against their will in three police cars
and abandoned them on wasteland, from where they had to ﬁnd their way home. In
Eades (2004: 499) she argues that, in addition to ‘unrestrained’ and ‘haranguing beha-
viour’, which included shouting at the witness, ‘the manipulation of Aboriginal ways of
using English was central to this defence strategy’ and she highlights the particular use of
‘silence and gratuitous concurrence’. An illustration of the strategies, particularly of the
use of silence and ‘gratuitous concurrence’ is given and is reproduced in (20).
(20) Gratuitous concurrence in cross-examination of Barry (B, pseudonym) in the Pinkenba
case (DC is Defence Counsel).
1 DC: And you knew (1.4) when you spoke to these six police in
2
the Valley that you didn’t have to go anywhere with them if
3
you didn’t want to, didn’t you?
4 B:
(1.3) No.
5 DC:
You knew that, Mr (1.2) Coley I’d suggest to you, PLEASE DO
6
NOT LIE. YOU KNEW THAT YOU DIDN’T HAVE TO GO
7
ANYWHERE if you didn’t want to, didn’t you (2.2) DIDN’T YOU?
8
(2.2) DIDN’T YOU, MR COLEY?
9 B:
(1.3) Yeh.
(Eades 2004: 500)
Using a critical (socio)linguistic approach Eades (2004: 500) explains that these
tactics contributed to the success of the defence case (on behalf of the police oﬃcers)
which led to
the magistrate accepting defence counsels’ construction of these victim-witnesses as
criminals with ‘no regard for the community’, and the reinterpretation of the
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
310

alleged abduction as the boys voluntarily giving up their liberty while the police
took them for a ride. As a result, the charges against the police oﬃcers were
dropped.
(Eades 2004: 500)
Brennan’s (1994) and Brennan and Brennan’s (1988) work also focuses on children in the
Australian courts. He says:
Questions asked in cross-examination are aimed at not admitting the experience of
the child and attempt to inﬂuence the child’s response quite deliberately. Whatever
the rationalisation for the court procedures they are generally not recognising the
needs of the child, or the admissibility of evidence gathered and cross-referenced
outside the combative, interrogating context of the courtroom.
(Brennan 1994: 206)
Brennan focuses on some of the general characteristics of questions which are capitalised
on in cross-examination: complexity, which makes the listener work hard; connected
and unconnected utterances, which require ‘constant reorientation’; volume or number
of questions, which might ‘make a witness acquiescent’; and making material signiﬁcant
for the hearer in terms of ‘display[ing] evidence’ (Brennan 1994: 208–10). He also
exempliﬁes a huge array of linguistically tactical questions, which can constitute powerful
tools of cross-examination: use of negatives; juxtaposition of topics that are not overtly
related; nominalisations; multifaceted questions; unclear questions; embedding; and many
more (Brennan 1994: 212–16). The ﬁnal one, embedding, is illustrated in example (21),
which is certainly complex and also contains negation (‘incorrect’) and nominalisation
(‘a tripping’).
(21) Complexity, embedding, negation and nominalisation in a cross-examination
question to a 15-year-old
Q: Would it be incorrect to suggest that it was not so much a tripping but because of
the state of inebriation of yourself, that you fell over?
(Brennan 1994: 216)
One might imagine that in the current English and Welsh system, where special
measures have been introduced in an attempt to ameliorate the experience of vulnerable
witnesses, including children, they might fare better. But, despite being supported by the
special measures, vulnerable witness still struggle to cope. Conviction rates are typically
low. 6.5% is the 2007–8 conviction rate for domestic violence and rape victims in
England and Wales, compared with 34% for criminal cases in general (Afua Hirsch,
Guardian 13 March 2009. Last accessed 6 May 2009). We will now reﬂect on the success
or otherwise of the special measures.
Evaluation of the special measures
The MOGP and then ABE heralded real developments in investigative interviews and
raised awareness of the interviewing diﬃculties that witnesses and interviewers can
experience. The new procedures, of course, had a number of teething problems:
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
311

interviewers were initially nervous of being on camera and there were a number of
technical diﬃculties with the equipment. But, on the whole, the recommendations were
welcomed and have certainly improved witness conﬁdence in the criminal justice system.
For example, a report by Hamlyn et al. (2004) suggested that 76% of the child witnesses
were satisﬁed with special measures; indeed, 44% of these felt that they would not have
been able to give evidence without them. Another report (Plotnikoﬀand Woolfson
2004) highlighted the importance of the live link opportunity for child witnesses. Our
own survey (Aldridge and Williams 2006) conﬁrms these ﬁndings:
 Witnesses previously too frightened to come forward may now do so.
 Some of the special measures (such as the removal of wigs and gowns and the
introduction of an intermediary) may well reduce stress for vulnerable witnesses.
 The fact that the evidence-in-chief can be recorded before the court case begins
means that it can occur earlier, so the witness’s memory may be sharper.
South Wales was a pilot area for the introduction of an intermediary for children and
people with disabilities and the oﬃcers involved spoke highly of this measure. The following
quotes taken from Aldridge and Williams (2006) are examples:
 An intermediary gave opportunities to those who previously would not have had
a hearing in court.
 I got the information I needed but I had to use an intermediary.
 The intermediary explained to me what the witness said, understood her personal
and social issues needs and helped me get the interview suite ready.
 The intermediary certainly made the witness more relaxed.
But, as with all progress, there are reported disadvantages including:
 Planning and resources: Oﬃcers reported that much more time was needed
in planning a case and they felt that there were not suﬃcient intermediaries
available. They requested more training in how to perceive and interpret the
measures; they were particularly anxious about being able to identify people as
vulnerable and they were not conﬁdent about putting their training into use,
requesting more guidance and monitoring of interview performance in the
workplace.
 Public awareness: Oﬃcers felt that they, the lawyers, the judges and the public
needed awareness raising exercises to understand how special measures worked
and to dispel common myths and prejudices that all children and people with
disabilities will be unreliable witnesses. Many felt that calling these witnesses
‘vulnerable’ just added to the stereotype of limitations rather than empowering
them.
 Impact: Some oﬃcers expressed doubts that giving evidence via video and/or link
room was as eﬀective as giving live evidence in the courtroom, though research in
England and Wales and in Australia does not support this concern (Taylor and
Joudo 2005).
 Quality of evidence: Some oﬃcers feared that the quality of the video-evidence
was poor and this does seem to be a real concern as illustrated in the following
report.
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
312

A Crown Court Judge (Keen 30th January 2009) ‘criticised police after he was forced to
dismiss a case because of the poor standard of video evidence’. He was ‘critical of the
way the interview room was set up, with the camera positioned to show the female child
witness from the side’ and the fact that she was being interviewed by a male oﬃcer using
repetitious and unhelpful questions. It was reported that the prosecution had been forced
to withdraw other cases in the area because the jury could not hear what the vulnerable
witnesses were saying.
Implementation of these special measures is a phased one, with no pre-recording of
cross-examination as yet. Thus, while the special measures are a change in procedure,
they are limited in scope, and we wonder whether in practice there has been a great deal
of change. Davies et al. (1995) found no diﬀerence between the guilty verdicts delivered
for cases involving videotaped evidence as opposed to live cases. Indeed, at the time of
writing, in British courts, acquittals have increased and we must wonder whether the
introduction of special measures has encouraged the CPS to proceed with cases once
thought impossible but yet, once in cross-examination the witnesses still do not present
as credible.
Conclusion
Examples of special measures can be found in Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Ireland,
Israel, New Zealand, Scotland, South Africa and the USA as well as in England and
Wales. But all reports suggest that the adversarial system is problematic for vulnerable
witnesses. A quote from one of our oﬃcers summarises the current position:
The criminal justice system struggles to provide an adequate stage on which
vulnerable witnesses can perform. The court doesn’t accept [that] the young child
or the disabled witness can be reliable. I’ve no conﬁdence in barristers – they’re not
trained in the needs of vulnerable witnesses. CJS cannot cater for everyone. Special
measures do not provide an equal footing for such witnesses. The burden of proof
is beyond most witnesses.
(Aldridge and Williams 2006)
We agree with Ellison (2001: 12) that ‘there is a clear and seemingly irreconcilable
conﬂict between the needs and interests of vulnerable witnesses and the basic assump-
tions and resultant evidentiary safeguards of the adversarial trial process’. While, the
changes in the initial interview are to be welcomed, there remains a problem with the
dual function of the video interview (Aldridge and Luchjenbroers 2008), since it has both
to gather evidence for use in criminal proceedings and act as the prosecution case. These
tasks may be incompatible. Combining this with the fact that cross-examination still goes
on linguistically unchecked, we wonder whether tinkering with the system can ever
work. As Ellison (2001: 7) states ‘the approach currently in operation can be described as
one of accommodation, in that solutions have been primarily sought and crafted within
the constraints of the established trial framework’ and ‘the above discussions show the
signiﬁcant limitations of the accommodation approach’. It seems that the adversarial
system cannot easily oﬀer justice for vulnerable witnesses and we must now turn our
attention to research the popular contention that inquisitorial style criminal proceedings
hold inherent advantages for vulnerable witnesses.
VULNERABLE WITNESSES
313

Further reading
Bottom, B., Najdowski, C. and Godman, G. (2009) Child Victims, Child Oﬀenders: Psychology and the
Law, Guilford: The Guilford Press.
Lamb, M., Hershkowitz, I., Orbach, Y. and Esplin, P. (2008) Tell Me What Happened, New York:
Wiley.
Pipe, M., Lamb, M., Orbach, Y. and Cederborg, A. (2007) Child Sexual Abuse: Disclosure, Delay, and
Denial, Mahwah, NJ.: Erlbaum.
Walker, A.G. (1999) Handbook on Questioning Children: A Linguistic Perspective, (2nd edition) Washington,
DC: ABA Center on Children and the Law.
Westcott, H., Davies, G. and Bull, R. (2002) Children’s Testimony: A Handbook of Psychological Research
and Forensic Practice, Chichester: Wiley.
MICHELLE ALDRIDGE
314

21
False confessors
A jihadi heart and mind? Strategic
repackaging of a possibly false confession
in an anti-terrorism trial in California
Gillian Grebler
Introduction
In April 2006, after a nine-week trial and nine days’ deliberation by a jury, a young
Californian man was found guilty of providing material support to terrorists. The con-
viction could carry up to 39 years in prison. The government had a videotaped confes-
sion from 22-year-old Hamid Hayat, as well as hours of surreptitiously recorded
conversation between him and Nassim Khan, an FBI “cooperating witness.” In addition
to “material support,” Hayat was convicted of three counts of making false statements to
the FBI, denying on three occasions that he had been to a militant training camp in
Pakistan, been trained there, and returned to the United States with the intent to
commit violent jihad. But we have cause to wonder whether in fact those three alleged
denials actually told the true story of Hayat’s time in Pakistan, and whether the confes-
sion upon which the case was built told a story that was false.
False confessions
A false confession is a narrative which tells a tale of something that did not happen, or of
a place that might never have existed. It can happen spontaneously, as a “voluntary” false
confession, or be induced through interrogation. When police interrogate suspects in an
accusatory, “guilt-presumptive” manner, a suspect may make a false confession. When
suspects come to doubt the validity of their own memory and to believe, usually tem-
porarily, that they are guilty of a crime, their confession can be referred to as a “coerced-
internalized” false confession (see Wrightsman and Kassin, 1993 for this typology). When
they comply with interrogators while retaining knowledge of their innocence, their
confession is called “coerced-compliant.”
There is now a large and growing literature by psychologists and linguists on police-
induced false confessions. Much is known about how they arise from the use of tactics
315

and ploys used by interrogators (see for example, Ofshe and Leo 1997a; Shuy 1998b),
about the psychological vulnerabilities of the suspects who make them (Gudjonsson
1992; Kassin and Gudjonsson 2004). We know in particular that children and juveniles
are especially vulnerable to accusatory, guilt-presumptive interrogation (Redlich and
Goodman 2003; Drizin and Colgan 2004; Redlich et al. 2004). We know something
about the diﬃculties that can arise when non-native or non-English speakers are
interrogated (Berk-Seligson 2002).
We know also that “actual innocence” does not protect suspects, but may put them at
risk (Kassin 2005) in a number of ways: after initial encounters, investigators conclude
that innocent suspects are guilty, suspects waive their rights “naively believing in the
transparency of their innocence”, they may “elicit” confrontational interrogations and
be led to confess through the use of tactics and strategies. Police and others cannot
diﬀerentiate between uncorroborated true and false confessions.
Public awareness and legal safeguards against the dangers of false confession developed
much earlier in the UK than the US. In the UK, high proﬁle wrongful convictions came
to public attention during the 1970s. Advocacy organizations such as Liberty and Justice
were active. Ludovic Kennedy’s 10 Rillington Place, about the wrongful hanging of
Timothy Evans, brought false confessions to a large audience as early as 1961 and had an
eﬀect on Evans’s eventual posthumous pardon. The 1977 Fisher Report into the Murder
of Maxwell Confait, led to the Royal Commission of Criminal Procedure (1979–1981).
BBC Television’s program Rough Justice reinvestigated important cases, which were then
referred back to the Home Oﬃce and Court of Appeal. Research into police inter-
rogation was directed by the Police Foundation. MENCAP and MIND supported
research into police interrogation of mentally disabled and mentally ill suspects and wit-
nesses (Tully and Cahill 1984; Cahill et al. 1988). This activity led to the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act PACE (1984) which mandated tape recording in cases of serious
crime. Gisli Gudjonsson’s landmark study of Police Interrogation and False Confessions,
cataloguing the psychological and institutional factors that go into false confessions
was published in 1992. The Criminal Cases Review Commission, an independent
body responsible for investigating suspected miscarriages of criminal justice in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland was established in 1995. Forensic linguistic expertise (e.g.
Coulthard 2005) was used in the reinvestigation of cases in which disputed confessions
were central. The PEACE method of police interrogation was put into eﬀect during the
mid-1990s. US research started during the late 1980s with the research of psychologists
Kassin and Wrightsman, Richard Ofshe and later his student, Richard Leo, and by
linguist Roger Shuy. This expertise began to be recognized and used by attorneys. There
has been a huge increase in attention in the last ten years with the establishment of
Innocence Projects across the country, the proliferation of DNA exonerations and a great
deal of media attention.
Confession evidence is gathered in an interactional setting, one of asymmetric power,
in which police interrogators are trained (Inbau et al. 1986; Reid and Associates online;
Walkley 1987) to get a confession and an account of the crime with suﬃcient informa-
tion to establish the intent or mental state of the suspect. Unfortunately, innocent people
are as susceptible to its pressures as guilty suspects and can be made to provide false
confessions.
This problematic and complex evidence is then de- and recontextualized in various
ways and at various points during the course of trial, a process shown in recent forensic
linguistic work that takes an “intertextual” approach to trial data (see for example,
GILLIAN GREBLER
316

Cotterill 2002; Johnson 2008c; Matoesian 2001; Rosulek 2008 and this volume). This
“repackaging” is done strategically and emotively to create coherent, compelling and
persuasive accounts.
Confessions come laden with social and moral meaning. In Troubling Confessions, Peter
Brooks (2000) considers the role of confessions in religion, literature and law, leaving us
in no doubt that they take on a performative reality as they are spoken and are framed as
true, sincere and serious.
Once entered into evidence, confessions are highly probative. In two large studies of
proven false confessions, false confessors who pleaded not guilty and took their cases to
trial were convicted by juries between 73 and 81% of the time. As social psychologist
Saul Kassin wrote in the New York Times in 2002,
Juries so readily convict innocent defendants in false confession cases because false
confessions are counterintuitive – most jurors simply cannot imagine that they
would ever confess to a crime they did not commit.
(Kassin 2002)
A false confession raises a challenging question: what does it take to get an innocent
suspect to put his or her own reality on hold, to move into the “frame” of guilt insisted
upon by the interrogator, and then to produce a ﬁctional account in apparent coopera-
tion with this powerful co-teller? As Ochs and Capps (2001: 259) put it, “conversational
partners may drown out one or another version of what happened by reformulating or
contradicting the casting of past events.” When Hamid Hayat’s father, a US citizen since
1997, was asked why he told FBI agents that Hamid had been to a training camp, he
explained that he was telling a story because “they were not believing when I was telling
the truth” (Frontline 2006).
Whatever they tell, say yes, yes, yes, either wrong or right. I was trying to go
home. … they was calling me liar. So then I make a story, that’s all, because I want to
go home. … I never went to camp. There is no camp in Pakistan. Never. No camp.
When a confession is the primary evidence in a case, both its voluntariness and reliability
have to be considered. Questions of voluntariness can be considered by judges in pre-trial
“suppression” hearings. What brought the suspect to admit; what were the conditions of
arrest and detention, the length of interrogation, the tactics and strategies used by inter-
rogators? Was the defendant given and did he understand his Miranda Rights, did he
grasp the implications of waiving them? (See Ainsworth, this volume, for some of the
problems associated with this.)
Once a confession is allowed into testimony, jurors must decide how reliable it is.
Does it “ﬁt” what else is known about the alleged crime (Ofshe and Leo 1997b)? Are
there inconsistencies in it (Shuy 1998b)? They have to be guided in this analysis by the
defense attorney and sometimes by expert witnesses.
Laurence Rosen (2006) describes the process of collective decision-making that juries
undertake as they strive for a verdict. They do not, he says, simply “sort through all the
data to reach a collective decision” but
put together a narrative as they individually listen to the trial, matching each new
piece of information to the story they’ve been telling themselves along the way. As
FALSE CONFESSORS
317

they view the entire body of evidence and begin to discuss the case among them-
selves jurors work towards a collective narrative, one that necessarily depends on
the ways in which narratives are generally created in their culture.
(Rosen 2006: 148)
As Heﬀer (2002 and this volume) points out, a jury trial is a complex genre whose
opening address and closing arguments are in the mode of story construction and jurors
make decisions to a large extent through story-making (Bennett and Feldman 1981;
Pennington and Hastie 1993; Amsterdam and Bruner 2002).
Jurors may be inﬂuenced by the believability, lifelikeness and compellingness of the
stories told, on what clinical psychologist Donald Spence (in Ochs and Capps 2001) calls
narrative truth. In contrast to historical truth, which aims to come as close as possible to
what “really” happened (and which surely should be the goal of a jury decision), narra-
tive truth depends on “continuity and closure and the extent to which the ﬁt of the
pieces takes on aesthetic ﬁnality” (Spence in Ochs and Capps, 2001: 285).
Confessions are given inordinate weight at every stage of a criminal case (Wrightsman
and Kassin 1993). Recent academic studies of wrongful conviction cases show that
15–20% contained confessions in evidence (Drizin and Leo 2004; Gross et al. 2005). In a
recent article, Leo and Davis (2009) consider the relationship between false confessions
and wrongful convictions in the United States, pointing to an important gap in
knowledge. Too little is known, they say, about what leads so inexorably from a police-
induced confession to a conviction, in other words what makes confessions so compelling
for judges and jurors.
In this chapter, I explore the question of compellingness by looking at the life of a
problematic confession: its “production” at FBI headquarters and the multiple ways it
was “used” during the trial, during examination and cross-examination, as well as in
opening and closing arguments, and at the comments the judge made concerning it.
I describe the process by which the defendant’s story is rejected by his interrogators and
replaced by the government story, the repackaging of this story into a probatively
powerful confession, and the strategic retelling of the confession in rebuttal argument.
I consider the narrative devices used by the government in rebuttal and the extent to
which these may have inﬂuenced the decision-making of the jury.
The case
Surveillance, arrest and interrogation
After September 11, 2001 the United States government began to identify and investi-
gate Pakistani American youths who had been to Pakistan to study at religious schools,
madrasas, aﬃliated with banned militant groups; 22-year-old Hamid Hayat, born in
Stockton, California, in 1983, was the ﬁrst to be arrested.
Hayat is part of a small, largely working-class Pakistani community whose families
began to arrive during the early 1900s to work on the railroads and in the ﬁelds. The
FBI’s Joint Terrorism Task Force, set up in Sacramento after September 11, had been
investigating the Lodi Moslem community since 2003. Cooperating witness, Nassim
Khan, had inﬁltrated the community in 2002, befriended Hamid Hayat and began
secretly tape-recording their conversations in March 2003. In February 2006, the
GILLIAN GREBLER
318

Director of National Intelligence, John Negroponte, delivered the Annual Threat
Assessment in Washington, DC. He told the Senate Intelligence Committee that federal
authorities had uncovered a network of Islamic extremists in the San Joaquin County
farming town of Lodi.
Hamid Hayat’s ﬁrst knowing contact with the investigation was on May 30, 2005
when his ﬂight from Pakistan was rerouted to Japan, he was interviewed by an FBI
agent and deemed safe to return to the US. When Hayat was eventually charged
with three counts of lying to the FBI, the interview in Japan was the basis of the
ﬁrst count.
The second count was based on an interview on June 3, 2005 at his home. The two
FBI agents took various publications, Hamid’s scrapbook and a tawiz or traveler’s
prayer from his wallet. The local media called it a “raid.” The agents asked Hamid and
Umer Hayat to come to FBI headquarters the next day to help with the investigation.
When they arrived, they were separated and Hamid was taken into an interview
room to be questioned by Agent Harry Sweeney. Sweeney read Hayat his rights at
12:30 p.m.
The third count was based on the ﬁrst three and a half hours of a four-hour
interrogation during which Hamid again answered questions about his time in Pakistan
telling the agents that he played cricket, helped his mom, and spent time with his
cousins. But at 4 p.m., Hamid Hayat stopped denying that he had been at a training
camp and made what Agent Sweeney considered his ﬁrst “admission,” saying that he had
been to a training camp in 2000. Forty-ﬁve minutes later, he made his second admission:
that he had been to a training camp in 2003.
Hayat’s confession has all the risk factors that are by now well known from the analysis
of proven false confessions: the defendant was young, with a compliant personality, his
language abilities in English were weak, and at the time of interrogation he was
exhausted because of the time diﬀerence between Pakistan and California, and from
working the night shift. We do not know whether he understood his rights and he
certainly did not understand the implications of waiving them. Although he was
interrogated for over thirteen hours, he never seemed to grasp the fact that he was a
suspect; he thought and was allowed to think, that he was helping the agents with their
investigation.
This crucial ﬁrst three and a half hours of the thirteen hour interrogation of June 4 and
5 was not videotaped so our only way to evaluate the voluntariness of the confession is
through Agent Sweeney’s notes and the things he said during cross-examination. In fact,
the defense attorney’s questioning allows us to learn enough about it to cause concern
about both its voluntariness and its truthfulness.
Hayat’s initial admission came after repeated denials and the use of several well-known
interrogation tactics. Sweeney told Hayat—falsely—that there were satellite photos of
him at a training camp, and later, that he had failed his polygraph test. He then used
what interrogators call a minimization tactic (Inbau et al. 1986), suggesting to Hayat that
perhaps he had been to a religious rather than a military training camp, mitigating the
seriousness of the accusation. Because the ﬁrst interrogation was not recorded we cannot
know whether the “admissions” Hayat gave Sweeney were hypothetical or real. When
Sweeney asked Hayat whether it was possible that he had gone to a training camp in 2000
under the mistaken impression that it was a religious camp, Hayat may have answered,
that yes, it was possible. And Hayat could have been operating within this frame of the
possible throughout the remainder of his interrogations.
FALSE CONFESSORS
319

The post-admission narrative
Once FBI Agent Sweeney considered that Hayat had made admissions, he set in motion
an order to videotape and handed Hayat on to Agent Schaaf, whose job it was to seek
details to verify and bring to life the sparse admissions. Two further interrogations were
conducted that same evening, and both were videotaped. During these nine hours,
agents and suspect worked together until the early hours of the morning to shape “the
unfolding tale” (Ochs and Capps, 2001), the joint production of an admission narrative.
What began as two opposing stories was transformed into one: the FBI version, which
became the key evidence in the trial.
In a coerced-compliant false confession, the interrogator sometimes leads a suspect to his
ﬁrst admission by asking him for a hypothetical description. We cannot know whether this
happened during the ﬁrst interrogation since it was not recorded, but during the second
interrogation, the agent invites Hayat to imagine a scenario and tell what he sees (1).
(1) (GS is Agent Schaaf and HH is Hayat)
1 GS:
So, all right. And uh, so tell me, what put, put me in the front seat
2
of the bus. What am I seeing as you’re coming into the camp? Uh
3
here I am, I mean through your eyes tell me what you’re seeing as you
4
come out
5 HH:
Um just go inside and you’re not gonna go try to take bus inside.
When the agent tries the same approach again a little later Hayat does not seem to
understand and fails to come up with anything (2).
(2)
1 GS:
So that’s, do you go up the main route into the camp?
2 HH:
I mean, on walk we go?
3 GS:
Yes.
4 HH:
Yeah, we walk.
5 GS:
Ok.
6 HH:
We walk.
7 GS:
Ok. And so tell me, alright, take me on the walk. What happens on
8
the walk?
9 HH:
Nothing happens.
When dominant co-tellers such as police interrogators insist that the truth is a lie and
“contend that certain unremembered events transpired” (Ochs and Capps 2001), the
story that emerges often has signs of what linguists call the language of uncertainty—it is
full of vagueness, hedging, pauses and self-correction (or what conversational analysts call
self-repair). It will contain the subjunctive and conditional formulations indicative of
what Ofshe and Leo (1997b) call the “grammar of confabulation.”
In (3) and throughout this interrogation we hear the interrogating oﬃcer, who is
trying to ask questions about something he knows nothing about, and the defendant,
trying to cooperate by answering his questions, both using this language of uncertainty
(note ‘I assume’ in line 3). Agent Schaaf is trying to help Hayat describe a place where
Hayat may never have been and which in fact may not even exist. In line 2, Agent
GILLIAN GREBLER
320

Schaaf uses “these camps” and in line 8, Hamid uses “there,” but this doesn’t mean that
each is referring to the same place and the mass of people described is also very diﬀerent:
“hundreds” (line 2) versus “not over 50” (line 7).
(3) Interview with Hamid Hayat, p.10
1 GS:
So, um during the course of the time that you’re there um how many
2
people did you ob-I mean, usually these camps have, you know, hundreds
3
of people coming and going so that I assume that this is, the way you’re
4
describing it, would sound similar in that regard. Is that, is that right?
5 HH: Like hundreds of people.
6 GS:
Yeah, yeah, you know.
7 HH:
I didn’t see that much like uh over 50 people I’ll say. I didn’t see
8
over 50 people there, Sir.
9 GS:
At any one time?
10 HH:
One time you know I see, I see like you know all together all the
11
time I like you know, about like 70.
In the early hours of the morning, when Hayat was asked again about possible targets of
terrorist action, he is still vague (4).
(4) Interview with Hamid Hayat (p. 175 transcript)
1 HH: Like buildings and I’ll say buildings.
2 TH:
What kind of buildings?
3 HH: Bigger building, you know, buildings.
4 TH:
Buildings? Commercial buildings?
5 HH: You know commercial, projects and like those kind of buildings.
6
I’ll say
7 TH:
Umm, alright you’re not
8 HH: Yeah, but I am not sure about the buildings you guys are talking about.
9
The big ones, I’ll say, you know ﬁnance, I’ll say ﬁnance and things like that.
And a little later, asked yet again in (5)
(5)
1 TH: But I need you to tell me details about targets, what they said you
2
know. And, this is where I need your memory to come back.
3 HH: Like I said sir, you know, big buildings and you know
4
hospitalities and you know, ﬁnance buildings, banks and what’s it called
5
ah, hmmm maybe like you know uh stores, stores
6 TH: What kind of stores?
7 HH: Stores, like food stores, anything like that.
This exchange was cited in the ﬁrst aﬃdavit for Hayat’s arrest, which read, “Hamid advised that
he speciﬁcally requested to come to the United States to carry out his jihadi mission. Potential
targets for attack would include hospitals and large food stores” (Aﬃdavit, June 2005).
Like people who have made what we know to be false confessions, Hayat did not
seem to understand the implications of his admissions. Like others (like his father Umer)
FALSE CONFESSORS
321

he may have been aiming simply for a short-term result, an end to the interrogation. Hamid
repeatedly asked to see his father, he oﬀered to return another day, he oﬀered to take the agents’
numbers and report anything suspicious to them. At about 6 p.m., after two hours of inter-
rogation by Agent Gary Schaaf, Hayat seems to think the interview is over. He asks Schaaf
(6)
1 HH: Do you have a card sir?
2 GS:
I will. I don’t have one on me.
3 HH: I contact you (UI).
4 GS:
Yeah.
5 HH: How bout beeper to (UI) remember anything to contact you.
Later, after nearly thirteen hours of interrogation, Hamid still did not seem to understand that he
was a suspect. He oﬀered to return the next day. He is surprised that he is about to be arrested
and that he is going to jail. He has stopped asking for his father. Now all he wants is sleep.
(7)
1 HH: So I come back here tomorrow? Again.
2 TH:
No, no. You’re not leaving here tonight, no.
3 HH: No, I mean ah, tomorrow. I’m going to be here tonight. Staying
4
here? In the building?
5 TH:
No. no you’re going to go, you’re going to go to jail.
6 PA:
Hamid you’re going to jail.
7 HH:
Yeah, so am I going to get a place to sleep over there like that?
8 PA:
It’s jail Hamid you understand that?
9 HH: Yeah, I know, I know it’s a jail, but can I lay down because my
10
head (HH points to his head) is hurting, I want to sleep.
Closing arguments: adversarial storytelling
In closing argument, government prosecutor Robert Tice-Raskin repackaged this pro-
blematic and possibly false confession to paint a picture of a young man with a jihadi
heart and a jihadi mind, who admitted “in his own words” attending a military training
camp. The surreptitiously tape recorded conversations made by cooperating witness
Nassim Khan were also drawn upon in the prosecution’s closing argument to character-
ize Hayat as having a “jihadi heart and mind.” The prosecutor quoted in full a disturbing
conversation in which Hayat speaks approvingly about the murder of Daniel Pearl.
Although the defense successfully attacked Khan’s credibility at trial, Hayat’s jury were
not given the beneﬁt of a linguistic analysis of the tapes (Shuy 1993a, 2005 and this
volume). This kind of analysis would have revealed to the jury the conversational stra-
tegies Khan used to elicit and encourage Hayat’s anti-American talk, letting them
understand why the tapes are “troublesome, seductive and ultimately unfair” (Shuy
2005) as evidence. Khan played on a relationship of apparent friendship, misplaced trust
and hidden power, in which he tried to persuade Hamid to go to a training camp, in
Shuy’s words, to “seduce” him, using the stock of “conversational strategies” that
cooperating witnesses typically use. Hayat’s jury hears his apparently damning words
doubly removed from their interactional context because they are translated from the
Pashto (and occasional Urdu).
GILLIAN GREBLER
322

The defense attorney on the other hand, was certain that the prosecution had not
proved that Hayat had been to a training camp. In discussing Hayat’s confession during
her closing argument (8) she reminded the jury that the police had intimidated Hamid,
the police used questionable tactics, he was exhausted, and he was asked many leading
questions. He didn’t “know what was happening to him” (8).
(8) (Transcript of closing arguments, page 4319)
1 He didn’t realize that by telling the FBI what they wanted to hear, that he
2 attended a camp in Pakistan, that he had just gotten himself into a whole lot of
3 trouble. It’s really quite sad to watch that video and watch [Hayat] say things
4 that make no sense. They don’t even make sense to the agents who are
5 listening to them. And you really see him trying to cooperate and provide the
6 answers the best that he can.
Agent Timothy Harrison oﬀers to help Hayat in exchange for his cooperation. One
example of several is in excerpt (9) from his interview at 2 a.m.
(9) Interview
1 TH:
Okay I’ll meet you, I’ll meet you half way, alright.
2 HH:
What’s that mean half way? You want me to cooperate.
3 TH:
Cooperate.
4 HH:
Cooperate, yeah I get that sir.
5 TH:
Yeah you gotta give me something, in order for me to go help you.
6 HH:
Okay.
7 TH:
You know, to tell my bosses that you’re cooperating, that
8
you’re working with us. You know you’re in a bad situation, you know,
9
but it could be a lot worse, and there’s a lot we can do to help you.
10
But you got to help us, you gotta work with us. (HH nodding) All right.
More basic even than the fact that Hayat is trying to cooperate and appears to be oper-
ating within a diﬀerent “frame” to that of his interrogators, we do not know how much
Hayat understands of the interrogator’s language, as in the exchange in (10).
(10)
TH: Which way was north?
HH: What do you mean north?
The rebuttal argument
If the confession is not valid, if the apparently remembered experience of being at a
training camp is not reliable, then there is no evidence with which to charge Hamid
Hayat. As the defense attorney said at trial (11):
(11) (Transcript of defense closing argument, page 4319–20)
And so that’s what you have, Ladies and Gentlemen, you have a meaningless
confession. You have Hamid Hayat being intimidated into saying things that the
FBI wanted him to say … The entire interview was meaningless, and it does not
FALSE CONFESSORS
323

prove that Hayat went to a camp. And because [Hayat’s] statements come from a
meaningless confession and they are completely unreliable, the government ladies
and gentlemen, is left with nothing.
But it is essential to the prosecution case that the jury begins its deliberations with the
confession intact. Because the government has the burden of proof, the prosecution gets
the last word with a “rebuttal” argument. David Deitch uses this “extremely powerful
tool for the plaintiﬀ” (Read 2007: 279–80) to great eﬀect.
In rebuttal, Deitch discredits the defense closing argument. He “relegitimizes” (Rosulek
2008 and this volume) the confession which the defense attorney had carefully presented as
“meaningless” and “unreliable.” He retells the story of the interrogation, erases apparent
gaps, uncertainties and contradictions in the confession and characterizes the defendant as a
youth capable of committing great violence for ideological reasons. He plays on the fears
and uncertainty jurors may feel in a post-9/11 United States, and leaves them with a sense
that it is their responsibility to protect the public by upholding the government case.
The ﬁrst weakness that Deitch set out to relegitimize is the point where Hamid Hayat
stopped denying and began to admit, a pivotal moment upon which the voluntariness of
the admission and the reliability of the narrative details hinges. The defense attorney had
brought this crucial moment into question during the trial in her careful cross-examination
of Agent Sweeney (12).
(12) Defense cross-examination
1 Q:
And your recollection is during that ﬁrst three and a half hour
2
period in all of his responses he denied any connection to jihadi training?
3 A:
That is correct.
4 Q:
Okay. Now let’s move into that second portion, when he makes his
5
initial – did you call it an admission.
6 A:
Admission. Confession. Yes.
7 Q:
Do you recall the question that you asked when he ultimately said
8
that at about 3:30? …
9 A:
My question to him was, Is it possible, Hamid, that you didn’t
10
know that you were going to a jihadi training camp? Is it possible that
11
you may have thought it was something else, like a religious education
12
camp?
13 Q:
Okay. Did he give you any inclination that that may have been a
14
possibility?
15 A:
No, he did not.
16 Q:
And when you asked that question, what was his response?
17 A:
His response was that, yes, that, in fact, was the case.
18 Q:
What were the words he uttered; do you recall?
19 A:
I don’t recall the exact words.
20 Q:
… Do you recall, was it a yes, or was it a yes with detail?
21 A:
I recall that it was a yes with detail.
22 Q:
The ﬁrst time you asked? …
23 A:
No. Actually, the ﬁrst time I brought up that topic and asked that
24
direct question, or that direct issue, it wasn’t necessarily an automatic yes,
25
that’s it. There may have been several times that I raised that particular
26
issue.
GILLIAN GREBLER
324

In the rebuttal Deitch characterized that crucial turning point as a “breakthrough,” to
overcome juror’s concerns about its elicitation (13, line 9).
(13)
1 Hamid Hayat told Harry Sweeney, in response to questions, that he had
2 gone to Pakistan to help out his mom, that he had gone to get married, that
3 he played cricket, that he hung out with friends, and that he’d sometime go
4 and travel to eat in American style restaurants. Hamid Hayat speciﬁcally
5 denied to Special Agent Sweeney that he had ever received any weapons
6 training at a jihadist training camp, and that he had ever received any
7 training at a jihadist camp to ﬁght against the United States. He denied
8 that more than once. After doing that though, there was a moment in
9 which there was a breakthrough. Harry Sweeney asked Hamid Hayat, Is it
10 possible that you didn’t know that you were going to a jihadi training
11 camp? Is it possible that you may have thought it was something else, like
12 a religious education camp? After Harry Sweeney posed that
13 question, Hamid Hayat confessed for the ﬁrst time.
The government had to prove that Hayat was at a militant training camp. The agents
tried to establish its location but got vague and contradictory information from Hayat.
The rebuttal repackages this problematic gap to produce what prosecutor David Deitch
calls the “consistent thread” of Balakot, making it sound as if Hayat told Agent Sweeney
three times that he was there ((14), lines 1–4). Deitch continues, suggesting that Hayat
himself repeated the name out loud six times in a row ((14), lines 5–6).
(14)
1 So when Hamid Hayat goes on video, he’s already given away a lot of
2 information. And perhaps the most important piece of information he’s
3 given away, I’ll say it in one word, Balakot. Balakot. He told Harry
4 Sweeney the camp was in the area of Balakot. …
5 And he repeated, at least six times during the videotaped interview,
6 Balakot, Balakot, Balakot, Balakot, Balakot. Balakot.
In the rebuttal argument details that emerged at length and which were often later
contradicted in the interrogation are presented as if they are undisputed facts. Vague
images, invariably suggested ﬁrst by the interrogator and then integrated into the account
(15), become vivid in rebuttal.
(15)
1 GS:
Ok. Now tell me about riﬂe training. There’s …
2 HH:
Oh, riﬂe training is very hard sir, you know, they make me stand
3
over here in I say I barely could pick it up it’s very heavy, you know, I’m
4
skinny you know
5 GS:
Was it a big so, tell me what kind of riﬂe it is, do you remember?
6 HH:
It was a shotgun, I think sir.
In the rebuttal the material in (15) was transformed into “Hamid Hayat recalled that he
trained with what he described as being a riﬂe or shotgun.” And an interview exchange
FALSE CONFESSORS
325

about Kalashnikovs became, in the prosecutor’s words: “He also stated that he was aware
that they had Kalashnikovs and indicated that he, in fact, had seen one.” Information about
possible explosive training proposed by Schaaf became ampliﬁed in rebuttal: “Hamid
Hayat also admitted that he consistently heard a lot of explosions while he was at camp.” Deitch
uses subjective verbs which cannot be contradicted: Hayat, he says, “admitted,” “indicated,”
“remembered,” and “recalled” details of the training camp. This way of casting narrative
“events as what they or another ‘remember’” (Ochs and Capps (2001: 284), is strategic in
that it presupposes “that the events truly occurred” gaining an “authenticating power.”
In her closing argument, the defense attorney demonstrated that every detail about the
training camp was introduced by the agents. This seems like a serious indictment. But
research has shown that human memory does not always distinguish amongst sources of infor-
mation (Shuy 1993a; Schachter 2001) and the rebuttal argument (16) plays on this weakness.
(16)
1 Hamid Hayat didn’t just make up these details about this camp. Why
2 was he able to describe a camp in the outskirts of Balakot, with this trail
3 through the woods, over the mountains, opening into a ﬁeld and so forth?
4 He may have gotten a lot of the details wrong either because of lack of
5 recollection or because of the kind of lying and gauging that I’ve talked
6 about but he sure got a lot of the details right. Someone who had not been
7 to that camp, it would be an awful coincidence to get all of those right and
8 for it to match.
In the rebuttal argument events are “materialized” ((16), lines 2–3) and arranged in a
temporal and causal order to achieve an appearance of reality. Disparate physical details
that came into the narrative through a series of alternative, either/or, questions ((17),
lines 2 and 6) are pulled together (18) to portray a journey with a beginning and an
arrival: Hayat’s movement from home to camp entails a bus journey and then a trail that
goes through woods, over mountains, into a ﬁeld.
(17)
1 GS:
Um and uh and then you’re uh what time do you, do you leave at
2
night or in the daytime or
3 HH:
From where to the camp?
4 GS:
From from Pindi yeah.
5 HH:
Uh daytime, sir.
6 GS:
So you left in daytime. Did you arrive in dark or was it,
7 HH:
Yeah it was dark when we arrived, yes, sir.
(18)
1 He recounted to the agents that he arrived by bus at nighttime, that
2 he followed an unidentiﬁed male who had a ﬂashlight, and then they went
3 up a zigzag road up a mountain. And you will recall, when you see him on
4 videotape, the way Hamid Hayat would describe with his hands how he would
5 go up the various zigzag portions of that road. Hamid Hayat indicated that at
6 the end of that hike he reached a ﬁeld, and that there were trees all around
7 him.
GILLIAN GREBLER
326

To make the description even more concrete, Deitch reminds jurors that they saw Hayat
gesturing on videotape when “describing” the road ((18), lines 4–7). He creates a sense
of heightened reality by highlighting Hayat’s “live” appearance on videotape ((19), lines
1–2), calling upon the jurors’ sense of televisual reality to give them conﬁdence in the
existence of the road Hayat described. Richard Sherwin (in Scelfo 2001) warns us that
“visual persuasion” can be used to “short-circuit the ideal of rational deliberation and
supplant it by a more emotional form of judgment.” In ((19), line 3) Deitch compounds
the emotional impact by repeating the word “repeatedly.”
(19)
1 During the course of the videotaped interviews, again, where you
2 had chance, folks, to see Hamid Hayat live, he gave a fairly
3 detailed confession in which he repeatedly, repeatedly conﬁrmed
4 that he had attended a jihadi camp both in 2003–4 as well as
5 earlier in 2000.
In fact, Hayat’s interrogators never heard him “repeatedly, repeatedly conﬁrm” that he
had attended a jihadi camp. On the contrary, they struggled with him to produce a
coherent, convincing and legally sound confession narrative and although Hamid Hayat
wanted very much to cooperate, they did not succeed. Towards the end of the third
interrogation, after 3 a.m. Agent Aguilar, sitting in with Agent Harrison, says:
(20)
1 PA:
Hamid, we keep asking you these questions and, and you’re
2
giving us the answers you are taking I mean why, why aren’t you
3
being truthful here?
4 HH:
I don’t get that, like the questions you guys are asking again,
5
you know. What question, you ask me again, I try my best you know.
Deitch ends his argument (21) with a highly emotive, imagined scene in which he dis-
credits the defense portrayal of Hayat as harmless by projecting him as the possible future
agent of horriﬁc violence.
(21) End of prosecution rebuttal
1 But there is a more important point here. Let’s say that Hamid Hayat came
2 back, how thin or not thin do you think you need to be to spray a crowd
3 with an AK-47? How thin or not thin do you think you have to be to
4 wear a backpack full of explosives into a crowded shopping mall? How
5 thin or not thin do you think you need to be to drive a Ryder truck full of
6 explosives into a public building?
Then, in a bold rhetorical move ((22), lines 2–5) he “animates” Hamid Hayat, by creating a
ﬁctionalized confession as if actually spoken by him in an uninterrupted monologue. The
attributed words imply clear intention on Hayat’s part to carry out the charged actions.
(22)
1 There is lots of evidence here, ladies and gentlemen. Lots of evidence
2 to show that a man, Hamid Hayat, said, I’m going for training, I’m going
FALSE CONFESSORS
327

3 to be trained to commit jihad, and that he returned and said, Yes, I did go,
4 and I was trained to commit jihad, and I came back here with the intent to
5 do just that, consistent with his conversations and consistent with the
6 physical evidence that you’ve seen in this trial.
Hayat is made to tell a very simple story with a clear chronology and Deitch’s
“breakthrough into performance” (Hymes 1981), his use of direct discourse, carries an
inordinate power. As Tannen (1989:133) writes, “By giving voice to characters, dialogue
makes story into drama and listeners into an interpreting audience to the drama … Thus
understanding [of this type of] discourse is in part emotional.” In the case of Hayat, the
dramatic dialogue conveyed by using direct reported speech is one of the features that
make both the prosecution and rebuttal arguments compelling. Shonna Trinch (2005b
and forthcoming), in her study of direct reported speech in Latina domestic abuse aﬃ-
davits, suggests that the role of direct reported speech varies by setting but is always
contextual, always meaningful.1 Kandel (2002) points to the persuasive force of reported
speech in legal settings where it can give a strong appearance of veracity, speciﬁcity, and
accuracy of memory, involve the hearer emotionally, and make what is narrated in this
form especially salient, memorable and signiﬁcant to the hearer.
The verdict
We do not know whether Hayat was ever at a military training camp or whether he
admitted only to the possibility of having been at one and then cooperated with the
interrogators to describe a camp he had never been to and which may never have exis-
ted. If the latter is the case, if Hayat was induced through interrogation to confess falsely,
the jury should have been told about the frequency and causes of false confession in
order to evaluate his confession. They should have been told that Hayat was similar to
suspects known to have confessed falsely, and that he was questioned in a manner known
to have generated false confessions.
Perhaps the defense could also have softened the emotional force of the rebuttal with
an attempt to convey Hayat’s experience: how confused he might have been about
his role, surprised when the police did not believe him, isolated without his father,
exhausted by the repeated questioning, puzzled at his continued failure to satisfy his
interrogators when he was trying so hard to help. The defense did not give the jurors
this crucial information. Without it, they were unable to counter the compelling
re-legitimation of the confession put forth in the rebuttal argument.
After nine days of deliberation, the jury found Hayat guilty on four counts: one count of
providing material support or resources to terrorism, and three counts of lying about it to
the police. In October 2006, Hayat’s defense attorneys submitted a motion for a new trial.
According to the jury foreman Joe Cote, in an interview just after the trial (Waldman
2006), the outcome was uncertain when they began deliberations. According to Cote, it
was reviewing the videotaped interrogation for a second time that made the diﬀerence.
The ﬁrst time the jurors saw the videotape he says, they were bothered by the leading
questions and “pressure tactics” used by the FBI interrogators. But they had got an
instruction from US District Judge Garland E. Burrell stating that “the government may
utilize a broad range of schemes and ploys to ferret out criminal activity.” Also crucial
according to Cote, by the time they viewed the videotape for the second time, the jurors
had absorbed all the other evidence, and by this time, they had heard the closing arguments.
GILLIAN GREBLER
328

Cote said that judging from Hayat’s mild demeanor in court and his recent marriage,
he did not seem to pose much danger. But then, said Cote, he thought of the faces of
the terrorists caught on videotape before last summer’s bombings in London and said he
thought they looked just as non-threatening. “Can we, on the basis of what we know,
put this kid on the street? … On the basis of what we know of how people of his
background have acted in the past? The answer is no.” There are “So-called new rules of
engagement and I don’t want to see the government lose its case.”
Future directions
Much research has been done on false confessions. We know who tends to make them,
how they get made, what their makers feel like at the time of interrogation and after-
wards. We know the ways Miranda is given so as to encourage suspects to waive their
rights (Leo 1998; Ainsworth, this volume). We know what happens when the right to an
attorney is invoked with the “wrong” words (Ainsworth 1993 and this volume; Solan
and Tiersma 2005). We understand the eﬀects of diﬀerent kinds of questions. We know
that police oﬃcers can alight on the wrong suspect, assume his or her guilt and in an
accusatory, guilt-presumptive interrogation drive for an admission, and supply critical
details of the narrative (Hill 2003). We know that interrogators are trained to get the
kinds of details that conﬁrm an admission with information only the perpetrator could
know, and that ﬁll out a story, providing sensory and interactional details of the crime
scene. We know that, armed with a confession, police investigators often proceed
with “tunnel vision,” excluding other lines of investigation and other possible suspects
(Findley and Scott 2006; see also Solan, this volume, on biases).
Overwhelmingly academics, lawyers and advocates call for mandatory videotaping of
police interrogations. In order for these recordings to be useful we need to develop ways
to analyze the tapes using multimodal methods that consider prosody, gaze, gesture and
other nonverbal aspects of the interrogation (Goodwin 1994, 2000; 2007; Mateosian, this
volume) attending to the eﬀect of camera angle (Lassiter 2004; Lassiter et al. 2006),
intentional “audience manipulation” by interrogators doing the recording (Coulthard 2002)
and remembering (Sherwin 2002) that visual evidence has persuasive power of its own.
In 1996, Phillip Meyer wrote that:
the nature of lawyering practice and storytelling at trial is changing rapidly. Many of
these changes are the result of new technologies, especially the use of aural and visual
“paratexts” at trial … The impact of this new storytelling technology at trial is profound.
(Meyer 1996)
We should continue to apply the ﬁndings of cognitive and social science to understand
the making of false confessions and the decision-making of judges and juries when con-
sidering them. Conversational analysis can help make a case for the fact that sociality,
cooperativeness, politeness, and “preference for agreement” constrain confession-makers
as they do ordinary conversationalists. It can shed light on the “interlocutory relation-
ship” of suspect and interrogator, a relationship which as Brooks (2000: 6) says “urges
towards speech,” and it can illuminate the workings of “linguistic coercion.”
Linguistic anthropologists interested in the role of narrative in creating and maintaining
collective memory and in the functioning of social memory in speciﬁc institutions
FALSE CONFESSORS
329

(Mendoza-Denton 2008), can help explain how the human proclivity to story-making
and particular narrative devices such as reported speech inﬂuence individual and
collective decision-making.
Conclusion
Storytelling has a pragmatic eﬃcacy. In pretending to recount the real, it
manufactures it. It renders believable what it says, and it generates appropriate
action … The voices of narration transform, reorient and regulate the space of
social interaction.
(De Certeau 1986: 200)
Narrative strategies make a story compelling, seem to give it an anchor in reality, gen-
erate emotion and enhance involvement. They can also be used to manipulate listeners
and obscure reality. As Jerome Bruner (2004: 15) says, “We seem to have no other
way of describing ‘lived time’ save in the form of narrative” and that makes us very
susceptible to the eﬀect of story.
Legal decision-makers should be guided to see the intentionality in the gathering and
presentation of legal evidence, to “understand their subtle strong persuasive eﬀect”
(Kandel 2002). As Kandel (2002: 8) says, “Rhetorical devices are like the brushstrokes of
a master painter.”
There are instances of true stories supplanted by false stories which are then so compellingly
told that they convince decision-makers of their reliability. Hayat’s trial may be one of them.
In the closing arguments, the original interaction on which the evidence was co-produced
(both between the cooperating witness Khan and the defendant Hayat, and between the
police oﬃcers and the suspect) are erased while other, imagined relationships are created and
new meanings assigned. By using as evidence talk that was spoken by the defendant these
closing arguments gain a superﬁcial air of authenticity—especially with regard to the so-called
confession—a speech act which always seems to generate an expectation of sincerity.
The prosecution’s closing arguments portray a young man with a jihadi heart and a
jihadi mind. And they accomplish this portrayal, they claim, through his own words
captured forever on tape. By focusing on his own words, they gain the authenticating
power that reported speech can bring. However, the jury isn’t reminded that these “own
words” emerged from the constraining and coercive context of interrogation.
In October 2006, Hayat’s attorneys submitted a motion for retrial. The motion was
denied by Judge Burrell. While the jury seems to have struggled with the evidence,
according to Cote reaching its decision “with a heavy heart,” Burrell shows no sign of
such struggle. On 10 September 2007, at the Federal District Court in Sacramento,
he sentenced Hayat to 24 years in prison. According to an article in the NY Times (11
September 2007), Hayat was solemn and attentive as the words of Judge Burrell were
translated into Urdu.
Hamid Hayat attended a terrorist training camp and returned to the United States,
ready and willing to wage violent jihad when directed to do so, regardless of the
havoc such acts could wreak on persons and property in the United States, and
then lied to the FBI on three separate occasions.
(NY Times, 11 September 2007)
GILLIAN GREBLER
330

Burrell added that the evidence suggested a likelihood of recidivism and an unlikelihood
of rehabilitation.
An appeal was heard in June 2009 (available online at: www.ca9.uscourts.gov [Accessed 3
August 2009]) and awaits decision. Meanwhile Hamid Hayat has been transferred to a prison
in Indiana, far from his family and community in Lodi.
The Hayat case, like other anti-terrorism cases in the United States after September
11, 2001, is one which the prosecution characterized as preemptive: no crime had been
committed. In fact it may have been wholly fabricated, a case where actual truth may
have been trumped by narrative truth. And yet the repercussions for the defendant, his
family and the Moslem community in Lodi are pervasive.2
Charles Briggs (1996: 30) reminds us that “Close study of who controls the processes
by which stories are told and retold, as well as how they are interpreted, challenged and
co-opted, is … of central importance to social scientiﬁc and humanistic inquiry.”
Continuing research and education about false confessions is essential in order to
prevent wrongful convictions. The reliability and trustworthiness of every confession
should be considered before it is entered into evidence. Leo and Ofshe (1998) recom-
mend a mandatory “reliability hearing” before a confession is allowed into evidence. If,
as in the Hayat case, a judge does allow a problematic confession into evidence the jurors
should be fully informed about the dangers of false confessions.
Notes
1 Diez (2005) looks at reported speech in asylum interviews and Johnson and Holt (this volume) in
police interviews. Galatolo and Mizzau (2005) describe yet another speciﬁc function of direct
reported speech they say has emerged from the analysis of their testimony data from an Italian
court—“in the context of lay witness’ testimony, direct reported speech can be a tool for covertly
expressing one’s point of view about events, bypassing the rule that prevents one from expressing
individual opinions and evaluations while testifying.”
2 The Hayat case may be an example of the “collateral damage” that can result from the so-called war
on terror. Kent Roach and Gary Trotter (2005) warn that the “temptation of departing from
normal legal standards and engaging in prejudgment, prejudice, and stereotyping may be particularly
high in emotive and devastating cases involving allegations of terrorism and fears of continued acts
of terrorism … In addition, the risk of wrongful convictions in terrorism cases, both before and after
9/11, are likely to fall disproportionately on particular groups, such as racial and religious minorities,
or those with radical political views.”
Further reading
Gudjonsson, G. (2003) The Psychology of Interrogations and Confessions: A Handbook, London: Wiley.
Hepworth, M. and Turner, B.S. (1982) Confession: Studies in Deviance and Religion, London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Leo, R. (2008) Police Interrogation and American Justice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leo, R.A. and Thomas G.C. III (eds) (1998) The Miranda Debate: Law, Justice and Policing, Chicago:
Northeastern University Press.
Reid, J. and Associates, www.reid.com for a frequently updated compendium of trial and appeal court
decisions regarding Miranda, police interrogation and confession evidence.
Shuy, R.W. (1993) Language Crimes, Oxford: Blackwell.
White, W.S. (2003) Miranda’s Waning Protections, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
FALSE CONFESSORS
331

Case documents
Aﬃdavit, June 6, 2005 Eastern District of California. Available online at: www.washingtoninstitute.org/
documents/42b18c1d93623.pdf.
U.S.A. Plaintiﬀv. Hamid Hayat and Umer Hayat No. CR.S – 05 – 240 Reporter’s Transcript, Jury
Trial, February 16 – April 12.
FBI Interrogations with Hamid Hayat – Transcript and Video.
Translated transcriptions of Khan tapes (Pashto to English, some Urdu).
www.milnet.com for many of the case documents and articles regarding the Hayat case.
Recorded Interview of Hamid Hayat, June 4 and 5, 2005.
Appeal heard – June 10th 2009 USA v. Hayat, 10457, San Francisco, CA. Available online at: www.
ca9.uscourts.gov/media/view_subpage.php?pk_id = 0000003604 (accessed 3 August 2009).
GILLIAN GREBLER
332

22
Representing oneself
Cross-examination questioning:
lay people as cross-examiners
Tatiana Tkacˇ uková
Introduction
Witness examination is an essential principle of the adversarial legal system. Through
examining witnesses, the prosecution and the defence present their versions of events
to the judge and jury. While it is expected that witnesses are prepared for examination-
in-chief, cross-examination proceeds in a hostile atmosphere and is feared by witnesses, as
it is an intimidating experience. It is also feared by novice barristers, as the success of the
case can depend on their cross-examination skills. What is more important, though, is
that the principle of cross-examination can easily turn into a tool for distorting the truth
instead of revealing it (Riding 1999: 415–18). Facts speak for themselves: the main aim
of a cross-examiner is to discredit the testimonies of witnesses by casting doubt on
their credibility or their presentation of events (Gibbons 2003: 112). This is achieved by
controlling witnesses through coercive questioning.
Linguistic research on witness examination and particularly cross-examination aims to
minimize the injustices and alert legal professionals to problematic practices. Forensic
linguists, together with psychologists, anthropologists and legal professionals, have gradually
contributed to several changes in legitimate cross-examination tactics and examination
proceedings in general. Studies on rape trials, for instance, have contributed to the fact
that lawyers cannot any longer subject rape witnesses to questioning on their sexual history
without a serious reason, as this was found to be an unfair pragmatic cross-examination
strategy (Brereton 1997: 251; Gibbons 2003: 231; Ehrlich, this volume). Gibbons (2003:
202–5, 231) reports on how judges change the proceedings (e.g. by using video links to
create a better environment for the child, eliminating structurally complex questions,
making sure there is no misunderstanding) as they become more aware of problems that
children experience in the witness box and Aldridge (this volume) reports recent changes
that have taken place for vulnerable witnesses in England and Wales.
The ﬁrst aim of this chapter is to look in detail at the research on cross-examination
questions and strategies. The author then draws on this research in order to bring to light
333

a topic that has so far been neglected: lay people as cross-examiners. Self-represented
litigants (also pro se litigants) have previously been the subject of research just in small
claims cases and divorce cases where such litigants present their case before a judge,
usually without calling witnesses (Conley and O’Barr 1998; O’Barr and Conley 1990).
This chapter focuses on the high-proﬁle libel case McDonald’s Corporation v. Helen Steel
and David Morris tried in the Royal Courts of Justice in London from June 1994 until
December 1996.
Steel and Morris (the defendants) were accused in a writ by McDonalds UK and US
(the plaintiﬀs) of publishing a leaﬂet which accused McDonalds of poor practice in rela-
tion to six major areas: the link between food and disease (heart disease and cancer);
advertising; animal treatment; food poisoning; employment practices; starvation in the
Third World; and destruction of the rainforest. In the media, the case became widely
referred to as the ‘David and Goliath case’, since the two litigants-in-person, without any
previous experience of legal proceedings (Steel and Morris), were facing a top libel
lawyer representing McDonald’s (Mr. Rampton QC). In deﬁance of all the obstacles, the
self-represented litigants managed to prepare a strong case against McDonald’s. The
outcome of the trial shows that they won several important issues (e.g. they managed to
prove that McDonald’s exploits children in their advertisements; oﬀers bad working
conditions; advertises deceptive information on the nutritional value of their food) and
lost in less important issues (e.g. according to Mr. Justice Bell, Steel and Morris did not
bring suﬃcient evidence that McDonald’s is responsible for the destruction of rainforests;
discarding of litter on the streets; ﬁring pro-union workers).
This chapter exempliﬁes in what ways cross-examination performed by the professional
counsel is diﬀerent from cross-examination performed by the two litigants in person.
Overview of research on cross-examination questioning
Linguistic research on cross-examination questioning falls into several categories. Studies
dating back to the 1980s (Woodbury 1984; Danet et al 1980; Philips 1987; Harris 1984)
tend to adopt a quantitative approach towards diﬀerent question types, since at that time
the growing popularity of computer-aided data processing allowed the processing of
more extensive samples. Typically, such studies concern themselves with the coerciveness
reﬂected in the syntactic structure of diﬀerent question types (Woodbury 1984; Danet
et al. 1980) and the eﬀect of questions on the length or type of responses from witnesses
(Danet et al. 1980; Harris 1984). Though the function of diﬀerent question types in
context is not a major concern in most quantitative studies, pragmatic aspects are some-
times also included in the analysis (Woodbury 1984; Philips 1987; Harris 1984). From
the more recent quantitative studies, Luchjenbroers (1997) and Heﬀer (2005) are of
particular importance. Luchjenbroers (1997) takes a complex look at statistics on question
distribution and answer types, whereas Heﬀer (2005, ch. 4) relates his statistics to the way
diﬀerent questions and responses contribute to narratives constructed by the prosecution
and, on some occasions, also by the defence (see also Heﬀer, this volume).
Linguistic research starting from the 1990s reﬂects the development of such linguistic
sub-disciplines as pragmatics, CA and CDA, as scholars turn their focus towards prag-
matic aspects of cross-examination questioning. New approaches to data allowed
researchers to consider power relations during witness examination from a variety of
aspects. The research on cross-examination strategies shows how lawyers coerce witnesses
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
334

into preferred replies (Conley and O’Barr 1998; Aldridge and Luchjenbroers 2007; Drew
1990; Matoesian 2005a; Cotterill 2003; Gibbons 2003: 112–127; Ehrlich, this volume).
An inseparable part of the struggle for control is the witnesses’ attempts to put forward
their own versions and minimize the lawyers’ inﬂuence (Drew 1992; Drew 1990;
Atkinson and Drew 1979; Janney 2002). There are other fascinating directions the
research can take. Researchers have, for instance, emphasized such issues as manipulation
of cultural stereotypes and ideologies through questioning (Aldridge and Luchjenbroers
2007; Matoesian 1997) or the struggle over lexical choices (Eades 2006; Cotterill 2004).
A valuable source of additional research on questioning comes from the related area of
police interrogations (Newbury and Johnson 2006; Heydon 2005; Johnson 2002;
Benneworth, this volume).
Research challenges – Data
Studies on courtroom discourse face a serious methodological complication: the access to
data. Heﬀer (2005: 53) describes the diﬃculties of acquiring data – it is prohibited to
make any notes during trials and oﬃcial audio recordings of hearings are virtually
impossible to obtain (see also Drew 1985). Court transcripts are easier to obtain, but even
so not all parts are transcribed (parts that are not important for possible appeals are usually
not transcribed) and the cost for transcripts may be very high (Heﬀer 2005: 53). One
of the options is to draw the data from court transcripts available on the internet (e.g.
OJ Simpson trial, the Shipman trial) or search the databases of widely publicized trials
(e.g. CourtTVNews, Famous Trials).
Outside common law countries, it is not very common to transcribe courtroom
proceedings verbatim. In the Czech Republic, for instance, key witnesses’ testimonies are
transcribed verbatim only in criminal cases. In civil cases, witnesses’ testimonies are just
summarized (the contents of a summary are usually dictated by the judge) but the partici-
pants have the right to demand a particular part of the testimony to be transcribed verbatim.
In general, court transcripts are made to preserve a verbatim record of everything said
in court. Their complete accuracy is, of course, unachievable due to the nature of spoken
language (Fraser 2003; Eades 1996; Walker 1986b). Just one example of the limitations
of transcription is that the mere necessity of including punctuation in the written text
makes the transcription dependant on the stenographers’ interpretation of an utterance
(Fraser 2003; Eades 1996; Walker 1986b; Haworth, this volume). Other potential perils
that researchers need to be aware of derive from the fact that the transcripts are produced
purely for legal purposes and stenographers can’t be expected to record features that are
not of immediate interest to linguists or legal professionals (e.g. simultaneous speech,
interruptions, third turns). Interruptions are, for instance, usually indicated with dashes,
but such a simpliﬁed system does not make it clear when exactly interruptions begin and
for how long simultaneous speech lasts (Walker 1986b: 211–13).
The data for the current chapter are drawn from the court transcripts available from
the
McSpotlight
web
page
(www.mcspotlight.org/case/trial/transcripts/index.html,
accessed 30 June 2009). Performing a linguistic analysis of oral discourse which is based
on written transcripts is certainly disadvantageous – had the author been in the position
of Slembrouck (1992) having access to both written and spoken versions, the study
would have beneﬁted signiﬁcantly. However, the seriousness of this drawback is diminished
by the fact that the current study concentrates on the formal features of cross-examination
questions and the function of questions in the context of cross-examination strategies.
REPRESENTING ONESELF
335

Research challenges – Question types
A researcher conducting a study on cross-examination question types faces an important
decision in selecting an adequate typology of questions. An obvious option is to follow the
widely accepted categorization of questions into open and closed questions (Huddleston
and Pullum 2002: 867). Open questions are wh-questions (e.g. ‘What is it?’), whereas
closed questions are alternative questions (‘Is it black or white?’), yes/no questions (‘Is it
black?’), declarative questions (‘This is it?’) and tag questions (e.g. ‘It’s nice, isn’t it?’). Such
classiﬁcation of questions rests on the formal features of questions (i.e. their syntactic
structure) and the type of answers expected.
The type of answers expected is related to the degree of coerciveness of diﬀerent
question types. Out of the most frequent types of closed questions, yes/no questions, are
generally regarded as the least coercive type as they oﬀer at least a limited possibility for
witnesses to digress. In comparison to yes/no questions, tag questions and declarative
questions are strongly biased towards a conﬁrmative answer and so they are more
coercive (Huddleston and Pullum 2002: 881, 894). Apart from coercing witnesses into
type-conforming replies, these types of questions oﬀer one more obvious advantage to
counsels: they are perceived as statements and as such help to change the questions into
evidence (Hobbs 2003b: 486–87). Tag questions and declarative questions thus become a
powerful tool which enables counsels to give evidence on behalf of witnesses and reduce
witnesses to the role of minimal responders. But it is tag questions that are considered by
some scholars (Woodbury 1984: 205; Berk-Seligson 1999: 36) to be the most coercive
type of questions as they have an additional pragmatic meaning: they imply that the
person knows that the questioner is right. Gibbons (2003: 101), however, warns of
relying heavily on the form of questions since intonation, or tone of voice, is equally
important for deﬁning the degree of coerciveness.
It is also necessary to keep in mind that the semantic and pragmatic properties of
questions go beyond the strictly formal categories outlined above. Modality is a resource,
which, as Gibbons (2003: 100) points out, can be understood either in terms of direct-
ness/indirectness or in terms of embedding information within a modal verb frame. For
example, an indirect request or statement, ‘I wonder whether he was there’, is less con-
straining than a direct question ‘Was he there?’ and in terms of embedding information
within a modal verb frame, ‘Could you tell us what the colour of the car was?’ is more
polite than: ‘What was the colour of the car?’ In courtroom questioning modality is used
to establish pre-conditions for more speciﬁc questions (Rigney 1999: 87). Another
pragmatic category important for courtroom questions is factuality, for example, ‘Is it
true that you lied to the police?’ or ‘As a matter of fact, did you lie to the police?’
Rigney (1999: 91) argues that factuality maximizes the level of coerciveness in questions
because the information embedded in the question is presented as a truthful fact.
Depending on the nature of data and the aim of the study, it may thus be important to
consider incorporating semantic or pragmatic properties into the typology of questions.
An ideal typology of cross-examination questions would reﬂect cross-examiners’
control over witnesses and over the message to be heard by the intended audience, the
judge and the jury. It is, however, almost impossible to combine all the aspects into one
typology. Gibbons (2003: 102–7) thus suggests several typologies of questions. One of
them sorts questions according to the deniability of the information from the perspective
of a defendant or witness whereas a diﬀerent one lists questions according to their
coerciveness.
336
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ

The detailed typology of questions used for this study can be found on the web pages that
accompany the Handbook, available at: http://www.forensiclinguistic.net/. The present chapter
deals with the most important formal question types: wh-questions, yes/no questions, declara-
tive questions and tag questions. Alternative questions were omitted due to their rare
occurrence in the data.
Quantitative analysis of cross-examination questions
The corpus was prepared with the help of Jan Pomikálek from the Faculty of Infor-
matics, Masaryk University in the Czech Republic. The sample for analysis comprises 21
days of cross-examination of key expert witnesses (7 cross-examination days by Rampton
and 14 cross-examination days by Steel and Morris). The sample of cross-examination
questions asked by Steel and Morris was extracted from three periods of the trial: their
very ﬁrst cross-examination conducted in July 1994, their later cross-examinations in July
and September 1994, and cross-examinations they conducted towards the ﬁnal stages of
the case in May 1996. Figures 22.1 and 22.2 contrast the occurrence of diﬀerent question
types used by the professional lawyer and the two litigants-in-person (Figure 22.1
concentrates on Steel, Figure 22.2 concentrates on Morris).
As it could be expected, we can see from Figures 22.1 and 22.2 that wh-questions occur
more often in the pro se litigants’ cross-examination. Rampton uses wh-questions very rarely,
as they do not restrict the response boundaries as eﬀectively as closed questions. Towards the
end of the trial the occurrence of wh-questions in Morris’s usage decreases signiﬁcantly, which
is related to his increased use of closed questions (especially declarative questions and tag
questions). Steel, however, does not show any variance. Her frequent use of wh-ques-
tions can be explained by her occasional hesitance to use more coercive closed questions
(‘This dietary advice that you think is a – well, what do you think of it?’ – 22 July 1994).
Out of closed questions, the most striking diﬀerence is in the occurrence of tag ques-
tions. While tag questions are the most frequent type of questions used by the counsel,
Figure 22.1 The ratio of cross-examination questions used by Mr. Rampton QC and Steel during the
three periods
REPRESENTING ONESELF
337

neither of the defendants makes use of tag questions to such an extent. Nonetheless,
towards the ﬁnal stages of the case both Steel and Morris increase the occurrence of tag
questions (from approximately 12% to 21%), which means that they become more
coercive. With declarative questions, the situation is opposite. Both litigants-in-person
use them slightly more often than the counsel does. What is more important, though, is
the use of tag questions and declarative questions. Table 22.1 contrasts example questions
asked by the litigants in person at the beginning of the trial and towards the ﬁnal stages.
As the ﬁrst column in the table shows, at the beginning of the trial Steel and Morris
used declarative questions and tag questions mostly to check for facts (questions 1–2).
Closed questions, however, have much more potential; they are used by lawyers to lead
witnesses into the preferred answer and persuade the audience into accepting the message
embedded in questions (see example (1) for closed questions asked by the counsel). As
can be seen from the second column (questions 3–4), Steel and Morris’s questions
become more coercive. Even the length of questions suggests that they put more eﬀort
into inﬂuencing witnesses. Steel’s question (question 3) bears an implication that her
Figure 22.2 The ratio of cross-examination questions used by Mr. Rampton QC and Morris during the
three periods
Table 22.1 The comparison of the self-represented litigants’ declarative questions and tag questions in
two different periods
tag questions
Steel – July 1, 1994
Steel – May 22, 1996
(1) This leaﬂet was available in
stores, was it not?
(3) It is fair to say, is it not, that (…) since you last gave your
evidence [against the existence of causal links] there have been
a considerable number also pointing to the suggestion that
there are such causal links?
declarative questions
Morris – July 21, 1994
Morris – May 22, 1996
(2) So the fruit pies up to 1989
used to include beef tallow?
(4) But presumably the reason that the fat consumption has
been causally linked to heart disease is precisely because the
body is unable to cope with the high levels of fat in the
bloodstream?
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
338

arguments are well founded and that there is conﬂicting evidence to the witness’s view.
Morris’s declarative question (question 4) is likewise more coercive than the earlier one.
Thus, the defendants’ move towards coerciveness is reﬂected both in the occurrence and
also the use of tag questions and declarative questions.
While pro se litigants experience problems with the use of tag questions and declarative
questions, there are no striking diﬀerences between the counsel and the lay people in the
use of yes/no questions. It is not surprising since yes/no questions are more common in
everyday conversation than declarative questions or tag questions.
Question types in the service of pragmatic
cross-examination strategies
Cross-examiners face a multiple task: discredit the witness, propose an alternative
approach to the events, and persuade the audience. This is achieved purely by means of
questioning, until they come to closing speeches. The syntactic form of questions helps
to deﬁne the response boundaries and elicit type-conforming replies. There is, however,
a more complex phenomenon behind the art of cross-examining. It is a strong under-
standing of the interaction between meaning, context, and communication that helps
counsels to corner witnesses eﬀectively. This section aims to link the two inseparable
parts of cross-examination and relate question forms to pragmatic strategies.
Cross-examination strategies used by barristers cover a wide range of tactics including
lexical means (particular choices of words used in questions – see Cotterill 2004) or
prosodic means (ironic tone or prolonged pauses after signiﬁcant replies can be used
strategically to convey additional meanings – see Gibbons 2003: 117–26). Gibbons
(2003: 112) diﬀerentiates between idea-targeted and person-targeted pragmatic strategies.
Idea-targeted pragmatic strategies challenge the testimony, whereas person-targeted
pragmatic strategies cast doubt on the personal characteristics of witnesses. The latter type
is of particular importance for cross-examination of expert witnesses because it is always
possible to challenge scientiﬁc expertise. It is, nonetheless, important to realize that it is
impossible to draw a strict borderline between the two types of pragmatic strategies as
the same means can be used for both (e.g. vocabulary choice is listed in Gibbons under
the idea-targeted strategies, but it is shown to be used for discrediting the professional
status of the witness, as in example (1)).
The following sections illustrate the diﬀerences between the counsel and the lay litigants-
in-person in the use of pragmatic tactics (see also, Matoesian, this volume, on use of
gesture and multimodality in cross-examination).
Person-targeted pragmatic strategies by Mr. Rampton QC
Among the most widely used person-targeted pragmatic strategies is the ‘status manip-
ulation tactic’ (Gibbons 2003: 113). Example (1) illustrates the counsel’s persistent
undermining of the professionalism of an expert witness.
(1) Cross-examination of Barnard (W) by Rampton (Pr) – 11 September 1994
1 Pr: How much of your time is spent looking after your medical patients, your
2
psychiatric patients?
3 W: Currently?
REPRESENTING ONESELF
339

4 Pr: Yes.
5 W: One morning per week.
6 Pr: What do you do the rest of the time?
7 W: I write books, I conduct research and I work at the Physicians Committee for
8
Responsible Medicine with the other physicians and staﬀwe have there.
9 Pr: You see, I am willing to concede that somebody who has a preliminary
10
qualiﬁcation of general medicine, may in one sense have an advantage over a
11
judge sitting in court in England or a barrister standing on his feet in that he
12
will more readily understand the biological or physiological mechanisms of
13
terminology. The other qualiﬁcation which I imagine – you correct me if I
14
am wrong – you propose for your presence in this case is that you have spent
15
a lot of time reading the literature; is that right?
16 W: I have spent a great deal of time reviewing literature and talking with experts
17
about its meaning.
18 Pr: That is a task which can as easily be performed by an intelligent layman, or
19
very nearly, as it can be by you?
20 W: Certainly have always encouraged lay persons to learn as much as they can
21
about the links between diet and disease. If they care to spend their time
22
dusting oﬀthe medical literature in the library, I would encourage that.
23
(…)
24 Pr: You said you talk to experts in the ﬁeld; we can do the same; you would
25
encourage us to do so, would you not?
26 W: Certainly.
27 Pr: Much of your time if you are only doing psychiatry one day a week or one
28
morning a week, whatever it is, you tell us is spent writing. It must have been
29
quite a labour to produce this book. Was it a labour, hard work?
30 W: I devoted a considerable amount of time reading the literature, talking with the
31
researchers, trying to put their words into a useful way that might be of beneﬁt
32
to the reader.
Rampton’s initiating turns present speciﬁc information about the proportion of the
witness’s practical experience and theoretical expertise. His open question in line 6 elicits
only a short response that ﬁts the boundaries set by the question. Starting with line 9,
prosecuting counsel pursues the chosen line of argument and suggests that with some
training lay people can do the same things as Dr. Barnard does. To elicit a positive
reaction from the witness, Rampton chooses to make use of a special strategy that is
described as a ‘false friend’ strategy by Aldridge and Luchjenbroers (2007: 102). The
counsel overtly admits that the witness’s qualiﬁcation is of an advantage (‘I’m willing to
concede’; ‘more readily understand the biological or physiological mechanisms of termi-
nology’). On the other hand, the use of the modal verb ‘may’ (line 10) for a weak degree
of possibility covertly suggests that medical qualiﬁcation is only a minor advantage. The
adjective ‘preliminary’ (line 9) further demeans the witness’s qualiﬁcation. The discourse
marker ‘you see’ (line 9) is also loaded with strong pragmatic meaning; it was found by
Hale to signal ‘proclaimed knowledge’ when used in cross-examination questions (Hale
1999: 69). By using it, Rampton covertly suggests that it is clear that lay people can read
medical literature.
There is one more tactic that the counsel employs in lines 9–13. He breaks the
expected distribution of adjacency pairs and instead of asking a question, Rampton
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
340

makes use of a third turn. The following question (lines 13–15) changes the seemingly
supportive third turn into an evaluative turn. Evaluative third turns were recorded in
other sources (Gibbons 2003: 124; Matoesian 2005a: 746) as an eﬀective means for
rebuﬃng the veracity of witnesses. Here the third turn works well together with the
following agreement tag question (lines 13–15) for casting doubt on the professionalism
of the witness. The counsel, in fact, implies that the witness is only reporting the work of
others and accuses him of committing an expert equivalent of ‘hearsay’. The subsequent
closed questions are framed into the same narrative (lines 18–19, 24–25). The counsel
corners the witness by gradually ‘nailing down’ (Matoesian 2005a) his series of questions
to the response he wanted to obtain (line 26). In his next third turn (lines 27–28),
counsel re-establishes the fact that the witness spends most of his time doing theoretical
research. Through presupposing the answer (lines 28–29) to his following question and
using a strong modal verb ‘must’, counsel diminishes the work of the expert witness. The
tactic of answering one’s own questions is noted by Chang (2004: 717) to be a very
coercive strategy. There is yet another way that counsel challenges the witness. By using
the noun ‘labour’ (line 29) to refer to the process of writing, he stresses the fact that it must
have been extremely diﬃcult and maybe even below the level of the witness’s expertise.
As is evident from the sample, counsel’s questions are mostly coercive closed questions
that covertly ‘smuggle’ the intended message (Aldridge and Luchjenbroers 2007: 93). His
lexical choices (‘a preliminary qualiﬁcation of general medicine’ in lines 9–10, ‘quite a
labour’ in line 29, ‘produce this book’ in line 29) create lexical landscaping (Cotterill
2004: 527) that questions the witness’s expertise, presupposing that the same task can be
done by lay people.
Person-targeted pragmatic strategies by Steel and Morris
This section oﬀers two examples of person-targeted pragmatic strategies used by the lay
litigants-in-person, one at an early stage of the proceedings (2) and the second in the
ﬁnal stages of the proceedings (3). Both examples were chosen in such a way as to reﬂect
similar situations as in (1), that is, status reduction tactics.
(2) Cross-examination of Arnott (W) by Steel (D1) and Morris (D2) – 12 September
1994
1 D1:
Is it fair to say, by and large, that you have concentrated on treatment rather
2
than research into causes, prevention?
3 W:
That is only partly true. I am very much concerned with treatment, that is
4
absolutely right. But in order to treat patients, one has to have some
5
understanding about the possible causation and the mechanisms by which
6
causative agents may give rise to cancer because treatment, part of treatment is
7
prevention, if one can, and part of treatment is also removing various factors
8
which may be responsible for causing the cancer; it is not just the
9
administration of anti-cancer type treatment. In fact, for example, some of the
10
chapters of books I have written are concerned with all aspects of cancer; for
11
example, the geographical distribution, possible aetiology as well as treatment.
12 D1:
Right. What sorts of things have you studied in relation to prevention?
13 W:
Well, large studies, for example, on cigarette smoking and lung cancer. I have
14
been very much involved with studies on diet, their possible implications in
REPRESENTING ONESELF
341

15
cancer. Radiation exposure, and the possibility that that may have an inﬂuence
16
in the development of cancer, particularly childhood cancer; a lot of studies in
17
that aspect of things; genetic aspects and, you know, there are a variety of
18
studies that I have been involved with which have looked at possible causation
19
of cancer in terms of trying to prevent the development of the cancer.
20 D1:
What exactly have you studied in relation to diet as you know in terms of
21
preventing cancer?
22 W:
Well, I have obviously done a very extensive literature search. I worked, when
23
I was in Scotland, I worked in conjunction with the gastroenterological unit at
24
the Western General hospital there, where some of our patients actually
25
participated in some of the studies they were carrying out, looking at various
26
aspects of diet and possible causation of cancer. These are the main ones.
27 D1:
Right.
28
(…)
29 D2:
Can you give some examples of the recognition you have in the ﬁeld of
30
treatment in your academic ﬁeld, recognition you have by that ﬁeld in terms of
31
maybe chairing bodies or conferences or participation?
32 W:
Well, I am, I have been Secretary of the British Stomach Cancer Group. I have
33
been a member of the working party of the Medical Research Council looking
34
at colorectal cancer and also involved with the Medical Research Council
35
looking at new forms of treatment (…).
36
(…)
37 D1:
What percentage of all those things was involved in, was, kind of, looking up
38
the causes of cancer as opposed to treatment?
39 W:
I would say about a third.
40 D1: Right.
Example (2) shows that in comparison to the counsel, the lay litigants-in-person are not
as successful with their status reduction tactics. At the very beginning, in an attempt to
emphasize that the witness does not have much experience with the research, Steel asks a
closed question (lines 1–2). Her question, however, elicits an evasive reply. Neither do
her next routinized wh-questions (Philips 1987) lead towards the desired aim (lines 13,
22–23). What is more, when Morris asks a yes/no question (lines 29–31), he basically
invites the witness to comment on his achievements, which is expected in examination-
in-chief, but not the cross-examination. It is only in lines 37–8 that Steel manages to
make her point that the witness is more concerned with the treatment rather than the
research.
It would be a mistake to view the ﬁxed distribution of turns during examination in
terms of adjacency pair question–answer sequences only. As examples (1) and (2)
demonstrate this is not the case in courtroom interaction any more than it is in con-
versation. Counsel and the pro se litigants do use third turns (see lines 12, 27, 40 in
example (2)), but their function is diﬀerent. Rampton’s third parts are evaluative and
challenging, whereas Steel’s third turns consist of the discourse marker ‘right’ which
seems to be accepting the witness’s contribution. According to Hale (1999), such dis-
course markers are common in everyday conversation where they function as cohesive
devices. In cross-examination, they usually signal control, coerciveness or contradiction
(Hale 1999: 59). However, the way novice cross-examiner Steel uses ‘right’ as a third
turn corresponds to its everyday use of signalling comprehension or acknowledgement.
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
342

Example (3), from the ﬁnal stage of the proceedings, illustrates a similar situation when
the pro se litigants attempt to challenge the veracity of the witness.
(3) Cross-examination of Preston (W) by Steel (D) – 7 May 1996
1 D: (…) I am asking you before you made this statement, did you actually research
2
what the situation was or did you just put down any old rubbish?
3 W: I took advice.
4 D: You took advice from who?
5 W: From my solicitors, lawyers.
6 D: So your solicitors told you what to put in the statement?
7 W: No. I took advice from them.
8 D: What do you mean? I am asking you whether, when you made this statement,
9
which is supposed to be about things within your own knowledge, whether you
10
researched it before you wrote the statement or whether you just put down any
11
old rubbish?
12 W: I discussed it with the people who were involved and my counsel.
Example (3) leads us into the question of politeness strategies during cross-examination.
Several researchers (e.g. Cashion 1985; Harris 2003) have focused on the connection
between politeness and power and have come to the same conclusion. Surprisingly, those
participants who hold the most powerful roles tend to use politeness strategies abundantly
to redress the face-threatening acts that they have to perform. But these participants can
also choose not to use politeness strategies in case they need to explicitly show their
power. According to Harris (2003: 33), it is negative politeness features that are especially
relevant to institutional settings (i.e. those strategies that prevent imposing on the speaker
or impeding them). The counsels in Cashion’s study (1985: 13) were found to exhibit
mostly negative politeness features whereas positive politeness strategies (strategies that
attend to the speaker’s needs to be liked) occurred only rarely. In his cross-examination,
Rampton employs a negative politeness strategy ‘correct me if I’m wrong’ to avoid
imposing his knowledge on the witness (see lines 13–15 in example (1)).
In order to make the witness admit his mistake, Steel nails down his answers with a series
of closed questions (lines 1–2, 4, 6). In lines 1–2 and 8–11, Steel performs a face-threatening
act without any attempt to redress it. Instead of catching the witness in an intricately
designed web of closed questions, she explicitly confronts him without the desired result.
In a way, the contest with the witness puts her in a less powerful position while the
witness insists on his vague answers (lines 3, 7, 12) and manages to avoid self-incrimination
(c.f. Janney 2002: 460).
Thus, in comparison to Steel’s performance at the early stage of the hearing
(see example (2)), there is some improvement in the use of questions, but the use of
cross-examination strategies is still not expert.
Idea-targeted pragmatic strategies
Examples (4) and (5) below illustrate the diﬀerences between counsel and the litigants-
in-person in their use of pragmatic strategies when cross-examining expert witnesses on
the nutritional value of McDonald’s meals. Steel and Morris had to prove that a
McDonald’s diet causes cancer and other diseases. Rampton chose to show that research
linking diet to health problems has been inconsistent and that there may be other more
REPRESENTING ONESELF
343

serious causes. Example (4) shows how Rampton evokes Galileo’s struggle for the truth
in order to bring to light the idea that even widely accepted facts may be erroneous.
(4) Cross-examination of Cannon (W) by Rampton (Pr) – 3 October 1994
1 Pr: It was widely held at one time, we can agree perhaps, that the world was ﬂat,
2
was it not?
3 W: Yes.
4 Pr: Certain people were persecuted for holding that maybe that view was wrong?
5 W: Yes.
6 Pr: It turned out that the people who were persecuted were right, did it not?
7 W: You mean Gallileo, for example, was right?
8 Pr: Yes.
9 W: Indeed so.
10 Pr: The world is not ﬂat, is it?
11 W: It is generally agreed that the world is round, indeed so, yes.
12
(…)
13 Pr: Virtually every respectable medical man would now accept, perhaps you
14
would agree, that there is a causal relationship – I stress the word ‘causal’ –
15
of between a diet high in fat and, particularly, saturated fat and the incidence
16
of cardiovascular disease, would they not
17 W: Yes.
By asking short closed questions (lines 1–2, 4, 6, 10), Rampton narrows down a compli-
cated narrative to short phrases, which are easy to comprehend and remember. The
counsel uses ‘natural narrative structure’ (Gibbons 2003: 123) in order to bring to light the
topic of widely known misconceptions. After developing a strong narrative, the counsel
asks a question on the existence of causal links (lines 13–16) and elicits a positive reply. But
the question is perceived in the context of the preceding exchanges and the witness appears
to be holding yet another erroneous opinion. Counsel continues in the chosen line of
argument when cross-examining other expert witnesses, highlighting the notion that
modern science cannot prove the connection between diet and heart disease and cancer.
Example (5) shows one of the most celebrated moments in the trial when the litigants-
in-person managed to elicit a damaging reply from a McDonald’s expert witness.
(5) Cross-examination of Arnott (W) by Morris (D) – 12 September 1994
1 D
I want to ask you about another document about advice to the public. ‘A diet
2
high in fat, sugar, animal products and salt and low in ﬁbre, vitamins and
3
minerals is linked with cancer of the breast and bowel and heart disease.’
4
Is that a reasonable statement?
5 W
It has been linked, yes.
6 D
So would that be a reasonable statement?
7 W
Well, it depends to whom it is being directed.
8 D
The public.
9 W
If it is being directed to the public, then I would say it is a very reasonable
10
thing to say, but if it is directed towards the scientiﬁc community, then I think
11
one would be a bit more careful in the language which one is using.
12 D
That is actually a quote from the London Greenpeace fact sheet which is the
13
subject of the libel action.
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
344

Morris chose not to identify the document he is reading the quotation from (lines 1–3)
oﬀering a reasonable explanation to the judge: ‘I just wanted to not colour any possible
professional response’. In line 6, Morris repeats his question to elicit a more deﬁnite
reply. He then uses a third turn (line 12–13) to reveal the source of the document, that
is, the fact sheet that contained criticism of McDonald’s business practices. Although
Morris’s strategy is much simpler than Rampton’s, he managed to elicit a crucially
damaging reply from the McDonald’s witness, who agreed that the most important
statement against McDonald’s diet was very reasonable. Often the litigants-in-person,
however, did not manage to make witnesses agree.
Contrary to example (5), example (6) illustrates a situation where Morris did not
manage to show that the witness was providing a misleading answer. Prior to the
exchange in the example, Morris and the witness were talking about an allegation of a
large amount of sugar added to McDonald’s drinks.
(6) Cross-examination of Wheelock (W) by Morris (D) – 22 July 1994
1 D: How do you deﬁne the word ‘nutritious’?
2 W: Well, it is something which pertains to nutrition.
3
(…)
4 D: So sugar is nutritious?
5 W: Oh, yes, sugar is a source of calories.
6 D: But it has not a range of nutrients?
7 W: No, it has not.
8 D: It is just the sugar?
9 W: It has calories. Again it depends what you actually want at the time.
In line 1, Morris asks a wh-question to ﬁnd out how the expert witness deﬁnes the word
‘nutritious’. According to the witness’s deﬁnition, any type of food can be nutritious. In
his following closed questions (lines 4, 6), Morris tries to resist such an approach, but the
witness still insists on his standpoint that sugar is nutritious because it has calories. The
declarative question in line 4 is so-prefaced (Johnson 2002). Cotterill (2003: 152)
describes ‘so’ summarizers occurring in her data during cross-examination as very pow-
erful follow-ups that are widely used by lawyers to ‘oblige the witness to concede and
reiterate in an explicit form something damaging’. Cotterill’s example (2003: 153) is: ‘So
that after nine months of investigation, you discovered on Saturday that this important
piece of evidence was perfectly innocuous; is that right?’ (Cotterill 2003: 153). Morris’s
use of ‘so’ is much more simple. Though his question summarizes what was said before,
there is only implied criticism and no other embedded message. He has to follow it up
with additional information in lines 6 and 8. Line 8 has a question mark at the end of the
sentence, indicating that this is a declarative question for agreement. In this turn, Morris
provides an argument rather than asking an information-seeking question. We see how
asking an initial wh-question leads to an answer from which additional ideas are gener-
ated for conﬁrmation. Though successful, the lay cross-examiner fails to fully exploit the
pragmatic resources of so-prefaced questions in the ways that professional counsel does.
Conclusion
Noticeable changes in the frequency and use of closed questions over time, for example
the increase in the occurrence and restrictive use of tag questions, indicate the pro se
REPRESENTING ONESELF
345

litigants’ awareness of the necessity to gain control over the witness replies. But at the
same time some aspects are left underestimated; their closed questions often lack dis-
crediting embedded messages and thus allow witnesses to formulate replies without
major restrictions. Even the pro se litigants’ third turns are supportive instead of being
challenging. They also appear powerless when they compete with a witness, since the
witness manages to avoid self-incrimination (see example (3)). All in all, formal aspects of
cross-examination like restrictive questions are easier to observe and adopt, but pragmatic
strategies and the art of narrating through questioning are more diﬃcult to acquire
without a solid understanding of the basic principles of the adversarial system and without
professional practice.
The self-represented litigants’ mixed progress over the course of the trial can be
accounted for by the hypothesis that they developed an interlanguage and additional
competence as the hearings progressed, comparable to second language learners who
develop an interlanguage as they learn a new language. In the case of Steel and Morris, a
more exact term would be an inter-genre instead of an interlanguage, as previously sug-
gested by Trinch (2005a). Her study focuses on lay Latina women who come for protective
order interviews as victims of domestic violence and have to adapt their language to the
genre of report when interacting with legal professionals. The author’s conclusion is that
the laywomen do develop an inter-genre, but only to a very limited extent. In the cur-
rent study, the situation is slightly diﬀerent. The two self-represented litigants do learn
from the counsel but since they do not receive any assistance on cross-examination
questioning and its purpose, their development remains unstable as they have other
matters to concentrate on during cross-examination.
This study shows that lay litigants-in-person do need help: an informative brochure on
courtroom discourse, cross-examination questions and strategies would be very helpful to
pro se litigants as it is only fair to show them what legal professionals do with language.
Further reading
A detailed typology of questions used for this study can be found on the web pages that accompany the
Handbook, available at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/
Aldridge, M. and Luchjenbroers, J. (2007) ‘Linguistic manipulation in legal discourse: Framing questions
and “smuggling” information’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 85–107.
(The paper concentrates on the inﬂuence of the wording of questions on the perception of rape
witnesses’ testimonies.)
Bülow-Møller, A.M. (1992) ‘The notion of coercion in courtroom questioning’. (Eric Document
Reproduction Service No. ED 359752.) (The paper relates question forms to their function in
courtroom examination; special attention is paid to the eﬀect of questions on the audience.)
Cotterill, J. (2004) ‘Collocation, connotation, and courtroom semantics: Lawyers’ control of witness
testimony through lexical negation’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 513–37. (The paper emphasizes the
role of lexical choices in the contest between lawyers and witnesses.)
TATIANA TKACˇ UKOVÁ
346

Section II
The linguist as expert in legal processes


2.1
Expert and process


23
Trademark linguistics
Trademarks: Language that one owns
Ronald R. Butters
Historical and theoretical perspectives
The rise of linguistic testimony about trademarks
Trademark linguistics is an established area of forensic linguistic theory and practice:
“One type of case in which linguists routinely testify [in the United States] is trademark
litigation, often with both sides oﬀering linguistic testimony” (Ainsworth 2006: 262).
Testimony is also reported in Canada (Chambers 2008: 35), Australia (Eades 1994b: 119),
Chile (Oyandel and Samaniego 2004), South Africa (Sanderson 2007), and, recently,
Great Britain (Heﬀer 2008a; Olsson 2008a).
In the United States, the earliest known linguistic consulting about a trademark was
undertaken by the dialectologist Raven I. McDavid, Jr. (see McDavid 1977: 126) and
the lexicographer and dialectologist Frederic Cassidy (WSM, Incorporated, Appellant, v.
Dennis E. Hilton and Country Shindig Opry, Inc., Appellees, 1984 U.S. App.724 F.2d
1320). They were joined at about the same time by two eminent American lexico-
graphers, Allen Walker Read and Jess Stein, who testiﬁed for opposing sides in the
same case (reported in detail in Bailey 1984). Thirty years later, one eminent linguist
had testiﬁed in so many cases that they formed the backbone of an entire book (Shuy
2002), and at least a dozen American linguists had been active trademark consultants.
There is a growing body of scholarly literature (e.g. Adams 2005; Adams and Wester-
haus Adams 2005; Baron 1989; Butters 2007a, 2007b, 2008a, 2008c; Butters and
Westerhaus 2004; Clankie 2002; Creech 2005, 2007; Dinwoodie 2008; Durant 2008;
Lentine and Shuy 1990; Nunberg 2001; Shuy 2008; Tamony 1986). Japanese scholars
have written about trademark linguistic theory (Okawara 2006; Hotta 2007a, 2007b;
Hotta and Fujita 2007), and there is passing mention in the German context (Kniﬀka
2007: 29, 139–40), but the scholars of neither country instance actual courtroom
testimony.
351

Deﬁnitions and terminology
Trademarks (or just MARKS), like copyrights, are proprietary language—bits of linguistic
or semiotic material that people, corporations, and institutions in a very real but limited
sense own. Paraphrasing Landau (2001: 405–6),
A trademark is a symbol, phrase, or name used by a maker of a product or provider
of a service to distinguish the product or service from others of its kind. It is a name
for or symbol or phrase associated with a brand of a kind of thing, rather than with
the kind of thing itself.
MARKS may be words or phrases (e.g. BRAND NAMES such as Apple, Mac, Applecare Protection
Plan); symbols, logos, and designs (e.g. the proﬁle of an apple with a bite taken out of it);
slogans or taglines (e.g. “Think diﬀerent,” “It Does What a PC Does, Only Better”);
and, in the past decade, internet domain names (apple.com, imac.com, imacapple.com,
imac-apple.com, podmart.com). Ownership of all the marks just mentioned is claimed
by the computer company, Apple Inc.
In the United States, the symbol “®” is often attached to a mark (e.g. Mac®) to
indicate that the mark has been properly registered with the federal government’s United
States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO); the symbol “TM” indicates a claim
for common-law viability of a mark that has not been registered with the USPTO.
Technically, TRADEMARKS identify goods, while SERVICE MARKS identify services.
Trademark and copyright are distinct concepts. Trademark laws have a narrow focus:
they grant control over the linguistic and semiotic entities (MARKS) by means of which
providers of goods and services identify what they market to the public. Copyright laws,
however, protect broader linguistic and semiotic entities that are in themselves products,
granting rights to individuals to control the results of their creative enterprises (novels,
poems, plays, essays, letters, musical compositions, paintings, etc.). Copyright issues arise
for forensic linguists who pursue questions of plagiarism, authorship identiﬁcation, and
forensic stylistics.
Trademark litigation and the forensic linguist
Shuy writes (2002: 182–83), “issues of phonology, morphology, syntax, lexicography,
semantics, pragmatics, and discourse … are likely to be relevant in a trademark case,” and
he notes that semiotic analysis may be employed as well (134–35). Especially important
are (1) experience in applied linguistics such as one ﬁnds in lexicography and (2) the sort
of interest in empirical data that dialectologists and sociolinguists deal with centrally in
their professional enterprises.
Most trademark disputes occur when a party attempts to protect its established
linguistic property (called the SENIOR MARK) from encroachment by a party that uses or
plans to use a new, similar or identical mark (the JUNIOR MARK). In the US there are two
principal venues for action, (1) the USPTO and (2) the federal courts.
The USPTO receives trademark renewal applications and new applications. If the
USPTO denies an application, attorneys for the applicant may appeal the decision to a
subdivision called the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board (TTAB). Applications are
sometimes denied for reasons having to do only with features of the mark itself (if, for
example, the USPTO ﬁnds it to be obscene); denial may also arise if the owner of a
RONALD R. BUTTERS
352

registered mark has ﬁled an objection to the applicant’s mark on the grounds that the
new mark infringes upon the established one, in which case both sides will present their
cases to the TTAB.
Federal courts are where a trademark owner brings suit against an alleged infringer;
decisions of the TTAB are also sometimes appealed to the courts.
Generally, forensic experts in trademark cases are involved in three or four stages.
Typically, the ﬁrst duty of a forensic expert will be the preparation of an EXPERT REPORT,
which is often submitted under oath. If opposing counsel has already commissioned an expert
report, the ﬁrst expert may be asked for a REBUTTAL REPORT. Even COUNTER-REBUTTAL
reports happen occasionally.
Next, opposing counsel usually requires the experts to appear for a DEPOSITION in which
the expert will be questioned, under oath, about the report. Depositions are usually taken in
face-to-face confrontation (sometimes videotaped) in a law oﬃce and recorded by a trained
court reporter; telephone depositions are also possible. Theoretically, depositions can go on
indeﬁnitely, though in practice they generally last between three and eight hours.
Many trademark cases are SETTLED between the parties by agreements entered into
without going to court. If not, the linguistic trademark expert may actually TESTIFY AT
TRIAL. Courtroom cases often are not decided by juries but by a judge acting alone in a
procedure known as a BENCH TRIAL—or in preliminary proceedings in which the judge
decides if the outcome of the case is so apparent that having an actual trial would be a
waste of time (SUMMARY JUDGMENT).
Forensic linguists confront four issues in trademark litigation. Only occasionally do
linguists give expert advice on what is termed (1) the PROPRIETY OF THE MARK; these are cases
in which the USPTO rejects a proposed mark as “immoral, deceptive, or scandalous …
disparaging” (a provision found in a federal statute, 15 USC 1052, “Trademarks Registrable
on the Principal Register; Concurrent Registration”, www.bitlaw.com/source/15usc/1052.
html). Forensic linguists have analyzed Fat Bastard Wine, Redskins, and Dykes on Bikes—all
initially rejected on propriety grounds (for further discussion, see Butters 2008c: 243–44;
Butters 2007b: 336). Even rarer for forensic linguistic consultation is (2) DILUTION—though
it is one of potential increasing interest (Butters 2008a: 507–20). In these cases, owners of a
famous mark allege that the use of the mark by a lesser-known enterprise weakens the
public’s perception of the uniqueness of the famous mark—or sullies the mark through
disreputable association. For example, in Starbucks Corp. c. Wolfe’s Borough Coﬀee, Inc. (477
F.3d 765, 81 U.S.P.Q.2d 1927 [2d Cir. 2007]), the plaintiﬀalleged dilution of its famous
mark in an attempt to prevent the defendant’s use of Mister Charbucks for its coﬀee.
The two most frequent areas in consulting and testimony will be analyzed in this
chapter: (3) LIKELIHOOD OF CONFUSION and (4) STRENGTH OF THE MARK. The chapter con-
cludes with a discussion of the forensic linguist’s ethical responsibilities with respect to
the role of trademarks in society.
The two main consulting areas (case studies)
Likelihood of confusion
If consumers seem likely to confuse one mark with a similar one, then the senior mark’s
owner may attempt to block use of the junior mark. SIMILARITY is categorized as likeness
in SIGHT, SOUND, and MEANING; in addition, SIMILARITY OF USE is also pragmatically relevant.
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
353

Likelihood of confusion was an issue in Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Speedy Car-X, Inc.,
35 U.S.P.Q.2d 1703 (E.D. Va. 1995), wherein I was consulted by Circuit City’s
attorneys. Circuit City, having opened several of what it planned as a national chain of
used-car stores, began using CarMax as the chain’s trademark; soon, a long-established
automotive repair service named CAR-X opposed them in federal court, arguing that
CarMax and CAR-X are so similar that customers would be confused about the own-
ership of the two enterprises. My goal as consulting linguist was to explain the marks’
linguistic similarities and diﬀerences in a way that would help the bench-trial judge
decide if the likelihood of confusion was so great that CarMax should not be allowed
to use its mark.
The category of SIGHT
SIGHT takes in the totality of the appearance of a trademark, including also such semiotic
features as color, typeface, and design, but most particularly orthography and spelling.
SIGHT is especially important when the public’s exposure to trademarks is from signage,
print-media advertising, television ads, and, of course, on packages.
One complication in Circuit City was that CAR-X is not always spelled the same way:
one also ﬁnds Car-X, as well as two spellings without a hyphen, one in the ﬁrm’s website
(www.carx.com), the other in a stylized logo (itself a registered trademark which the
reader can view on the website) in which the “c” and “a” are lower-case italic letters, in
what appears to be a typeface known as IMPACT, and the “r” is represented by the
well-known symbol for medical prescriptions, an upper-case “R” with the slant leg
extended to make an “x” ( ); the words “AUTO SERVICE” ﬁt neatly under the “ca” and the
ﬁrst half of the R, on a line with the “x”; the letters are in black ink against a yellow
background, and the entire logo is surrounded by a thick black line that forms a rectangle
with rounded edges.
Even so, regardless of which spelling is selected, the beginnings and endings of the
two marks are in some sense identical: Car-X can be said to be just CarMax with the
internal hyphen replaced by-Ma-. And it is a well-accepted principle of psycholinguis-
tics that the beginnings and endings of words are the most important to recognition
and memory:
There is abundant evidence that the initial portions of words are of crucial impor-
tance to word identiﬁcation. … [M]emory storage of words assigns greater weight
to the two ends of the words than to the middle, and probably particular weight to
the initial positions.
(Cutler 1982: 19)
Moreover, CarMax and CAR-X share four of the six graphemes found in CarMax and
four of the ﬁve found in CAR-X. Thus 73% (8/11) are identical—and they are arranged
in the same order.
On the other hand, there are major sight diﬀerences that serve to distinguish the two
marks one from another semiotically. (1) In typeface, CARx uses italic Impact and the
noticeably eccentric hybrid character, while CarMax uses a heavy roman typeface, per-
haps Gill Sans Ultra Bold. (2) The yellow background of the CARx logo contrasts with
the rich blue of the CarMax logo. (3) The CarMax logo has no border, whereas the
CARx logo has a thick black border. (4) The black letters of the CARx logo contrast
RONALD R. BUTTERS
354

with yellow letters in the Car of CarMax and the white letters of the Max portion,
which is (5) underlined in a gold broken line. (The reader can view the CarMax logo on
the CarMax website www.carmax.com/.)
With respect to SIGHT, then, the two marks display considerable diﬀerences as
well as similarities. All of the data is important for the consideration of the judge
or jury.
The category of SOUND
Each word has two syllables, with a primary stress on the ﬁrst syllable. Seven phonemes
comprise CarMax: [karmæks]; CAR-X has six: [kareks] or [karłks] (depending on
style and dialect). The [r] may be deleted in some dialects. Thus, quantiﬁcationally, the
two marks share 10 phonemes out of 13, or 77% (8 of 12, or 67%, for those dialects
with post-vocalic /r/ deletion). Again, the marks phonologically share their begin-
nings—and endings—and the phonemes are arranged in the same order. Such features
could to some degree inhibit speakers’ ability to remember which word refers to which
business—and hearers might sometimes be unsure which referent was intended in a
context where either might be uttered (e.g. Did you pick up your car at that CarMax/
CAR-X place?).
However, the pronunciation of CarMax also diﬀers from the pronunciation of CAR-X
in signiﬁcant ways:
1. CarMax always has one more phoneme, [m], than does CAR-X.
2. Distinctive features of which [m] is acoustically composed are sharply diﬀerent
from all of the other phonemes in the two words: [m] is the only nasal and the
only labial.
3. Physiologically, speakers must close their lips in the middle of uttering CarMax,
whereas CAR-X must be pronounced with the lips open.
4. The second syllable of CarMax is pronounced much more loudly and forcefully
than the second syllable of CAR-X, especially in normal or allegro style.
5. The vowel of the second syllable of CarMax diﬀers from the second syllable of
CAR-X by three distinctive features: [æ] is a low non-tense front vowel, whereas
[ł] is a high lax central vowel.
6. In many dialects of American English, the [r] will be deleted in CarMax but not in
CAR-X.
These signiﬁcant, noticeable “sound” diﬀerences will act as psycholinguistic agents for
distinguishing the trademark and preventing confusion.
Quantiﬁcational comparisons and distinctive feature analysis must be reported with
prudence. Shuy (2002: 75) speaks in praise of “another linguist, [who] … very success-
fully used distinctive feature analysis to show that the sound of ‘Little Dolly’ were only
13 percent diﬀerent from those used in the name of his client, ‘Little Debby’.” However,
it is not clear how such ﬁgures are related to psychological reality:
 Are some distinctive features more important than others?
 How do feature similarities interact with the location of phonemes in words?
 Are acoustic eﬀects on the hearer’s memory diﬀerent from the eﬀects that diﬀerences
in the physiological work of uttering has on speakers?
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
355

Various American court decisions have found all of the following pairs of marks to be
confusingly similar, yet the raw percentage of phonemic overlap between them varies
considerably:
SMIRNOFF/SARNOFF [smIrnaf]/[sarnaf]
10/13 = 77%
DYPRIN/DIAPARENE [dayprIn]/[dayæpłrin]
12/16 = 75%
SMIRNOFF/SERRANOV [smIrnaf]/[sErłnaf]
10/14 = 71%
SMIRNOFF/SMARKOFF [smIrnaf]/[smarkaf]
10/14 = 71%
AVENT/AVANCE: [łvent]/[łvæns]
6/10 = 60%
PROZAC/HERBROZAC [prozæk]/[hrbrłzæk]
8/14 = 57%
BONAMINE/DRAMAMINE [bonłmin]/[dramłmin]
8/15 = 53%
Also, it may well be that quantiﬁcations, especially counts of distinctive features rather
than phonemes, may be so complex that juries and judges will be more confused than
enlightened. For this reason, Shuy cautions particularly about distinctive-feature counts
(2002: 12, 75, 112).
The category of MEANING
Courts generally rely on dictionary deﬁnitions for words as important evidence in
trademark disputes. However, dictionaries give relatively little information about trade-
marks per se: even unabridged dictionaries have entries for no more than a small
percentage of marks, and dictionaries generally disclaim any explicit authority with respect
to the trademark status of the words that they list as entries (Landau 2001: 407–8). It is thus
not surprising that neither CarMax nor CAR-X are found in standard dictionaries.
Indeed, they are COINED words—they have no ordinary dictionary meanings in and of
themselves.
Courts seek to base likelihood of confusion on the MEANING marks will have to the
ordinary persons who are likely to purchase the product or service (hereafter, p/s) to
which the mark refers. The meaning of MEANING in the legal context of trademarks
includes (1) denotations and connotations and (2) any speciﬁc referential association that
may have developed between the p/s and a source (i.e. the company oﬀering the p/s for
sale). The technical term for the latter association is SECONDARY MEANING, and it is aﬀected
by such various factors as the general reliability of the p/s, the market share of the p/s,
and the eﬀectiveness of the advertising of the p/s—factors at best only indirectly amen-
able to linguistic analysis. If secondary meaning is strong enough, the marks are given the
technical appellation FAMOUS MARKS.
Apart from secondary meaning, trademarks generally have no ordinary denotations at
all (except in the case of exceptionally famous marks, which may acquire a type of
denotative meaning by metaphorical extension). However, many marks may have
homonyms that are ordinary words (e.g. Apple/apple, but not Exxon). Thus, a trade-
mark’s connotations will depend largely on the denotations and connotations of the
words or word-like elements of which it is composed. For some coined words (e.g.
Kodak, Exxon) there may be only the vaguest of connotations. CarMax and CAR-X,
however, have component parts that themselves are ordinary words (Car), morphemes
(Max, -X) and sememes (Rx), which themselves have denotations and connotations.
Thus, the meanings of the composing units adhere to the marks themselves.
RONALD R. BUTTERS
356

A meaning analysis of a trademark thus begins with the dictionary deﬁnitions of the
component words and morphemes, even if they are only arbitrarily related to the
enterprise that the trademark refers to. In the case at hand, car has only one clearly rele-
vant meaning, “automobile,” and it is found at the beginning of both marks. Thus, it is
clear that the two marks have some meaning similarity.
That, however, is where the obvious meaning overlap ends. The linguist must also
compare the meanings of Max and Rx as used in the respective marks. As is often the
case with trademarks, Max is not explicitly deﬁned as an ordinary word in standard
dictionaries, though they do sometimes list the slang or informal usages max and to the
max, a clipped form of maximum (see, for example, the New Oxford American Dictionary, s.
v. max: “informal a maximum amount or setting … at the most”). Thus, the consulting
linguist will do well to analyze the term’s meaning through independent lexicographical
research. This consists of inductively examining the empirical data that a lexicographer
would normally consider if a trademark-sense entry were contemplated for a dictionary:
 CINEMAX is the second element in the trademark of an American national
pay-television channel.
 D-MAX Imaging Co. was the name of a desktop publishing ﬁrm in Durham,
North Carolina.
 OﬃceMax is the name of an oﬃce supply store chain.
 RE/MAX is the name of a chain of real estate agencies.
 T.J.Maxx is the name of a chain of clothing stores.
 UMAX is a name of a computer-equipment manufacturer.
These uses parallel and surely give rise to the connotations that consumers will infer for a
mark such as CarMax.
As a part of a trade name, then, MAX conveys a strong sense that the product or service
being oﬀered to the public is au courant and superlative: CINEMAX is “the maximum
in modern cinema”; OﬃceMax oﬀers “the best possible up-to-date oﬃce furniture and
supplies,” etc. Similarly, CarMax suggests “the best and most state-of-the-art place for
cars.”
The meaning of the second syllable of CAR-X is far less clear, in part because the
meaning of-X is diﬀuse, and partly because the CAR-X ﬁrm displays the ca sememe
prominently in its advertising, suggesting that the “X” of CAR-X is related to the estab-
lished symbol for medical prescriptions. In conﬁrmation, an internet search revealed that
other businesses use Rx it this way as well, e.g. Rx Gallery and Wine Bar (San Francisco) and
ScoreRx a company that helps people increase their credit scores. The inductive conclusion
is clear: speakers of current American English will infer that CARx is intended to convey
the meaning “car prescriptions”—a place where one would take an automobile for repairs
with the same conﬁdence and certainty that one would feel about a pharmacy. Such a
meaning accords precisely with the nature of the CAR-X business, which is automobile
repairs and service.
Otherwise, the-X of CAR-X contributes little to the connotative meaning because X
has many semiotic functions (“ten,” “the unknown,” a position on a map,” “a kiss,” “the
signature of an illiterate person,” “something crossed out”), none of which seems parti-
cularly related to cars. This, in itself, separates the ﬁnal element Max of CarMax (which
has speciﬁc meaning) from the ﬁnal element-X of CAR-X (which has no speciﬁc
meaning).
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
357

The assignable connotative meaning of CAR-X then, is demonstrably distinct from
that of CarMax, despite the identity of the ﬁrst element.
Ethics and outcomes
How far a linguist can go in testifying to the ultimate issue is a thorny question, much debated
by linguists and not easily resolved (Shuy 2006; Butters 2008b; see also Coulthard 2007). As is
generally true in experts’ consulting, it is not the job of the linguist to determine whether the
scientiﬁc facts are legally compelling enough to sustain or deny the lawsuit. That is a decision
that only a judge or jury can make; the linguistic evidence is only part of the evidence that is
relevant to the outcome of a case. The linguistic expert’s goal must be to provide the court
with all of the relevant linguistic evidence upon which to base legal decisions.
In Circuit City, I testiﬁed with a good deal of professional conﬁdence that ordinary
consumers would not be very likely to confuse CarMax and CAR-X if one considered
only the linguistic grounds. The trier of fact agreed that, in sight, sound, and especially
meaning, the factors that could create substantial confusion among CAR-X’s customers
were less signiﬁcant than the factors that made the two marks distinct; furthermore,
a pragmatic factor further served to distinguish the two: CarMax sells automobiles;
CAR-X services them. Circuit City was allowed to keep using its CarMax mark.
Strength of mark
Deﬁnitions
Whether a trademark is deemed WEAK or STRONG depends on where it is deemed to fall
along a continuum of categories, (1) GENERIC, (2) DESCRIPTIVE, (3) SUGGESTIVE, (4) FANCIFUL,
and (5) ARBITRARY, where (1) is the weakest and (4) and (5) are the strongest.
Marks that fall into categories (3)–(5) generally are absolutely protected from use by
competitors. FANCIFUL MARKS are coined words made up from morpheme-like material—
Kodak, for example. ARBITRARY MARKS are genuine words that have no meaning rela-
tionship to the enterprises they name (Apple, for example, denotes a kind of fruit but as a
trademark for a brand of computers and a music-recording company has nothing to do
with fruit). Thus, neither FANCIFUL nor ARBITRARY marks have either a denotative or
strongly connotative relationship to the products or services they refer to.
SUGGESTIVE marks do not literally denote the products or services oﬀered to the public,
but they nonetheless strongly connote the enterprises they refer to. For example, the
trademark Beanie Baby, a soft, plush, pellet-ﬁlled doll, may bring to mind “doll” (from
Baby), “small” (from the-y diminutive ending), and “pellet-ﬁlled” (Beanie). Such asso-
ciations are thought to be a help to the memory of consumers in mentally keeping the
brand apart from others. Suggestive marks also frequently create positive associations, as
in the names of many sports teams: the Minnesota professional football team is not literally
composed of Vikings, but Vikings are legendary for ﬁerceness in battle, and Minnesota is
popularly thought to be the home of the descendants of many Scandinavians. CarMax
contains the suggestive element Max and the descriptive element Car; the-X of CAR-X is
presumably arbitrary (or perhaps fanciful), whereas the Rx in the CARx logo is suggestive.
DESCRIPTIVE marks merely denote some major aspect of the product or service being
oﬀered to the public, as in the Car of CarMax and CAR-X; generally, laudatory terms
such as pure and tasty are also considered descriptive.
RONALD R. BUTTERS
358

Landau (2001: 406) deﬁnes GENERIC, as it applies both to lexicography and the law, as:
“an ordinary … term, not for the brand of a thing but for the kind of thing itself.” A
putative trademark is generic if the term is like aspirin, automobile, theme park, even (as
applied to fruit) apple—one that denotes the product or service itself and not the brand
name (e.g. CVS, Chevrolet, Universal Studios, Harry&David’s Fruit Gifts).
Generic marks are so weak that they cannot be trademarks at all for the entities that
they denote. The rationale for this is simple: if merchandisers were allowed to own
generic terms, then there would be no straightforward way for their competitors to refer
to their own products. This would not only be confusing to the purchasing public, but it
would also give the owners of the generic mark an unfair advantage in the marketplace.
Descriptive marks are also inherently weak, and they can only be legitimate trademarks if
it can be demonstrated that they have acquired signiﬁcant SECONDARY MEANING, that is,
that the mark is in no little measure FAMOUS (see SUGGESTIVE marks, below).
Challenging putatively weak marks
Which category a mark falls into is often the subject of litigation, and linguists are fre-
quently engaged to write reports and give testimony in such cases. Solan and Tiersma
note,
morphology can be a helpful tool in trademark disputes. … [Strength of mark]
issues are obviously linguistic questions, and courts deciding trademark cases usually
allow linguistic expertise to be taken into consideration.
(Solan and Tiersma 2005: 248n42)
However, the type of linguistic expertise required is much more a matter of practical
applied linguistics than theoretical morphology. The forensic linguist is not reanalyzing
medieval Celtic verb structure according to the latest redaction of theoretical syntax.
Rather, the forensic linguist considers objective, empirical data to focus intensely and in
depth upon one or two morphemes using the essential methodology of lexicography:
1. access a relevant and representative body of data;
2. examine the data inductively so as to form conclusions about the meanings of the
words in the minds of the persons who created the data.
In strength-of-mark cases, the owner of the senior mark trademark challenges the use or
projected use of the competitor’s junior mark as INFRINGEMENT. The junior’s owner
generally claims that the senior mark is either generic or descriptive without secondary
meaning.
I wrote a report (in Steak n Shake Co. v. Burger King Corp., 323 F. Supp 2d 983, 985
[E.D. Mo. 2004]) in which the plaintiﬀs, a chain of fast-food restaurants, had long
marketed a type of sandwich that they called a Steakburger. Steak n Shake apparently
never attempted to register the trademark, but they were able to claim de facto (COMMON
LAW) trademark rights because of their long and allegedly exclusive use of Steakburger as a
trademark. When Burger King began also using Steakburger in advertising a new sand-
wich that they marketed in their fast-food chain, they were almost surely aware of Steak
n Shake’s use. However, when Steak n Shake brought the suit, Burger King’s attorneys
successfully defended their junior use of the term by asserting that steakburger is a generic
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
359

term for “burger sandwich made from steak.” Therefore, steakburger could not be a valid
trademark for a sandwich made from beef. Attorneys for Steak n Shake countered that
their Steakburger is suggestive, or at worst a famous descriptive mark (having signiﬁcant
secondary meaning).
In analyzing steakburger, I again made use of dictionaries and lexicographical metho-
dology. In addition, I surveyed the scholarly literature concerning the word hamburger—
literature that itself makes use of, and inﬂuences, the lexicographical methodology.
The earliest dictionary record of the word steakburger that I found was that of the 1961
publication of the second edition of Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the
English Language, Unabridged, 2d edn (Publisher’s Guild, Inc./World):
burger [from hamburger] a combining form meaning sandwich of ground meat (and),
as in steakburger, cheeseburger, etc. [Slang.]
A similar deﬁnition is found in the Shorter Oxford Dictionary on Historical Principles, 5th
edn, 2002:
steak … Comb. & phrases: steakburger a beefburger made of minced steak
These are important because both the deﬁnitions describe exactly the sandwich that
Steak n Shake calls its Steakburger, but without any reference to source: it is a kind of
thing, rather than the name of a kind of thing. Moreover, the deﬁnitions span a forty-year
period, demonstrating a continuity of usage that indicates that the generic status of
steakburger has been ﬁrmly established for some time. Finally, the 1961 deﬁnition treats
steakburger as not only generic, but exemplary of an entire class of ground meat sandwiches
using the suﬃx-burger, of which steakburger is but one of many.
The lexicographical record is ampliﬁed if one looks at specialized lexicographical
literature. Thus, Pound (1938: 157) wrote, “The ending of ‘hamburger’ is having
good success irradiating itself. Cheeseburgers, made of ham and cheese, and chick-
enburgers may now be had in many dining places as well as at highway stands.”
A year later, Arnold Williams (1939: 154) cited, the following burger words that he
had recorded in “a notebook kept on travels about the country”: chickenburger, cheese-
burger, clamburger, lamburger, rabbitburger, nutburger, porkburger, Wimpyburger, goonburger,
and demonburger.
A multitude of other examples can be cited from scholarly literature and from more
specialized dictionaries in which the morpheme-burger appears and is always used in a
totally generic way. The meaning of the compounds is assumed to be transparent from
the denotative component parts. Source is never identiﬁed.
Another source of evidence that the courts ﬁnd persuasive in genericness cases is that
of third-party use—cases in which the senior mark is clearly used generically by com-
petitors and the public at large. A search of newspapers, magazines, and the internet from
the 1930s on, found an abundance of examples in which steakburger was used to denote a
kind of sandwich, without any indication that the users intended to use it in reference to
their own particular brand. Such evidence overwhelmingly indicates that steakburger is
generic, and, even if it did not, there could scarcely be secondary meaning if the only
source of identiﬁcation of steakburger and Steak n Shake is Steak n Shake’s own
advertising. Moreover, Steak n Shake’s claims of historic exclusive (and original coinage)
disappeared in the face of the linguistic record.
RONALD R. BUTTERS
360

In the trial in which I participated, Burger King prevailed. The judge declared steak-
burger to be generic as a name for sandwiches and indicated agreement that the linguistic
history demonstrated that it was generic from the beginning. Interestingly, Burger King
seems to use steakburger sparingly in its recent advertisements, and only as a generic term
that characterize their “Steak House Burger” sandwiches (www.restaurantnewsresource.
com/article31839.html). And Steak n Shake continues to advertise “Our famous Steak-
burger” and to indicate that they claim common-law trademark rights to the term
(“STEAKBURGERTM”: www.steaknshake.com/menu/burger.asp), even if they are
unable to register the brand because of its apparent genericness.
Genericide
Steakburger has always been generic; if no litigation had taken place before Burger King, it
was because nobody ever chose to use the term in a way that Steak n Shake found
threatening enough to pursue in court. In a diﬀerent kind of genericness case, the junior
mark claimants assert that, while the senior mark may have at one time been strong, it
has been a victim of its own success, becoming generic over a period of time. Many
trademarks have gone this route (sometimes referred to as GENERICIDE): aspirin, escalator,
and trampoline, for example (at least in the United States). When speakers sometimes use
Xerox to refer in general to photocopies, photocopying machines, and the general process
of photocopying, without regard to whether they are actually referring to products
manufactured by the Xerox ﬁrm, they are using the brand name as if it were generic. If
the general population of photocopy product users ever comes to believe that Xerox is
not a brand name, then Xerox will likewise lose its right to its own brand. Similarly,
Hoover as a term associated with vacuum cleaners is recognized primarily as a brand name
in the United States, but in the UK it has become genericized to the extent that, in
common speech, it is often used as a verb for the process of using a vacuum cleaner.
The law makes a distinction between the commercial meanings that typical consumers
actually attach to a trademark and the shorthand (or, to use the technical linguistic term,
SYNECDOCHICAL) uses that a consumer may make of that trademark. A trademark linguist
may need to tease out from the data whether a trademark has truly undergone legal
genericide or is merely exhibiting symptoms of synecdochical use.
The function of trademarks in modern society: uses
and abuses of linguistics
Although the ideal of “freedom of speech” is thought of as a fundamental right, all
societies impose penalties for a variety of verbal civil and criminal acts: defamation,
obscenity, sexual harassment, perjury, forgery, extortion, illegal solicitation, inciting a
riot, oﬀering or accepting a bribe, treasonously repeating state secrets, threatening
another with harm to life or property.
Even so, some people view the existence of proprietary interest in language as an insult
to free speech rights and take exception to laws that allow persons to “own” words,
phrases, and logos—even for the limited purpose of brand identiﬁcation. For example,
the media were amusedly sardonic when reporting that a Canadian teenager, Michael
Rowe, had received warnings that he must stop using the web address www.MikeRowe
Soft.com, which he had registered as a domain name, because it infringed upon the
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
361

proprietary rights of the Microsoft Corporation (Sieberg 20 January 2004). Not wishing to
seem like greedy bullies, Microsoft reportedly tempered its initial demands after Rowe’s
situation was widely publicized, oﬀering Rowe “an Xbox with some games,” which he
reportedly accepted (Kotadia 2004; see also Wikipedia 2008). Clankie summarizes this
highly negative concept of trademarks:
That a common language expression can be withdrawn from use for no other
purpose than ﬁnancial proﬁt is, in my opinion, a far more criminal action than is
another company actually using it in violation of the law.
Clankie (2002: 160)
Clankie’s extreme condemnation too easily reduces trademark ownership to naked
capitalist greed, failing to consider that a trademark worth ﬁghting over is probably as
much a focus of “ﬁnancial proﬁt” for the infringer as it is for the infringed-upon. The
simplistic view that trademarks are a “criminal” insult to free speech ignores positive and
important values of brand identiﬁcation in modern society. Historically, trademarks ori-
ginally became the object of legal protection in large part to shield honest businesses
from unfair competition. If an upstart competitor were allowed to use an established
respected brand name, the upstarts would appropriate for free the valuable reputation of
the senior mark’s owners. The senior owner would have no control over the quality of
the upstart’s product; inferior items sold by an upstart under the senior name would harm
the reputation of the senior name owner and even facilitate an infringer’s lower pricing.
Moreover, reliable brand names are useful to consumers, who employ the reputation of
established marks when making choices between competing products and services.
Misgivings about proprietary language are voiced as well by forensic linguists and legal
scholars in more sophisticated critiques of potential free-speech implications of trademark
law. Referring to a famous case (McDonald’s Corporation v. Quality Inns, International, Inc.
695 F. Supp. 198, 215–16 (D. Md. 1988.) in which he testiﬁed for the defendants
(wherein a world-famous restaurant chain prevented another large company from using
McSleep as a hotel trademark), an eminent forensic linguist writes, “one can still wonder
why it is that the expenditure of money can determine who can have ownership of a word,
much less a preﬁx [Mc]” (Shuy 2002: 109); “expenditure of money” refers to advertising
outlays used to create in the public mind a linguistically arbitrary association between a
single bound morpheme, Mc-, and the goods oﬀered for sale in fast-food restaurants.
One answer to Shuy’s rhetorical question may simply be that there seems little social
beneﬁt in creating a system that would make it easier for one megacompany (Quality
Inns) to use a morpheme that another megacompany (McDonald’s) has long used as a
product identiﬁer. Moreover, altering the rules that currently govern trademarks and
advertising would surely have disruptive eﬀects that Shuy does not consider.
But Shuy (2002: 2) also has in mind a more profound, related, challenge, one that is
not totally unrelated to Mike Rowe’s encounter with Microsoft. Elsewhere, Shuy points
out the danger to free speech that arises when trademark litigation (or even the threat of
it) is used as a means of asserting “authority over what can be said or written, and [what
can] not”—a form of censorship. For example, dictionary writers have long struggled
with trademark lawyers’ threats of lawsuits:
Some trademark owners are hostile to any inclusion of trademarks in a dictionary,
[demanding that trademarks be] … entered in capitalized form and identiﬁed as
RONALD R. BUTTERS
362

trademarks. … Almost all trademark owners are concerned to have their trade-
marks identiﬁed [in dictionaries] as trademarks, and lawyers often try to specify to
lexicographers the exact form which they ﬁnd acceptable. … Trademark owners or
their lawyers [make] … importunate demands, even threats [of legal action]. …
The dictionary editor must do battle to include any [registered] trademarks, and he
is under great pressure to distort the facts of usage.
(Landau 2001: 406–8)
The lawyers are merely trying to protect their clients’ trademarks, but in so doing they
may inadvertently be agents of censorship of the honest, professional work of lexico-
graphers (or journalists, who may also sometimes be the recipients of similar warnings
from attorneys). Of course, it is unlikely that dictionary makers could actually be sued for
freely using a word in a way that a trademark owner might dislike (Richardson 2004:
online 12). For example, as early as 2003 the McDonald’s Corporation announced their
objection to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary’s new entry, McJob, which was deﬁned—on
the basis of actual usage—as “a low-paying job that requires little skill and provides little
opportunity for advancement” (BBC News 2003; Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary
2009). Similar pressure was brought to bear in the UK in 2007, when the Oxford English
Dictionary added a similar deﬁnition (BBC News 2007). McJob is not actually a trademark
of McDonald’s Corporation, but, as we have seen above, McDonald’s were victorious in
asserting proprietary trademark rights in the USA to the Mc morpheme. Even so, despite
McDonald’s eﬀort to change the lexicographer’s conclusions about the public’s percep-
tion of the connotations of McJob (but no actual lawsuits for trademark infringement or
dilution), the dictionary deﬁnitions remain today exactly as they were in 2003 and 2007
(see Oxford English Dictionary Online 2009).
Still, legal pressure has without question functioned as a kind of de facto censorship
based on trademark law, as Landau attests. Citing Shuy’s censorship warnings, Richardson,
notes cases where trademark owners brought suit merely because, they
[were] unready to allow uses of their trade marks that they believe could reﬂect
badly on them, or are controversial, or lie too far outside the scope of their activ-
ities, no matter their overall social value (and including cases where those who wish
to use will pay).
(Richardson 2004: online 11, 27)
For example, the Star Wars mark owners sued to prevent its use in a critique of
government military policies, claiming “trademark infringement, unfair competition,
misappropriation, [and] disparagement” (Lucasﬁlm, Ltd v. High Frontier 622 F Supp 931
[1985]). The case was dismissed, but, as Richardson notes, even if “plaintiﬀs generally fail
in legal terms, the worry is [that] their ability to threaten will be enough to stop the
practice”—the expense of defending one’s linguistic usage in court “raises the spectra of
unfree speech in a society that generally values free speech and may even provide for it
in its Constitution,” a point that Shuy makes as well (2002: 13–14).
Moreover, such legal pressures do not always fail. Pullum (2004a, 2004b, 2004c)
comments on how dilution litigation can restrain the use of trademarks for small
businesses (a threat from the giant Lexus-Nexus caused a small linguistics start-up to drop
the use of their chosen brand name, Lexeme). Richardson also reports on MGM-Pathe
Communications Co v. The Pink Panther Patrol 774 F Supp 869 (1991), wherein a public
TRADEMARK LINGUISTICS
363

safety campaign mounted by a gay community organization was forced to changed its
name (identical to that of a famous MGM-owned movie) because the court
held [it] too likely confuse the public about possible sponsorship (which the First
Amendment would not exempt) irrespective of the defendant’s political motives
and the absence of evidence of actual confusion.
The problem of the rich using their wealth to manipulate the legal system to censor or
otherwise bully the poor is characteristic of a wide variety of types of civil cases, not just
trademark litigation. Even so, the forensic linguist has a citizen’s right to be concerned
about such issues and even propose changes in the law (though Landau, Pullum, Shuy,
and Richardson do not), and the discussion of these and other ethical issues is certainly a
proper subject for trademark linguistic theory. As for individual cases, as Shuy points out
in a diﬀerent book (2006: 123), “working on a case does not mean that you have to
agree with or support the accusations or positions of the clients on either side”—and,
furthermore, forensic linguists are free to “avoid such cases” as their “own moral reasons”
may dictate, on the rare occasions where one is asked to use one’s forensic linguistic
expertise on behalf of a cause that one may disapprove of.
Further reading
The foundational work on trademark forensic linguistics remains R. Shuy’s 2002 book,
Linguistic Battles in Trademark Disputes (see also the “Trademarks” chapter in his 2008
Fighting Over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases). The portions of S. Landau’s 2001
book Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography (2nd edn) oﬀer invaluable insights into
lexicographical methodology and practice. Clankie’s book presents the best list of
genericized (and pseudogenericized) brand names in print. For speciﬁc discussion of
genericness issues, see R. Butters and J. Westerhaus, “Linguistic change in words one
owns: how trademarks become ‘generic’” (2004). Concerning dilution, see R. Butters,
“A Linguistic Look at Trademark Dilution” (2008).
Legal cases cited
Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Speedy Car-X, Inc., 35 U.S.P.Q.2d 1703 [E.D. Va. 1995].
Lucasﬁlm, Ltd v. High Frontier 622 F Supp 931 [1985].
McDonald’s Corporation v. Quality Inns, International, Inc. 695 F. Supp. 198, 215–16 [D. Md. 1988].
MGM-Pathe Communications Co v. The Pink Panther Patrol 774 F Supp 869 [1991].
Starbucks Corp. v. Wolfe’s Borough Coﬀee, Inc. (477 F.3d 765, 81 U.S.P.Q.2d 1927 [2d Cir. 2007]).
Steak n Shake Co. v. Burger King Corp., 323 F. Supp 2d 983, 985 [E.D. Mo. 2004].
WSM, Incorporated, Appellant, v. Dennis E. Hilton and Country Shindig Opry, Inc., Appellees, 1984 U.S.
App.724 F.[2d 1320].
RONALD R. BUTTERS
364

24
Consumer product warnings
Composition, identiﬁcation, and
assessment of adequacy
Bethany K. Dumas
Introduction
Deﬁnitions
Warnings, whether labeled as such or not, are generally considered to be
statements about future events or states that are not in the hearer’s best interest, and
which are uttered in situations in which it is not obvious to both the hearer and
the speaker that the event will occur or that the state will transpire.
(Searle 1969: 67)
Warnings are thus like promises and threats in that they refer to possible future actions
(Fraser 1975, 1998). They are diﬀerent from promises in that the future action is not in
the hearer’s best interest; they are diﬀerent from threats, a special type of warning (Fraser
1975, 1998), in that the future action will be the result of the hearer’s actions, not the
action of the one doing the threatening. I have suggested that evidence of the close
similarity between warnings and promises, if we categorize a threat as a special type of
warning, is illustrated by the frequent occurrence in informal conversation of the joking
rejoinder, “Is that a threat or a promise?” (Dumas 1992: 268).
Warnings may be either direct or indirect and either literal or nonliteral. That is, many
warnings are highly context-dependent, and their interpretation may depend upon lesser
or greater amounts of inferencing. They can also be categorized as categorical warnings
or hypothetical warnings. Searle suggests that categorical warnings fulﬁll the function of
advising, not requesting. Such warnings inform hearers or readers that certain results will
follow certain modes of behavior, but the warnings do not attempt to get a given indi-
vidual to modify his or her behavior. An example, tongue-in-cheek, is a statement on a
menu that says, “Eating Any Selection From The Enclosed MENU Can Be Dangerously
Habit Forming!”
365

Hypothetical warnings are phrased in such a way that they fulﬁll the function of
requesting. The basic logical structure for a hypothetical warning is “If X, then Y,”
though the if and then elements may be implicit, rather than explicit. Thus an example
might be “Give me your money or I’ll shoot,” a statement that is generally regarded as a
demand that the individual spoken to turn over money. (It is also a special type of
warning, a threat.) Warnings can also be categorized as imperative or informational (Tiersma
2002 and see below). Categorical warnings are generally informative, while hypothetical
warnings are at least partly imperative.
It has long been recognized that all these categories are fuzzy. Further, there is over-
lapping among the sets of categories. Vanderveken (1990: 174) points out and Tiersma
(2002: 363) aﬃrms that the speech act of warning is “systematically ambiguous between
an assertive and directive use” and shares features of both the informative/categorical and
imperative/hypothetical styles. Below are examples of real-life warnings used in my
earlier research (Dumas 1992: 277–78); I include them here with new category labels in
order to illustrate the complexity and ambiguity of the classiﬁcation schemes.
Example 1. Take heed, sweet soul.
—nonliteral, indirect, hypothetical, imperative
Example 2. Let me tell you something straight. When you go and snitch to anyone that we
had anything to do with this, you’ll ﬁnd a snitch tattoo on your forehead.
—literal, direct, categorical, informative
Example 3. Komsing Causes Lung Cancer, Heart Disease, Emphysema, and May Complicate
Pregnancy
—literal, indirect, hypothetical, informative
Example 4. Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined That Komsing Is Hazardous
to Your Health
—literal, direct, categorical, informative
Example 5. This is the ﬁnal warning. I have acted as a gentleman should, have given you
ample time to consider my demands before an unfortunate incident occurs. You have twenty-four
hours to introduce a bill in the Congress of the United States of America to return to me, as the
rightful heir to James Smithson, the Smithsonian Institution and its belongings. Time has run
out, sirs.
—literal, direct, hypothetical, imperative/informational
Legal requirements
When used on consumer products, warning labels are often designed to meet speciﬁc
legal requirements. Warnings on US tobacco products, for instance, must comply with
speciﬁc wording requirements; further, manufacturers of tobacco products such as cigar-
ettes sold in the US must use six rotating warnings. As Tiersma (2002) points out, the
kinds of consumer products generally involved in litigation about warnings and other
safety information are those that serve a useful function, but also have “potential risks or
dangers associated with their use” (p. 54). Such cases thus fall within the legal standards
for product liability law, a fairly new development in law (Tiersma 2002: 54; Shuy 2008).
As Tiersma (2002) documents, the legal standards for warnings are more diﬃcult to
apply when products are intended for use by non-native speakers of English with limited
proﬁciency. Symbols, pictograms, and color can be used to assist in achieving adequacy,
BETHANY K. DUMAS
366

but symbols can be misunderstood by members of diﬀerent cultures, so they must be
used with care. More research is needed with respect to the issue of warnings addressed
to non-native speakers of English (or any local language).
Warnings have been used and known by speakers of the English language since at least
the fourteenth century. We thus have a situation in which a common, ordinary term and
concept, warning, is put to a special use where legal requirements in product liability law
are concerned. This chapter will explore the nature and function of warnings in product
liability law, describe and evaluate techniques for assessing and increasing adequacy of
such warnings, and suggest strategies for continuing to improve warning and other safety
information adequacy.
Nature and function of warnings and warning labels
Nature of warnings and warning labels
In order to assess warning adequacy and eﬀectiveness, it is necessary to recognize the
diﬀerence between a warning and a warning label. Government agencies often prescribe
the wording of some product warnings, and the prescriptions often specify that consumer
products must carry speciﬁc warning labels such as Danger!, WARNING, or Caution.
However, for various reasons, including the fact that industries often lobby successfully to
have their preferred wording used in legislation about warning labels, statements labeled
as warnings may actually be other kinds of speech acts. For instance, one of the rotating
warnings required on cigarette packages reads thus: “SURGEON GENERAL’S
WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious Risks to Your Health.”
On its surface, the text suggests that it is a promise, not a warning. In spite of the label
WARNING, the text of the message suggests that good will result if the one being
warned quits smoking. The text does, of course, imply a warning, a warning that might
be worded thus: “SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Continuing to Smoke
Greatly Increases Serious Risks to Your Health.” However, a strong argument can be
made that if we are serious about advising consumers about health risks we should reduce
reliance on such inferencing.
It is also necessary to recognize the diﬀerence between imperative and informational
warnings, between warnings like Do Not Climb Beyond This Point and Climbing Beyond
This Point May Result in Injury and Death. As Tiersma (2002) points out (citing Fraser
1998 and Vanderveken 1990), all warnings contain both a bit of a directive (even if it is
indirect, as above) and some information. One question needing further research is
whether one style is more eﬀective than the other. There is probably not a single answer,
and Tiersma is probably right when he suggests that some consumer products, including
cigarettes, probably need warnings that are both imperative and informational, perhaps
something like “do not smoke cigarettes; smoking can kill you.” He is also probably right
when he suggests that “Many governments will balk at the imperative element, however,
given the tax revenues that derive from smoking” (Tiersma 2002: 64).
And certainly private interest groups sometimes lobby against what are perceived to be
eﬀective consumer product warnings. Such lobbying is frequent where Congressional
action is involved. The interests of private interest groups, as I have previously pointed
out (Dumas 1992), are often at odds with those of the average consumer, and such
groups often have enormous sums of money at their disposal. One such group is the
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
367

Tobacco Institute, the lobbying arm of the tobacco industry. The wording of cigarette
package warnings in the USA has always been the result of a compromise between
Congressional proposals and successful lobbying eﬀorts of the Tobacco Institute and
other private groups.
The very existence of lobbying eﬀorts by private interest groups suggests that there is
some general knowledge about what constitutes an adequate warning—or at least that many
individuals assume that they know what constitutes an adequate, i.e. eﬀective warning.
And linguists are in general agreement about what constitutes an adequate warning, even
though there may not be complete agreement about the eﬀectiveness of warnings that
are more informative than imperative. My own position is that hypothetical warnings are
more eﬀective than categorical warnings and that, as Tiersma suggests, the best warnings
should be both informational and imperative. I also agree with Tiersma that imperative
warnings are better when it is not possible to provide both informational and imperative
language.
Functions of warnings and warning labels
In general, warnings and warning labels have a variety of functions. They sometimes seem
to serve primarily merely to call attention to items, often for comic eﬀect. For instance, a
few years ago, cartoons showed warning labels on raw eggs, stating that they contain
cholesterol. And in a cartoon strip, a child was questioned about why she was eating only
French fries for lunch. She replied that if they were dangerous there would be a warning
on the side of each one. Equally revealing are the annual results of the Wacky Warning
Label Contest (conducted by Michigan Lawsuit Abuse Watch, M-LAW, and designed to
reveal how lawsuits, and concern about lawsuits seem to have created a need for common
sense warnings on products). The ﬁrst-place winner in 2005 was a toilet brush, an item for
cleaning the inside of a toilet, which warned: “Do not use for personal hygiene”; another
winner that year was a popular scooter for children that warned, “This product moves
when used” (www.mlaw.org/wwl/pastwinners.html). The 2007 Grand Prize went to a
label on a small tractor that warns, “Danger! Avoid Death” (www.mlaw.org/wwl/).
But the primary function of warnings and warning labels in the legal context is to
inform of and reduce risk. For a warning on a product to be adequate, it must get the
attention of the intended user and must convey to the product user comprehensible
information about potential risks and methods of avoiding then. My earlier analyses of
consumer product warnings were conducted on the basis of three general guidelines for
consumer product warnings that insure that they come to the attention of the user and
provide information about both risks and how to avoid them. They need to be displayed
on products which would be unreasonably dangerous without such warnings. They need
to be directed to the ultimate users of the product and to any individuals who might be
expected to come into contact with it. And they need to be able to (1) catch the attention
of a reasonably prudent person in the circumstances of use, (2) be understandable, and
(3) convey a fair indication of the nature and extent of the potential danger to the individual.
These functions of warnings were suggested by Shuy:
1. Name the hazard or risk.
2. Explain how to avoid the hazard or risk.
3. Explain what to do if injury occurs.
(Shuy 1998b: 171)
BETHANY K. DUMAS
368

In quoting Shuy 1998b, Tiersma (2002: 64) points out that both Shuy and the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) recognize implicitly the dual function of warnings in
that they require language about both the risk and methods of avoiding risk.
More recently, Shuy has provided this statement of the function of consumer product
warnings and warning labels:
Warnings … should identify and describe the nature and danger of the risk. Then
they should tell the reader how to avoid it. Finally they should communicate those
things in clear and understandable language.
(Shuy 2008: 72)
There is this general agreement that warnings have a dual function, but it is less clear
how those dual functions can best be accomplished; the topic is addressed in the following
section.
Warning adequacy
Warnings on cigarette packages
My initial research on consumer product warnings began in 1985 with the speciﬁc goals
of identifying (1) the legal issues involved in cigarette warning litigation, and (2) the
issues of warning adequacy from the point of view of both linguistic and human factors
analysis. My research began after I received a telephone request from a local attorney to
research the adequacy of cigarette warnings. I replied that I would have to do some
preliminary work before I could tell him whether I thought I would be useful to him in
a case against R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (Roysdon v. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.,
623 F. Supp. 1189 [E. D. Tn. 1986]).
In my initial literature search, I discovered that there were two lines of research, one
by linguists (e.g. Searle 1969; Fraser 1975) and one by human factors analysts (e.g. Lehto
and Miller 1986; Miller and Lehto 1987). The linguists had focused on discourse analysis
and speech act identiﬁcation, while the human factors analysts had focused on such
issues as type size, placement, and the general visibility of warning labels, as well as the
usefulness of graphic images. I drew on both in planning my own empirical research.
I also familiarized myself with the legislative history of warning label requirements on
cigarette packages and with the role of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in that
history. I also examined some federally mandated warning labels used on prescription
drugs. Finally, I analyzed the six cigarette warnings in order to identify potential pro-
blems with content and readability and to formulate hypotheses for research. I studied
the legislative history of the warning label requirements in order to discover the factors
which had been identiﬁed as important by the drafters. As I studied, I learned that
required warnings have usually been signiﬁcantly weaker than those initially proposed.
Legislation mandating use of the original (1965) cigarette package warning “Caution:
Cigarette Smoking May Be Hazardous to Your Health” had the eﬀect of preempting a
proposed FTC Trade Regulation Rule that would have required all cigarette packages
and advertisements to warn that “Cigarette Smoking is dangerous to health and may
cause death from cancer and other diseases” (The Trade Regulation Rule for the Pre-
vention of Unfair or Deceptive Advertising and Labeling of Cigarettes in Relation to the
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
369

Health Hazards of Smoking). Had Congress not preempted that requirement, the very
ﬁrst federally mandated warning would have mentioned speciﬁc negative consequences
of smoking cigarettes (speciﬁc diseases) and would have speciﬁed that smoking is
dangerous, not merely hazardous.
Later the FTC proposed a modiﬁed version of the warning, which, had it been
adopted, would have required all cigarette packages and advertisements to carry this
message: “Warning: Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous to Health and May Cause Death
From Cancer, Coronary Heart Disease, Chronic Bronchitis, Pulmonary Emphysema, and
Other Diseases” (34 Fed. Reg. § 7919 [1969]). Sadly, Congress amended the text to
read: “Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined That Cigarette Smoking Is
Dangerous To Your Health” (15 U.S.C. §§ 1331 et seq., 1970).
Since then four rotational warnings, still in current use, were adopted. Again, the
impetus for change seems to have come from the FTC. A May 1981 FTC StaﬀReport
on the Cigarette Advertising Investigation (StaﬀReport) sets out the reasons why that
agency thought the 1970 warning was ineﬀective. The ﬁrst factors, identiﬁed on the basis
of common sense, were (1) overexposure (the warning was “worn out”), (2) lack of
novelty (it contained no new information), (3) the abstract and general nature of the
wording, and (4) the lack of personal relevance of the warning. Also, the unchanging size
and shape of the 1970 warning were felt to contribute to its ineﬀectiveness. Later market
research surveys reported by the FTC suggested additionally that (1) if warnings were
to be eﬀective, they should be short (one idea per warning), simple, and direct; and
(2) disease-speciﬁc warnings, that is, those listing speciﬁc diseases as possible consequences
of smoking, are far more eﬀective than non-disease-speciﬁc warnings.
The proposal to use a rotational warning system evolved partly as a way to address the
four problems already cited. The FTC recommended that the rotational warnings should
be selected in accord with four criteria: (1) medical accuracy, (2) demonstrable ﬁlling of a
gap in consumer knowledge about health hazards, (3) intelligibility, and (4) ability
to “prompt consumers to think about the health hazards of smoking” (StaﬀReport
pp. 5–33). Sample warnings prepared by the FTC meet all those criteria. Representative
ones include the following:
1. WARNING: Smoking causes death from cancer, heart attacks and lung disease.
2. CARBON MONOXIDE: Cigarette smoke contains carbon monoxide and other
poison gases.
3. WARNING: Smoking may be addictive.
4. LIGHT SMOKING: Even a few cigarettes a day are dangerous.
Again, we ﬁnd the same pattern of FTC-proposed warnings mentioning speciﬁc negative
consequences of smoking, followed by Congressionally promulgated warnings which
mention fewer or weaker speciﬁc negative consequences of smoking. The four rotating
warnings currently required are a good deal weaker and certainly less comprehensive
than the ﬁrst ones proposed by the FTC.
I also examined some federally mandated warning labels used on prescription drugs.
Most of the warnings were brief, appear to be medically accurate and certainly ﬁlled gaps
in my own knowledge about health hazards. They were generally intelligible and, as a
consumer, I felt that they would prompt me to think about health hazards. Most striking
was the use of graphic symbols (e.g. automobiles, outlines of faces) and color contrast. It
seemed obvious that warning label designers could comply with the FTC-proposed
BETHANY K. DUMAS
370

criteria and that the resulting warnings could be medically accurate, ﬁll gaps in consumer
knowledge about health hazards, be intelligible and “prompt consumers to think about
the health hazards of smoking.”
My empirical
research
was carried out by means of
written categorization,
rank-ordering, and paraphrase experiments, as well as rapid and in-depth anonymous
interviews. On the basis of the pilot study, I concluded that there was
strong evidence for the existence of objective criteria by means of which the rela-
tive adequacy of warnings on cigarette packages [could] be assessed and that those
objective criteria [were] for the most part not characteristic of present or past
cigarette package warnings.
(Dumas 1992: 262–63)
I further suggested that warnings diﬀer by degree and that consumers show some uniformity
in classifying warnings as strong or weak and that strong warnings generally have at least some
of the following characteristics, while weak ones lack one or more of these characteristics.
1. They are often formulated as hypothetical warnings or contain strong warning
words like POISON.
2. They mention speciﬁc possible negative consequences and lack such modal qualiﬁers
as may and could.
3. They are easy to see.
4. They are written in simple syntax and in ordinary, everyday language.
Federally mandated cigarette package warnings display characteristics of weak warnings: (a)
qualifying language (e.g. the modal auxiliaries may and can), (b) unusual syntax (e.g. the
double-ing construction as in Quitting smoking now, and (c) technical and semi-technical
vocabulary (e.g. fetal injury, carbon monoxide). The warnings lack signiﬁcant information
(What are the precise dangers? Who will be aﬀected? To what extent?). The warning
labels are hard to read because of their position on the side of the package, their small type size
and the fact that they often appear in hard-to-read color combinations (e.g. gold on red).
Space limitations constitute another problem. Later research by graduate students
reported that some pregnant women thought that Low Birth Weight was a desirable
result of smoking. It was unclear whether that was because they interpreted the statement
to mean that their weight would be lower at birth or that having a baby weighing less
would be desirable. Attempting to propose alternative wordings makes it clear that some
problems inherent in the warning would take more words to clear up than there is room
for on the package. The usual need for brevity is a serious obstacle to the formulation of
adequate warnings. An informationally adequate warning might read thus: “Smoking by
pregnant women may cause injury to the baby before birth, as well as dangerous health
problems resulting from the baby’s being born prematurely or underweight.” Also, there
is some evidence that two of the present rotating warnings have the eﬀect of weakening
the eﬀectiveness of the one disease-speciﬁc warning in current use.
These were my recommendations:
1. Either formulate the warnings as hypothetical or use strong conventional warning
labels like POISON.
2. Avoid unnecessary qualifying language, e.g. the modal auxiliaries may and can.
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
371

3. List speciﬁc undesirable consequences of unsafe behavior.
4. Make the warnings conspicuous in all ways, e.g. color contrast, type size, and
position on product.
5. Write the warnings in simple syntax and in ordinary vocabulary.
6. Include speciﬁc information about negative consequences on each label in a rotational
series.
7. Do not narrow the target population by addressing speciﬁc labels to diﬀerent
portions of that population (e.g. pregnant women).
8. When considering the use of rotating warnings, consider that diﬀerences in the
strength of individual warnings may have the eﬀect of weakening stronger warnings.
9. Field-test all proposed warnings. (This step would appear to go without saying, but,
given the history of proposed federally mandated warnings, it is clear that it does not.)
(Dumas 1992: 300–301)
Shortly before the trial, I was able to obtain a copy of the Conﬁdential Version of the
1981 Federal Trade Commission StaﬀReport on the Cigarette Advertising Investigation,
a document that revealed that the Tobacco Institute had conducted research similar to
that I had just conducted and had used the results to lobby for changes in proposed new
cigarette warnings.
I testiﬁed at trial in the Roysdon v. R. J. Reynolds case, but I was not allowed to testify as
to the ultimate issue, i.e. whether the warnings on cigarette packages are or have in the
past been adequate to inform consumers about the health risks of smoking. That is because
shortly before trial Judge Thomas G. Hull of the Eastern District of Tennessee, the pre-
siding judge, ruled that the federally mandated warnings on cigarette packages are adequate
as a matter of law. This ruling had the eﬀect of removing the issue from consideration. In
my testimony, I described my research methods, summarized my conclusions about how
warning labels are perceived by consumers, and summarized published information about
how the Tobacco Institute had conducted research into how warning labels are perceived,
prior to lobbying Congress about the wording of current cigarette package warnings.
Further, at the end of the plaintiﬀ’s presentation (including my testimony), Judge Hull
dismissed the suit, ruling that the plaintiﬀhad made no case. He gave two reasons for
doing so: (1) the federal statute on cigarette package labeling had preempted state
common-law actions based on alleged inadequacies, and (2) common knowledge about
tobacco was such that cigarettes are not unreasonably dangerous. The plaintiﬀappealed,
but the Sixth Circuit upheld the ruling of the trial court, stating that the smoker’s claim
under state law, based on the tobacco company’s failure to provide adequate warnings,
was preempted where the warnings required by the Cigarette Labeling and Advertising
Act, 15 U.S.C.S. §§ 1331–41, were given. The district court directed a verdict for the
tobacco company because the smoker failed to establish a prima facie case that the
cigarettes were defective or unreasonably dangerous. The court held that a “defective
condition” was one that that rendered a product unsafe for normal or anticipatable
handling and consumption, Tenn. Code Ann. § 29-28-102(2). Since, there was no
evidence that the use of the cigarettes presented risks greater than those known to be
associated with smoking, the court held that no reasonable jury could ﬁnd that they were
defective in the sense that they were improperly manufactured or contained dangerous
impurities. Extensive public information regarding the risks of smoking precluded a jury
question as to whether the cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous (Roysdon v. R.J. Reynolds
Tobacco Co., 623 F.Supp. 1189 [E.D. Tn. 1986]).
BETHANY K. DUMAS
372

The ultimate outcome of this case was that the Sixth Circuit Court aﬃrmed the
dismissal of the smoker’s claim, holding that the failure to warn claim was preempted,
and aﬃrmed the order directing a verdict for the tobacco company. The appellate court
held that the cigarettes presented no greater risks than risks associated with smoking, and
so were not defective. The court also held that the availability of extensive public
information about the risks of smoking precluded asking a jury whether the cigarettes
were unreasonably dangerous (Roysdon v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, 849 F.2d 230
[6th Cir. 1988], rehearing denied 1988). The plaintiﬀdid not appeal to the Supreme Court.
Warnings on a manufacturing product
A few years later, I was asked to evaluate the adequacy of both warnings and safety
information contained in Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), safety information state-
ments that often accompany industrial products. Such statements have the potential to
convey much more safety information than can be printed on a product label. In two
1990 cases, Whitis v. Loctite Corporation and Davis v. Loctite Corporation, plaintiﬀs were
workers who developed disabling contact dermatitis; they alleged that the cause was a
glue product, Loctite RC/609, used on the assembly line, that was manufactured by the
defendant corporation Loctite and furnished to the manufacturing company.
I began my research with photocopies of warning labels on the glue containers and of
the MSDS, the American National Standard Guide for Classifying and Labeling Epoxy Products
According to Their Hazardous Potentialities (1978) (ANSI Standard) and medical reports on
the eﬀects of Loctite RC/609 on the human body and also of the medical conditions of
the plaintiﬀs. Although medical causality was, of course, not within my area of expertise,
I was asked to assess whether the warnings were adequate to warn potential users of severe
and possibly disabling dermatitis: whether the MSDS adequately warned employers that
use of the glue could result in disabling contact dermatitis; to take precautions with
employees; and to give additional warnings to employees, including the information that
using vinyl gloves and rubber ﬁnger cots might not be adequate protection.
The following labels appeared on various sizes of glue containers:
CAUTION:
MAY IRRITATE SENSITIVE SKIN. Contains methacrylic ester.
Wash after skin contact. KEEP AWAY FROM CHILDREN.
[found on the back of one container]
CAUTION:
MAY IRRITATE SENSITIVE SKIN. READ CAUTION ON
BACK LABEL. [found on the front of one container]
CAUTION:
Contains methacrylic ester. Wash after skin contact. KEEP AWAY
FROM CHILDREN. [found on the back of the container which
directed the user to the back of the container]
The language on the latter two labels contains a total of seven sequenced information
chunks (Shuy 1990b) or idea units (Chafe 1985). They read thus:
CAUTION:
MAY IRRITATE SENSITIVE SKIN. READ CAUTION ON
BACK LABEL.
CAUTION:
Contains methacrylic ester.
Wash after skin contact.
KEEP AWAY FROM CHILDREN.
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
373

The warning label on the front of the container functions primarily for reference value.
It mentions the possibility of a harmful eﬀect following its use, then directs the reader to
a second label. Unfortunately, the second label, on the back of the container, is not
much more informative. It again mentions the possibility of skin irritation, but says
nothing about severe, even disabling dermatitis. I suggested that a highly informative
warning might read something like this:
WARNING! IF you handle this product without wearing gloves, you risk
DISFIGUREMENT and DISABILITY. ALWAYS WEAR GLOVES WHEN
HANDLING THIS PRODUCT.
Further, one of the statements, including the technical term methacrylic ester, is probably
meaningless to the average consumer or worker, probably meaning less even than carbon
monoxide, prominent in one of the rotating cigarette warnings.
There is a great deal of highly technical information in the MSDS as well as infor-
mation about possible health risks and recommended precautions. That information is
not prominently displayed and there is no evidence that the employer is expected to
convey any of the information to an employee. Two precautions suggest that gloves
(rubber or plastic) be worn and that “prolonged skin contact” be avoided, but in the
cases at issue, employees were wearing vinyl gloves at all times they were in contact with
Loctite RC/609. Clearly, the safety information provided by the manufacturer was
inadequate to warn of the dangers inherent in exposure to the glue.
I testiﬁed for parts of two days at trial. Aside from plaintiﬀs, the only other witness
was the medical doctor who testiﬁed about the severity of the disabling dermatitis
caused by exposure to Loctite RC/609. It was so severe that one plaintiﬀ, who was
pregnant, was told that she would be have to wear gloves in order to change her baby’s
diapers. The jury found for the plaintiﬀs and awarded the largest amount of damages
ever in a civil case in Anderson County, Tennessee. However, as I soon learned,
while the jury was deliberating, the plaintiﬀs, worried about the outcome, reached a
“high–low” agreement with the defense. A high–low agreement is a settlement that is
contingent on a jury’s award of damages and that sets a minimum amount that the
defendant will pay the plaintiﬀif the award is below that amount and a maximum
amount that the defendant will pay if the award is above that amount, regardless of the
amount of the jury award.
The jury verdict was for far more than the “high” amount agreed on. However, the
plaintiﬀs felt that the defense had a good chance of winning on appeal, so both sides
agreed to live with the “high–low” ﬁgures and also to retain all trial exhibits, including
charts and other materials used by witnesses. Those materials would thus be unavailable
for future litigation. After trial, I learned that the jury had been strongly pro-defense
prior to hearing my testimony. The verdict and jury award amount were based on lin-
guistic evidence of a failure to warn (Dumas 2000b).
Cleaning product risk, carbon monoxide poisoning, toxic shock
syndrome, and toxic gas poisoning
In his recent discussion of four product liability cases in which he testiﬁed as an expert
witness, Shuy (2008) provided rich data from cases involving carbon monoxide poison-
ing, toxic shock syndrome, and toxic gas poisoning (Ch. 8–11 of Fighting Over Words:
BETHANY K. DUMAS
374

Language and Civil Law Cases). In a case involving carbon monoxide poisoning in a
recreational vehicle, he compared ANSI requirements with three owner’s manuals,
concluding that two manuals failed to meet ANSI standards in a number of ways. He
made use of topic, topic sequencing, speech act, and semantic analysis to reach his
conclusions (Fighting Over Words, p. 106). In a case involving use of a cleaning product
on a ship, Shuy compared regulatory standards with the label on the tin of cleaning
compound, concluding that the label was not consumer-friendly and that it minimized
the danger. In a case involving tampon-induced toxic shock syndrome, Shuy analyzed
tampon box warnings and package inserts in order to assess the adequacy of the
warnings. He also made some suggestions for warning label revision, suggesting reor-
dering, reduced syntactic complexity and redesign, both to increase the likelihood that
a consumer would pay attention to the text and to enhance readability. In the fourth
case, the question of whether a pilot’s speech changed over the course of a four-hour
period was at issue. It was assumed that if the pilot’s cognitive abilities were diminished
over a period of time (due to the possible presence of a toxic substance), that would be
reﬂected in his speech. But the pilot showed no meaningful change in syntax,
speech acts, pause ﬁllers, pronunciation, or conversational cooperativeness (Shuy 2008:
128–29).
Conclusion
I suggested at the outset of this chapter that I would summarize research about the nature
and functions of warnings, describe and evaluate techniques for assessing and increasing
adequacy of warnings, and then suggest strategies for continuing to improve warning and
other safety information adequacy. Summaries of past research reveal clearly, I think,
both the complexity of assessing the adequacy of consumer product warnings and other
safety information and the reasons for the diﬃculties of applying reasonable standards—
and also the real diﬃculties of composing eﬀective warning labels, especially in contexts
where space is quite limited.
The role of context, both in our society as a whole and in particular personal or
commercial contexts, is important. In our society, we face, for instance, the fact that
eﬀective warning information on tobacco products might have the eﬀect of reducing tax
revenues (Tiersma 2002). In industry, some warnings appear to be constructed with
more attention to their anti-litigation function than their eﬀectiveness, and as noted above,
product warnings often have to compete for consumers’ attention with package con-
struction designed to attract consumers. However, as linguists we have the tools to improve
the quality of warnings if others empower us to do so. One example of package con-
struction designed to attract consumers comes from 2007, when R.J. Reynolds introduced
Camel No. 9 cigarettes, clearly designed to attract female smokers. The cigarettes were
described as “light and luscious,” and their packages feature what the New York Times
called “hot-pink fuchsia” and “minty-green teal” colors; ﬂowers surrounded the packs in
magazine ads (“City Room; Female Smokers And a P.R. Coup”).
The packaging strategy is not new. A 2008 exhibit of historic cigarette ads at the
New York Public Library’s Science, Industry and Business branch, “Not a Cough in a
Carload,” displayed historic cigarette ads that were designed to override medical
information and conventional notions of appropriate behavior, especially for women:
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
375

[I]n 1928, Edward Bernays, often considered the father of modern public relations,
was retained by American Tobacco Company to help get women to smoke.
Recognizing that women were still riding high on the suﬀrage movement,
Mr. Bernays used the equality angle as the basis for his new campaign. He con-
vinced a number of genteel women, including his own secretary, to march in the
1929 Easter Day parade down Fifth Avenue and light up cigarettes in a deﬁant
show of their liberation.
.… [T]he media ate it up:
Ten young women turned out, marching down Fifth Avenue with their lighted
“torches of freedom,” and the newspapers loved it. Two-column pictures showed
elegant ladies, with ﬂoppy hats and fur-trimmed coats, cigarettes held self-
consciously by their sides, as they paraded down the wide boulevard. Dispatches
ran the next day, on page one, in papers from Fremont, Nebraska, to Portland,
Oregon, to Albuquerque, New Mexico.
The Times published an article the next day on the Easter Parade, with headline
saying in part, “Group of Girls Puﬀat Cigarettes as a Gesture of ‘Freedom’”
.…
The cigarettes became known as “torches of freedom.”
Cigarette companies then started tailoring their messages to women. One of the
most resonant themes was that smoking would keep women slim (even then,
women thought thinner was better).
(“Female Smokers And a P. R. Coup”)
Recently, Philip Morris USA began marketing cigarettes labeled “Virginia Slims Superslims
Lights” that also appear to be directed primarily to female smokers. The cigarettes
themselves are much thinner than most cigarettes; twenty of them ﬁt into a package
called a “Purse Pack” that is much thinner than most cigarette packages. The packages
are lavender and silver and green and silver. I ﬁrst saw them when I purchased packs of
Camel No. 9 cigarettes. The packages are so tiny that I did not believe that one could
hold twenty cigarettes. I purchased and opened a package to verify the contents. Both
the sales clerk and I were astonished to ﬁnd twenty cigarettes inside the package.
Clearly, the contest continues. The contest is sometimes portrayed as one between
conscience and proﬁts or between comprehensibility and proﬁts, but the contest also
involves the full role of context in communication scenarios, including the psychology of
risk assessment as noted above. Linguists cannot address the issues of proﬁt versus
conscience, but we can address the issues of comprehensibility and also the full role of
context. My earlier suggestions about improving written and graphic warning labels and
Material Safety Data Sheets were restricted primarily to comprehensibility issues. I now
suggest that linguists can further contribute to increasing the eﬀectiveness of safety
information statements, including warnings and such documents as Material Safety Data
Sheets, by focusing attention on the likelihood that even strong, eﬀectively worded
warning information may appear in contexts in which glamour and style compete with
health concerns. How do we counter that? One possibility is to incorporate the lure into
some warnings, possibly by stating something like this: “Lose weight by smoking? Yes!
All of it! You die!” or “Smoking: A Sure Slow Death” or even “Look Good While You
Die – Smoke!” Additional research into the relationship between locutionary and illo-
cutionary acts and perlocutionary eﬀects is still needed if we want to improve on the
persuasiveness of warnings—but then, on the other hand, such research may simply
BETHANY K. DUMAS
376

enable advertisers to be even more successful in selling cigarettes and other tobacco
products.
Further reading
Cotterill, J. (ed.) (2002) Language in the Legal Process, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan: 54–71. (Contains chapter by Tiersma on “The Language and Law of
Product Warnings.”)
Dumas, B.K. (1992) “Adequacy of cigarette package warnings: An analysis of the adequacy of federally
mandated cigarette package warnings,” Tennessee Law Review, 59: 261–304. (Contains details of
warning label analysis.)
——(2000) “Warning labels and industry safety information standards: The case of Loctite RC/609,” in
J. Peyton and P. Griﬃn (eds) Language in Action: New Studies of Language in Society, Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press, 302–17.
——(2001) “Warnings,” in J. Mitchie (ed.) Reader’s Guide to the Social Sciences, London and Chicago:
Fitzroy Dearborn. Vol. 2, 1747–48. (Overview with bibliography.)
Shuy, R.W. (2008) Fighting Over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. (Contains data from four product liability cases.)
Legal cases cited
Bogle v. McDonald’s Restaurants Ltd., Neutral Citation [2002] EWHC 490 (QB), Case No:
HQ0005713.).
Liebeck v. McDonald’s Restaurants, P.T.S., Inc., No. D-202 CV-93-02419, 1995 WL 360309 (Bernalillo
County, N.M. Dist. Ct. Aug. 18, 1994).
Roysdon v. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 623 F.Supp. 1189 [E.D. Tn. 1986].
Roysdon v. R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, 849 F.2d 230 [6th Cir. 1988].
CONSUMER PRODUCT WARNINGS
377

25
The forensic phonetician
Forensic speaker identiﬁcation by experts
Michael Jessen
Introduction
Forensic speaker identiﬁcation is the most important task within the ﬁeld that is known as
Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics or Forensic Speech and Audio Analysis. The former term
corresponds to the name of the organisation International Association for Forensic Phonetics and
Acoustics (IAFPA; see their website www.iafpa.net), which hosts an annual international
meeting and is represented in the journal International Journal of Speech, Language and the
Law. Although it has been made very clear by the IAFPA that phoneticians are not privi-
leged among its membership over, for example, speech engineers, in fact phoneticians and
linguists are traditionally most strongly represented in the organisation. The second term,
Forensic Speech and Audio Analysis, is entirely neutral with respect to any underlying
academic ﬁeld (phonetics) and this is the term used for the name of a working group
within ENFSI (European Network of Forensic Science Institutes; see www.enfsi.eu). In
that group, engineers and computer scientists are at least as strongly represented as pho-
neticians and linguists. This is partially due to the fact that forensic speech and audio analysis
comprise many activities other than speaker identiﬁcation, which can beneﬁt from a
speech and audio engineering perspective. Such activities include both audio enhance-
ment, i.e. the attempt to increase the intelligibility of poor-quality speech through
advanced ﬁltering and other signal processing procedures, and audio authentication, i.e.
detecting indications that an audio recording has been manipulated. Since these activities
outside of speaker identiﬁcation are not excluded from the scope of the IAFPA, it makes
little sense to see a diﬀerence in meaning between the two terms Forensic Phonetics and
Acoustics and Forensic Speech and Audio Analysis, so they will be treated as synonymous.
A third term, which should also be seen as synonymous is Forensic Speech Science. This is the
name of the ﬁrst academic programme that was established in that ﬁeld at the University of
York, UK in 2007 (see www.york.ac.uk/depts/lang/postgrad/forensic.htm).
Forensic speaker identiﬁcation can be divided into several sub-tasks. A classiﬁcation
that has proven useful in forensic practice is shown in Table 25.1.
If audio recordings exist of both the unknown speaker (i.e. the oﬀender in situations
such as kidnapping, stalking or drug dealing) and a suspect, it is possible to conduct a
378

speaker comparison and use it as evidence in court. An alternative term for speaker
comparison is voice comparison, which means the same. If the suspect is cooperative, a
recording can be made of his speech and the forensic expert can have a large amount of
control over this recording. For example, it is possible to make a transcript of the
unknown speaker’s utterances and then ask the suspect to read them or repeat them in
appropriate chunks of speech. Such a procedure results in text identity, which can
be useful for some subsequent activities such as the measurement of vowel formants.
(Formants are resonance frequencies that result from the shape of the vocal tract and they
are measured in Hertz (Hz); the lowest resonance frequency is called the ﬁrst formant –
commonly abbreviated as F1 – and the highest resonance frequency used for most
forensic applications is the third formant, F3.) However, text identity is not a require-
ment in forensic speaker identiﬁcation, and reading or (less so) repeating can result in
unnatural prosody, which creates its own problems. Therefore, the recording of a suspect
should also contain speech that is uttered as spontaneously as possible. If, however, the
suspect is not cooperative and does not agree to have his voice recorded, it will depend
on the legal system of the country and the circumstance of the case whether prior
recordings of the suspect, perhaps taken from police interviews or from telephone sur-
veillance, can be used. Another form of uncooperative behaviour occurs when a suspect
agrees to a recording, but then tries to disguise his voice in an apparent or subtle way. In
such a case, the expert has to decide from a forensic-phonetic perspective whether this
evidence can still be used. The methodology used in speaker comparisons involves a
wide variety of both auditory and acoustic parameters and will be addressed in Section 3.
If an audio recording exists of the unknown speaker, but no suspect has been found, it
is still possible to create a speaker proﬁle based on the recording. Synonymous terms for
such activity are voice analysis and voice proﬁling. Speaker proﬁles are usually requested by
the police in an ongoing investigation for the purpose of ﬁnding a suspect. Information
useful for that purpose includes age, sex, region, social status and foreign language
background. Speaker proﬁling is addressed in more detail in Section 2. In the same
situation in which a speaker proﬁle is requested, it is also possible to present audio
samples of the unknown speaker to the general public, using mass media such as TV,
radio or the internet. This is usually only implemented in high-proﬁle cases, partially
because the subsequent expert work required in evaluating all the responses from the
public (including conducting many subsequent speaker comparisons) can be substantial.
Some forensic cases begin with a speaker proﬁling stage and end with a speaker
comparison stage. Perhaps the most remarkable example is the Yorkshire Ripper case,
Table 25.1 Different tasks of forensic speaker identiﬁcation
Audio recording of unknown
speaker available
No audio recording available, but
witness available
Suspect exists
Speaker comparison
[if suspect is cooperative or prior
recordings of the suspect exist and
can be used]
Suspect previously known to the witness:
regular witness statement
Suspect not previously known to the
witness: voice line-up
No suspect exists
Speaker proﬁling
and/or presentation of unknown
speaker voice in the media
Rare expert involvement;
possible future: acoustic phantom picture
using speech synthesis
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
379

where these two stages lay 30 years apart. In the early stages, a speaker proﬁle was
provided of a caller claiming to be the Yorkshire Ripper, who between 1975 and 1980
had murdered 13 women in Leeds, Bradford, Huddersﬁeld and Manchester. Later it was
discovered that the calls had been made by a hoaxer. A suspect hoaxer was eventually
found through DNA analysis in 2005. A speaker comparison between the voice of the
suspect and the voice from the calls in the 1970s revealed strong indications that these
two voices belonged to the same individual. The Yorkshire Ripper case is described in
detail in Ellis (1994) and French et al. (2006).
In some situations, no recording of the unknown speaker is available, but a witness has
heard the person speaking. In some cases, such as robbery or rape, the witness may also
be the victim. In these situations, it makes a diﬀerence, both scientiﬁcally and legally,
whether or not the witness knew the oﬀender from before the crime. In the former
situation, the task required of the witness is called familiar-speaker identiﬁcation and in the
latter unfamiliar-speaker identiﬁcation. Familiar-speaker identiﬁcation enters the evidential
process in the form of a regular witness statement. Here the challenge might be to
ascertain – based on scientiﬁc knowledge about human speaker perception in general –
whether such a witness statement is reliable or whether adverse conditions occurred that
cast doubt on its reliability. Such adverse conditions include short utterances, distance,
additive noise and unusual utterance modes such as shouting (see Blatchford and Foulkes
2006 for a recent case study and further references). Cases with unfamiliar-speaker
identiﬁcation require a diﬀerent methodology and can be addressed in terms of a voice
line-up, also referred to as voice parade (see Nolan 2003).
In the fourth possibility shown in Table 25.1, somebody has witnessed the crime
but no suspect and no recording exists. Although this scenario occurs frequently in
reality, experts are only rarely asked for their involvement (at least this holds for
Germany). Perhaps this is because there is no established forensic methodology for
such a scenario. What would be very useful here is some way of creating what in the
visual domain are known as phantom pictures or photoﬁt pictures (Nolan 1983: 208
for that suggestion). Current technologies in speech synthesis developed under the terms
‘voice transformation’ and ‘voice conversion’ are very promising (Stylianou 2008 for
overview).
Speaker comparison and speaker proﬁling, which were shown on the left side of
Table 25.1, fall into the province mentioned in the title of this chapter, i.e. speaker
identiﬁcation by experts (see Künzel 1995; Broeders 2001 for the term). The term speaker
identiﬁcation by experts is opposed to naïve speaker identiﬁcation which denotes the situations
shown on the right-hand side of Table 25.1. To be more precise, although the identiﬁ-
cation process in naïve speaker identiﬁcation is performed by individuals who are not
trained with respect to speech analysis, the framework in which these perceptions by
naïve listeners are elicited is a professional one, in which experts are involved in the
planning and execution of procedures such as voice line-ups. An alternative term
for speaker identiﬁcation by experts is technical speaker identiﬁcation (Nolan 1983, 1997). As
Nolan (1997) points out, the adjective technical has to be understood in a broad sense – as
not only covering the use of instruments such as spectral analysers, but also as referring to
non-instrumental methods such as auditory-based phonetic transcription. In this chapter
the former term will be kept, which presents an opportunity to think more closely about
the kind of qualiﬁcations that are needed by an expert in forensic speaker identiﬁcation.
Since this issue depends on the diﬀerent methods that are used, this task will be
postponed towards the end of this chapter.
MICHAEL JESSEN
380

Speaker proﬁling
Within the domain of speaker proﬁling it is useful to make a distinction between the task
of speaker classiﬁcation and the task of identifying salient speaker characteristics that can
be understood in lay terms. Speaker classiﬁcation (see Müller 2007 for the full range of
that term) can be understood as the task of inferring from speech evidence the “class” or
“category” to which a speaker belongs. As mentioned above, this includes region, age,
sex, and social background. One reason why speaker classiﬁcation is useful in an ongoing
police investigation is because the information that is derived about the unknown
speaker can be used by the police directly, without any further need to listen to the
voice. For example, if a speech sample is found to contain indications of both a Russian
foreign accent and a local dialect from the southwest of Germany close to Stuttgart,
Germany (as occurred in a case of organised drug smuggling in 2005), the police can
focus their attention on the population with these characteristics.
But a speech sample might also contain other features that are striking and noteworthy
speaker characteristics in the perception and categorisation of a layperson, although these
features might have nothing to do with speaker classiﬁcation. For example, a voice might
be very high- or low-pitched, the speaker might speak in a very fast or slow manner or
in a very careful or sloppy manner; there might be creaky, breathy, harsh or nasal voice
quality and so forth. When descriptions like these are given to the police and perhaps
made available to a wider public (along with speaker classiﬁcation information, such as
the presence of a particular accent), it is possible that investigating police oﬃcers or
someone from the public will have a candidate who ﬁts this description. Therefore, the
voice proﬁling task should not be limited to speaker classiﬁcation, but should also be
performed with a view to eliciting speech features that might be striking speaker
characteristics from a layperson’s perspective.
Another task that can become relevant in speaker proﬁling, but also in speaker com-
parisons, is to draw conclusions about transitory speaker states, such as stress and emotion
or the intake of drugs or alcohol.
An important terminological point that emerges from this discussion and that will
recur in the section on speaker comparison is the distinction between speaker classiﬁcation
and speaker-speciﬁc characteristics. The features that are used for speaker classiﬁcation are by
deﬁnition not speaker-speciﬁc but rather characteristics of sets of speakers. Features such
as a high-pitched voice or a fast speech rate, on the other hand, are individual features.
That does not mean that speakers are uniquely characterised by these individual features;
there is still a long way to go until we know whether, and if so, how speakers can be
completely individualised by speech evidence alone (Nolan 1997 for discussion). But it
means that information about pitch and speech rate is important in the forensic task of
distinguishing individual speakers.
Figure 25.1 shows the speaker classiﬁcation domains that have been used in casework
or might be used more intensively in the future (body size). The diﬀerent domains have
Figure 25.1 Domains in forensic speaker classiﬁcation
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
381

been roughly organised according to whether their motivation lies primarily in organic/
biological factors, or social factors or whether the main inﬂuence is that of a linguistic
system.
There is a certain correlation between body size (i.e. the height of a speaker, and to
a more limited extent the weight) and the length of the vocal tract (distance from larynx
to lips). Vocal tract length, in turn, can be estimated from the measurement of vowel
formants. The correlation is not high, which is why no accurate estimate of body size
from formant frequencies is so far possible. More research in this area is necessary (see
Rendall et al. 2005 for a recent study). However, what can be said is that a speaker with
very low formant frequencies is likely not to be a short person and someone with very
high formants is likely not to be tall (Greisbach 1999). Based on laboratory data (Jessen
et al. 2005) compiled by the Bundeskriminalamt (BKA), this statement by Greisbach can be
conﬁrmed (Figure 25.2). Figure 25.2 shows that a negative correlation occurs between
body size and the average frequency of the third formant (according to the LTF-method
shown in Figure 25.5). Although the correlation is very weak in the mid-range of
formant frequencies and body height measures, there are clear patterns at the extremes.
Speakers with formants in the high range above 2500 Hz have small or medium
body size, whereas speakers with formants in the low range below 2200 Hz have above-
average body size. In addition, the results for the average second formant (not shown) are
similar to those of the third formant.
As a practical example, in a case of organised drug dealing in a German town close to
the Polish border, the unknown speaker was called der Kurze by his accomplices (collo-
quial form of ‘the short one’). His formant frequencies were above average in the male
adult population. The suspect, who had similar formant values and who later turned out
to be identical with the unknown speaker, was in fact below average in stature.
Indices of medical conditions in speech are found, ﬁrst of all, in the domain of
language, speech and voice pathology. In particular, those disorders that are of forensic
use have long-term eﬀects, and exclude, for, example, laryngitis, which comes and goes
rapidly. Examples of medical conditions that have been used in casework are stuttering as
Figure 25.2 Negative correlation between body size [cm] and average frequency of third formant [Hz]
among 81 adult male speakers of German
MICHAEL JESSEN
382

well as malformations of sibilant fricatives – also known as sigmatism – although
telephone bandpass limitations impose a strong challenge to the analysis of sigmatisms.
Künzel (1987: 65, 71) mentions a case of left-wing terrorism where a spectrographically
detectible whistle sound occurred as a rare characteristic of the production of the
postalveolar voiceless sibilant fricative by the oﬀender. Medical conditions outside
speech-language pathology that have been applied forensically include obstruction in the
breathing pathways, which sometimes co-occurs with obesity. Another relevant domain
is the eﬀect of psychiatric disorders on speech (Darby 1981). In the speech evaluation
of medical conditions, collaboration with qualiﬁed physicians and speech-language
pathologists is advisable.
Turning to the domain of age, most of the criminal oﬀenders in our casework are
male and between 20 and 40 years old, sometimes up to 50 but rarely beyond. However,
most of the changes in speech patterns occur below and above that age range, i.e. in
childhood and puberty as well as in the transition into old age. These are also the age
ranges for which most of the research has been done, whereas very little information is
available for the forensically most relevant range. Most information is available on the
inﬂuence of age on the fundamental frequency level (f0). For male adults there is a
decrease in f0 up to about the age of 40, then from about 50 an increasing pattern that
continues into old age. For female adults there is a gradual decrease from young adult-
hood on, sometimes accelerated during menopause; there might be a slight increase again
at old or very old age (Baken and Orlikoﬀ2000: 173–76; Schötz 2006: 83). In a recent
large-scale study, Schötz conﬁrmed this pattern and also found that speech rate is a good
age correlate, because it decreases gradually for both males and females (Schötz
2006: 110). She found another salient correlate – increasing intensity range – which
requires further research. In forensic casework, the age domain of speaker classiﬁca-
tion is most commonly approached by performing an age estimation that is based on
overall perceptual impression. Research has shown that the average diﬀerences between
perceived age and chronological age are around six years, and that forensic experts
are slightly better at this task than laypersons (Braun 1996). Age correlates, especially
those at young and old age, are primarily based on biological factors. There can also
be age correlates that are motivated by social factors and that usually interact with
gender and social status (Foulkes and Docherty 2006). Finally, age can be motivated
by the linguistic system when it occurs as a reﬂection of sound change. Wells (1999),
for example, shows that overt pronunciation of [h] in words like white declined from
speakers born in 1933 to speakers born in 1973 and later. Good reviews on age in
speech production and perception are provided by Linville (2001) and Schötz (2006,
2007).
The next domain to be discussed is sex/gender (the term sex is usually used for the
biological aspects and the term gender for the socio-cultural aspects of the male–female
distinction). Deciding whether the unknown speaker in a recording is a man or a woman
is usually not an issue because laypersons and phoneticians alike are, under most
circumstances, able to perceptually identify the sex of the speaker among the adult
population (before the onset of old age). This success of perceptual sex classiﬁcation is
largely based on the fact that most women have a much higher average pitch level than
most men. The importance of pitch for sex identiﬁcation has also been shown in per-
ception experiments (Coleman 1976). This diﬀerence can be explained by male–female
diﬀerences in vocal fold length, which is about 60% longer in men than women (Titze
1994: 173). The forensic-phonetic expert is able to quantify and objectify the pitch level
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
383

of a speaker by applying fundamental frequency (f0) analysis. According to a study of
read speech based on 100 male and 50 female adult speakers of German, men on average
have a pitch level of about 115 Hz and women of about 210 Hz (Künzel 1989). More
important than the average across many speakers is the distribution of the f0 values of men
and women in an estimate of the population. The range of mean f0 from the lowest-
pitched to the highest-pitched voices is from about 80 to 170 Hz in men (Künzel 1989;
Jessen et al. 2005) and from about 165 to 260 Hz in women (Künzel 1989; Simpson and
Ericsdotter 2007). This information about f0 distribution can prove useful in situations
where perceptual sex classiﬁcation is diﬃcult because the pitch of the unknown voice is
too low for a typical female and too high for the typical male voice. In such a case, the
expert can state whether and to what degree the given f0 evidence is more consistent
with male or with female speech. The f0 distributions mentioned here were obtained
from laboratory recordings under neutral speech conditions. When loud and emotional
speech is taken into account, there can be more overlap between the two distributions
(see also Figure 25.4).
There are situations, however, where pitch is not available as a cue to speaker sex. This
could be because the pitch level is unreliable due to voice disguise (e.g. when a creaky
voice is used), or because the speech is voiceless, as in a whisper (which can be another
voice disguise strategy). In such cases – or in addition to the pitch evidence – other
phonetic cues to speaker sex can be used. One important source of sex diﬀerences lies in
the acoustic eﬀects of diﬀerences in the length of the vocal tract, which is about 12%
longer in men than women (Fitch and Giedd 1999). The vocal tract length eﬀect can be
captured by measuring the formant frequencies F1 to F3 (formants higher than F3 are
usually not accessible in telephone speech). Women tend to have higher formant
frequencies than men (Hillenbrand et al. 1995). Formant frequencies have similar
importance for perceptual sex identiﬁcation as f0 (Lehiste and Meltzer 1973; Mullennix
et al. 1995). But, because the perceptual eﬀects that are due to vocal tract length are
diﬃcult to transcribe phonetically and diﬃcult to distinguish from perceived pitch, sex/
gender determination is a case where acoustic-phonetic methods are very important in
speaker classiﬁcation (Jessen 2007b for further discussion of this point).
Although the characteristics of sex/gender that have been discussed so far have
an organic/biological motivation, this motivation is not suﬃcient to account for all
male–female diﬀerences in speech. One important point is that biologically determined
diﬀerences can be exaggerated or minimised due to socio-cultural factors. For example,
Johnson (2006) shows that male–female formant diﬀerences can be larger among
speakers of Russian than among speakers of Danish. This is more likely to be due to
socio-cultural diﬀerences in these speech communities than to diﬀerences between the
linguistic systems. Other sources of evidence indicating that sex/gender characteristics go
beyond anatomy and physiology are male–female diﬀerences in childhood, where
organic diﬀerences are too small to account for all the observable speech diﬀerences
(Whiteside 2001), or inﬂuences of sexual orientation, where some speakers adopt
characteristics of the opposite sex/gender (Munson and Babel 2007).
As much as the facts show ambiguous status between biological and social factors, so do
the explanations. It has been shown that women have a wider vowel space than men –
meaning that the diﬀerent vowels of a language are more distant from each other
acoustically in female than male speech (Diehl et al. 1996). Women also tend to show
fewer instances of word-ﬁnal stop deletion and other forms of reduction in the produc-
tion of consonants (Byrd 1994). Both increased vowel space and decreased consonant
MICHAEL JESSEN
384

reduction can be interpreted as forms of increased articulatory precision. Biological
explanations state that increased articulatory precision among women is a compensation
for the loss of intelligibility that occurs because formant structure is less-well deﬁned in
high-pitched voices (Diehl et al. 1996). Furthermore, because women have a smaller
cross-section of the vocal tract, it is easier for them to reach articulatory targets than it is
for men (Simpson 2001). Social explanations state that increased articulatory precision is a
special case of the tendency among women to speak more standard-like (“correct” in a
prescriptive sense) and to approach levels of higher prestige, which has been observed in
sociolinguistics (Cheshire 2002 for discussion). These and other sex/gender characteristics
reported in the literature can be drawn upon in cases where determination of sex/gender
is diﬃcult.
A practical example of sex/gender determination is a case from 2003 where the airport
in Düsseldorf, Germany, received several telephone calls in which it was claimed that a
bomb would detonate unless all take-oﬀand landing actions were terminated for a day.
The case was taken seriously because aﬃliation to a terrorist organisation was claimed by
the caller and all aircraft movements were indeed stopped for the day. It was diﬃcult to
determine the sex of the speaker, because the person spoke very loudly (both male and
female speakers have a high average f0 in loud speech and can be diﬃcult to distinguish).
The eﬀect of vocal tract resonances was ambiguous as well. There were a few short
passages, however, where enough evidence could be found to conclude that the speaker
was likely to be female, but had lowered resonances due to lip rounding, which was used
as a voice disguise. This conclusion turned out to be correct. There was no terrorist
background, but what had happened was that a woman created the entire scenario
because she had had a ﬁght with her boyfriend and did not want to join him for a
vacation on a ﬂight that would depart that day.
The speaker proﬁling domains of sociolect, regiolect (dialect) and foreign accent/
ethnolect will not be discussed here for reasons of space and because the reader can
become familiar with them through a wide range of text- and handbooks (e.g. Chambers
et al. 2002; Doughty and Long 2003). Furthermore, the speciﬁcs of these three speaker-
proﬁling domains depend strongly on the language and the country. For example, the
speciﬁcs of regional, social and ethnic diﬀerentiation are diﬀerent in Germany to those in
the UK. Experts who want to do casework in a speciﬁc language and in a speciﬁc
country need to become familiar with the local situation, so a general overview across
languages and countries is of little help. In contrast, sex and the other speaker-proﬁling
domains that have been discussed here are more universal, which is mainly due to their
biological aspects. Further information about forensic speaker classiﬁcation can be found
in Künzel (2004), French and Harrison (2006) and Jessen (2007b).
The rightmost term ‘language’ in Figure 25.1 accounts for situations where the
language classiﬁcation of the relevant speakers that was provided by other parties is not
correct or not suﬃciently accurate. This has occurred in cases from language areas with a
dense distribution of diﬀerent languages (e.g. Caucasus) or with a complicated pattern of
multilingualism (e.g. Berber vs. Arabic in North Africa).
Speaker comparison
In the discussion of speaker proﬁling a distinction was made between speaker classiﬁca-
tion on the one hand and speaker characteristics that can be understood in lay terms on
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
385

the other hand. In speaker comparisons, a similar distinction can be made. Firstly, speaker
classiﬁcation is part of speaker comparison, as it is part of speaker proﬁling. Secondly,
speaker comparisons report speaker-speciﬁc characteristics, but in contrast to speaker
proﬁling these are analysed not from the layperson’s, but from the expert’s perspective.
This situation is summarised in Figure 25.3.
There can be overlap between the two strategies of reporting speaker-speciﬁc char-
acteristics. For example, in both speaker proﬁling and speaker comparisons an unusually
high speech rate would be reported. But it is clear that the range of speaker character-
istics that are analysed is wider and the accuracy of the results higher in speaker com-
parisons than in speaker proﬁles. For example, speaker-speciﬁc characteristics that require
acoustic measurements are only reported in speaker comparisons.
There are two main ways in which speaker classiﬁcation becomes important in speaker
comparisons. Firstly, speaker classiﬁcation can lead to very strong evidence against the
identity of two speakers. This situation occurs if two speakers show categorically diﬀerent
values in one or more speaker classiﬁcation domains. For example, if one speaker is
identiﬁed as being young, say around 20 years, and another is probably over 50 (and the
recordings are contemporary), this is a strong indication that the speakers are not iden-
tical. An analogous situation occurs with dialect mismatch, although here the possibility
of bidialectal competence has to be taken into account. Secondly, if a speaker classiﬁca-
tion feature is very rare in the population, this can lead to very strong evidence in favour
of the identity of two speakers. The best examples are various medical conditions, the
rarity of which is demonstrated in the medical literature. Also, dialects, sociolects and
foreign accents can be rare but usually this depends on the context of the case. For
example, it makes a huge diﬀerence in terms of the percentage of the local population
that produces a Bavarian dialect, whether the case took place in a Bavarian town (with
many speakers of Bavarian around) or close to the Danish border (with few speakers of
Bavarian around). This, however, is contextual information that is not always made
known to the expert, and even if it is known, it is not clear to what extent this ‘a-priori’
information (Rose 2002) should be included in the analysis.
Turning now to the speaker-speciﬁc characteristics from an expert’s point of view, a
compilation of features that are frequently used in speaker comparison cases is shown in
Table 25.2. The classiﬁcation proposed in Table 25.2 is a slight deviation from the clas-
siﬁcation Stimme, Sprache, Sprechweise ‘voice, language, manner of speaking’ that has been used
in the BKA (Künzel 1987, 1995; Gfroerer 2006). The most important diﬀerence lies in the
category ‘idiolectal’ vs. ‘language’, where in the previous BKA approach the categories dialect,
sociolect and foreign accent are included in the language category, whereas according to
Figure 25.3 Tasks in speaker proﬁling and speaker comparison
MICHAEL JESSEN
386

the present proposal these categories are assumed to be part of speaker classiﬁcation. The
advantage of the present approach is that the two concepts speaker classiﬁcation and
speaker-speciﬁc characteristics (Figure 25.3) are distinguished more clearly.
The pitch level and its acoustic correlate, the average fundamental frequency (f0),
have already been mentioned as an important correlate of sex/gender, which is anato-
mically motivated primarily by the length of the vocal folds. The same motivation also
holds within the sexes, where large diﬀerences between speakers occur. A classical study
of inter-speaker diﬀerences in f0 that has been mentioned above is the one by Künzel
(1987, 1989). A more recent study, again on German, was performed by Jessen et al.
(2005) with consistent results, but a wider range of speech styles. The results on
mean fundamental frequency for spontaneous speech (in a laboratory situation) and
spontaneous speech in Lombard condition (exposure to 80 dB white noise over
headphones, causing an increase in vocal loudness) is shown in Figure 25.4 (see Jessen
et al. 2005 for a survey of other Lombard studies).
Figure 25.4 shows, for example, that for normal vocal loudness a mean f0 of 115 Hz is
something that occurs very frequently among men, i.e. it is typical, but that a value of 85
or one at 165 Hz is something that is very rare (nontypical). Due to these diﬀerences in
Table 25.2 Important speaker-speciﬁc characteristics in speaker comparisons
Organic
Idiolectal
Habitual
1. average fundamental
frequency (f0)
2. (long-term) formant frequencies
3. voice quality
4. individual aspects of sociolect,
regiolect and foreign accent
5. linguistic-phonetic details
6. forensic-linguistic features
7. articulation rate
8. f0-variability
9. dysﬂuent behaviour
Figure 25.4 Histogram of mean f0 in spontaneous speech among 100 male adult speakers of
German. Results are presented for Lombard speech (light columns, back row) and
speech at normal vocal loudness (dark columns, front row)
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
387

typicality, the strength of the evidence in favour of identity is stronger if unknown and
suspect fall into the same nontypical interval than if they fall into the same typical interval
(Jessen 2008b for explanation of this example in terms of Bayesian statistics; see Rose
2002 for other Bayesian examples). The ﬁgure also shows that the distribution shifts
towards higher f0 values when speech is produced more loudly than normal. Loud
speech occurs frequently in forensic casework. The upward shift of f0 under this condi-
tion is a case of ‘intra-speaker variation’, which is a phenomenon that is frequently found
in forensic speech analysis. In order to deal with intra-speaker variation it is important
that the expert has knowledge from the literature and from casework experience about
its sources and magnitudes.
Average f0 has also been investigated on 100 male adult speakers of British English
(Hudson et al. 2007). The mean f0 across speakers was 106 Hz for spontaneous lab
speech, whereas it was 120 Hz for essentially the same speech style in Jessen et al. (2005)
on German. One explanation for this discrepancy is that average f0 diﬀers slightly
between diﬀerent linguistic communities (cf. the discussion in Section 2 about socio-
cultural inﬂuences on acoustic correlates of sex/gender). Similar language dependencies
of average f0 are reported by Braun and Wagner (2002).
Formant frequencies have been mentioned above as important male/female
correlates which are due to diﬀerences in vocal tract length. As with f0, the same holds
within the sexes. There are diﬀerent ways to capture speaker-speciﬁc aspects of formant
structure. The method that has been used frequently in our laboratory is the Long-Term
Formant Distribution (LTF), which was ﬁrst proposed by Nolan and Grigoras (2005).
According to the method that we use, a speech signal is edited in a way that only vocalic
portions remain in which formant structure is clearly visible. Subsequently, automatic
formant tracking is applied and any remaining errors of formant tracking are corrected
manually. The resulting formant tracks are exported and further statistics, most impor-
tantly averaging, are applied. The stage prior to exporting is illustrated in Figure 25.5.
The quality and quantity of forensic material can diﬀer, so that in some cases no long-
term formant analysis is possible.
Figure 25.5 Illustration of LTF-method: spectrogram (time in seconds on x-axis; frequency in Hz on
y-axis) together with formant tracks for F1, F2 and F3 (from bottom to top) on vocalic por-
tions of a speech signal. Example taken from a case of blackmail to the owner of a dis-
cotheque
MICHAEL JESSEN
388

Figure 25.6 shows the average LTF of 71 of the 100 male adult speakers of German in
the corpus on which the f0-parameters in Jessen et al. (2005) were investigated (Moos
2008a, 2008b). The LTF measurements were based on a version of the corpus that was
transmitted by mobile phone. Figure 25.6 gives a good impression of the amount of inter-
speaker variation that can be found with the LTF method. According to this ﬁgure, a
speaker in a case with, for example, an LTF2 of 1300 Hz and LTF3 of 2200 Hz would be
quite rare in the population. The ﬁgure also shows that LTF2 and LTF3 are to a certain
extent correlated, which is predicted by a simple tube model of the vocal tract (Reetz and
Jongman 2009 for introduction). Furthermore, the values for reading and spontaneous
speech diﬀer slightly (higher in reading). Although probably no such multi-speaker LTF
study has been performed on other languages, casework experience so far has shown that
essentially the same formant space is used by speakers of other languages as well.
It will now be illustrated how LTF evidence can be used in casework. In December
2007, a young man made an anonymous call to the police emergency centre in a town
close to Kassel in Germany. In the call he warned about a planned school shooting in a
centre for occupational studies that was located in the neighbourhood. The police
Figure 25.6 Reference data for average LTF values [Hz] in spontaneous speech (closed circles) and read
speech (open circles) for 71 male adult speakers of German. Long-term second formant on
x-axis, long-term third formant on y-axis (after Moos 2008a)
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
389

identiﬁed a suspect and he agreed to make a recording. The police transcribed the text
that was spoken in the anonymous call, and it was read by the suspect ﬁve times. It
would have been beneﬁcial to have had samples of spontaneous speech as well, but the
police did not consult with an expert before the suspect recordings were made. LTF
measurements were made along with other phonetic parameters. Figure 25.7 shows that
the location of the LTF2/F3 value of the questioned speaker is within the range of the
ﬁve values obtained from the suspect recording. There was a certain tendency for higher
values in the suspect material. This is consistent with the result of Moos (2008a, 2008b)
that LTF values in read speech are on average slightly higher than in spontaneous speech.
Along with the overlap between the values of the questioned and the suspect speaker,
Figure 25.7 also shows that the values found in this case were somewhat below average
relative to the distribution shown in Figure 25.6. The overlapping pattern (high similar-
ity) and the below-average pattern (relatively low typicality) provide evidence for the
identity of questioned speaker and suspect.
Other ways of capturing speaker-speciﬁc formant information besides LTF are the
measurement of vowel centre formant frequencies (see Rose 2002) or the measurement
Figure 25.7 Average LTF values [Hz] in a forensic case, with one value for the questioned (= unknown)
speaker (closed circle) and one separate value for each of the ﬁve readings of the tran-
scribed text by the suspect (open circles)
MICHAEL JESSEN
390

of formant dynamics (see McDougall 2006; Morrison 2008). Formant information is
among the most important evidence in speaker comparisons, but there is also more
research that needs to be done in this area in order to understand the full potential of this
information (Rose 2006).
Turning to voice quality in Table 25.2, it is understood by us in the broad sense
proposed by Laver (1980) of including both laryngeal characteristics such as creaky,
breathy, harsh, and pressed voice and supralaryngeal settings such as (open and closed)
nasality, lip rounding and jaw lowering. Due to the frequency limitations of telephone
speech that occur regularly in forensic material and due to quality limitations such as the
presence of noise or signal distortions, voice quality is diﬃcult to measure acoustically in
casework. Therefore, our primary approach to voice quality assessment is auditory. Fur-
ther information and discussion on voice quality in forensic speaker identiﬁcation is
provided by Köster and Köster (2004) and Nolan (2005).
Fundamental frequency, formant frequency and voice quality have been classiﬁed as
‘organic’ in Table 25.2. This classiﬁcation was made because there is an organic basis for
speaker diﬀerences, such as length of vocal tract and vocal folds. This is not to imply that
the features classiﬁed under that label are entirely determined by organic factors. We
have seen, for example, that socio-cultural factors can inﬂuence average f0 and formant
structure. Especially the classiﬁcation of voice quality under the label organic is
preliminary; further research might show that the third category ‘habitual’ is more
appropriate. This issue also depends on the particular voice qualities involved. For
example, harsh/rough voice quality has a strong organic foundation, whereas lip round-
ing is to be found in the habitual domain. There are also some overall voice quality
diﬀerences with speakers of diﬀerent languages and dialects (Braun and Wagner 2002 for
data and overview).
Although a classic notion in linguistics, the concept of ‘idiolect’ (see second column
of Table 25.2) is still open for discussion as far as its implications for forensic speaker
identiﬁcation are concerned (Nolan 1997; Jessen 2008b; Grant (this volume) for some
aspects). Here three types of phenomena are included under this concept. Firstly, idiolect
includes situations where a speaker combines aspects of several regional, social and multi-
lingual varieties. The idea behind this concept of idiolect is that a speaker might change
location and social setting in the course of their lifetime, carrying certain features of each
of them along the way. Such a biography leaves room for many idiosyncrasies (thanks to
Francis Nolan for making this reading of idiolect clear to me). Second language acquisi-
tion can be a related source of speaker idiosyncrasies (Oksaar 1987), for example, because
an individual has acquired a second language to a certain level and in a certain pattern –
based on factors such as aptitude, motivation, duration of exposure, or the age of ﬁrst
exposure. A related aspect of idiolect is the possibility that a speaker uses a certain com-
bination of characteristics of a dialect while excluding other characteristics of the same
dialect. A special case of this possibility is the notion of degree of dialect, i.e. whether a
speaker displays stronger or weaker signs of a dialect (or other variety). Degree of dialect
can also be evident from the consistency of occurrence or the strength of a phonetic/
phonological (or other) characteristic of a dialect.
The second reading of idiolect is in terms of linguistic-phonetic details that are not, or
not only characteristics of dialects and other language varieties. An example is stop
epenthesis (insertion of a stop consonant) in words like hentce or eltse. Although stop
epenthesis has been shown to be subject to dialectal variation (Fourakis and Port 1986), it
is also subject to speaker variation within the same dialect (Yoo and Blankenship 2003;
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
391

Jessen 2008b). Other examples of potential idiolectal phonetic details mentioned in the
forensic literature include glottalisation of word-ﬁnal /p,t,k/ or velarisation of postvocalic
/l/ in English (Nolan 1983) as well as spirantisation (change from stop to fricative) of
intervocalic /b/ or the phonetic manifestation of the glottal stop in German (Künzel
1987). Moosmüller (1997) mentions further examples of speaker-speciﬁc segmental
phenomena that are free of dialectal and sociolectal variation. She points out that pro-
sodically weak positions and casual speaking styles are a good place to look for these
idiosyncratic patterns.
The third reading of idiolect is the one that has been worked out more comprehen-
sively in forensic linguistics than in forensic phonetics and that includes idiosyncratic
aspects of syntax and the lexicon (Coulthard 2004). One type of idiosyncratic feature that
occurs in spoken language is the use of stereotypical expressions, such as the frequent use
of you know. Stereotypical expressions are not completely speaker-speciﬁc, of course, but
the selections of stereotypical expressions and the frequency with which they are used are
only found in a limited number of speakers.
The third category used in Table 25.2 is called habitual. In a sense, this category is
deﬁned negatively: speaker characteristics that are subsumed under this category do not
have any obvious organic foundation nor are they related to the linguistic conventions
that are required or expected by the language system or the social community. The
examples of habitual features that are given in the table and often used in casework, are
articulation rate (Jessen 2007b for introduction and population statistics) and f0-variability
(Jessen et al. 2005 for further explanation). Dysﬂuent behaviour, especially the use of
ﬁllers (also called ﬁlled pauses) of the type uh and um, is another type of habitual feature
that according to a study on the BKA corpus mentioned above carries much speaker-
speciﬁc information (Tschäpe et al. 2005). This is consistent with evidence that ﬁllers are
not intentionally used by the speaker (Corley and Steward 2008). Speaker variation in
the use of ﬁllers was also found by de Leeuw (2007).
Whereas the term ‘idiolectal’ is used here for speaker idiosyncrasies that are more
closely associated to linguistic systems (‘grammars’), the term ‘habitual’ is used for idio-
syncrasies that are extra-grammatical (e.g. grammars do not specify a certain speech
tempo). Furthermore, idiolectal features are also often segmental whereas habitual fea-
tures are commonly prosodic, but there are exceptions. There are also uncertainties
about where to locate certain phenomena. For example, coarticulation (neighbouring
sounds inﬂuencing each other in phonetic detail) has been shown to be an important
source of speaker variation (Nolan 1983). Is coarticulation idiolectal because it deals with
(segmental) phonetic details that are associated with the linguistic system (e.g. coarticu-
lation patterns can diﬀer between languages), or is it habitual because it is about the
freedom of how to get from one phonological target to the next and because it changes
on the axis between a habitually careful or a ‘slurred’ manner of speaking? This example
shows that the three-way classiﬁcation in Table 25.2 is only a rough guideline on how to
distinguish diﬀerent kinds of speaker-speciﬁc characteristics (see Nolan 1983 and Rose
2002 for further classiﬁcations).
Conclusion
In this chapter an overview of speaker proﬁling and speaker comparison – two tasks
within forensic speaker identiﬁcation – has been presented. It should have become clear
MICHAEL JESSEN
392

during the presentation that these tasks require experts that have an academic back-
ground in phonetics and linguistics. As for the phonetic part, both auditory phonetic
transcription and acoustic phonetic measurements are necessary, including in many
‘extra-grammatical’ domains such as speaker-speciﬁc voice quality and articulation rate.
Linguistic knowledge is required for the identiﬁcation of dialects and other linguistic
varieties and is very important if casework is required in a foreign language, where
cooperation with informants or other linguists is necessary. When any lack of knowledge
becomes apparent in a particular case, the expert needs to know where to look for fur-
ther literature in linguistics and phonetics and must be able to understand it. The BKA is
sometimes approached by forensic institutes from other countries asking whether it can
provide training in forensic speaker identiﬁcation and certify that the attendees are
competent in carrying out casework independently. On these occasions, we point out
that training of this sort is only possible if there is a previous academic background in
phonetics, linguistics or a closely related discipline, but that such training is not possible
from scratch. It is true that certain aspects of speaker identiﬁcation methodology can be
taught quite easily, such as how to measure average f0 or long-term formants. However,
this trained knowledge is only suﬃcient as long as the case is easy. However if, for
example, the quality is low and it not clear where the third formant is located or whether
a certain acoustic pattern is part of speech or of non-speech noise, more in-depth
knowledge about speech production and its acoustic consequences is necessary. Or, for
example, if formant patterns do not match despite other ample evidence of identity, it is
important to have a good knowledge of diﬀerent potential sources of intra-speaker var-
iation. There are many diﬀerent ways in which a case can be diﬃcult and where in-depth
knowledge about speech and language is necessary. It is the opinion of the author that
academic phonetic and linguistic training is necessary in order to carry out casework in
speaker identiﬁcation, but this position does not go undisputed in the forensic speech and
audio analysis community. Although explicit statements are rare, there is a strong
impression that in some countries forensic speaker identiﬁcation is seen as a technical
problem that can be solved by purchasing particular speech analysis equipment and/or
applying automatic speaker recognition. Automatic speaker recognition is an important
development, but it should be seen as an addition to phonetic/linguistic methods, not as
a replacement. Automatic speaker recognition could not be addressed in this chapter, but
introductory information and further references are provided in Jessen (2008a).
Further reading
Hollien, H. (1990) The Acoustics of Crime: The New Science of Forensic Phonetics, New York: Plenum.
(A textbook that gives a good impression of the full range of forensic phonetics and acoustics –
including topics outside of speaker identiﬁcation – and that contains many references to previous
literature in the historical development of the ﬁeld.)
Jessen, M. (2008) ‘Forensic phonetics’, Language and Linguistics Compass, 2: 671–711. (A recent review of
forensic speaker identiﬁcation with an emphasis on speaker comparison theory and methodology,
including automatic speaker recognition.)
Nolan, F. (1983) The Phonetic Bases of Speaker Recognition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
(A classical monograph that lays many terminological and conceptual foundations in forensic speaker
identiﬁcation and that contains relevant phonetic experiments.)
——(1997) ‘Speaker recognition and forensic phonetics’, in W.J. Hardcastle and J. Laver (eds) The
Handbook of Phonetic Sciences, Oxford: Blackwell. (An important review which makes it clear that
THE FORENSIC PHONETICIAN
393

forensic work is an important application of phonetics and that forensic phonetics is an established
ﬁeld within phonetics.)
Rose, P. (2002) Forensic Speaker Identiﬁcation, London: Taylor and Francis. (A modern textbook in for-
ensic speaker identiﬁcation that emphasises acoustic phonetics and Bayesian reasoning and that pro-
vides interesting perspectives for the future of the ﬁeld.)
Website Appendices
The following references are supported by accompanying conference Powerpoint pre-
sentations, which can be viewed on the Handbook’s accompanying website available at:
http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/.
Jessen, M. (2008b) ‘Categorical v. Continuous Variations Between Speakers’, paper presented at the
17th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, Lau-
sanne. Supported by: IAFPA 2008 Jessen.ppt
Moos, A. (2008b) ‘Long-Term Formant Distribution (LTF) Based on German Spontaneous and Read
Speech’, paper presented at the 17th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic
Phonetics and Acoustics, Lausanne. Supported by: IAFPA 2008 Moos.ppt
Tschäpe, N., Trouvain, J., Bauer, D. and Jessen, M. (2005) ‘Idiosyncratic Patterns of Filled Pauses’,
paper presented at the 14th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics
and Acoustics, Marrakesh. Supported by: IAFPA 2005 Tschaepe et al.ppt
MICHAEL JESSEN
394

26
The forensic linguist
The expert linguist meets the adversarial system
Lawrence M. Solan
Science in the adversarial system
The academic world and the world of litigation produce an awkward mix. Lawyers are
in the business of winning their cases. Academics are in the business of engaging in dis-
interested research in an eﬀort to uncover truths. Academics, including those who work
in the “hard sciences,” are accustomed to such tasks as evaluating competing theories,
each of which has its own strengths and weaknesses. Criteria of evaluation generally
include both descriptive and explanatory adequacy and sometimes such things as
Occam’s Razor and other measures of parsimony and elegance. In linguistic theory, for
example, competing syntactic accounts are frequently judged on the breadth of the
phenomena they are able to explain without resort to ad hoc solutions. The more elegant
solution that covers more ground wins. In this realm, uncertainty is the norm. Those
engaged in scientiﬁc inquiry do not close up shop once they have achieved some
progress. Rather, they continue their explorations, often revising (and sometimes even
discarding) earlier hypotheses as new data and new explanations come to light.
The legal system is also designed to uncover truths. But, in places that employ an
adversarial system, it does not do so by conducting disinterested research, but rather
through the vigorous presentation of evidence slanted toward diﬀerent positions. The
assumption—more a matter of faith—is that the better sets of facts, arguments and the-
ories presented in the court room will rise to the top, and that thereby the quest for truth
will be served (see Landsman 1984). For this reason, during the litigation process, lawyers
are likely to exploit the uncertainty of opposing experts. This can lead to serious dis-
comfort when an expert accustomed to living with a level of uncertainty as a professional
matter ﬁnds himself the subject of ridicule in the courtroom (see, e.g. Shuy 2006;
Coulthard and Johnson 2007 for discussion).
Philosopher/legal scholar Susan Haack, drawing on the work of Peirce, comments on
the diﬀerence between scientiﬁc and legal inquiry:
Distinguishing genuine inquiry, the real thing, from pseudo-inquiry or “sham
reasoning,” C.S. Peirce – a working scientist as well as the greatest of American
395

philosophers – wrote that “the spirit … is the most essential thing – the motive”;
that genuine inquiry consists in “actually drawing the bow upon truth with
intentness in the eye, with energy in the arm.” For the same reason, I am tempted
to write of advocacy “research” (in scare quotes); for it is something of a stretch to
call advocacy research “research” at all. Advocacy “research” is like inquiry insofar
as it involves seeking out evidence. But it is part of an advocacy project insofar as it
involves seeking out evidence favoring a predetermined conclusion; and it is
undertaken in the spirit, from the motive, of an advocate. In short, it is a kind of
pseudo-inquiry.
(Haack 2008: 1071)
Making matters worse, lawyers are not required to be sincere in their attacks (Post 1987;
Solan 2008). They are not permitted to lie outright. Nonetheless, the lawyer who
believes the opposing expert’s position to be valid remains obliged to ﬁnd holes in the
analysis and to exploit them vigorously. If a coroner makes a computational error in
computing the time of death, the lawyer will—in fact, must—take maximum advantage
of the mistake even if the lawyer believes the time of death in the report to be correct.
At least that is so in the United States.
It is somewhat ironic that scientiﬁc investigation accepts more uncertainty than does
the legal process, since it is the legal system’s assumption that scientiﬁc knowledge is crisp
and factual that makes it attractive to the legal system in the ﬁrst place (see Berger and
Solan 2008 for discussion). Nonetheless, that is often the case. The imperfect match
between scientiﬁc inquiry and the structure of the adversarial system presents a challenge
for the expert witness. One lawyer wants the witness to act as a good team player, while
the other attempts to rip him or her to shreds. In this article, I bring to the attention of
the forensic linguistic community a number of issues that have been raised more gen-
erally about expert evidence in the adversarial system that might be important to the ﬁeld
as it develops.
A large body of literature demonstrates that in interpreting facts, people (including
experts) tend to be biased toward conﬁrming the result that they have already reached.
People are aware of such tendencies in others, but deny it in themselves. This means that
even experts with high moral integrity will tend to cast their conclusions in a way that is
helpful to the position they have espoused. Moreover, people tend to view positive
results without regard to underlying base rates. This has led to the acceptance of forensic
identiﬁcation techniques that are not adequately grounded in science. The proliferation
of DNA analysis in legal settings makes the absence of such analysis in other forensic
sciences particularly salient, but the problem has been there all along.
The legal system has reacted to these problems in diﬀerent ways. In the United States,
there has been a growing emphasis on the importance of valid and replicable
methodology in court, as evidenced by the United States Supreme Court’s 1993 Daubert
decision and it progeny. The UK, while also considering a move in that direction (see
Law Commission 2009), has required experts to certify that they understand their ﬁrst
obligation is to be straightforward and disinterested. Both are positive developments.
I begin by discussing some of the cognitive biases that have been discussed in the
recent psychological and legal literature. Awareness of them can both help the expert
linguist to understand some of the pitfalls of entering the all-or-nothing fray of litigation,
and further help to understand the intensity of the current push toward developing
reliable methodologies on which experts can base their testimony. I then turn to
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
396

developments in the legal system directed at addressing some of these problems. Finally,
this chapter turns to forensic linguistics in particular, and discusses various standards that
the ﬁeld may adopt on its own behalf.
The challenge facing forensic identiﬁcation sciences
The need to make forensic science more scientiﬁc
Forensic identiﬁcation techniques have been under serious scrutiny and attack in the
United States during the past decade. To take a dramatic example, until recently bullet
lead analysis had been a staple of law enforcement agencies in criminal cases. For more
than thirty years, analysts, in particular from the FBI, would testify that the lead from a
questioned bullet and that from a reference box of ammunition associated with the
defendant, “were analytically indistinguishable,” “came from the same batch,” “were
consistent with their having come from the same box of ammunition,” and so on.
(Giannelli 2007: 200). Disturbingly, diﬃculty in determining how to couch conclusions
about the ﬁrmness of an identiﬁcation shows itself in forensic linguistic identiﬁcation as
well. But more disturbingly, bullet lead analysis has now been shown to be without
scientiﬁc basis. In 2004, the National Research Council (NRC), which is the research
arm of the National Academies (formerly the National Academy of Science) issued a
devastating report (NRC 2004). Among its conclusions was that the output from a single
“melt” of lead “can range from the equivalent of as few as 12,000 to as many as 35
million 40-grain, .22 caliber longriﬂe bullets” (NRC 2004: 6). Courts began jumping
ship and, in 2005, the FBI abandoned the procedure.1 Prior to that, the analysis was used
in many criminal trials involving ﬁrearms, including death penalty cases. The recognition
that this forensic procedure is not provably reliable has had its consequences. Based on
the discredited technology, in 2008, a Florida court overturned the conviction of a man
who had spent ten years in prison for killing his wife based on the discredited technol-
ogy. The legitimacy of many other convictions has been brought into question.2
Lead bullet analysis is not alone. Even ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation, long considered an
airtight method, has been questioned in recent years. Signiﬁcantly, the history of ﬁn-
gerprint identiﬁcation reveals that it developed in the absence of studies demonstrating
their uniqueness. That has always been taken as a matter of faith (Mnookin 2001a). This
is not to say that ﬁngerprinting has been unsuccessful as a tool for law enforcement. The
Innocence Project announces on its web page that there have been 240 post-conviction
DNA exonerations in the US courts of people who had been convicted of crimes, but of
those, only two involved incorrect testimony about ﬁngerprints. In one case, an analyst
testiﬁed that the comparison was inconclusive when in fact, it had excluded the defen-
dant; in the other, the crime lab compared two sets of the defendants’ known prints to
each other, rather than comparing the prints at the crime scene to the defendant’s known
prints.3 Moreover, while few disagree that ﬁngerprint comparison can be very accurate in
most cases (but see Cole 2004), ﬁngerprints in forensic settings are often both partial and
degraded and we do not know the rate at which accuracy and consensus diminish as the
amount of information is decreased. A case in point is the FBI’s incorrect ﬁngerprint
identiﬁcation of an American Muslim as the Madrid bomber (see Dror et al. 2005).
The same holds true for handwriting analysis, which has received particularly brutal
treatment in the literature on the admissibility of expert testimony (see Risinger and Saks
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
397

1996; Mnookin 2001b, but see Moenssens’ 1997 defense of the ﬁeld). Here, again, the
issue is not whether document examiners ever get it right. Of course they do. Rather,
the issue is that handwriting analysis was not put to the test to determine its limits. Even
when a document examiner has been well-trained and is a person of integrity, without
the implementation of techniques that have been validated, we do not know where an
expert’s expertise begins and ends, other than as a matter of trust.
More broadly, in 2009, the National Research Council of the National Academies
came out with a report on the status of forensic identiﬁcation. Entitled Strengthening
Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward (NRC 2009), among its ﬁndings were
the following:
Two very important questions should underlie the law’s admission of and reliance
upon forensic evidence in criminal trials: (1) the extent to which a particular
forensic discipline is founded on a reliable scientiﬁc methodology that gives it the
capacity to accurately analyze evidence and report ﬁndings and (2) the extent to
which practitioners in a particular forensic discipline rely on human interpretation
that could be tainted by error, the threat of bias, or the absence of sound opera-
tional procedures and robust performance standards. … Unfortunately, these
important questions do not always produce satisfactory answers in judicial decisions
pertaining to the admissibility of forensic science evidence proﬀered in criminal
trials.
(NRC 2009: S-7)
The report, thus, criticizes both the various forensic disciplines for not policing them-
selves adequately, and the courts for falling asleep at the job and not performing
their gatekeeping function with adequate standards. What should be done? The report
suggests:
A body of research is required to establish the limits and measures of performance
and to address the impact of sources of variability and potential bias. Such research
is sorely needed, but it seems to be lacking in most of the forensic disciplines that
rely on subjective assessments of matching characteristics. These disciplines need to
develop rigorous protocols to guide these subjective interpretations and pursue
equally rigorous research and evaluation programs.
(NRC 2009: S-6)
Cognitive biases in forensic science
What are the biases to which forensic scientists are so susceptible? They are the same
biases to which scientists of all sorts may succumb. First among them are observer eﬀects, in
particular conﬁrmation bias. Observer eﬀects refer to the long-recognized fact that “context
and expectations inﬂuence an individual’s perceptions and interpretations of what he
observes.” (Risinger et al. 2002: 12). Recognition of this potential drives a great deal of
methodology in science, especially in areas of medical research where double-blind
studies are the norm. Even when patients are randomly selected for participation, it is
only when both the doctor administering the treatment and the patient receiving it are
unaware of whether the patient is receiving the experimental treatment or is a member
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
398

of the control group receiving a placebo that the results of clinical trials are deemed
reliable. The concern is that otherwise subtle, even unconscious cues may lead to
distortions in the results.
In the case of forensic experts, one of the most important cues is prior knowledge of
the result that the party engaging the expert would like them to reach. This leads to
conﬁrmation bias, the “unwitting selectivity in the acquisition and use of evidence” in
which people are likely to engage (Nickerson 1998: 175). In fact, even when we
have no stake in the outcome, we tend to look at data selectively to conﬁrm tentative
conclusions we have reached. In a famous study using a card game, Wason and Johnson-
Laird (1972) found that people quickly see the signiﬁcance of information that may
prove them right or wrong. In contrast, most people ignore evidence that can disconﬁrm
a working hypothesis but cannot otherwise serve to strengthen the hypothesis.
Once we have taken a position on a matter, information that supports that position
becomes more salient, and information that tends to disconﬁrm it becomes less so
(Nickerson 1998; Simon 2004). To take a classic example from the psychological
literature, Darley and Gross (1983) showed two groups of subjects a videotape of a child
taking an academic test. One group of subjects was told that the child came from a high
socioeconomic background, the other group told that the child came from a low
socioeconomic background. They were then asked to evaluate the child’s academic
ability based on what they observed of the child’s behavior while she took the test.
The results were dramatic. Those who were told that the child came from a wealthy
background rated her ability as greater than did those who were told she was eco-
nomically disadvantaged. Both groups supported their ratings by referring extensively to
evidence from the videotape.
Real-life experiences abound. It happens, for example, when the police, certain that
they have apprehended the guilty party and acting in good faith, ignore evidence of
another’s guilt and of their suspect’s innocence as they build their case. Malcolm
Coulthard discusses a number of such cases in his writings (see, e.g. Coulthard 2004).
In one, convinced that they had apprehended four men who killed a 13-year old
newspaper delivery boy, the police extracted a confession from one of them—Patrick
Molloy. However, the police denied that the language contained in the confession was
language that they had suggested to him and that he had accepted under duress, as he
alleged. The four were convicted, and Coulthard was consulted on appeal, at which time
he found the transcript of a police interview to be unrealistically identical to that of a
statement attributed to him. The Crown conceded error during the appeal process, based
on other evidence of the defendants’ innocence. Such things happen when the police are
so convinced that they have the right person that they feel justiﬁed in cutting corners.
The doctoring of an interview record is misconduct, but the motivation to do so comes
largely from conﬁrmation bias.
Conﬁrmation bias also occurs when an expert witness focuses in a report on the
information that bolsters the position taken, and understates or ignores information that
would tend to lead to a contrary position. Dror et al. (2005) presented ﬁve experienced
ﬁngerprint analysts with separate pairs of ﬁngerprints for comparison. In each case, the
pair was one that the analyst had himself identiﬁed as a match sometime earlier in the
ordinary course of business. The experimenters also showed each of these ﬁve pairs of
prints to independent examiners, who agreed that each pair of prints constituted a
matched set. However, a confederate told each of these experts that the questioned prints
were the ones erroneously identiﬁed by the FBI as a match in the Madrid bombing case.
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
399

The experts were then told to ignore this contextual information in conducting their
analysis. The result was that three of the ﬁve experts found no match, one said he could
not decide, and only one came to the same conclusion he had reached earlier: that there
was a match.
Making things worse, not only are we subject to this bias, but we each have a “bias
blind spot” (Pronin et al. 2002). That is, we have a propensity to think that our own
beliefs are objective, while the beliefs of others are colored by various biases that inﬂu-
ence them. Even when such biases are brought to our attention, we tend to recognize
them as applying to others—not to ourselves. In other words, we see bias in others,
analytical crispness in ourselves. Pronin and Kugler attribute this asymmetry to the fact
that “people over-value thoughts, feelings, and other mental contents, relative to beha-
vior, when assessing their own actions, motives, and preferences, but not when assessing
others’” (Pronin and Kugler: 2007: 566). They call this the “Introspection Illusion.”
Their studies ﬁrst conﬁrmed the bias blind spot. When, for example, Harvard students
were told that some people tend to be biased toward self-serving views of their academic
or job performance, they attributed this bias more to other, similarly situated students
than to themselves. They further said that they judged themselves more by evaluating
their own thoughts and motives, and judged others based more on their actual behavior.
Whether judging themselves or others, the more they relied on thoughts and motives,
the less bias they found. The more they relied on behavior, the more bias they found.
Signiﬁcantly, when participants were told in advance that relying on introspection
instead of evaluating their own behavior can lead them to a biased assessment, they took
heed and were no longer subject to the bias blind spot (Pronin and Kugler 2007: 575).
This ﬁnding may have signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations in the forensic arena.
Judicial reactions to expert evidence in the US and the UK
We have now identiﬁed two problems facing the expert linguist: the brutality of the
adversarial system, including snide and personal attacks on individuals working within
standard scientiﬁc paradigms, and a broad concern that the forensic identiﬁcation sciences
lack adequate scientiﬁc foundation. This section deals with how the courts have grappled
with the second of these issues. The next section will deal with the tension between the
two problems, and how forensic linguistics might develop to jointly address them.
Linguistic expert testimony is widely accepted in both English and American courts.
However, the courts in the US and the UK have engaged diﬀerent strategies to deal
with the need for ensuring reliable expert testimony. While American courts have
focused more on the need for valid and reliable methodology, British courts have con-
centrated on requiring experts to certify that they have conducted their analysis in a
neutral, disinterested manner. Both approaches have something to oﬀer in response to
the issues raised above.
The Daubert standard in American courts: the judge as gatekeeper
For most of the twentieth century, American courts admitted scientiﬁc evidence if it had
“gained general acceptance in the particular ﬁeld in which it belongs.” The standard was
derived from a 1923 court of appeals case, Frye v. United States, a case that involved a lie
detector test that measured systolic blood pressure. The problem with the Frye test,
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
400

however, is that it is subject to manipulation by changing the deﬁnition of “the particular
ﬁeld in which it belongs.” Among lie detector analysts, the device in question in Frye
might be perfectly acceptable. Among social scientists and medical experts, waiting for
the results of validation testing, it might be unacceptable. Moreover, as noted at the
beginning of this article, science is often not about certainty, but rather about con-
troversy. The “right” theory may have been articulated, but is not yet generally accepted,
whether because of the sociology of the scientiﬁc community, or because the theory is in
development and has not yet been shown to be able to handle crucial cases and to
explain apparent counterexamples.
These problems with the Frye standard were recognized in 1975, when the Federal
Rules of Evidence were ﬁrst adopted. The standard under Rule 702 as originally enacted
was that expert evidence should be admitted, “if it will assist the trier of fact to under-
stand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue.” It was not clear from the rule’s language,
however, whether this standard was intended to replace Frye, or merely to explain the
goal of the Frye standard.
The Supreme Court of the United States answered that question in three cases decided
in the 1990s, which have come to be called the Daubert trilogy. The ﬁrst case, Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., was decided in 1993. The issue there was whether
Bendectin, an anti-nausea drug taken during pregnancy, caused birth defects in the
plaintiﬀ’s children. Most of the scientiﬁc literature said that it did not, but the plaintiﬀ
wished to have an expert testify to challenge the scientiﬁc literature and to discuss animal
studies which suggested that Bendectin might indeed cause birth defects in children.
Ultimately, the case was sent back to the lower appellate court, which ruled that the
expert testimony was not admissible because it lacked the indicia of scientiﬁc validity. In
determining whether proﬀered testimony is scientiﬁcally valid, the standard would no
longer be whether it was generally accepted by the scientiﬁc community. Rather, the
testimony must have a “grounding in the methods and procedures of science” (p. 590).
This grounding may be evidenced by four nonexclusive criteria: whether the theory
oﬀered has been tested; whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication;
the known rate of error; and whether the theory is generally accepted in the scientiﬁc
community (p. 593). Note that the fourth criterion is the Frye standard, which has now
become one of a number of nonexclusive factors that a court will consider.
The second case in the Daubert trilogy, General Electric Company v. Joiner, concerned
the standard of review for appellate courts of Daubert decisions made at trial. The Court
held that rulings about the admissibility of expert testimony should be overturned only if
the trial court abused its discretion. This is a very lax standard, and it means in essence
that the decisions of trial judges to admit or reject expert evidence will rarely be
reviewed seriously, and even more rarely reversed.
Finally, in Kumho Tire Company v. Carmichael, the Supreme Court held that the Daubert
approach applies not only to scientiﬁc testimony, but also to experts who testify based on
their experience. The expert in that case was called to testify on the cause of tire damage
based on his experience in the tire industry. The Court held that his opinion based upon
experience that cannot be tested did not meet evidentiary standards. The determining fact
is whether the expert “employs in the courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that
characterizes the practice of an expert in the relevant ﬁeld” (p. 152).
As a result of these three cases, the Federal Rules of Evidence were amended to permit
expert testimony if it will “assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to
determine a fact in issue,” and if:
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
401

(1) The testimony is based upon suﬃcient facts or data,
(2) The testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and
(3) The witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.
(Rule 702, Fed R. Evid.)
It should be noted that all three cases in the Daubert trilogy were civil cases in which an
individual was suing a corporation, and in all three, the courts held that the expert’s
proﬀered testimony did not pass muster. It was the legal academic community, and to
some extent criminal defense lawyers, who subsequently argued that the Daubert
approach should apply to the forensic identiﬁcation sciences, which were inadequately
validated notwithstanding their claims (see, e.g. Risinger and Saks 1996). It is still not at
all clear that American courts apply these principles evenhandedly in civil and criminal
cases alike (Risinger 2000), or for that matter, that the actual rulings of courts diﬀer
signiﬁcantly depending upon whether a jurisdiction applies the Frye standard or the
Daubert standard (Cheng and Yoon 2005). Nonetheless, Daubert has colored the debate
about forensic testimony, which often is oﬀered as scientiﬁc even though validations
studies have not been conducted in a scientiﬁc manner.
Expert certiﬁcation of neutrality in the UK
The UK has taken a somewhat diﬀerent approach (see Law Commission 2009),
although, at the time of writing, Daubert-like standards are under consideration there as
well. Rather than focusing on the methodology, the UK has traditionally focused on the
credentials and integrity of the expert. Aware of the temptation for experts to present
biased evidence, Civil Procedure Rules have been enacted requiring experts to aﬃrm
that they are acting in a neutral manner. The rules state explicitly that
1. It is the duty of an expert to help the Court on matters within his expertise.
2. This duty overrides any obligation to the person from whom he has received
instructions or by whom he is paid.
(Civil Procedure Rule 35.3)
Expert reports must contain a statement that the expert understands his duty to the court
and that he has complied with that duty (Civil Procedure Rules 35.10).
Similarly, Appendix 11 to the Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide (2002)
imposes neutrality on experts. Because the material may not be familiar to those who do
not work within the British courts, it is worth quoting in full:
1. It is the duty of an expert to help the court on the matters within his expertise:
rule 35.3(1). This duty is paramount and overrides any obligation to the
person from whom the expert has received instructions or by whom he is paid: rule
35.3(2).
2. Expert evidence presented to the court should be, and should be seen to be, the
independent product of the expert uninﬂuenced by the pressures of litigation.
3. An expert witness should provide independent assistance to the court by way of
objective unbiased opinion in relation to matters within his expertise. An expert
witness should never assume the role of an advocate.
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
402

4. An expert witness should not omit to consider material facts which could detract
from his concluded opinion.
5. An expert witness should make it clear when a particular question or issue falls
outside his expertise.
6. If an expert’s opinion is not properly researched because he considers that insuﬃ-
cient data is available, this must be stated in his report with an indication that the
opinion is no more than a provisional one.
7. In a case where an expert witness who has prepared a report is unable to conﬁrm
that the report contains the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth
without some qualiﬁcation, that qualiﬁcation must be stated in the report.
8. If, after exchange of reports, an expert witness changes his view on a material
matter having read another expert’s report or for any other reason, such change of
view should be communicated in writing (through the party’s legal representatives)
to the other side without delay, and when appropriate to the court.
(Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide, 2002: 151)
Admirably, the goal is to reduce the adversarial nature of scientiﬁc debate in the litigation
context. No doubt these standards accomplish that goal to some extent. However, given
both the pressure placed on experts and the bias blind spot discussed earlier, it is not
likely to accomplish that goal up to the level of purely disinterested scientiﬁc standards.
Experts will continue to be tempted to write short, uninformative reports in order to
keep the opposing party from preparing a rebuttal adequately; present few if any coun-
terexamples to their analysis in their main reports; or to be as helpful to opposing parties
during cross-examination as they would be if they believed themselves to be entirely
neutral; or to raise issues on their own that might compromise their party’s position, even
if they would have done so in an academic climate. As Sanders notes:
[W]hen [experts] do fail to present adequate justiﬁcation for a belief, often it is not
because they fail to present the best case for a position but that they fail to tell the
“whole truth” about their belief and present with equal force the evidence for and
against it.
(Sanders 2007: 1558)
Thus, it should not be surprising that the UK is considering a move toward focusing on
valid methods.
The direction of forensic linguistics
I have identiﬁed two problems facing the linguist who ventures into the world of liti-
gation: One is a problem that experts have with the legal system—its intolerance of
uncertainty in scientiﬁc inquiry, notwithstanding that scientists accept that the current
best account may not ultimately survive further the test of time. This, combined with the
aggressive advocacy of the adversarial system, can lead lawyers to ridicule even experts
who are prominent researchers in their ﬁelds. The result of this hostility is a reluctance
on the part of many top scholars to participate in the system at all (see Coulthard and
Johnson 2007 for discussion and also Gray, this volume). The second problem that the
legal system has with experts is that the experts themselves provide inadequate protection
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
403

against bias by failing to develop methods that have been independently validated. This is
the main thrust of the National Research Council (2009) report on forensic science in
the United States.
I would like to argue here that in fact these are the same problem, at least in large part.
Fixing the second will reduce the severity of the ﬁrst in that the best way for an expert to
avoid bias and to reduce the stress associated with defending one’s professional opinion in
court is to employ reliable methods that have been proven valid. A second, somewhat
less eﬀective, approach is for experts to submit to proﬁciency testing. This is not as good
as the ﬁrst method, because even proﬁcient experts can succumb to bias in a forensic
setting. Nonetheless, I explore the beneﬁts of proﬁciency testing below.
Developing valid methodology
The basic concern in developing methods that will be acceptable in court and meet the
standards of normal science is to develop and test those methods outside the litigation
context. Not only is litigation-driven research more prone to bias, but it is less highly
valued by the courts for that reason. In fact, as Haack (2008) points out, once Mrs.
Daubert’s case was sent back to the lower court for additional proceedings, the judge
there commented on the reduced reliability of scientiﬁc evidence gathered for the pur-
pose of the litigation itself. Judge Kozinski commented there: “[I]n determining whether
proposed expert testimony amounts to good science, we may not ignore the fact that a
scientist’s normal workplace is the lab or the ﬁeld, not the courtroom or the lawyer’s
oﬃce.” (Daubert 2, 1316–17 n.3) He further contrasted the increased likelihood of bias
when the result is tied to remuneration, with independent research conducted as normal
science, which carries its own indicia of reliability.
The development of valid methodology has produced positive results in other forensic
ﬁelds. For example, as mentioned above, handwriting analysis has been in ill repute in
the United States because of its inability to describe a valid method with provable rates of
accuracy. In part because of that criticism, the government has funded research in that
area, resulting in improved technology that has been accepted under Daubert analysis. In
a 2002 case, United States v. Prime, the trial court summarizes some of that progress—
including a greater understanding of the rate of error—in admitting the testimony of a
handwriting expert who had been involved in these improvements to that ﬁeld.
Academic critics have also begun to recognize this progress (see, e.g. Giannelli 2003: 8–9).
How such research is to be conducted in the linguistic arena diﬀers from one subﬁeld
to another. The forensic phonetic literature, for example, is replete with studies of what
circumstances make it easier or harder to recognize a speaker by his or her voice (see
Yarmey forthcoming for a good summary). Moreover, some researchers are developing
automated systems that are being tested for rates of error in terms of both misses (failure
to identify) and false alarms (false identiﬁcation; see Solan and Tiersma 2005 for
discussion of some of these developments.). At the same time, there has been some
movement toward the proﬁciency testing of those phoneticians who use both aural and
acoustical information to form judgments, a trend to which I return below.
When it comes to authorship identiﬁcation, some researchers have attempted to
identify criteria which, taken in combination, can diagnose both authorship and non-
authorship. Chaski (2005), for example, uses aspects of punctuation, marked syntactic
structures and word length in combination. Her results are impressive, and she has been
permitted to testify in cases after Daubert scrutiny, although the process has still not been
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
404

tested for validity and reliability through independent means. My point here is a basic
one: the research upon which expert testimony is based is best conducted in the lab,
outside the context of a particular dispute, as Judge Kozinski prescribes. Other researchers
have employed similar research methods, using criteria for identiﬁcation that diﬀer from
Chaski’s, sometimes using sophisticated mathematical modeling (see, e.g. Stamatatos 2006).
Recent research into the conventions of text messaging shows promise for research
along these lines. Grant (this volume) discusses cases in which two possible authors of a
questioned text message use in general quite diﬀerent styles of abbreviation and ellipsis in
their texting. Once pointed out, one’s intuition is that such diﬀerences will predict
authorship, although research conﬁrming this has not yet been published. Grant himself
suggests some ways in which such research could be structured. Olsson (2003) observes
that while some texters are entirely consistent in their use of stylistic conventions, some
are not, and the amount of inconsistency varies from person to person. This diversity
should be taken into account in determining—based on research from corpora that
are already available or which are gathered for research purposes—how predictive of
co-authorship and non-authorship these conventions are.
In other subﬁelds of forensic linguistics, the methodology may require only that the
types of materials examined and the arguments made be standardized to the extent that
a consensus develops about what might be useful to the legal community. Linguists
frequently testify in trademark disputes, for example. Those who conduct frequent
analyses, for the purpose of determining the confusability or the strength of a mark,
might publish their approaches in order to set best practices for the ﬁeld. This, at least to
some extent, is occurring (see Shuy 2002; Butters 2008a and this volume).
Proﬁciency as a substitute for methodology
Those who have practiced in the area of forensic linguistics, especially in the area of
authorship identiﬁcation, might respond to the call for methodology as follows: “I have
been doing this for a long time, and I am very good at it. I cannot tell in advance exactly
which features in a particular case will be diagnostic of authorship, so requiring that
I develop a methodology that is tightly deﬁned will require me to ignore data that might
be important in an individual case.” In discussing some prominent cases involving
authorship identiﬁcation, Peter Tiersma and I (Solan and Tiersma 2005) note that
the absence of established methods might lead some insightful analysis to remain unac-
ceptable in the courtroom. We therefore suggest that research projects be initiated to
discover and validate reliable methods that will stand up to evidentiary scrutiny.
Perhaps, however, proﬁciency testing, if done properly could serve as an intermediate
level of validation while a ﬁeld conducts research into replicable methods. In a recent
lecture, Professor Jennifer Mnookin has referred to this as the “black box” approach to
forensic identiﬁcation, and argues that it might be useful in some instances. The concern
is that in some instances, Daubert may be causing us to throw the baby out with the
bathwater, rejecting skilled diagnosis based on experience (see Sanders 2001 for discus-
sion). Medical diagnosis is in part an art in which the most skilled diagnosticians are
unable to articulate what separates them from the rest of the pack (see Groopman 2007).
It would not be surprising if practitioners of forensic linguistic identiﬁcation also
developed skills that more than meet the standard of being helpful to the trier of fact.
Valid proﬁciency testing is diﬃcult to accomplish. The biggest problem is developing
materials that are relevant to real-life forensic problems. For example, when a document
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
405

has only two possible authors, rejecting one of them is suﬃcient to establish the other as
the author (assuming only one person wrote the document). In other cases, however, the
question is whether a particular suspect wrote a document, and there is no information
about who else might have written it otherwise. How many other potential authors
should the expert be able to reject before reaching an opinion that the suspect is the
likely author? These are diﬃcult questions that must be resolved before proﬁciency
testing can be designed in a meaningful way.
Notwithstanding these diﬃculties, information about a practitioner’s proﬁciency might
be useful to the legal system, especially during the development of validated methodol-
ogies. In fact, the success rate of proﬁcient practitioners might be compared with that of
other methods, particularly automated ones. Cambier-Langeveld (2007a) conducted a
study in which she pitted phoneticians using the auditory-acoustic method against semi-
automatic and automatic speaker recognition systems. The result was that the machines
produced fewer false alarms than the phoneticians, but at the same time failed to make
some correct identiﬁcations that the phoneticians were able to make. Some phoneticians
were extremely good and outperformed the machines, but disturbingly, the phoneticians
varied in their level of skill, highlighting the importance of proﬁciency testing at
the minimum. Without that testing, the individual who goes before the jury with
conﬁdence and charisma may be the one who prevails, regardless of actual skill.
Even experts who are proven to be good at what they do through proﬁciency testing
will be subject to bias when they conduct their analysis in a litigation context. Thus, I do
not advocate this approach as a long-term goal in the development of forensic linguistics.
Nonetheless, it might play a role in preserving insight while the ﬁeld moves ahead.
Conclusion
I have explored here two related, but seemingly distinct problems that arise when the
expert linguist enters the world of litigation: the legal system is unrealistic about what
science can do, and the forensic community has not adequately developed valid and
reliable methods. I have attempted here to show how these problems can be solved
together, through a single approach to methodology, and have suggested that proﬁciency
testing might bridge the gap in the short term.
It will be up to both the academic and the forensic linguistics communities to move
the ﬁeld ahead in these directions. To do so is particularly diﬃcult given the dual role
that many play as both academics and consultants. Yet some thirty years ago, it was the
academic linguists and phoneticians who demanded that forensic use of spectrograms
(voice prints) be used judiciously since they had not been proven accurate in forensic
settings. The ﬁeld of forensic linguistics remains capable of moving itself forward in the
early part of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Notes
The author wishes to express his gratitude to Susan Haack and Michael Risinger for valuable comments
on an earlier draft of this article.
1 Eric Lichtblau, ‘F.B.I. Abandons Disputed Test for Bullets from Crime Scene’, New York Times,
Sept. 2, 2005, p. A2.
LAWRENCE M. SOLAN
406

2 Judge Overturns Jimmy Ates’ Conviction: Use of Junk Science Leads to Release, press release of the
Florida Innocence Project, available online at: www.oranous.com/innocence/JimmyAtes/Ates%
20Press%20Release%2012%2017%202008%20FINAL.pdf (accessed 16 July 2009).
3 www.innocenceproject.org/docs/DNA_Exonerations_Forensic_Science.pdf, visited June 21, 2009.
Further reading
Darley, John M. and Paget H. Gross (1983) ‘A hypothesis-conﬁrming bias in labeling eﬀects,’ Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 44: 20–33.
Giannelli, Paul C. (2007) ‘Wrongful convictions and forensic science: the need to regulate crime labs,’
North Carolina Law Review, 86: 163–235.
National Research Council of the National Academies (2009) Strengthening Forensic Science in the United
States: A Path Forward, Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
Pronin, Emily and Matthew Kugler (2007) ‘Valuing thoughts, ignoring behavior: The introspection
illusion as a source of the bias blind spot,’ Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43: 565–78.
Sanders, Joseph (2007) ‘Expert witness ethics,’ Fordham Law Review, 76: 1539–84.
Shuy, Roger (2006) Linguistics in the Courtroom: A Practical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Laws and cases cited
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 43 F.3d 1311, (9th Cir. 1993)(“Daubert 2”).
Frye v. United States, 293 F. 213 (D.C. Cir. 1923).
General Electric Company v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136 (1997).
Kumho Tire Company v.Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999).
United States v. Prime, 220 F. Supp. 2d 1203 (W.D. Wash. 2002).
Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide, Appendix 11 (UK) (2002) available online at: www.hmcourts-
service.gov.uk/docs/guide.pdf.
Civil Procedure Rule 35.3 (UK).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 702 (US).
THE FORENSIC LINGUIST
407


2.2
Multilingualism in legal contexts


27
Nationality claims
Language analysis and asylum cases
Diana Eades
Introduction
In the ﬁrst two decades of the development of forensic linguistics, most expert linguistic
evidence was in criminal and civil law. However, the most recent legal area in which
linguists are becoming involved concerns immigration, speciﬁcally in relation to the use
of ‘language analysis’ in the investigation of the nationality claims of asylum seekers who
do not have any oﬃcial documents from their country of origin. This is most commonly
referred to as Language Analysis in the Determination of Origin, or LADO (although it
has also been referred to as linguistic identiﬁcation, as in Eades and Arends 2004; and
LingID, as in Eades et al. 2003). Language analysis is often sought by immigration
departments for use in their administrative processing of claims to asylum, but, given that
appeals against decisions of administrators can end up in the legal process, where linguists
can be called on as experts to give counter-analyses, then this work comes within
forensic linguistics.
According to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR 2008), at
the end of 2007, there were 11.5 million refugees worldwide and 647,000 new applications
for asylum or refugee status. Contrary to the widespread myth that refugees are ﬂooding
industrialised countries, the UNHCR estimates that only about 14% of the world’s refugees
are living outside their region of origin. That is, most refugees ﬂee to neighbouring coun-
tries. Nevertheless, the fear of being ‘swamped’ by asylum seekers is commonly voiced in
industrialised countries (UNHCR 2007: 16) and it is in this climate of fear, serious human
rights abuses and unprecedented global movement that LADO work is situated.
This chapter aims to provide an overview of how LADO work is carried out, and
some of the speciﬁc linguistic issues involved. The ﬁrst section below outlines the way in
which LADO works. There follows an introduction to some concerns of linguists about
problematic assumptions and practices. A sample report is then presented and discussed in
order to exemplify some of the issues involved in language variation, multilingualism and
language contact. Of particular concern are the problems which arise from LADO jud-
gements and reports being produced by ‘native speakers’ who have not been trained in
linguistics. The chapter concludes with a discussion about the challenges for linguists
411

who move beyond expertise in individual cases and/or in scholarly research to engage in
‘expert awareness raising’. This chapter draws in part on my earlier work on this topic,
namely in Eades and Arends (2004), Eades (2005), Eades (2008a) and Eades (2009).
How LADO work is done
Asylum seekers are people who have left their home country and who claim refugee status
in one of the approximately 150 countries which are signatories to the 1951 United
Nations Refugees Convention. In assessing claims for asylum, the main issue for the
determining authority (typically the immigration department) is to ascertain whether the
applicant has a ‘well-founded fear of being persecuted’ in their home country. Thus, in
immigration interviews, applicants recount their experiences in their home country, which
have often involved the persecution of themselves or of family members. Applicants also
explain why they are currently unable to return to their home country because of fear of
future persecution. The immigration department typically refers to current information
about the human rights situation in that country, such as reports by the US State Depart-
ment or the online factbook of the US Central Intelligence Agency. In this way, the
department assesses such factors as the plausibility of the applicant’s story, and the recent
and current situation in the country from which the applicant has ﬂed. But, a second major
concern arises in cases where applicants have no oﬃcial documentation which can prove
their national origin or citizenship. For example, in Australia during the years when many
asylum seekers said they were ﬂeeing persecution in Afghanistan (1999–2002), there was a
widespread view that many of these people were actually from Pakistan and were not
genuine refugees. It is relevant to note that there are many reasons why asylum seekers
arrive in a new country without travel documents. For example, Hazaras in Afghanistan
were not eligible for Afghan travel documents during Taliban rule (Brennan 2003: 51).
When an immigration oﬃcer suspects that an asylum seeker’s claims about their origin
are not truthful, a tape-recorded interview is conducted for the purposes of language
analysis. Such interviews are sometimes carried out in the asylum seeker’s ﬁrst language
by an interpreter, and sometimes by an immigration oﬃcial with the help of an inter-
preter. But frequently in some countries, the interview is carried out by an immigration
oﬃcer using an international lingua franca such as English, which is not the ﬁrst language
of either the interviewer or interviewee. The tape-recorded interview is usually analysed
either within the department or by one of the small number of private companies in
Europe who do this work. However, the practice of the Swiss government is diﬀerent in
that the interviews are carried out by phone by the linguist who will carry out the
analysis (Baltisberger and Favaro 2007).
Generally, the aim of the analysis is to make a judgement on the basis of the recorded
speech about the speaker’s claims about origin, whether this is national, regional or
ethnic. Sometimes the analysis comments on the applicant’s claims about the countries in
which they (say they) have lived. The analysis can also include making a judgement
about whether the speech on the recording is ‘authentic’ in the sense of being the way
that the person ‘really speaks’, or whether, on the contrary, the speaker is trying to sound
like someone from a particular background. For example, in several of the Australian
cases studied by Eades et al. (2003), the language analysis concluded that the speaker was
a Hazara from Pakistan who was trying to speak as if he was from Afghanistan, because
of alleged pronunciation or word choice, as we will see in the example below.
DIANA EADES
412

The analyst’s judgement is communicated in a written report to the immigration
department, where it can form the basis of a decision about the granting of asylum, or
where it can be one of many factors involved in making such a decision. To give an
example which appears to typify the use of LADO in a number of countries, an asylum
seeker in Australia who claimed to be from Afghanistan was denied refugee status by the
immigration department, largely on the basis of a report by a European language analysis
company (see RRT 2000 for details of this case). This company analysed a short tape-
recording of the asylum seeker speaking to an interpreter in the immigration detention
centre in Australia, and found that the man was speaking the Hazaragi dialect of Dari,
which is ‘mainly spoken in central Afghanistan but also in Pakistan and Iran’. On the
basis of the interviewee’s use of one Urdu word, and his pronunciation of ‘some words
with a slight Urdu accent’, the conclusion of the analyst was that the dialect used by the
asylum seeker ‘may, with considerable certainty, be said to originate from the Quetta
region’ of Pakistan. In coming to this conclusion on the basis of some Urdu inﬂuence in
the applicant’s speech, the analyst ignored the fact that Urdu is also spoken in some parts
of Afghanistan (Grimes 1992). The analysis also ignored the fact that the border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan is porous, and that people escaping Afghanistan have to travel
through Pakistan. The LADO report played an important role in the decision of the
immigration department that this applicant was from Pakistan, and not from Afghanistan,
as he claimed. The government decision was later overturned by an appeal to the
Refugee Review Tribunal, which raised a number of doubts over the assumptions in the
language analysis. It is also worth pointing out that in this case the applicant had reported
that he ‘had had diﬃculty understanding the interpreter because the interpreter had not
been Hazara’ (but presumably a speaker of a diﬀerent variety of the language).
Linguists’ concerns
Several linguists have raised concerns about some of the LADO reports they have seen
(usually, but not always, when asked to provide a counter-expertise report). In 2003, a
group of Australian linguists including the author (Eades et al. 2003) examined decisions of
58 Australian appeals in the Refugee Review Tribunal in cases in which LADO reports
had been used. This report concluded (p. 179) that the ‘language analysis’ being used in
Australian asylum seeker cases at that time appeared ‘to be based on “folk views” about the
relationship between language and nationality and ethnicity, rather than sound linguistic
principles’. Concerns over cases in the Netherlands and Belgium have been raised by
Arends (in Eades and Arends 2004); Corcoran (2004); Maryns (2004, 2006). Readers are
directed to these publications for examples of LADO, and linguistic discussion of them.
Eades and Arends (2004) also raised concerns about the conﬁdence with which Simo
Bobda et al. (1999: 303) claim that ‘the regional and national origin of [sub-Saharan]
African speakers of English can very reliably be identiﬁed’ on the basis of linguistic ‘clues’
in their use of English as a second language. Among the issues raised is that Simo Bobda et
al.’s discussion ‘makes insuﬃcient allowance for variation within a language variety, as well
as for bilingual speech, assuming that each speaker will consistently use a variety of English
which is bounded by geographical and/or political borders’ (Eades and Arends 2004: 184).
A major concern addressed in all of these publications by linguists is the reliance in
many of the LADO reports on folk linguistic views about language use and the
relationships between language varieties. (Folk linguistics refers to ‘popular beliefs about
NATIONALITY CLAIMS
413

language, many of which diﬀer from professional linguistic understandings’ Swann et al.
2004: 112.) For example one such LADO report stated that on one occasion in his
15-minute interview, an applicant ‘uses a typical Pakistani word patata (= potatoes),
which indicates that he has lived in Pakistan for a period of time’ (cited by the New
Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority RSAA 2002). Such an ‘analysis’ appears to be
based on an unsubstantiated popular belief about the use of a particular word. A linguist
who had lived and worked in Pakistan for more than 12 years gave contra-analysis in
this New Zealand case. She pointed out that even ‘if patata is used in Pakistan the use
of a single vocabulary item is not proof of residence in Pakistan. Vocabulary from
non-indigenous food stuﬀs is typically borrowed’.
Linguists’ concerns over LADO reports being written by analysts who base their
‘language analysis’ on folk linguistics have not been restricted to Australia, New Zealand,
the Netherlands and Belgium. In 2004, an international group of linguists (Language and
National Origin Group) released a 2,000-word document titled Guidelines for the Use of
Language Analysis in Relation to Questions of National Origin in Refugee Cases (http://www.
forensiclinguistics.net/). These Guidelines (as I will now refer to them), were intended to
provide some elementary understanding for governments, lawyers and refugee advocates
of linguistic issues relevant to LADO, particularly ‘in deciding whether and to what
degree language analysis is reliable in particular cases’. The authors took 10 months to
produce the Guidelines, engaging in lengthy email deliberations about how best to
explain relevant linguistic issues to non-linguists. The 19 signatories came from six
countries. About half of them had direct LADO experience, either in producing reports
for immigration departments, or in responding to such reports as experts providing
counter-analysis.
The Guidelines document comprises seven general guidelines and four more speciﬁc
ones. The general guidelines address the general limitations of linguistic expertise, for
example explaining that linguists should not be asked to make determinations about
national origin, nationality or citizenship (Guidelines 1 and 2). Rather, linguistic analysis
can sometimes be used to draw reasonable conclusions about the country of socialisation of
a speaker, that is where the speaker has learned, implicitly and/or explicitly, how to be a
member of a local society, or of local societies. And there is no necessary connection
between a person’s region of socialisation on the one hand and the political or bureaucratic
categories of national origin, nationality or citizenship, on the other hand. However,
sometimes the indications about a person’s region of socialisation which are revealed in the
linguistic analysis of that person’s speech may assist immigration departments in their
determination of the political or bureaucratic dimensions. Another issue addressed by the
general guidelines concerns the qualiﬁcations and expertise required to carry out LADO.
Guideline 3 states that ‘language analysis must be done by qualiﬁed linguists’, and Guideline
7 explains that ‘the expertise of native speakers in not the same as the expertise of linguists’.
Readers are referred to the full Guidelines (http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/) and
also to discussion of them in Eades (2005, 2008a, 2009). The more speciﬁc guidelines
(numbers 8–11) provide basic linguistic guidance on these four topics:
(#8)
the relationships between linguistic borders and national borders
(#9)
language mixing
(#10) where the language of the interview is not the speaker’s ﬁrst language
(#11) where the dialect of the interviewer or interpreter is diﬀerent from the
dialect of the interviewee.
DIANA EADES
414

Sample LADO report
In order to exemplify some of the concerns of linguists about the assumptions and
practices which are often involved in LADO, I present an example below. This is the full
‘language analysis’ report prepared in 2001 by a European company for the Australian
government (and cited in the Federal Court decision in the appeal in this case, FCA
2003). Eades et al. (2003) found evidence that indicates this report was typical of the
reports being prepared for the Australian and other governments by two large European
companies. Although the Australian government is understood to be currently using
LADO much less than it did a few years ago (Eades 2009), its use continues in many
European countries.
My purpose in citing this example is not to enter into a discussion of whether the
applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution. While this is the ultimate issue to be
decided in asylum seeker cases, it is not an issue for linguistic expertise. Nor is it my
purpose to make any judgement about this applicant’s claim to be a citizen of Afghani-
stan, an issue on which I can have no opinion, having no relevant expertise. But this
report exempliﬁes a number of issues that concern linguists. Readers who are interested
in the counter-analysis presented by a linguist, or in tracing the long legal history of this
complex case from the immigration department to the Refugee Review Tribunal and
then to the Federal Court of Australia, should read FCA (2003).
Full report (section numbers added)
[Report heading]: LINGUISTIC AND TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
Date: 3.12.2001 File no: CONARA 089
Language: Dari
[preamble]: The criteria used for linguistic and/or textual analysis of this type include
local or regional language characteristics of a phonological, morphological, syntactic and
lexical nature (i.e. elements of sound, patterns of word formation, the formation of
grammatical sentences, and vocabulary); for some languages, stylistic traits; and, in textual
analysis, handwriting.
The following observations were made in conjunction with a study of the tape/
document submitted for analysis. As many linguistic aspects as possible were taken into
consideration.
[1] The applicant speaks Dari. His Dari dialect is called Hazaragi. Hazaragi is mainly
spoken in central Afghanistan, but there are also Hazaragi speaking minority
populations in for example Pakistan and Iran. The applicant speaks colloquial
language. His accent is Pakistani.
[2] He speaks ungrammatically and says for example: “SAIS. MO KE ASTA AZ
QARIE HAIDER BUDE. QARIE HAIDER KE ASTA DA SE QOL TAQSIM
SHODA BUD. YAK BA NAME SAWSANGE HAIDER, YAK BA NAME
QANTAR GHOE HAIDER WA YAK BANAME LAKHCHAGE HAIDER,
INA KE BUD DAR BAINE WOLESWALI JAGHORI BUD WA DAR
BAINE WOLAYATE GHAZNI BUD. I MONTEQE AZ MO KE ASTA I
ANGORI YAGAN SE SAD RAH PAIPIYADA DUR BUT WA YAGAN
YAK SAT.”
NATIONALITY CLAIMS
415

[3] The applicant uses the Hazaragi verb preﬁx “MO”, for example “MOKAD”,
“MONA”, “MOSHA” and “MOGA”.
[4] He uses common Hazaragi words such as “GALA”, “LATA PERO”, “PORTA”,
“GOLKHO” and “SHIGHAI”.
[5] He pronounces ﬁnal “T” as “D” in the word “SAT” and ﬁnal “D” as “T” in the
word “BUD”. These are also Hazaragi traits.
[6] He pronounces many words with a Pakistani pronunciation, for example
“ONJAGA”, “BAZI”, “NERGAW”, “MEDGAW”, “KHATOM”, “NOMAZ”
and “TOBGANTAI”.
[7] He uses the Urdu words “PAN”, “BAD”, and “TASOWA”. Urdu is not spoken
in Afghanistan.
[8] The applicant’s Hazaragi dialect is Pakistani. His mother tongue is Dari.
[9] Observations made in conjunction with a study of the dialect/language variant
occurring in the text/tape recording submitted for analysis suggest that:
The dialect/language variant occurring in the text/tape recording may with considerable
certainty be said to originate from: PAKISTAN, BALUCHISTAN.
Discussion of sample report
Apart from the general preamble about the criteria used for analysis and the general
preamble to the closing statement, this analysis comprises 230 words.
Preamble
The general introduction to the report suggests that it will comprise phonological,
morphological, syntactic and lexical analysis, but what is actually to be presented is then
more aptly referred to as ‘observations’.
[1] The applicant speaks Dari
The opening of the substantive part of the report presents the analyst’s conclusion about
the applicant’s language (Dari), dialect (Hazaragi), language style (colloquial) and accent
(Pakistani). The analyst’s claim about the dialect and accent are taken up in the report.
The opening paragraph also explains that Hazaragi Dari is spoken in Afghanistan, Pakistan
and Iran.
[2] He speaks ungrammatically and says for example: ‘SAIS. MO KE ASTA
AZ QARIE’
The ﬁrst matter of concern for linguists is in the diagnosis that the applicant ‘speaks
ungrammatically’ and the supporting evidence given. As no analysis of the 67-word
extract is provided as evidence for ungrammatical speech, it is impossible to be sure how
this term is being used. Does it mean for example that the applicant is using ungram-
matical expressions which typify a language learner? Or is the analyst using the term in
the folk linguistic sense to mean that the applicant is speaking a non-standard variety? We
note that this 67-word extract is presented with unconventional full capitalisation and
conventional punctuation. It does not indicate pauses, false starts, repairs or other features
of language learners’ speech. This would tend to suggest that the analyst’s assertion that
DIANA EADES
416

the applicant ‘speaks ungrammatically’ refers to the use of some non-standard features. If
so, what features? Further, there is nothing in the rest of the report which could support
the view that the applicant is a learner of Hazaragi Dari. There is no indication of which
features are ungrammatical or non-standard, and no indication of what speaking gram-
matically would be. This raises the concern that the analyst has no awareness of the
realities of language variation.
Central to sociolinguistics, studies of language variation have established some basic
ﬁndings about language use which are at odds with much folk linguistic belief and pre-
scriptivism about how a language should be spoken. Thus, for example, sociolinguists
have found that the varieties of English spoken by both African-Americans in the US
and by Australian Aborigines have their own grammatical rules, which diﬀer from the
Standard English of these countries in systematic ways (e.g. Labov 1972; Kaldor and
Malcolm 1991). Even so, many non-linguists still describe the way in which African-
Americans speak English as ungrammatical (for example when they hear an African-
American say He be walking instead of He usually walks).
[3] The applicant uses the Hazaragi verb preﬁx ‘MO’, for example ‘MOKAD’
[4] He uses common Hazaragi words such as ‘GALA’
[5] He pronounces ﬁnal ‘T’ as ‘D’ in the word ‘SAT’ and ﬁnal ‘D’ as ‘T’ in the
word ‘BUD’. These are also Hazaragi traits
These next three paragraphs of the report provide examples of Hazaragi grammatical,
lexical and phonological features observed by the analyst in the applicant’s speech. From
the point of view of the applicant’s claim, these observations of Hazaragi features are not
contradictory, as the applicant claims to be a speaker of the Hazaragi dialect of the Dari
language. But, like paragraph [2], these paragraphs are also confusing: if the applicant has
these listed features of Hazaragi in some of his speech, what language variety does he
speak in the rest of the interview? Presumably, it is Dari, but not Hazaragi Dari? To what
extent is Hazaragi Dari distinctive from other varieties of Dari?
It is notable that these three paragraphs of the report, like the preceding ones, use capital
letters, rather than any form of phonetic or phonemic transcription. This is particularly
problematic for paragraph [5], as well as for [6] below, as they deal with phonology.
[6] He pronounces many words with a Pakistani pronunciation, for example
‘ONJAGA’
This is a confusing statement, as there are many languages spoken in Pakistan. What
particular ‘Pakistani pronunciation’ does the applicant have? And what exactly are the
cited forms? Are these the conventional spellings of Dari words for which the applicant
does not have an Afghan Hazaragi pronunciation? If so, how does his pronunciation
diﬀer from that of Afghan Hazaragi for these words? Or are these forms the analyst’s
representation of the applicant’s ‘Pakistani pronunciation’? Whatever these forms
NATIONALITY CLAIMS
417

represent, the fact that no phonetic indications of the alleged pronunciations are given
adds to the vagueness of this statement.
[7] He uses the Urdu words ‘PAN’, ‘BAD’, and ‘TASOWA’. Urdu is not
spoken in Afghanistan
This paragraph reveals an idealised view of language usage, in which each individual
speaker is supposed to speak only one language at a time, and never use words borrowed
from one language while speaking another. This folk linguistic view is at odds with the
ﬁndings of linguistic research that show that multilingualism is the norm in many socie-
ties throughout the world, and that many bilingual speakers use more than one language
variety in a single interaction, an issue addressed in Guideline 9 (see for example Edwards
2004: 5; Auer and Wei 2007; Wei 2000). It also wrongly claims that Urdu in not spoken
in Afghanistan, an error found in other LADO reports, as indicated above. However,
even while Urdu is not spoken as much in Afghanistan as it is in Pakistan, it appears that
the applicant had quite a bit of contact with people from Pakistan. He claimed to have
spent time while living in Afghanistan helping at his uncle’s shop, which was situated in a
market town on the main road to Pakistan (FCA 2003: #3). In addition to contact there
with people travelling to and from Pakistan, he also reported spending time in Pakistan
after his escape from Afghanistan (#5). In contact situations such as these, people often
acquire features from other language varieties.
This paragraph also reveals a homogeneistic view about the relationship between lan-
guage and social group, which is based on the erroneous assumption that each social
group uses just one discrete language variety (see Eades 2005, 2008a).
[8] The applicant’s Hazaragi dialect is Pakistani. His mother tongue is Dari.
The report concludes that the applicant speaks Dari as his mother tongue, and that the
particular dialect of Dari that he speaks is the Hazaragi dialect of Pakistan.
[9] … The dialect/language variant occurring in the text/tape recording may
with considerable certainty be said to originate from: PAKISTAN,
BALUCHISTAN
No evidence is given to support the analyst’s decision that the language variety spoken by
the applicant on the tape originates from the Baluchistan region of Pakistan. We have seen
that the complete evidence given in the report to support this ﬁnding comprises the
allegation of a ‘Pakistani pronunciation’ of ‘many words’, of which seven were cited. The
other negative comment about the applicant’s speech is that he speaks ‘ungrammatically’.
No connection is made in the report between the analyst’s assertion that the applicant
speaks ‘ungrammatically’, and the assertion that he is a speaker of the Pakistani Hazaragi
dialect of Dari. We have seen above that the analyst gives no indication of how he is
using the term ‘ungrammatically’. As mentioned above, it most likely reﬂects a folk view
about deviation from a standard variety. If this is the case, do Pakistani Hazaragi speakers
typically speak ‘ungrammatically’? Do they speak ‘ungrammatically’ more often than
speakers of Afghanistan Hazaragi? There is no analysis of the allegedly ungrammatical
features in the applicant’s speech, and there is also no reference to the ways in which
Hazaragi dialects diﬀer between speakers in Pakistan and speakers in Afghanistan.
DIANA EADES
418

Without such analysis and comparison, there are many unanswered questions. For
example, is it possible that the applicant speaks a variety of Hazaragi Dari from an area of
Afghanistan with which the analyst is not familiar? How long is it since the analyst was in
Afghanistan, and what regions of the country did the analyst travel to? How much
regional variation is there in Hazaragi Dari? How much ethnic and social variation?
These are all issues which need to be considered in evaluating the claim in this report
that the applicant speaks ‘ungrammatically’.
But information concerning the qualiﬁcations and expertise of the analyst in this case
was not provided to the applicant. This is typical of LADO cases and contrasts with other
situations where the opinion of experts is considered in the context of their training and
publications. In much LADO work, analysts remain anonymous, and no information
about the nature of their expertise is provided, although in Switzerland the applicant has
to be provided with ‘complete information concerning the origin, training and qualiﬁ-
cations’ of the LADO analyst (Singler 2004: 236).
In this sample Australian case, the European company provided general information
about the ‘minimum requirement for an analyst’, namely (FCA 2003: #14):
1. that the analyst has the language in question as his mother tongue
2. that he/she has proved capable of listening, making and formulating observations
on a linguistic level
3. that he/she is able to give logical and credible answers to questions put by [the
company’s] linguist in conjunction with the assessment writing
4. that his/her assessment ﬁts in with other assessments in the same case (cross
checking)
5. that he/she has passed a thorough test where he/she shall identify languages and dialects
6. that he/she has passed our security control.
As the Federal Court judge in this case pointed out, this company did not require ‘an
academic education with the language in question as a specialty’ (#14).
The analyst must have been a native speaker of the Dari language, and also s/he must
have received formal education in order to fulﬁl the assessment-writing requirement. The
applicant, on the other hand, told interviewers that he never went to school and was illiterate,
mostly doing farm work, when not helping in his uncle’s shop (FCA 2003: #3). In many
countries, educated people regard the speech of uneducated and/or rural speakers as
ungrammatical. Thus, the assertion that the applicant ‘speaks ungrammatically’ may
simply be the analyst’s folk linguistic way of observing that the applicant does not speak the
standard variety, or that he does not speak the same regional, ethnic or social variety as the
analyst.
Regardless of what is meant by asserting that the applicant ‘speaks ungrammatically’,
the report gives no indication of how this ‘observation’ relates to the conclusion that his
speech is colloquial Hazaragi Dari with a Pakistani accent. It is possible that speaking
‘ungrammatically’ is merely intended as synonymous with speaking colloquially. But
perhaps it implies something ‘inauthentic’ about the applicant’s speech? For example,
could it imply that the applicant is trying to speak Hazaragi Dari as if he is from Afgha-
nistan, and being unable to do this, instead speaks ‘ungrammatically’?
We have seen that there is no detailed analysis provided in this report to support the
observations, nor any indication of what variant forms would have been expected if the
applicant was a speaker of Afghanistan Hazaragi Dari as he claimed, rather than of
NATIONALITY CLAIMS
419

Pakistani Hazaragi Dari, as the analyst claimed. From conference discussions about
LADO in the last few years, it has become clear that reports are kept deliberately short
and vague in such ways, because of concerns that speciﬁc analysis would provide assistance
for any future dishonest asylum seekers who wish to ‘cheat’ in their LADO interviews.
Thus, representatives of immigration departments have expressed the view that people
might be able to use speciﬁc details in LADO reports to learn ‘inauthentic’ ways of
speaking, in order to ‘masquerade’ as a speaker of a variety which is not their own. The
issue of ‘inauthentic’ speech in LADO interviews will be taken up below.
Similar concerns appear to be involved in some cases of preventing applicants and their
advisors from having access to the interview tape and the full LADO report. In some
cases, all that is provided is a letter which quotes extracts from the report. In the sample
case discussed here, the Federal Court judge remarked that ‘there appears to be some
concern that the provision of such reports to applicants will enable them to coach others
so they can anticipate the things looked for by language analysts in future’. The judge
found this reason ‘questionable’ (FCA 2003: #12).
Linguistics, folk linguistics and native speakers
Not all LADO reports are based on folk linguistics (although it is diﬃcult to access
reports written by linguists). Singler (2004) argues that there can be a valid place for
linguistic analysis, that is, analysis carried out by linguists following linguistic principles
and methods. As Baltisberger and Favaro (2007: 86) point out, analysts used for LADO
work by the Swiss government have university training in linguistics and have specialised
in one or more of the languages spoken by the applicant. Singler explains that several
factors have enabled him to provide linguistic analysis in Swiss cases where applicants
claim Liberian origin. In addition to his own expertise on Liberian varieties of English,
Liberia is an unusual country linguistically, owing to its colonial and related linguistic
history. Being the only country in West Africa which was colonised by people from the
United States, the English varieties spoken in Liberia show regular diﬀerences from
neighbouring Anglophone countries, which were colonised by the British. Thus, the
widely spoken Liberian Vernacular English shows inﬂuences from African-American
Vernacular English, while both School English and International English in Liberia are
modelled on American English. In this way, these Liberian varieties are distinctive and
the Liberian situation contrasts with that in the rest of Anglophone West Africa. Further,
unlike many other areas of the world, the linguistic border is aligned with the national
border. These factors lead Singler to conclude that ‘even in the face of an interviewing
situation that greatly inhibits the use of the vernacular, linguistic analyses in asylum cases
can – in some circumstances – be done right’ (2004: 235, emphases in original). He
details these circumstances as: ‘if the linguistic situation is straightforward, if the analyst is
truly a specialist in linguistics, and if the analyst has detailed local linguistic and cultural
knowledge’.
However, as we have seen, not all countries that use LADO reports in their immi-
gration processing rely on trained linguists. For some regions of the world from which
people are ﬂeeing persecution, there has been no linguistic research and there are
no trained linguists. In such situations, countries such as the Netherlands (Cambier-
Langeveld 2007b) rely on the judgement of native speakers who work in conjunction
with, or under the supervision of trained linguists who do not necessarily know the
DIANA EADES
420

languages in question. However, unless these linguists have expertise in the languages
in question, how can they assess the soundness of the judgements of the native
speakers? The supervision by a linguist without expertise in the language(s) in question
would arguably not be suﬃcient to ensure that the native speaker’s judgement is
linguistically valid. It is true that native speakers can play a valuable role in assisting
linguists in any kind of linguistic analysis, but this is not the same as asking native
speakers for their judgements about where someone grew up, or whether someone
speaks the same dialect as they do. The sample report discussed above shows some of
the problems which can arise when such a judgement is made by a native speaker
relying on folk views about language.
In the debate over the role of native speakers in making LADO judgements, the main
point of contention seems to revolve around the need for native speakers to detect ‘non-
authenticity’. For example, Cambier-Langeveld (2007b: 17) claims that ‘Linguists who
are not native speakers are not in the best position to judge the authenticity [of the
speech of the asylum seeker]’. It appears that a major concern of governments is that an
asylum seeker may speak a certain language variety with a degree of ﬂuency that can
persuade a linguist that their origin claims are genuine, but that only a native speaker can
really tell if they are ‘faking it’. Such a belief appears to ignore sociophonetic research
about the distinction between variations which speakers are highly aware of and those
which only a linguistically trained observer is aware of, but which may in fact char-
acterise a particular accent (Labov 1994: 78; Mesthrie et al. 2000: 91). Thus, if careful
analysis of a person’s accent is carried out by a linguistically trained analyst, the question
of whether or not a person is faking their accent can be considered in a measured and
theoretically sound way.
Further, without even considering problems with the notion of ‘native speaker’ (see e.g.
Rampton 1995; Pennycook 2001), research in perceptual dialectology raises doubt over
the reliability of native speaker judgements, even where the native speakers are educated.
Clopper and Pisoni (2006) provide a good summary of some of this research, which
indicates that the recognition of the region of origin of a speaker of one’s own language
is not straightforward (e.g. Preston 1993). For example, in a study of the recognition of
the regional origin of Welsh speakers of English, Williams et al. (1999) found that
schoolteachers were accurate in only 52% of cases. And in their own study in the US,
Clopper and Pisoni (2004) found that only 31% of ‘naïve listeners’ (i.e. those without
linguistic training) were accurate in categorising unfamiliar talkers by dialect (see also
Fraser 2009). While these studies show that relying on the judgements of educated native
speakers can be problematic, we could expect that doing this in LADO cases can be even
more problematic, given the possible ethnic rivalries and political tensions involved.
From expertise to awareness raising
LADO in asylum seeker cases is an area where forensic linguistic work takes one or more
of three approaches. For some linguists, their work in this area is in preparing linguistic
expert reports and sometimes giving related evidence in court. At other times, their work
is in scholarly research and writing (e.g. Singler 2004; Maryns 2004). Finally, following
the release of the Guidelines, the 19 linguists comprising the Language and National
Origin Group have engaged in a third kind of linguistic work, which we can call expert
awareness raising. The LNOG group believes that as experts we have a responsibility to
NATIONALITY CLAIMS
421

draw attention to the ways in which serious injustice can be perpetrated by the misuse of
language analysis.
But it is important to remember that the issue of asylum seekers is highly political, and
this is an area where linguistic expertise cannot exist in an a-political vacuum. Despite
this, it is important for linguists (and other scholars) to separate political argument from
scholarly argument. Thus, it should not matter from a linguistic point of view whether a
language analysis makes a conclusion which supports or contradicts the claims of an
asylum seeker (although this political position is untenable for some linguists, I have
found). If it is made on the basis of ﬂawed assumptions and linguistically inadequate
analysis, then it is up to linguists to point this out.
This separation of political argument from scholarly argument has some similarities
with the position in which experts ﬁnd themselves in the adversarial Anglo-American
legal system (in countries such as Australia, the UK and the US). As experts in this legal
system, linguists must continually be on the alert for attempts in court to draw them into
adversarial rather than scholarly argument on their expertise, because once this happens,
the linguist is considered to have over-stepped their expertise, and their evidence is in
danger of being disallowed. Similarly, in matters of linguistic awareness raising, it is
important to distinguish between what we can say on the basis of our linguistic expertise,
and what we might want to say as part of a political debate (and thus, not as ‘experts’).
This distinction can be particularly diﬃcult and not all linguists are willing to make it.
But I have found that some inﬂuential people, such as government oﬃcials and politicians,
are unwilling to hear from linguists if we cannot make this distinction.
So, while linguists may be driven by questions of social justice for some of the world’s most
powerless and oppressed people, our awareness raising must be restricted to the areas in which
we have recognised expertise, namely those involving the ways in which language analysis
contributes to understandings about a speaker’s origins. Hopefully, our scholarly awareness
raising can be taken up by those involved in bureaucratic and legal decision-making.
And we must always remember that the ultimate problem being addressed by LADO
work is not a linguistic one. Linguists are not responsible for, or qualiﬁed to provide a
solution to problems relating to asylum seekers’ claims about origin, whether national,
ethnic or regional. But we might be able to do something to address the errors and
injustices brought about by problematic language analysis, by using our expertise in reports
to governments, evidence in courts, academic publications, and expert awareness raising.
Further reading
Eades, D. and Arends, J. (2004) ‘Using language analysis in the determination of national origin of
asylum seekers: An introduction’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 179–99.
Eades, D., Fraser, H., Siegel, J., McNamara, T., and Baker, B. (2003) ‘Linguistic identiﬁcation in the
determination of nationality: A preliminary report’, Language Policy, 2(2): 179–99.
Fraser, H. (2009) ‘The role of “educated native speakers” in providing language analysis for the deter-
mination of the origin of asylum seekers’, International Journal of Speech Language and the Law, 16(1): 113–38.
Maryns, K. (2004) ‘Identifying the asylum speaker: Reﬂections on the pitfalls of language analysis in the
determination of national origin’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 240–60.
DIANA EADES
422

28
Non-native speakers in detention
Assessing non-native speaking detainees’
English language proﬁciency
Fiona English
Introduction
I ﬁrst became involved in this area of work in 1994 as the result of a speculative enquiry
from a London law ﬁrm to the university department in which I worked. The case
concerned a nightclub confrontation which had resulted in a fatal stabbing and the
detainee, an eighteen-year-old Turkish Cypriot man with English as an additional lan-
guage, was on remand in prison. The acting solicitors wanted ‘an opinion’, as they put it,
‘on the defendant’s level of comprehension and his ability to articulate accurately in
English in each of the interviews’. They were particularly concerned about the initial
interview, where there had been neither a solicitor nor an interpreter present and where
their detainee had, essentially, incriminated himself. They were convinced that, as a result
of poor English language skills, he had failed to understand not only his rights under the
law but also much of the line of questioning that followed.
This chapter draws on my work as an expert witness in relation to the English
language proﬁciency of non-native detainees and, using examples from actual cases, it
describes the approach I use in assessing a detainee’s proﬁciency in order to fulﬁl the
request to ‘give an opinion’.
Evidence of English language ability is a normal pre-requisite for non-native speakers
of English seeking entry to communicatively demanding contexts such as university
study or certain work environments. However, for those lay people involved in legal
encounters such as through arrest, interrogation and court interaction, the checks are far
less rigorous even though the stakes are arguably much higher. As Eades (2006: 524)
points out when referring to cases relating to asylum claims ‘an interviewee with limited
proﬁciency in the language of the interview may – simply because of language diﬃ-
culties – appear to be incoherent or inconsistent, thereby leading the interviewer to a
mistaken conclusion concerning the truthfulness of the interviewee’ (see Eades, this
volume, on testing in asylum claims cases). Of course, the circumstances of an arrest and
interrogation do not allow for formal pre-testing but, given that language proﬁciency is
423

fundamental to the reliability of evidence gained through police interviews, its relevance
needs to be taken more fully into account.
This is not to say that no account is taken of English language proﬁciency in these
situations, as can be seen in the following clause from the UK Police and Criminal
Evidence Act (PACE).
If the detainee appears deaf or there is doubt about their hearing or speaking ability
or ability to understand English, and the custody oﬃcer cannot establish eﬀective
communication, the custody oﬃcer must, as soon as practicable, call an interpreter
for assistance in the action under paragraphs 3.1–3.5.
(Home Oﬃce, PACE code C Section 3.12, 2008)
There are two main points of interest here. The ﬁrst is that the assessment and subsequent
decision is left to the discretion of the police oﬃcers, who are unlikely to have expertise in
this area. Secondly, what constitutes ‘eﬀective communication’ is open to wide inter-
pretation even amongst professionals. Under such circumstances, errors of judgement are
inevitable, leading to decisions based on mistaken assumptions about language proﬁciency
as in ‘he understands English perfectly’, stated by one police oﬃcer about a Lithuanian
detainee, or ‘you’ve spoken perfect English’ referring to the Cypriot man above.
Such errors are often further compounded by detainees’ own misconceptions of their
English language ability, a phenomenon identiﬁed by Ross (1998), who points out that
learners have diﬃculty in giving accurate estimations of their own second language skills
tending to either underestimate or overestimate their ability. Added to this is a kind of lin-
guistic bravado, perhaps relating to the context, that can make detainees reluctant to admit
any kind of weakness, let alone linguistic disadvantage. The exchanges in (1), taken from the
case involving the Turkish speaker mentioned above, illustrate this and should, in fact, have
given much greater cause for concern about his English language ability than it actually did.
(1) Interview with detainee Mr O (IE) by police interviewer (IR) at police station
1 IR:My friend, my friend, this interview we’ve spoke now for an hour and a half.
2 IE: Yeah.
3 IR:And you’ve spoken perfect English.
4 IE: Yeah.
This was despite the detainee’s obvious diﬃculties in expressing himself adequately as can
be seen in (2), which is an extract taken from shortly before the exchange in (1) and
which typiﬁes the several hours of video-taped interview.
(2) Interview with detainee Mr O (IE) by police interviewer (IR) at police station
1 IR:Which man, which man had this shining thing?
2 IE: Who wear white thing.
3 IR:The white thing?
4 IE: White, white shirt.
5 IR:Is he the man you stabbed in the backside?
6 IE: Yeah
7 IR:Yeah?
8 IE: Yeah
FIONA ENGLISH
424

9 IR:And how long was this shining thing?
10 IE: Fifteen second it’s
11 IR:How, how, how?
12 IE: Five seconds. How long? Ah yeah [responding to IR’s gesture], I can’t
remember.
13 IR:You can’t remember
14 IE: I see something shining but I can’t remember.
The consequences of such faulty English under circumstances like these can be very serious
as was indeed the case here. In fact, although an interpreter had ﬁnally been called in at the
behest of the solicitor, the detainee only sought help from him towards the end of the
series of interviews, when he ﬁnally began to realise that he was struggling.
Similar concerns are documented by Cotterill (2000), Rock (2007) and Pavlenko (2008)
who focus particularly on issues concerning rights. Cotterill investigates how the ‘caution’
is delivered orally, particularly in relation to paraphrasing, and the impact this can have in
shaping interviews and Rock’s comprehensive study of rights communication in the UK
demonstrates the diﬃculties in articulating this crucial information eﬀectively. Pavlenko’s
discussion oﬀers a study involving a Russian student in the USA who was a murder sus-
pect. In that case, although the she had a high level of English language proﬁciency, the
suspect’s failure to adequately understand the signiﬁcance of the Miranda warnings and
their legal implications led her to completely misjudge the seriousness of the situation she
was in. Whilst neither Cotterill nor Rock focus on non-native speakers, their work pro-
vides valuable insights into the problem of communicating complex information and
Pavlenko’s discussion, with its focus on a non-native speaker, illustrates the misconceptions
that can arise as the result of the interview’s sociolinguistic complexity.
However, it is not only interactions around rights that can be problematic. As extracts
(1) and (2) indicate, all interactions between police, lawyers and lay people, particularly
non-native lay people, have the potential for miscommunication.
In the next section, I provide a brief discussion of language testing and sampling as
used in applied linguistics and language education research in order to provide a theo-
retical context for my assessments for forensic purposes. I then consider how testing for
forensic purposes diﬀers, before moving on to discussing the tests themselves.
Language testing
Language testing in applied linguistics and language
education research
Language testing is most usually associated with language learning and teaching and has
developed to serve three main purposes. The ﬁrst concerns achievement, usually in
relation to a course of study and entails testing what has been learned and is not relevant
to the current discussion. The other two purposes, however, are fundamental to my
work. One concerns proﬁciency and entails evaluating a person’s level in order to predict
how they might handle a given situation. The other relates to research where assessment
is used to provide data for speciﬁc types of analysis.
There is a substantial literature on language testing oﬀering useful overviews of the
ﬁeld (e.g. Bachman and Palmer 1996; McNamara 2000). Bachman’s (2000) review of
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
425

language testing at the turn of the century oﬀers a concise and highly informative
account which highlights important theories that have been particularly signiﬁcant. Of
particular relevance to the current discussion is assessment based on performance. This
oﬀers the opportunity to analyse production, which concerns the linguistic resources used
(vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation) and proﬁciency, which concerns communicative
eﬀectiveness in oracy and literacy. This approach to language assessment owes much to
Canale and Swain’s (1980) inﬂuential work on the assessment of communicative
competence, following on from Hymes (1974). More speciﬁcally, Weir (1990), Skehan
(1998) and Ellis (2003) focus particularly on communicative language testing, including
testing with tasks, and the implications of such approaches.
Task-based activity is an important methodology in relation to learning and teaching,
and tasks are used widely in language assessment and research. Essentially, a task is an
activity which provides a meaningful context in which communication can take place.
‘A task is an activity which requires learners to use language, with the emphasis on
meaning, to attain an objective’ (Bygate et al. 2001:11). Examples of tasks are simulations
of ‘real world’ activity such as planning and designing a weekend trip to the seaside or
more focused activities such as the construction of a story based on a set of pictures.
Tasks are used in many public language tests such as the International English Language
Testing Services (IELTS) in which tasks associated with academic work are used to assess
the language proﬁciency of non-native speaking university applicants (see Shaw and
Weir 2007). They are also used extensively in research, particularly in collecting samples
of performance. Of particular relevance to the current discussion is the suggestion by
Bachman and Palmer (1996) that task-based tests allow inferences to be made about a
person’s abilities to use language in speciﬁc situations.
My approach owes much to the work of Gorman et al. (1990) which analysed and
evaluated language performance across the school curriculum drawing on recorded face-
to-face assessments of task performance, followed by analysis of the samples obtained
during the tests. This methodological combination enables me not only to provide
information on a detainee’s proﬁciency but also to exemplify features of production
which might inﬂuence overall performance. I discuss this in more detail later when
describing the tests and tasks I have used in this work.
Unlike most testing of this type, which is used to comment on current or potential
performance, my assessments are used to make inferences about past performance
during police interviews. This can be seen as problematic since the circumstances in
which the assessment samples are obtained are very diﬀerent from those that applied
during the police interviews. For one thing, the experience of a language assessment is
unlikely to be as challenging as that associated with arrest and detention. Another
factor is that a detainee may have participated in English language classes whilst on
remand and hence is likely to have improved since the time of arrest. However, despite
these reservations, a linguistic proﬁle of the detainee based on performance during
face-to-face assessments can provide useful and sometimes important insights into his
earlier performance during the interviews. My discussion of diﬀerent cases below shows
how this works in practice.
Language testing for forensic purposes
The main purpose for the kind of language assessments I am concerned with in this
chapter is the provision of information about a particular person’s use of English, in other
FIONA ENGLISH
426

words, a linguistic proﬁle. In the case referred to above, although my assessment was
based only on an evaluation of the videotapes and transcripts of police interviews, I was
able to provide a description of the detainee’s production of English on the one hand
and use it to comment on areas of concern during the interviews. However, relying on
police interview tapes alone may provide only a partial view of a detainee’s English
language ability. These interviews are, as already mentioned, extremely complex com-
municative events involving communicative strategies unique to such contexts, for
example, avoidance strategies on the part of the detainee and coercion strategies on the
part of the interrogators. As Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 201) suggest while referring
to courtroom cross-examination, Gricean ‘rules’ of communication are subverted if not
completely ﬂouted. Pavlenko (2008) also refers to the strategic manipulation of the ﬂow
of the interviews and the strategies employed to disguise, for example, the saliency of
certain questions. Moreover, my experience of working only with tapes, as in the case
above, led me to the conclusion that face-to-face assessments would enable me to test
proﬁciency through diﬀerently focused tasks as well as describe features of production
through the collection of performance samples. As Ellis and Barkhuizen (2005:21) point
out, ‘what learners know is best reﬂected in their comprehension of input and in the
language they produce’.
A key diﬀerence between language testing for ‘normal’ purposes and language testing
for forensic purposes concerns the reporting process, particularly in relation to an audi-
ence consisting of legal professionals, the judiciary and the police. This makes it a tricky
document to produce, as it has to ‘speak’ to people who draw on diﬀerent frames of
knowledge compared to language and linguistics professionals. The ‘expert’ has to
balance disciplinary knowledge in undertaking the assessments and analysing the
samples with the task of presenting it in a way that is accessible and meaningful for a
non-professional audience, each of whom, as Coulthard (2005: 1) explains, ‘is in some
senses an expert on language’ by dint of their being language ‘users’.
A further consideration regarding audience is the adversarial nature of courtroom
interaction whereby, no matter how strong the linguistic evidence might be, it will
never ‘convince’ the opposing barrister whose job it is to refute the arguments. As
Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 201) point out ‘Novice academic experts may be
deceived into thinking that they are still in an academic environment and that, if they
are suﬃciently coherent and persuasive, they can convince the cross-examiner of the
correctness of their opinion’ (see also Solan, this volume). In the light of my experi-
ence, I have learned that evidence, both in the written report and in case of a court
appearance, needs to be highly explicit with illustrative examples. It must not be overly
disciplinary in its discourse, though suﬃciently so to be considered professionally valid.
It must provide enough background to the assessment materials and analytical criteria
without becoming too technical and it must provide readily accessible information
about performance and its implications. I give examples from some of my reports later
in the chapter.
Another area that needs to be considered concerns the circumstances in which the
language data are obtained. I am not referring to the police interview samples which are
outside the control of the assessor, but the face-to-face tests in which the assessor has
direct involvement. It is important to consider the possible eﬀects of the environment in
which the test is conducted, how the tests are perceived by the testee and how familiar
the testee is with language testing as a procedure. These factors may inﬂuence the will-
ingness or ability to participate and ultimately the quality of performance data that can be
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
427

collected. Willingness, for example, may depend on the detainee’s attitude toward the
test, how convinced he is of its usefulness or his attitude towards anything connected
with the legal process in the ﬁrst place. He may also be unfamiliar with the kinds of
activity associated with the assessment, such as describing pictures, spotting the diﬀer-
ences, doing listening comprehension activities and may have no idea of how to do
them, or consider them childish.
A good example of how easy it is for an assessor to take task knowledge for granted
comes from a recent case where I introduced a ‘spot the diﬀerences’ task, assuming that
the testee would recognise it. In this case, there was no issue of ‘childishness’ but rather
a conceptual problem. He had simply never ‘played’ this game and had no under-
standing either of what to do or of its relevance in the assessment. This resulted in a
somewhat laboured performance as, despite my willingness to forgo the task, having
started he did not want to give up. Of course, for the purposes of the forensic assess-
ment, task completion is not necessarily important as it is a means to obtain speech
data. From the detainee’s perspective, however, completion can be experienced as
achievement and inability to complete can be experienced as ‘failure’ which can be
very demotivating.
There are a number of strategies for dealing with these issues. One is to create a
context of mutuality whereby both parties, the tester and the testee, acknowledge the
situation and agree to suspend ‘belief’. Another is to ensure that the materials used, par-
ticularly images and other texts, have some kind of relevance to the detainee’s context.
For instance, as part of a reading comprehension test, I used the detainee’s local news-
paper as a resource. Finally, it is important to ensure that the detainee understands what
he is supposed to be doing and, as far as the task completion aims are concerned, why.
This requires the assessor to be responsive and ﬂexible, to balance the forensic needs to
obtain data and the detainee’s need to complete the task.
With regard to the last point, there have been a number of discussions examining the
issue of whether a detainee might under-perform in an attempt to strengthen his case.
For example, Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 137) have suggested that face-to-face lan-
guage assessments might be open to challenges of underperformance and my court
experience conﬁrms this. They point out that ‘although applied linguists have a great
deal of experience in assessing the linguistic performance of non-natives, most of their
tests are predicated on the assumption that the testee is trying to do their best’, whereas,
they argue, language assessment for forensic purposes might result in a defendant doing
his worst because he thinks it might help his defence.
However, in my experience, it is rare for a detainee to underperform, as it is quite a
diﬃcult thing to maintain throughout an extended face-to-face interview. The simplest
way would be to contribute nothing or almost nothing, but, as I explain to both the
detainee and to the acting solicitors, silence will not help the case, unless, of course, his
English really is that weak. The more a detainee produces the more informative a
report can be. What tends to happen is that a test eﬀect comes into play and the
detainee, caught up in the assessment process, strives to do well. Evidence of this might
include expressions of irritation at not ‘getting’ something during a listening com-
prehension task, requests for an extract to be played again or attempts to seek the
appropriate word during a discussion task. In such cases, it is important for the assessor
to take the initial performance as evidence of general comprehension and use the
repeat occasions as a source of evidence of speciﬁc problems to include in the linguistic
proﬁle.
FIONA ENGLISH
428

Conducting an assessment
An assessment involves three main phases: obtaining a linguistic proﬁle of the detainee
based on face-to-face testing data; juxtaposing the linguistic proﬁle against the police
interviews; and producing a report. The report includes information about the assessment
procedures, the linguistic proﬁle itself and, drawing on the proﬁle, an opinion of
whether poor language proﬁciency might have played any part in the interviews.
Methodology
Testing is usually carried out in one of two places, depending on the circumstances, and
usually lasts up to an hour. If the detainee is on bail, it usually takes place on the premises
of the acting solicitors but if he is on remand it takes place in the prison. It may be
assumed that testing in a prison might lead to a somewhat constrained interaction, but
my experience is otherwise. In fact, because the language assessment breaks the routine
of prison life, the detainee tends to be extremely willing to talk, particularly with
someone from outside the prison or legal community and about topics other than mat-
ters of their legal case. This can be highly motivating and productive and often results in
spontaneous authentic conversation.
The assessments themselves involve conversational strategies in that I participate in the
performance as a co-respondent. To enable later analysis, the entire process is voice
recorded including whilst the detainee is engaged in listening or reading comprehension
tasks. This aspect of performance provides very useful information about task processing
in relation to these less obviously ‘productive’ activities where requests for clariﬁcation
and help, expressions of frustration or satisfaction can provide further evidence of the
detainee’s language performance. What is more, it can be referred to as evidence of
willingness and eﬀort in response to potential claims of underperformance.
Test materials
The main aims in undertaking these tests are to obtain performance samples for later
analysis and to evaluate the detainee’s communicative proﬁciency. For this, I draw on
both conversational discussion, which facilitates the assessment process, and task-based
assessment materials, which enable focus on particular genres, communicative strategies as
well as speciﬁc lexical and grammatical features.
Conversational discussion serves several purposes. In the ﬁrst instance, it helps create an
informal and relaxed environment through talking about familiar topics such as personal
information and family, although it is necessary to be cautious here to avoid any dis-
comfort on the part of the detainee. It provides the opportunity to clarify the purposes of
the assessment and the procedures involved, including why the whole process is being
recorded, an important point to clarify as this too could worry the detainee. It also enables
the assessor to gauge the detainee’s general level of English language before deciding on
which tasks to use and how to use them. Further opportunities for discussion may arise
naturally during the process of task completion, thereby increasing the sample size and
expanding its repertoire of genres and topics. These discussions can also oﬀer the chance to
learn more about the detainee’s sociolinguistic background, such as length of residence in
the UK, language preferences in diﬀerent domains, attitudes to English and opportunities
for using it, which can be helpful in producing the linguistic proﬁle.
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
429

The task materials are generally based around visual resources such as photographs or
diagrams and task instructions are given orally, thereby avoiding potential problems
relating to English literacy. I choose a range of images to cater for diﬀerent interests and
to elicit information about the detainee’s ability to talk about particular topics which may
have a bearing on the case itself, such as clothing or explanation of particular types of
activity. This enables me to explore lexical range or familiarity with certain grammatical
forms (e.g. elaborated questions, sequencing adverbs) that typify the genres involved in
police interviews. Tasks include images of everyday scenarios such as the workplace or
the home, images of people and places, sequences of images for ‘story’ telling and puzzle
images for speculation.
An Example
Photographs such as those in Figures 28.1 and 28.2 provide a context for discussion and
the opportunity to explore the detainee’s ability to deal with questions about a scene and
describe what is going on.
Figure 28.1 Street scene photo 1
FIONA ENGLISH
430

Tasks might include the following:
1. The assessor asks for a description of one of the pictures to see if she can match the
description to the picture being described. This provides samples of speech associated
with descriptions including use of prepositions, present tenses and vocabulary range.
2. The assessor takes one picture and asks speculative questions about it, including
questions about where it is, where the people might be going, what they are
doing and what might happen next. The assessor can use a mixture of direct and
embedded questions to explore how easily these are handled and can encourage
the use of speculative grammatical forms such as modal verbs or conditional clauses.
This approach oﬀers ﬂexibility in how the assessor wishes to use the materials and enables
her to link task choice to the circumstances. Pictures of scenes like these can also provide
the chance for further discussion, particularly if there is some kind of connection
between the image and the experience of the detainee. In a recent case with a Vietna-
mese detainee, I used the photograph in Figure 28.1 which he recognised as a Hong
Kong street scene. This led him to talk about the time he spent in Hong Kong, friends
Figure 28.2 Street scene photo 2
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
431

he had still living there and then onto his experiences leaving Vietnam back in the 1980s
as can be seen from extract (3) from the recorded sample.
(3) Assessment of detainee Mr. C (AE) by the author as assessor (AR)
1 AE:
Mayb::e (.) Hong Kong?
2 AR:
Yeah it is
3 AE:
In Hong Kong? (.) Yes beca:use I (.) I been Hong Kong (.) before
4 AR: [Mmm]
5 AE:
[Many times]
[...]
6 AE:
Did you go to the er what you call the (.) the mountain?
7 AR:
Oh the er Victoria Peak?
8 AE:
Yeah yeah (.) look at at night (.) it’s nice
9 AR:
[It’s beautiful yeah]
10 AE:
You can see the street (.) You can see the (.) what the sea?
11 AR:
The harbour
12 AE:
Yeah yeah harbour
[...]
13 AE:
I wa:::s um in Hong Kong 19:79
14 AR:
[Mmm]
15 AE:
When I came t::o England
16 AR:
[Mmm]
17 AE:
And I came back for two two time
From the moment he recognised the photograph of being from Hong Kong (line 1),
Mr. C’s position changed from being a ‘testee’ to a mutual participant in a conversation. His
own knowledge enabled him to ask his own questions (line 6), provide his own
information (line 8) and then go on to volunteer information about how he had
come to be in Hong Kong (line 13). This shift from a task to a conversation
enabled me to explore his personal association with the UK and English language as
well as obtain background information about his former life in Vietnam in a natural and
unforced way. It produced a rich source of linguistic and sociolinguistic data, not to
mention a substantially more relaxed and enthusiastic atmosphere throughout the rest
of the assessment. Of course, such informality, which is so helpful in obtaining
authentic performance data, could lead to criticisms of partiality due to overfamiliarity
with the detainee, as suggested by Peter Gray (this volume). However, as he also goes
on to say, professionalism, both as a practitioner and a researcher, oﬀers an eﬀective
defence against such claims.
I also use audio texts for speciﬁc focus on listening comprehension. In this case,
I choose published language teaching audio texts which are generally better produced than
those I might record myself. They oﬀer a variety of genres such as anecdotes or explanations
and involve diﬀerent speakers and diﬀerent regional accents which allows for comment
on whether the detainee’s comprehension might have been hindered by a speaker’s
accent. Published recordings also tend to be graded and as such oﬀer a point of reference
that is accessible to non-linguists. In most cases, I modify the activities that accompany
these texts to ensure that they are appropriate for the needs of the assessment in hand.
Occasionally, as in cases such as fraud where there is dispute relating to speciﬁc
documents, I develop reading tasks. These include texts that discuss topics which are
FIONA ENGLISH
432

relevant to the case and comprehension tasks that test diﬀerent reading skills from basic
information location to drawing inferences.
Analysing the performance samples
The analysis involves examining two sample sets; one obtained during the face-to-face assess-
ment and the second being the recordings and transcripts of the police interviews. I have
developed the practice of always analysing and describing the assessment samples before moving
onto the police interview data. This, I believe, ensures greater impartiality in conducting the
assessments, although it is fair to say that the way in which I have developed the assessment tasks
has been greatly informed by my growing familiarity with the discourse of police interviews.
Assessment samples
The assessment samples are analysed from the perspectives of production (pronunciation,
grammar and vocabulary) and proﬁciency (communicative eﬀectiveness and task outcomes).
The focus on proﬁciency allows me to comment on a detainee’s ability to deal with
certain communicative situations, including the handling of certain types of questions, whilst
the focus on production enables me to identify linguistic features which typify his use of
English and draw inferences on how this may aﬀect successful communication. Sometimes
it is helpful to link these to issues related to mother tongue transfer (Faerk and Kasper 1987)
as problems associated with this are often misunderstood and hence underestimated by
non-professionals. Observation comments (e.g. ‘he seems to be struggling with this one’, ‘he
raced through that reading text’) made during the assessments can add useful contextual
information regarding the detainee’s handling of the tasks. This information comprises
the main content of the linguistic proﬁle to be juxtaposed with the police interview data.
Police interview samples
This is a fundamental aspect of the work in that it is the reason why my advice has been
sought in the ﬁrst place. It is a lengthy process involving careful analysis of the video or
audio tapes and transcripts of the interviews. The aim is to gain an overall impression of
the interactions between the participants, compare the detainee’s performance in the
interviews with that during the face-to-face assessment, identify examples of commu-
nication breakdown or miscommunication and match these with performance features
from the assessment. It is also necessary to discover any resolved or unresolved
miscommunications as these are what have most bearing on the case.
It is also important to consider whether and how the police themselves deal with the
detainee’s language. In some cases, there is a tendency to overestimate proﬁciency,
though as Pavlenko (2008) points out, this may be a deliberate strategy. In other cases,
the police are more conscientious in acknowledging diﬃculties associated with English
and work harder to check comprehension. Although these interviews provide a very rich
source of data, particularly for a linguistic ethnographer (Rock 2006), it is diﬃcult to
decide where to draw the line. However, the kind of report that is helpful in the context
of a language assessment needs to oﬀer concrete and accessible evidence usable in court.
Therefore, it is necessary to limit the analysis to those aspects which can be compared
with the linguistic proﬁle; that is, examples of faulty grammar, imprecise vocabulary and
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
433

diﬃcult pronunciation which lead to misunderstandings or misrepresentation of the
events being discussed during the interviews.
Producing the report
The report is the most salient aspect of the expert’s work as it is this which is used as
evidence. In this discussion, I am using three examples from actual cases. For purposes of
anonymity I have replaced all names of detainees, referring to them by letters, Mr. ‘A’,
Mr. ‘B’ and Mr. ‘C’. All other names are represented by initials.
My reports usually contain the following sections: assessment procedures and rationale;
linguistic proﬁle derived from the assessments; implications in relation to the police
interviews; additional information; and concluding remarks. The intention is to provide a
systematic and explicit account of the process as well as both a summary and detailed
explanation of the ﬁndings.
Assessment procedures and rationale
Under the ﬁrst heading I include a general overview of the circumstances of the assess-
ment as (4) demonstrates.
(4) Report on Mr. A
I met Mr. A at the oﬃces of W. & Co on Tuesday 13th September 20XX in order
to carry out an assessment of his standard of spoken English. According to the
police charge record, Mr. A ‘speaks very good English’ (MG/DD/A: p. 2)
‘understands English perfectly’ (p. 17) and ‘spoke to the doctor in ﬂuent English’
(p. 17). In the light of these comments, the purpose of my assessment was to
explore the extent of Mr. A’s proﬁciency through a more formal evaluation
procedure.
This kind of framing provides a justiﬁcation for the report and establishes a backdrop
against which to present the assessment. Not all cases oﬀer such strongly articulated
expressions of police conﬁdence in the detainee’s language proﬁciency, though in most
police interviews that I have examined there is some reference to good language ability.
In the case of Mr. C, a diﬀerent framing was relevant (5).
(5) Report on Mr. C
It is important to note that Mr. C has been in prison for eight months, fully
immersed in an English speaking environment and taking regular classes in English
language. In such a context his level of English is likely to have improved sub-
stantially, so my assessment must be understood with this in mind.
The report then goes on to explain the purposes of the assessment in general and provide
detail of each of the assessment tasks and the rationale behind them. This ensures that
readers of the report understand the scope of the assessment, the relevance of the tasks
and the kind of information that is provided. Extract (6), from the case of Mr. B,
exempliﬁes this.
FIONA ENGLISH
434

(6) Report on Mr. B – Picture Story
I showed Mr. B a set of three pictures concerning a road incident involving a
vehicle and its passengers. The pictures were designed to be arranged to produce a
short narrative. I told Mr. B that he could put them in whatever order he liked so
as to make a story which he could then tell me. This involved describing the
incident and explaining why it had happened and what the consequences might
be. I also asked Mr. B a number of questions, using diﬀerent question forms, about
certain aspects of the story he had told.
Rationale
Narrative is a familiar activity for everyone but it has a particular relevance in
police interviews. I wanted to see how well Mr. B could sequence events and how
eﬀectively he could elaborate on them. I also wanted to test how well he dealt
with diﬀerent questioning strategies, such as embedded or elaborated questions,
common in police interviews.
The linguistic proﬁle
As explained above, the linguistic proﬁle is used to comment on the detainee’s proﬁ-
ciency in English indicating areas of concern. As a key component of the report, it is
necessary to exemplify features that typify his production and performance and demon-
strate how these might aﬀect communication. In one trial, the judge dismissed the case,
which revolved around whether the detainee had understood what a police oﬃcer had
said. This was in direct response to the proﬁle I had produced, which indicated that the
detainee might have diﬃculty in understanding unfamiliar regional accents. It turned out
that the chief witness, namely the arresting police oﬃcer, had a strong Glaswegian accent.
The summary of ﬁndings in extract (7) comes from Mr. B’s report and is an example
of a linguistic proﬁle.
(7) Report on Mr. B
Summary of Findings
Mr. B was very co-operative and forthcoming throughout the whole assessment.
He spoke freely, which gave me a good opportunity to evaluate his use of English
and his comprehension ability.
1. Mr. B can speak freely, though inaccurately, about familiar topics.
2. He has a conﬁdent manner when speaking and perseveres to get his meaning
across.
3. His English is heavily marked by a strong Turkish accent and he has diﬃculty in
producing certain sounds (e.g. /w/ instead of /v/, /e/ (as in men) instead of /a/
(as in man), /d/ instead of /ð/ (as in they)
4. He frequently misses hearing certain key sounds, such as un- as in unimportant.
5. His grammar is seriously ﬂawed, particularly his use of the following:
auxiliaries (is, be, have, etc.) (e.g. I living … )
verb tenses (simple past, etc.) (e.g. I go last week)
prepositions (to, for, at, etc.) (e.g. I get to home)
phrasal verbs (look after, get over, etc.) (e.g. She look to the children)
articles (the, a, etc.) (e.g. I go to pub)
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
435

6. He does not recognise embedded questions (e.g. I wonder what they’re doing?)
7. He does not understand elaborated requests or questions (e.g. Do you think you
could tell me what’s going on in this picture?)
8. He appears reluctant to admit his failure to understand which can result in a
communication breakdown.
9. He sometimes responds to questions he mistakenly thinks have been asked rather
than what has actually been asked. In other words, he sometimes does not know
that he has not understood.
This summary of ﬁndings (7) is followed by more detailed discussion of performance on
each of the tasks (8) in order to demonstrate the evidence with which the linguistic
proﬁle was produced.
(8) Discussion of performance tasks – Mr. B
Picture Story
Mr. B was able only to tell a very scant story based on the pictures, despite the
explicitness of the plot, the additional prompts I gave and the familiarity that might
be expected of the situation.
He was unable to respond to the embedded or elaborated questions that I asked
and could only answer when I simpliﬁed them as direct questions with extra non-verbal
indications such as pointing to the relevant details in the pictures.
e.g. Elaborated Question: ‘What do you think is going on here?’
rephrased as ‘What’s going on here?’
Embedded Question: ‘Can you tell me what’s happening here?
rephrased as ‘What’s happening here?
The kind of information in (7) and (8) can then be juxtaposed with the police interviews
as in (9).
(9) Interview with detainee Mr. B (IE) by police interviewer (IR) at police station
1 IR: Do you accept that that was you making that contact?
2
Mr. K does not respond, so DC. R makes a second attempt, this time
presenting the question as an assertion
3 IR: The phone calls made by your phone were made by you?
4 IE: Maybe I phone him, maybe he phone me…
It is impossible in such a case for the expert to say whether the detainee did or did not
understand the line of questioning in this case and the lack of response in line 2 may be
attributed to momentary consideration before deciding on how to answer. However, the
evidence from the test outlined above indicates that there may be some element of doubt
about the level of comprehension displayed.
In Mr. C’s case, although there were few examples of communication failure, there
were incidences where his faulty grammar led to misinterpretations as illustrated by the
exchange in (10).
(10) Interview with detainee Mr. C (IE) by police interviewer (IR) at police station
1 IE: I don’t want to get involved with him in this matter.
FIONA ENGLISH
436

2 IR: So if you don’t want anyone involved you lie do you?
3 IE: Yeah
The implication of the interviewer’s construction of Mr. C’s statement is that it is Mr. C who
doesn’t want to get involved with the other person rather than, as is later clariﬁed, that
Mr. C doesn’t want to get that person involved in his problems. Hence, Mr. C’s desire to
protect the other person is construed quite diﬀerently as a result of Mr. C’s faulty phrasing.
This might lead to a more negative impression of Mr. C than might otherwise be the case.
Additional information
For the purposes of these assessments the analysis rarely includes socio-pragmatic aspects as
in Maley (2000) nor does it consider cultural and ideological experience as in Blommaert
(2005). This is not to say that such a focus would be irrelevant. In fact, as Eades (2005) or
Blommaert (2005) argue, socio-cultural factors play a fundamental role in interactions with
the law, particularly in relation to understanding contextual features connected to prac-
tices and power relations. However, I have so far refrained from explicitly reporting on
these aspects, partly because they are not easily demonstrated to a lay audience and partly
because the evidence they might oﬀer would be more speculative than that aﬀorded by a
linguistic focus. Nevertheless, there is one sociolinguistic issue that needs to be addressed
as it is often raised in cross-examination. I am referring to the issue of low-level English
proﬁciency despite several years’ residence in the country. This is a phenomenon that is
widely experienced by members of the public, but little understood, and it is for this
reason that I make reference to it, where relevant, in my report, as in the example (11).
(11) Report on Mr. C
A further point to note concerns the length of time Mr. C has been living in the
UK. It is reasonable to assume that after 30 years residence, someone would have
fully mastered the language and that no problems would be encountered in using
English across a wide range of contexts. However, it is often the case that people
who remain within their own ethnic and linguistic community have a level of
English language proﬁciency that is lower than might be assumed given their
length of time in the country. This phenomenon has been well documented
both in the media (e.g. Mansur, 2007) and in scholarly literature (e.g. Wei, 1994,
Carr-Hill et al. 1996). … In other words, language proﬁciency depends as much on
the contexts in which one uses it as on the length of time one lives in a given
country. In the case of Mr. C, most of his interactions, until his arrival in prison,
have taken place within the Sino-Vietnamese community.
Such additional information can make a diﬀerence to how the rest of the report is
received. However, as with all the evidence provided, its eﬀectiveness depends largely on
the use that is made of it in the proceedings.
Giving an opinion
This part of the report is where an opinion is given. It draws inferences from the ﬁndings
of the assessment and comments on their implications in the interviews. Extract (12)
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
437

from Mr. A’s report exempliﬁes this. In this case, the issue concerned an oral rendition of
an oﬃcial document relating to drink driving.
(12) Report on Mr. A
Mr. A’s English language proﬁciency is far from ‘perfect’, as suggested in the police
report cited earlier. His use of English is full of grammatical inaccuracies and his
vocabulary limited. His understanding of spoken English is problematic in that it
ﬂuctuates between comprehension, apparent comprehension and clear lack of
comprehension as demonstrated in my detailed ﬁndings above.
Having examined the proforma texts used in the police procedures I can con-
ﬁdently state that it is highly unlikely that Mr. A would have understood much of
the language used.
The texts contain items of vocabulary which are far beyond the level of his com-
prehension let alone his own production (e.g. alleged, consumed, oﬀence, specimens,
device, proportion, disregarded, render, liable, prosecution).
The grammatical structures involved are complex for someone with Mr. A’s level of
English. For instance, consider the following:
I require you to provide two specimens of breath for analysis by means of an approved device.
(A14)
This sentence contains:
 the subjunctive (I require you to provide)
 participial phrasing/reduced relative clause (for analysis – instead of … which is for
analysis),
 idiomatic phrasing (by means of)
 participial phrasing/reduced relative clause + passive structure (an approved device –
instead of a device which is approved by …).
Taking these two aspects (vocabulary and grammar) together, and Mr. A’s standard of
English as discussed above, it can be said with a high degree of conﬁdence that such
discourse was beyond his comprehension.
It is the opinion part of the report which is referred to by both defence and prosecu-
tion lawyers, which is why it needs to be explicit, comprehensible and as unambiguous
as possible. The rest of the report, including description of the test materials and the
linguistic proﬁle, serves as evidence to support the ‘opinion’.
Conclusion
The process of assessing English language proﬁciency for forensic purposes is, as has been
seen, more complex than may be understood in the judicial process. Work of this type is
relatively unusual, at least in the British context, and for the most part law ﬁrms rely on
psychologists’ reports, based largely on psychometric tests, to evaluate language compe-
tence. In relation to non-native speakers, these are unlikely to be reliable. It might be
FIONA ENGLISH
438

argued that a simple standardised proﬁciency test could be devised to check a detainee’s
ability prior to an interview. Although this might be better than the somewhat arbitrary
method currently applied, it would be diﬃcult to monitor and such a test would neces-
sarily be a rather blunt instrument which might result in further complications. The
advantage of the approach I have described here is that it provides detailed information
which can shed light on actual incidences of performance. Furthermore, by providing
examples of performance, the report can raise issues that tend to go unrecognised but
which may have important implications for all concerned. For instance, evidence of how
non-native detainees struggle with certain grammatical structures such as embeddedness
or idiomatic expressions such as phrasal verbs, often mistakenly thought to be ‘easy’, can
help police interviewers adjust their own language choices accordingly.
The diﬃculty in embarking on one of these assessments is in ﬁnding a balance
between what to report on and considering how the diﬀerent audiences will make use of
the report. However, my experience has shown that the introduction of professional
applied linguistic input in this context oﬀers a new dimension to the legal process.
Regardless of whether the evidence produced succeeds in inﬂuencing the outcome, and
it is worth saying that it sometimes does, the inclusion of this kind of information ensures
that language and intercultural communication is foregrounded as an issue to be more
seriously taken into account.
It is clear that there is great scope for academic research in this ﬁeld. In my experience,
the process of providing an assessment has become increasingly diﬃcult the deeper I go
into the analysis and the more I learn about the process. It is not possible for a report,
with its very particular function, to double up as a piece of research. However, it is
certainly possible for researchers to use the data that is collected during an assessment to
investigate further, outside the context of the ‘expert’ report itself. Such work could
provide precisely the kind of evidence that is needed to support the arguments being
made with regard to the problems faced by non-native speakers embroiled in the legal
process.
Further reading
Blommaert, J. (2005) Discourse, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coulthard, M. and Johnson, A. (2007) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence,
London: Routledge.
Ellis, R. and Barkhuizen, G. (2005) Analysing Learner Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNamara, T. (2000) Language Testing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS IN DETENTION
439

29
Court interpreting
The need to raise the bar:
Court interpreters as specialized experts
Sandra Hale
I am concerned that so many people who put their trust in the administration of justice … have
suﬀered from incompetent interpretation. If you do not understand the proceedings through
competent interpretation, you are denied justice.
(Moustacalis, in Todd 2008)
Introduction
Much has been said and written about incompetent interpreting in the courtrooms. Yet,
little seems to have been done to achieve systematic improvements that will lead to a
better administration of justice. Multiple factors contribute to this impasse, but its
underlying cause seems to be the general lack of recognition of the complex nature of
court interpreting as a highly specialized activity (Christensen 2008). Many are quick
to criticize the interpreter’s performance, but few are willing to advocate rigorous
pre-service university training, to provide adequate working conditions and to pay pro-
fessional rates that are commensurate with the diﬃculty of the task (Morris 2008). On
the one hand, courts are happy to employ untrained bilinguals to act as interpreters at
very little expense; on the other, they wonder why these poorly paid, untrained indivi-
duals are not performing satisfactorily (Berk-Seligson 2008). The answer should be
obvious, yet little is being done at the systemic level to rectify this anomaly. Either the
legal professionals do not see the connection, or they do not consider the issue important
enough to take any action. What should indeed be surprising is that, given the current
employment conditions, poor remuneration and lack of recognition, there are still many
highly trained, competent and professional interpreters in the market whose work is
undervalued, unrecognized and unacknowledged.
There also seems to be an underlying misconception, as implied by the introductory
quotation, that it is only the accused who does not understand the language of the
courtroom who needs interpretation in order to ensure a fair trial. The fact is that when
one participant cannot understand or be understood, it is the legal process itself that
440

suﬀers and justice cannot be done. A lawyer’s best eﬀorts to ask the most strategic
questions in order to elicit the answers that will beneﬁt his/her case can be thwarted by
inadequate interpretation. A jury’s attempts to evaluate the credibility of a witness can be
frustrated by inadequate interpretation. A magistrate’s evaluation of the evidence pre-
sented in another language will be ﬂawed if based on inadequate interpretation. I use the
word inadequate deliberately. Inadequate does not refer only to the interpreter’s level of
competence, but also to the interpreter’s specialist training in court interpreting and prior
preparation. In addition, the interpreter’s opportunity to render an adequate interpreta-
tion depends heavily on the physical working conditions and the behavior of all the
participants involved in the interaction.
The 2007 Critical Link 5 Congress1 highlighted the necessity for all participants of
interpreted interactions to assume some of the responsibility for the quality of the
interpretation and the success of the communication. The misconception that inter-
preters perform “a purely mechanical function, much like a hearing aid, microphone,
or typewriter” (NSWLRC 2004: 62), portrays interpreting as an activity devoid of
thought, judgment or eﬀort and removes from the main speakers any responsibility to
help the interpreter understand and render the message accurately. Interpreted pro-
ceedings cannot be expected to be the same as monolingual proceedings, no matter
how competent the interpreter. Allowances must be made in order to accommodate
the interpreter. Before the event, interpreters need to be briefed with as much back-
ground information as possible in order to adequately prepare. During the event,
speakers’ turns at talk must be clear and of manageable length, and the interpreter
should be given permission to interrupt the proceedings if and when clariﬁcation is
required or a reasonable request warranted. The physical working conditions are also
important, including proper acoustics so the interpreters can hear the speakers clearly,
comfortable seating to allow for note taking and reference material, access to drinking
water and permission to take regular breaks. Ideally, for long trials, interpreters should
work in pairs, which is the current practice in conference interpreting. This creates
a quality assurance mechanism, because the interpreters can monitor each other’s
performance, as well as take regular breaks. However, even if such conditions were
granted, only competent interpreters with the correct specialist training would be able
to oﬀer a quality service.
Lack of awareness about the complexity of interpreting and the
need for high standards
Although some countries have accreditation or certiﬁcation systems that provide some
type of benchmark for competence, in no country is any type of training compulsory
before interpreters are allowed to practice. It is still not uncommon in some countries
for the police or the courts to use bilingual volunteers, including children or police
oﬃcers, as interpreters (Berk-Seligson 2000; Roberts-Smith 2009; Allimant and
Anne 2008). Ahmad comments on the inconsistency that exists in the United States,
where:
lawyers rarely subject interpreters to the level of scrutiny regarding qualiﬁcations
and reliability to which they would subject other types of expert. Indeed, it is
nearly inconceivable that untrained, untested, unpaid volunteers would be used as
COURT INTERPRETING
441

expert witnesses with the frequency with which such volunteers are used for legal
interpretation.
(Ahmad 2007: 1059)
In a review article, Len Roberts-Smith, a former Australian Chief Justice, comments
that “monocultural or Anglophone lawyers and judges” lack an understanding of
interpreting issues, resulting in forensic error. He reviews a number of cases where
poor interpretation created legal problems and attributes these to one of the following
causes:
1. The absence of anyone to interpret due to either a misconception from some
judges and lawyers that interpreters are an obstacle to communication or to the
unavailability of interpreters;
2. The provision of unqualiﬁed bilinguals or interpreters qualiﬁed in the wrong
language; and
3. The use of the services of “professional accredited” interpreters who are not
trained and who do not possess the high level skills necessary to perform at the
required level (Roberts-Smith 2009).
Such lack of recognition for trained interpreters and lack of awareness of the com-
plexity of court interpreting is not unique to English-speaking countries. A study of
court interpreting in Ecuador revealed a similar attitude (Berk-Seligson 2008). When
asked about who interprets for indigenous populations who do not speak Spanish, a
judge said: “We call in a person who understands the Quichua language and who
translates it into Spanish. There are two or three people who live nearby. They are
called. They collaborate. They aren’t paid. They are collaborators” (Berk-Seligson 2008:
20). Berk-Seligson comments that, ironically, although these judicial oﬃcers are happy to
call on non-professionals, there are always vehement criticisms of their work (2008: 27).
Studies from other countries such as Malaysia (Ibrahim 2007); Spain (Ortega Herráez
and Foulquié Rubio 2008; Giambruno 2008); Austria (Kadric 2000) and Denmark
(Christensen 2008) have produced similar ﬁndings.
Hertog et al. comment on the fear that surrounds the establishment and enforcement
of adequate standards for legal interpreters (Hertog et al. 2007). They speculate that not
only may governments fear having to pay adequate fees to qualiﬁed interpreters, but
also unqualiﬁed practitioners may fear losing their work and educational institutions
may fear not attracting suﬃcient numbers of students or students with the high level of
bilingual competence required to become interpreters. They conclude that “this
unholy trinity of, often unnecessary, fear has hindered and still hinders progress”
(Hertog et al. 2007: 164). It is ironic that the fear is based on issues other than the
potential for misinterpretation and for the grave consequences it can have on the
administration of justice.
Court interpreters as highly trained professionals
[C]ourt interpreters must be properly trained, the diﬃculty and importance of their
work fully recognized, their pivotal role in the judicial process acknowledged and
SANDRA HALE
442

accepted by judicial authorities, and their compensation established in accordance
with their responsibilities.
(Giambruno 2008: 48)
Compulsory pre-service training will not guarantee error-free interpretation, just as legal
training does not guarantee error-free lawyering. However, it will guarantee both a
minimum standard and professional status for interpreters. The diﬀerent skills that inter-
preters need as their everyday tools are acquired through rigorous training and consistent
practice. The main ones include the acquisition of pre-assignment preparation skills,
specialized note taking and memory aide skills, and competence in the diﬀerent inter-
preting modes: short consecutive, long consecutive and simultaneous interpreting and
sight translation. Knowing when to use each of these modes, how accuracy is constrained
by each of them and the consequences of the interpreter’s choices on the interaction are
competencies that can only be acquired through adequate training based on sound theories
and on the results of practical applied research. See (Hale 2007) for more details.
Added to these generic skills, court interpreters need to acquire specialized knowledge
of the legal system, of diﬀerent legal settings, of bilingual legal terminology and of the
discourse practices and strategies particular to the courtroom. Qualiﬁed interpreters will
also be familiar with a code of ethical conduct that will guide them on issues of impar-
tiality, conﬁdentiality, and their role in providing a true reﬂection of the voice of the
original speakers, as far as the situation and the participants will permit. Another crucial
area of competence is the interpreter’s ability to manage the interaction, to know when
and how to intervene to highlight a translation ambiguity or diﬃculty or explain a
translation choice that may impact on the case at hand. The next section will review
each of these areas of competence with illustrative examples.
Court interpreting competence
Prerequisite to becoming an interpreter: high level
bilingual competence
Interpreting is a highly complex activity that requires as a base, a native or native-like
level of competence in at least two languages in a variety of genres and registers. This in
itself is a rare ability that should be valued as such, as normally only those who have
received formal bilingual education and have lived in at least two diﬀerent language
communities throughout their lives can acquire such high levels of bilingualism. Very
few professions require such a demanding prerequisite to train in their ﬁeld.
The pool of competent bilinguals in all of the language combinations which require
interpreters is undoubtedly very limited. This fact alone makes it crucial for such people
to be provided with the necessary incentives to pursue a career as highly specialized
interpreters. It is an unfortunate reality that many of the best interpreting graduates in
Australia (Ozolins and Hale forthcoming) do not practice as interpreters for very long,
choosing to retrain for other more proﬁtable and less demanding professions. On the
other hand, examples of people who act as interpreters, but who lack basic linguistic
competence, abound. These people are, of course, not necessarily trained, accredited or
even paid for their services. Even if they have every intention of interpreting accurately,
their lack of basic skills does not allow it. For example, Ahmad (2007: 1061) comments
COURT INTERPRETING
443

on an aﬃdavit taken through an interpreter, which was replete with grammatical errors,
basic vocabulary and very short sentences, giving the impression that the speaker was an
uneducated person, when in fact he was a university academic. Berk-Seligson (2000)
gives examples of police oﬃcers in the United States who, despite their inadequate
Spanish language skills, insist on asking questions in Spanish, making it very diﬃcult for
the suspects to understand.
Examples of inadequate English competence can also be found in Australia, with dif-
ferent implications on the outcome of the case. Example (1) below shows an instance of
a Korean interpreter’s grammatical inadequacy in English.
(1)
Interpreter:
Ben Kim said someone is going to Central Coast.
Counsel:
to the Central Coast?
(Lee 2009a:106)
The interpreter’s omission of the deﬁnite article is highlighted by counsel’s need to
clarify the utterance, adding unnecessarily to the length of the case and possibly creating
confusion for the witness, who does not understand why his/her answer is being repe-
ated by counsel. Another example of inadequate interpreting leading to an obvious
consequence can be found in a recent Refugee Review Tribunal hearing, where the
Arabic interpreter continually misinterpreted “persecution” as “prosecution” and “wit-
ness” as “martyr,” confusing the witness and leading to an appeal on the grounds of poor
interpretation (Szldy & Ors v. Minister for Immigration & Anor [2008] Fmca 1684).
However, even if a person is a balanced, competent bilingual, this does not guarantee
their ability to interpret. The misconception that any bilingual, including children, can
automatically be called upon to interpret is unfortunately still prevalent. Roberts-Smith
(2009) provides an example of police asking a ﬁfteen-year-old girl, who was visiting the
inmate they needed to interview, to interpret. When she left, the interview continued
without her, and on the record it was written “interpreter quit here”, automatically
attributing to the girl the title of “interpreter.” A similar situation can be seen in example
(2), where the police prosecutor implies that a child was suﬃciently competent to act as
the interpreter for her mother. Interestingly, the mother qualiﬁes the daughter’s “inter-
preting” performance in an insightful manner, proposing that the child was not inter-
preting, but providing her own version of the facts and supplying her with some words
when needed.
(2) (The interpreter’s version was removed from the example) (PP is police prosecutor; W is
witness.)
PP:
Your daughter Karen was there, wasn’t she?
W:
Sí, estaba conmigo (Yes, she was with me)
PP:
And she speaks English?
W:
Sí (Yes)
PP:
And she speaks good English?
W:
Sí (Yes)
PP:
And she speaks Spanish as well?
W:
Sí (Yes)
PP:
And she assisted you in giving your version of events to the police, didn’t she?
SANDRA HALE
444

W:
Bueno, mi hija dio la..la versión de ella, de lo que vio y me ayudó a mí las cosas que
yo no … que ella me preguntaba que yo no sabía cómo contestarla’ porque no sé el
inglés po’ (Well, my daughter gave her … her own version of what she saw
and she helped me with the things that I didn’t … that she asked that I didn’t
know how to answer because I don’t speak English, you know).
(Police v. X. Assault case, Fairﬁeld Local Court, NSW, 1996)
Bilingual helpers will normally do what the witness above stated; they will give their
own summary of what they heard. Qualiﬁed interpreters are taught to aim at achieving
faithful and complete renditions of what the speaker said, attempting to maintain the
appropriate register and style. Faithful interpreting, however, is a complex and at times
controversial concept. Although widely discredited, the idea that faithful interpreting
equates to word-for-word translations is still common among some legal practitioners
(Hale 2007; Lee 2009b). A number of scholars have based their theories of accurate
interpreting on communicative theories of discourse and pragmatics, which also extend
to translation theories (House 1977; Nord 1997; Mason and Stewart 2001; Berk-Seligson
1990, 2002; Hale 1996, 2004, 2007). These theories argue against the concept of literal,
word-for-word translations, as such translations generally fail to achieve an accurate
representation of the communicative point and eﬀect of the original utterances. While, it
is beyond the scope of this chapter to explain these theories in detail, the underlying
concepts will be reviewed below, with accompanying examples.
Understanding the interpreting process
Untrained interpreters generally base their choices on personal intuition. Formal training
attempts to systematize those choices by providing theories to guide and inform inter-
preters in the process. From a discourse/pragmatic perspective, the interpreter’s goal is to
interpret from the source to the target language in such a way that the listeners in the
target language understand and react to the message in the same way that listeners in the
source language would; this has been referred to as “pragmatic equivalence” (see House
1977; Hale 2007). Within a Speech Act theory framework (Austin 1962), the interpret-
ing process can be roughly explained in the following way: when listening to the source
speech, the interpreter analyses it in terms of its locutionary act (the words uttered),
illocutionary act (what is performed by those words), and perlocutionary act (what is
achieved through them). In other words, the interpreter needs to fully understand the
communicative function of the utterance and the likely eﬀect on the listeners. Such
understanding of the utterance will largely depend on the speech event itself, on its
participants, and on the knowledge shared by those participants. To interpret faith-
fully, the interpreter needs to bridge the gap that exists between the two languages and
cultures by aiming to render the illocutionary act and at the same time aspiring to
achieve the intended perlocutionary act. This is often done at the expense of the locu-
tionary act. The examples below will illustrate some of the diﬀerences that exist across
languages at the various levels of the language hierarchy: lexical, grammatical, semantic
and pragmatic.
(3)
Spanish sentence:
A la niña la mordió el perro.
Lexical translation (literal, word-for-word):
To the girl it (feminine) bit the dog.
COURT INTERPRETING
445

Semantic translation:
The dog bit the girl.
Pragmatic translation:
It was the girl that was bitten by the dog.
One diﬀerence between languages is word order, as exempliﬁed in (3), which clearly
demonstrates that a literal, word-for-word translation would be inadequate in English.
Hale (2007) proposes that interpreting competence can be matched with the approach
the interpreter adopts when rendering his/her translation. For example, a person whose
bilingualism is rudimentary will approach translation at the lexical level and produce a
literal translation; untrained interpreters will tend to approach translation at the sentence
level, concentrating only on the propositional content and produce semantic translations;
and the most competent, trained interpreters, will approach translation at the discourse
level and attempt to produce pragmatic translations. In (3), we can see that the semantic
translation produces the correct propositional content: the dog bit the girl. The Spanish
utterance, however, uses a marked structure leading to the presumption that in context, a
possible distinction needs to be made between what animal bit which child, hence the
marked theme position of the girl/object, even though the clause is in the active voice.
The same eﬀect can be achieved in English by resorting to a cleft construction. In order
to achieve a pragmatic translation, the interpreter needs to choose from a diﬀerent
grammatical resource in English in order to match the original intention rather than the
original words, or structure. This process can be further complicated when context,
participants and culture are added to the equation.
This complex process is not widely understood let alone applied by untrained inter-
preters. Research has found that many tend to translate semantically, not pragmatically,
thus inadvertently changing the illocutionary and perlocutionary acts of the original
utterances (Hale 1996; Berk-Seligson 1999; Fraser and Freedgood 1999).
Overcoming challenges caused by cross linguistic differences
Trained interpreters will face as many challenges as untrained interpreters. However,
trained interpreters will ideally have received the tools to deal with such challenges. They
will also have the resources to not only make informed choices, but also to explain those
choices to the court when necessary.
Languages diﬀer at all levels of the linguistic hierarchy. Interpreters need to be com-
petent at all levels in each language, and be able to make judgments about what aspects
of the original utterance to sacriﬁce in order to achieve a pragmatic rendition when
interpreting. This is particularly diﬃcult in court interpreting, where subtle changes to
utterances can lead to changes in the evidence and to the evaluation of witness credibility.
This section will present a number of examples to illustrate cross linguistic diﬀerences
that require high level expertise to produce adequate, accurate interpretations.
At the grammatical level, a number of challenges can arise. One such challenge is
interpreting tense and aspect accurately between English and Chinese. In English, tense
and aspect are manifested mostly through verbal morphology, whereas in Chinese the
use of adverbial markers and context carry these same meanings, thus making it diﬃcult
for interpreters to choose the most accurate renditions (Lin 2006). In the case of Arabic
and Spanish, Hale and Campbell (2002) present the results of an empirical study which
demonstrates the number of choices translators are confronted with. The study found
that the categories that produced the highest number of alternatives, and therefore created
the greatest diﬃculty in ﬁnding translation equivalents, were oﬃcial terms, metaphors
SANDRA HALE
446

and complex noun phrases (Hale and Campbell 2002). One example was the seemingly
unproblematic English noun phrase “case management,” which caused diﬃculty at both
semantic and the grammatical levels because in neither Arabic nor Spanish can a noun
modify another noun.
Another very subtle diﬀerence between Spanish and English is the way speakers
verbalize motion. For example, Slobin (1996) found that English speakers tend to express
the manner of the motion by using manner verbs such as “staggered into the room,”
whereas Spanish speakers rarely describe the motion at all and when they do, do so by
adding an adjunct of manner “entró tambaleándose” (entered staggering). In a study of the
way interpreters interpreted manner verbs in witness testimonies, Filipovic found that
as a result of the habitual need to express manner in English, diﬀerent lexical choices
are made in the English translation that add information about the manner of
motion, not present in the Spanish original due to the use of manner-neutral lexical
items, which could result in diﬀerent interpretations of the situation described.
(Filipovic 2007)
One such example is (4).
(4)
Witness:
pero … salió por la seven
Literal translation:
But … (he/she/you formal) exited via the seven
Interpreter:
the suspect ran up 7th street.
(Filipovic 2007: 253)
Filipovic explains that the English questioning persistently insists on more detail about
the manner in which an action took place, while such information tends to be absent
from Spanish descriptions. This may lead interpreters to believe that they need to add
descriptions of manner, as in (4), where salió (went out) is translated as “ran up.” Such
translation demonstrates the interpreter’s own perception of the event, which may not
necessarily match the reality, as the details were not speciﬁed in the original. The inter-
preter is possibly also attempting to make the English version sound more natural and
pragmatically appropriate, but such an addition may impact on the propositional content
of the utterance. In a legal case, a witness’s detailed description of what they saw is cru-
cial and any subtle changes produced by the interpreter, as in example (4), can impact on
the consistency of the accounts by diﬀerent witnesses. The interpreter is therefore presented
with the diﬃcult task of deciding how to achieve the illocutionary and perlocutionary
acts without interfering with the propositional content. Filipovic goes on to explain that
the interpreter’s assumption that everyone was running in the chase scene turned out to
be incorrect, as it was later made clear that some people were on bicycles.
Another example provided by Filipovic is the diﬃculty in translating the non-agentive
reﬂexive pseudo-passive from Spanish into English, as in (5).
(5)
Witness:
Se me cayó en las escaleras
Literal translation:
To-me-it-happened that (she/he/it) fell on the stairs.
(Filipovic 2007: 262)
COURT INTERPRETING
447

The Spanish utterance in (5) poses a translation challenge that is diﬃcult to overcome
without an explicit explanation to the court. As (5) clearly shows, a literal word-for-word
translation would not produce an accurate rendition. The interpreter in this case inter-
preted the utterance as either “I dropped her” or “she fell,” both of which are accurate
translations but neither conveys the same subtle meaning of the original. In this case,
both translations caused confusion, leading to the same question about the dropping of
the victim being asked nine times. The diﬃculty was caused by the diﬀerent expressions
of intentionality in Spanish and English. The Spanish utterance “se cayó,” could be
translated as “s/he/it fell,” as the gender is unspeciﬁed and the interpreter needs to clarify
it, unless it is understood from previous information. The addition of “me,” as in the
example “se me cayó” indicates that the speaker was involved in holding or carrying the
person who accidentally fell out of the speaker’s grasp. The English “I dropped her”
could indicate that the speaker deliberately let go, whereas the Spanish clearly indicates
that the dropping was unintentional and intentionality is crucial in legal cases. This is a
clear example of a situation where the interpreter would be justiﬁed in intervening to
explain the translation diﬃculty, as a subtle misunderstanding of this utterance could have
major legal implications.
At the discourse level, interpreting challenges occur when utterances can be translated
easily at the lexical or semantic levels, but due to pragmatic diﬀerences, they do not
portray the same illocutionary and perlocutionary acts. Interpreting speech acts such as
polite requests in courtroom questions, can cause diﬃculties in some languages. In
English polite requests are normally performed indirectly, by the use of a modal inter-
rogative, such as “Could you tell the court what happened?” When interpreters hear this
utterance, they ﬁrstly need to understand that it is an indirect speech act which functions
as a polite request, and not as a genuine question about the listener’s ability to speak. The
illocutionary act, therefore, is a polite request for speciﬁc information regarding an event.
Languages such as Russian or Czech, for example, formulate such requests directly by the
use of the imperative followed by a politeness marker (Searle 1975; Mir 1993). A Russian
interpreter, for instance, would need to change the indirect speech act into a direct speech
act in order to match the illocutionary and perlocutionary acts in the target language.
Understanding the discourse strategies of the courtroom
Another layer of complexity is added to the interpreter’s task when interpreting in the
courtroom, due to the constraints placed upon the interpreting process by the setting and
by the strategic use of language itself. Studies of the discourse of the adversarial court-
room in particular, have shown the signiﬁcance of language as a metaphorical tool
(Danet and Bogoch 1980; Drew and Heritage 1992b; Gibbons 2003). Diﬀerent types of
questions are used by lawyers to achieve speciﬁc goals depending on the type of exam-
ination. The form and the words used in questions can inﬂuence the answers they elicit,
and even the recollections they trigger in eye witnesses (Harris 1984; Loftus 1979; Maley
and Fahey 1991). Similarly, the language and style used by witnesses when giving
evidence can impact signiﬁcantly on how convincing or credible they are (O’Barr 1982).
A number of studies of court interpreting found that even competent, accredited
interpreters who had not received specialized legal interpreting training, were not aware
of the signiﬁcance of certain linguistic features of courtroom discourse, and consequently
tended to unjustiﬁably omit or disregard them. Examples include arbitrary changes of
question type (Hale 2004; Pérez González 2006); the omission of discourse markers to
SANDRA HALE
448

preface lawyers’ questions (Hale 1999); the omission of coercive tag questions during
cross-examination (Hale 2001; Rigney 1999) and changes to levels of politeness and
changes of style and register in witness testimonies, all of which led to diﬀerent evaluations
of character (Krouglov 1999; Berk-Seligson 1990/2002; Hale 2004).
The changes found in these studies were generally not explainable by cross linguistic
pragmatic diﬀerences; rather they were usually the result of interpreters disregarding what
they seemed to consider superﬂuous features of speech. Example (6) shows an unjustiﬁed
change of question type, from an open question to a polar interrogative eliciting a very
diﬀerent answer.
(6)
Question:
Yeah, can you tell the court to the best … to the best of your
recollection, to the best of your memory?
Interpreter:
¿Pero algo recuerda usted?
(But you remember something?)
(Hale 2004: 58)
The English question is an indirect request to the witness to tell the court what s/he
remembers. The interpreted question changes the expected answer to a yes/no response,
which would then require a further question to get the witness to describe the events.
The interpreted version not only omits the reference to the court but also changes the
register and level of politeness. The interpreter deviated completely from the question’s
original intention.
Example (7) shows the omission of the discourse marker well.
(7)
Question:
And uh you tell the court that you have no prior convictions?
Interpreter:
¿Dice usted a la corte de que no ha tenido antes ninguna condena?
(Are you saying to the court that you have not had any convictions
before?)
Answer:
No.
Interpreter:
No.
Question:
Well, is it correct that you have no prior convictions?
Interpreter:
¿Es correcto decir que usted no ha tenido condenas anteriores?
(Is it correct to say that you have not had convictions before?)
(Hale 2004: 64)
The use of well in this case indicates that the lawyer was dissatisﬁed with the answer
because it was ambiguous; an ambiguity that was caused by the original question. It is
not clear whether the answer “no” refers to “no I don’t tell the court” or “no, I have no
prior convictions.” In order to clarify the answer, the lawyer asks another question,
which he links with the discourse marker well. Pragmatically, well implies “let me put it
another way,” which maintains coherence in the discourse, however, the interpreter
omits the initial discourse marker altogether and simply translates the rest of the question,
but this omission changes its pragmatic eﬀect. Well in this case could have been translated
as “Bueno, pero” (well, but) or by the conditional “Entonces, sería correcto decir …” (Then,
would it be correct to say … ).
COURT INTERPRETING
449

One common complaint from judicial oﬃcers has been that:
evidence given through an interpreter loses much of its impact … The jury does
not really hear the witness, nor are they fully able to appreciate, for instance, the
degree of conviction or uncertainty with which his evidence is given; they cannot
wholly follow the nuances, inﬂections, quickness or hesitancy of the witness; all
they have is the dispassionate and unexpressive tone of the interpreter.
(Filios v. Morland [1963] S.R. (NSW) 331, per Bereton J
at 332–33, in Roberts-Smith 2009)
The fear expressed above has been conﬁrmed by the results of experimental studies.
However, it has also been found, that interpreters can be trained to maintain certain
features of discourse that will minimize the impact of the interpreter on the evalua-
tion of witness credibility (Berk-Seligson 1990; Hale 2004). Based on authentic tran-
scripts, Hale (2004) conducted a number of experiments to ascertain whether the stylistic
characteristics classiﬁed by O’Barr (1982) as powerless and powerful speech styles,
determined the way jurors evaluated the credibility, trustworthiness and competence of
witnesses. The results showed that Spanish jurors rated the Spanish speaking witnesses
who spoke in the powerful style as more credible, more competent and more trust-
worthy. The same results were obtained from English speaking jurors, thus corro-
borating O’Barr’s study, both for English and Spanish speaking jurors. When the
ratings of the original Spanish witnesses were compared with the interpreters’ renditions,
it was found that the interpreters who interpreted accurately at the propositional level
but changed the style of the original from powerless to powerful, obtained a better
evaluation on all three points. When interpreters maintained the propositional con-
tent, but changed the style from powerful to powerless, they received a less positive
evaluation than did the original witness on all three points. However, when the
interpreters maintained as much as possible of both the propositional content and the
style of speech, the impact of the interpreter was minimal and the juror evaluations
showed no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The results of the above study show that
with adequate training, competent interpreters can produce renditions that are stylis-
tically, propositionally and pragmatically accurate, which will counteract the negative
eﬀects of the interpreter’s intervention mentioned by Judge Brereton above.
Understanding the role of the court interpreter
Misunderstanding of the interpreter’s role is common among non-professionals hired
as interpreters. Instead of seeing themselves as impartial interpreters, they see them-
selves as advocates or gatekeepers. Such attitudes may be manifested overtly, in their
comments or advice to their “client” or to the legal practitioner (as in (8)); or cov-
ertly, either through the omission of utterances they deem irrelevant or through the
addition of information (as in (9)). At the one extreme, we ﬁnd examples like example
(8) provided by Ahmad (2007), where a Burmese priest acts as a volunteer interpreter.
(8)
Lawyer to client:
Is there someone there that we could speak to?
Reverend Sen:
Why is it necessary for you to speak with them?
(volunteer interpreter addresses lawyer, without interpreting into Burmese)
SANDRA HALE
450

Lawyer:
Reverend, would it be possible for you to just translate what we
said? If Mae has questions about why we would like to speak
with them, we can answer then.
Reverend Sen:
I have helped many Burmese to apply for asylum, and I don’t see
why this information is important. Please explain it to me before
I translate for Mae.
(Ahmad 2007: 1005)
Reverend Sen cannot be blamed for acting in this way. He is not a professional
interpreter and is not bound by any professional ethical code, nor has he received any
training. The responsibility here lies with the lawyers who did not hire the services of a
professional interpreter and expect a volunteer to act as one.
Ibrahim (2007) gives another example of an interpreter in Malaysia, who unbeknown to
the Bench, persuaded an unrepresented accused to change his plea from not guilty to
guilty based on what the interpreter himself considered to be evidence against the accused
which would most certainly lead to a conviction. Ibrahim explains that the interpreter is
considered by the Malaysian legal system to be “a bilingual intermediary, clerk of the
court, and advocate of unrepresented accused, [who] receives little or no training and is
not paid appropriately for the responsibilities (s)he carries” (Ibrahim 2007: 209).
In Austria, studies of paid interpreters in asylum interview settings also found examples
of role confusion, where some interpreters interwove their own comments into their
renditions and covertly took on the role of pseudo immigration oﬃcials (Pöllabauer
2004; Kolb and Pöchhacker 2008) This can be seen in example (9).
(9)
Adjudicator: (!App)
Und haben Sie Ihre Religion ausgeübt?
(And did you practice your religion?)
Interpreter:
Did you practice that religion?
Applicant:
Yeah, I was a Christian! And I go to church.
Interpreter:
Yes, but but-look, there are many Christians who never go
to ch-You went to church?
Applicant:
Yes.
Interpreter:
Ich bin in die Kirche gegangen.
(I went to church).
(Kolb and Pöchhacker 2008)
In (9) the answer “Yeah, I was a Christian!” was not interpreted into German,
presumably because the interpreter did not agree with the implication that Christians
practice their religion, a personal opinion the interpreter makes explicit to the applicant
but not to the rest of the tribunal. Here the interpreter holds a private conversation in
English for no reason other than his/her disagreement with the applicant’s proposed
inference. It is impossible to say whether this interpreter had received any specialist
training and whether s/he understood the consequences of his/her choices.
In example (10), we see the interpreter being confronted with a claimant who does
not understand his role. The interpreter is interpreting to the claimant simultaneously in
whispering mode, while others are giving evidence. This is standard practice in court
interpreting, but while the interpreter interprets, the claimant must not make any com-
ments, as that would interfere with the interpreter’s rendition. In (10) we see that the
COURT INTERPRETING
451

claimant intervenes by commenting to the interpreter that s/he did not have a contract.
The interpreter then tries to explain his/her role in the subsequent turn.
(10) Interpreting simultaneously while others are giving evidence
Arbitrator:
[addressing the defendant]
Do you have a lease with this lady?
Interpreter:
[for the beneﬁt of the Polish-speaking claimant—in Polish]
Do you, Ma’am, have a contract with this lady?
Claimant:
(in Polish) But I don’t have a contract
Interpreter:
(to claimant, in Polish)
No, no no, Ma’am. I’m only translating what the lady is asking.
(Angermeyer 2005: 215)
Unrealistic expectations of the role of the interpreter added to poor working conditions
and inadequate pay have led to interpreters refusing to take on court assignments or
leaving the profession altogether. Ibrahim speaks of the “perpetual shortage of inter-
preters in Malaysian courts, as senior ones retire and new ones either resign after a short
period or do not come forward at all” (Ibrahim 2007: 213).
A parallel can found with Australian Aboriginal interpreters, as expressed in the quotation
below:
I stopped doing court interpreting years ago. … They just didn’t really understand
what the interpreter’s role was, and I just got sick of sort of being blamed, you
know, for allowing people to go free or putting people in.
(Cooke 2009)
Acquiring the expertise to know when and how to intervene
to offer expert opinion
Interpreters are constantly faced with diﬃcult choices about how best to interpret each
utterance, and need to continually make judgments about the likely impact of any
changes on the legal process, so as to alert the court to potential misunderstandings. A
well-trained competent court interpreter will have the expertise to intervene to explain
situations where potential misunderstandings arise, where direct equivalents are not pos-
sible, or where a linguistic strategy does not have the same eﬀect in the target language.
Such interpreter expertise should be valued and welcomed by the court. Lee (2009a)
speaks of diﬃculties encountered by Korean interpreters due to ambiguity and inexpli-
citness found in Korean utterances. In an interview with Korean court interpreters, she
found that most were reluctant to interrupt the court proceedings to seek clariﬁcation
when utterances were ambiguous. Lee (2009a) argues that the interpreters’ reluctance to
intervene is mainly due to the intimidating atmosphere of the court, which tends to
ignore the presence of the interpreter or not to view them as experts.
On the other hand, Berk-Seligson (1990) and Hale (2003) found that untrained
Spanish interpreters interrupted the proceedings for a number of unjustiﬁed reasons, for
example, in order to point out to counsel that a question just asked had been asked
previously, or to attempt to help the witness answer a question. Attempts to make
clariﬁcations were also found to create more confusion. These untrained interpreters
SANDRA HALE
452

demonstrated a lack of understanding of the discourse strategies of the courtroom and of
the role of the interpreter as well as inadequate linguistic and interpreting expertise.
Conclusion
Despite the law’s claim to “precision,” language is imprecise (Gibbons 2003),
misunderstandings are common in monolingual situations and the potential for
misunderstanding in bilingual situations is even greater. Legal systems have failed to
recognize the complexities of court interpreting, and have been content to “make do”
with less than adequate interpreting services provided by unqualiﬁed bilinguals. Such
bilinguals, however, are often subject to unrealistic expectations, criticized for their
failings, overworked and underpaid or even unpaid. The inadequate performance of
these bilingual helpers has at best led to appeals on the grounds of poor interpretation
and at worst to no action at all, with unknown consequences.
If justice is to be served, things need to change. The system must ﬁrstly acknowledge
that highly competent court interpreters are crucial for the successful conduct of bilingual
proceedings and secondly, the system must be prepared to pay for a quality service. On
the one hand, the demand for trained, competent interpreters will lead to the creation of
high quality university programs. On the other, incentives such as adequate remunera-
tion, decent working conditions and due recognition will lead to high level bilinguals
choosing to complete the relevant training to enter the profession.
Interpreters who receive adequate training will be educated not only on linguistic,
cultural and interpreting issues, but also on the discourse practices of the courtroom and
the requirements of the setting and its participants. Similarly, legal professionals are to be
educated about the requirements of interpreters in order to perform adequately, with all
participants assuming some of the responsibility for the success of the interaction. Ulti-
mately, legal professionals need to work together with interpreters to achieve their goals
and recognize them as expert participants, rather than “mere” translation machines. Only
when the bar is raised on court interpreting, will quality services be guaranteed and
justice served.
Notes
1 The Critical Link international conference series is dedicated to interpreting in legal, medical and
welfare settings. CL5, was held in Sydney, Australia, from 11 to 15 April 2007. Its theme was
“Quality in interpreting: A shared responsibility”.
Further reading
Berk-Seligson, S. (1990/2002) The Bilingual Courtroom: Court Interpreters in the Judicial Process, Chicago:
Chicago University Press. (This book reports the ﬁrst and one of the largest data-based studies into
court interpreting in the USA.)
Cook, M., Eades, D. and Hale, S. (eds) (1999) “Special issue on Legal Interpreting,” Forensic Linguistics,
6(1). (This special issue of Forensic Linguistics provides a compilation of research papers on diﬀerent
aspects of legal interpreting covering a wide range of topics from diﬀerent perspectives.)
COURT INTERPRETING
453

Hale, S. (2004) The Discourse of Court Interpreting, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
(This book reports the results of one of the largest data-based studies into court interpreting in Aus-
tralia looking at the discourse practices of interpreters, lawyers and witnesses in ﬁne detail.)
——(2006) “Themes and methodological issues in court interpreting research,” in Hertog, E. and
B. van der Veer (eds), Linguistica Antverpiensa. Taking Stock: Research and Methodology in Community
Interpreting (5/2006), Antwerp: Hoger Instituut voor Vertalers &Tolken (205–28).
(This chapter provides a review of the main research into court interpreting.)
Mikkelson, H. (2000) Introduction to Court Interpreting, Manchester: St Jerome. (This is a useful intro-
duction to court interpreting for those wanting to know more about the discipline or wanting to
become court interpreters.)
Russell, D. and S. Hale (eds) (2008) Interpreting in Legal Settings, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University
Press. (This is an edited volume of articles on spoken and signed language court interpreting from
around the world.)
SANDRA HALE
454

30
Interpreting outside the courtroom
‘A shattered mirror?’ Interpreting in legal
contexts outside the courtroom
Krzysztof Kredens and Ruth Morris
Introduction
Globalization has brought ever larger numbers of people to places where the local legal
systems were not used to dealing with speakers of other languages, or if they were, with
only a small linguistic range. Inevitably, non-proﬁcient or ‘second-language’ speakers
become involved in law enforcement practices, whether as victims, witnesses or suspects.
In order to ensure equal access to justice, decision-makers in a rapidly growing number
of countries must nowadays ﬁnd ways of coping with the resulting increased linguistic
diversity at all stages of the judicial process.
Given the nature of courtroom language, with its highly structured discourse,
competing narratives and speech styles, court interpreting is often regarded as the most
important sub-domain of legal interpreting (see Hale, this volume). However, in the
context of forensic linguistics, no less relevant are issues of interpreter-mediated com-
munication in other legal and forensic contexts; this chapter is devoted to just such issues.
In the law enforcement chain that begins with a crime, interpreters for second-
language speakers, whether they be suspects, victims or witnesses, can be an all-important
link. Unless the highest standards are maintained at all stages, failure may result further
down the line, at trial or at a subsequent appeal. In what follows we discuss interpreting
at ﬁve stages of the judicial process: initial contact, police interviews, client–lawyer
interactions, probation meetings and prison visits. These diﬀerent stages do not necessa-
rily pose diﬀerent kinds of linguistic problem. Rather, they can each be associated with
certain consequences (1) for the interpreter, who may be subjected to diﬀerent kinds of
pressure and often forced to take on unexpected roles, (2) for the second-language
speaker, who will be variously disadvantaged depending on the context, and, ﬁnally,
(3) for the administration of justice.
455

Emergency interpreting
A second-language speaker’s experience of law enforcement may begin with an emer-
gency call to the police. In the UK, when a caller is deemed to have limited proﬁciency
in English, the police service operator uses a telephone interpreting service, such as
Language Line, which claims on its website to be able to provide 24-hour access to
interpreters working in over 170 languages (www.languageline.co.uk). Language Line
operates worldwide – in New York, for example, all police precincts have had direct,
instant access to the service since July 2005. The programme was originally piloted in
2004 in some of the city’s most ethnically diverse communities. Police oﬃcers were
equipped with cellular and dual-handset speaker-phones which had direct, instant access
to interpreters of over 150 diﬀerent languages, in order to better assist immigrant victims
of domestic violence. In its ﬁrst month, the line was used three dozen times for nine
languages: Bengali, Korean, Cantonese, Mandarin, Russian, Sinhalese, Farsi, Spanish and
Hindi (Worth 2004).
Telephone-based remote interpreting, while a most welcome development, is not
without its problems, most of which have to do with the absence of the non-verbal cues
that normally facilitate turn-taking and also enable the interpreter to make decisions
about pragmatic aspects of the message. The interpreter is disadvantaged also because, as
Moser-Mercer (2003) writes, ‘the coordination of image and sound, the piecing together
of a reality far away and the concomitant feeling of lack of control, all draw on mental
resources already overcommitted in this highly complex skill’ (http://aiic.net/ViewPage.
cfm/article879). Additionally, it often happens that individuals requiring police assistance
are emotionally distressed. In such cases, the interpreter may actually have to intervene
by taking over, whether explicitly or implicitly, the task of assuaging the caller’s agitation
in order to be able to obtain relevant information.1
The need for what can be termed ‘emergency interpreting’ may arise in situations
where the police respond to an emergency call by arriving at the location only to ﬁnd
that they are unable to communicate with the individuals concerned. This problem is
well illustrated by the case of Robert Dziekan´ski, a Polish man who died after being
tasered by oﬃcers of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police at Vancouver Airport in
October 2007. Although his death seems to have been triggered by a combination of
factors – including a delayed ﬂight; failure by airport staﬀto locate Dziekan´ski following
a request from his mother, who was waiting for him in the arrivals hall; and his dis-
orientation following a prolonged period in a confusing environment (he had never
ﬂown before) – the most important factor was probably his inability to communicate in
English. After he left the immigration waiting area, some nine hours after his arrival, he
became agitated and, apparently in an attempt to attract attention, threw a computer
monitor onto the ﬂoor and overturned a table. When the police oﬃcers arrived, they
were unable to establish communication and, ﬁnding his behaviour threatening, tasered
him ﬁve times, following which he died on the scene. The police oﬃcers were also
erroneously advised by bystanders that Dziekan´ski spoke Russian, which – though ulti-
mately of no consequence to what followed – illustrates a further problem integral to
emergency situations. A crucial, often overlooked element is the proper identiﬁcation of
the speciﬁc language spoken by an individual with whom the police need to commu-
nicate, and/or even the need to provide an interpreter or other eﬀective means of
communication with witness, victim, or suspect. Widespread assumptions – such as that
most people from Eastern Europe can speak Russian, or that people from India or
KREDENS AND MORRIS
456

Pakistan can all understand each other through a common language, be it Urdu or
Hindi, or that everyone from South America speaks Spanish – can result in miscarriages
of justice (see the Florida case of Petrona Tomás and England’s Iqbal Begum below). As
made all too clear by the Dziekan´ski case, unless the appropriate method is chosen in a
speciﬁc instance, communication may be defective at best or non-existent at worst.
Failing access to a reliable telephone interpreting service, a partial solution may be
the use of modern technology such as portable voice translators, which use speech
recognition systems and small electronic libraries of set phrases encoded as audio ﬁles.
This, accompanied by the arguably universal semiotics of the police uniform, may be
eﬀective in at least telling those involved that they are being taken to the police
station, where an interpreter will join them. However, the increasing availability of
mobile telephony may make possible remote but on-the-spot interpreting at the
moment of arrest; conceivably, even for the users of sign language by means of a 3G
cellphone.
If used appropriately, telephone interpreting can be beneﬁcial but, as noted above, it is
not a satisfactory substitute for an on-the-spot interpreter in most situations. In addition,
cultural issues may further complicate situations involving individuals not familiar with
local rules. In the 1979 English appeal of Beck v. Sager, a drink-driving case, it was held
that the second-language-speaking defendant’s failure to understand what was being
required of him (to give a sample of either blood or urine), as well as to understand the
penal consequences of a failure to comply with this demand, was due to him being
‘mentally unable’ to provide a specimen. Sager, a Libyan air force cadet training near
Carlisle, had very little idea about the entire legal and cultural notion of driving under
the inﬂuence of drink or being tested for the presence of alcohol in the body. The
second-language speaker’s quandary is clear from Sager’s own comments at the appeal,
shown in extract (1).
(1)
I think he mean what I understand. I did not feel it was necessary to get someone
to explain for me. I think I understand. I did not ask for a friend to come and
explain the language at any time. I do not know why he want blood, my reason
for not giving blood – there was no reason. I understand at the time the sergeant
wanted blood. My ﬂying instruction is carried out in English. I would not have
given blood if allowed to take my car.
(Beck v. Sager [1979] RTR at 479)
Tellingly, in those pre-telephone interpreting days the appellate court in the shape of
Lord Justice Bridge commented wryly (2):
(2)
It is found that, during this procedure, the defendant at no time asked for an
interpreter. I dare say it would have been no good if he had, because Arabic
interpreters are probably fairly scarce at Carlisle; but at all events he neither asked
for an interpreter nor indicated any misunderstanding, and the police, perfectly
reasonably no doubt on their part, honestly believed that he had understood all
that was said to him. But the justices came to the conclusion that he did not in fact
understand much of what was said to him.
(Beck v. Sager [1979] RTR at 480–81)
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
457

Clearly, if none of the parties involved realize that there is a misunderstanding, the ready
availability of interpreting services will not solve the problem.
The police interview
Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which addresses the right to a
fair trial, stipulates in its section 3(1) that everyone charged with a criminal oﬀence has
the right to be informed promptly, ‘in a language which he understands and in detail’, of
the nature and cause of the accusation against him. Article 14.3(a) of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights uses almost identical language.
The problem of the administration of rights in a form that makes sense to the person to
whom they are administered is particularly acute in the United States, and serves as
grounds for many appeals. There have been numerous cases where the so-called Miranda
rights, communicated to suspects either during arrest or when in police custody, have been
ostensibly administered in a language of which they have no or only a poor understanding
(particularly when Spanish is used in the case of individuals from Central or South America
whose mother tongue is not Spanish and who may not even have any knowledge of the
language), or by individuals working on behalf of the police (often police oﬃcers or police
administrative personnel) who have an inadequate command of the language into which
they are supposedly interpreting. One notable case is that of Petrona Tomás, a 15-year-old
girl from Guatemala, charged in Florida with the ﬁrst-degree murder of her newborn
child. In November 2002, police in Palm Beach County twice questioned the girl, whose
mother tongue was an indigenous language called Kanjobal. However, the police ques-
tioned her in Spanish, a language that all involved in the case agree she could not speak
with any ﬂuency. The police did not try to ﬁnd a Kanjobal interpreter and her father, who
four years before had sold her, waived her Miranda rights. The transcript of the police
interview contains mostly one-word answers to often disjointed and leading questions, yet
it was the basis for a ﬁrst-degree murder indictment (Moﬀett 2003).
In her ﬁrst statement, Tomás repeatedly told the police the baby had been stillborn.
However, Pacenti (2002) reports that in the second of two statements, made from her hos-
pital bed just hours after she gave birth, Tomás appeared to have trouble understanding
the questions from Sergeant Enrique Ponce (3).
(3)
Ponce:
Did you see when the baby was breathing?
Tomás:
Huh?
Ponce:
When … when … when the baby was born you saw him breathe, no,
for 10 minutes?
Tomás:
No.
Ponce:
No?
Tomás:
No, no.
Ponce:
Did you tell us … She is saying no now. … Did you see the baby
breathe when he was born?
Tomás:
Yes.
Police practice when dealing with second-language speakers varies greatly worldwide.
For example, in Britain and Australia, on the whole, police forces work with outside
KREDENS AND MORRIS
458

interpreters from the interview stage onwards. In the United States, standard practice is
for the police to try to manage with the linguistic skills of their own oﬃcers, with one
oﬃcer conducting the interrogation and another acting as ‘interpreter’. Often problems
abound, as Berk-Seligson (2000) shows on the basis of a review of appellate cases from
1965 to 1999 drawn from three states – California, Florida and New York. In particular,
she identiﬁes the absence of clear-cut demarcations between certain sorts of legal actors
and others, such as court interpreters, community interpreters and police interpreters.
Where the police employ an incompetent interpreter, there will inevitably be major
pitfalls, as illustrated by the 1999 Ohio case of Alejandro Ramirez (State of Ohio v.
Alejandro Ramirez, 135 Ohio App. 3d 89; 732 N.E.2d 1065). The defendant, who had
arrived in the United States from Mexico four months earlier, did not speak a word of
English. Due to a complicated set of circumstances, he was initially persuaded by his
housemates to confess to the police that he had shot an intruder, even though he had
been drunk and asleep at the time of the shooting. He had erroneously been informed
by his fellow Mexicans that he would simply be deported. However, after it emerged
that the intruder had died, Ramirez was charged with and subsequently found guilty of
murder. Certain police failings emerged when he appealed his conviction, among other
things that during his questioning, his Miranda rights were not properly explained to
him, the interpreter made many errors and gave her own opinions without clearing her
answers with the defendant and the police did not contact the Mexican consulate.
Since the defendant spoke no English, the police had used a local administrative
assistant, Jennifer Rodriguez, as interpreter. She had been used as a Spanish/English
interpreter by the police several times before, but had no formal training. Her knowl-
edge of Spanish came from taking several Spanish classes in college almost 20 years
earlier and from living for several months in Mexico. She was not familiar with legal
terms in either language. On the basis of the material submitted to it, the appellate
court found that the interpreter provided Ramirez with an unintelligible version of his
Miranda rights, something that back-translated as: ‘you have the right that some-
thing … that you … ah … can use against yourself in a court of law’. In addition,
she made many grammatical and semantic errors in her translation: for example, she
translated the word ‘rights’ using the word for ‘right-hand side’ or ‘right hand’ (derecha),
instead of the term used in legal contexts (derecho) and translated Ramirez’s ‘hmm’ as
‘yes’. She also omitted parts of the Miranda rights. In particular, she did not advise the
defendant of his right to have an attorney present during questioning nor did she stop
her translation of the Miranda rights when the defendant indicated he was not
following what was being said.
During Ramirez’s trial, defence attorneys had argued that his confession should be
suppressed because he did not understand its ramiﬁcations when he made it. An expert
witness (a college professor unversed in forensic linguistics) engaged by the prosecution
to analyse the administration of Ramirez’s rights failed to accurately convey the actual
shortcomings of the interpreter’s poor performance. Nevertheless, the outcome of the
appeal stated: ‘Miranda warnings given to appellant were insuﬃcient to adequately
apprise him of his rights. The translated Miranda warnings were confusing, and
certain aspects of the warnings were simply not given’ (State of Ohio v. Alejandro Ramirez
732 N.E.2d 1065 at 1067). The court overturned the murder conviction and Ramirez
eventually pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter.
Writing speciﬁcally about cautions delivered through interpreting, with special refer-
ence to Japanese native-speaker suspects in the Australian criminal investigation system,
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
459

Nakane (2007) identiﬁes a number of factors which may lead to diﬃculties in communicating
the suspect’s rights in police interviews:
(1) rendering an originally written legal text in a face-to-face speech mode;
(2) the degree to which the illocutionary force and the legal implications of the
caution can be maintained in the translation;
(3) the interpreter’s understanding of the meaning and legal implications of the
cautions;
(4) the dynamics of interpreter-mediated interaction;
(5) the degree to which cultural or institutional gaps are to be bridged by the interpreter;
and
(6) the interpreter’s professional competence.
Nakane reports that both Shuy (1997) and Gibbons (2001a) argue that in some cases they
had worked on, there was some evidence that the suspects tend to say ‘Yes’ to the
comprehension check question when they actually have little understanding of the cau-
tions, what Eades (2002) has called ‘gratuitous compliance’. Nakane quotes a passage
which illustrates this point to perfection. Taken from Coldrey (1987: 84–85, cited in
Gibbons 2003: 209), the material graphically illustrates the problems involved with cau-
tioning an Aboriginal man, who is ostensibly an English speaker and hence no interpreter
is involved in the exchange (4).
(4)
IR:
Right. Now I want to ask you some questions about the trouble out there
but I want you to understand that you don’t have to answer any questions at
all. Do you understand that?
IE:
Yes.
IR:
Do you have to tell me that story?
IE:
Yes.
IR:
Do you have to though?
IE:
Yes.
IR:
Do you, am I making you tell me the story?
IE:
Yes.
IR:
Or are you telling me because you want to?
IE:
Yes.
The exchange in (4) makes it clear that the problem lies with the suspect’s inability to
understand the questions he is being asked by the police oﬃcer, who is trying hard to
convey the intent of the cautions. The question is to what extent a competent, trained,
experienced interpreter would have been able to overcome these problems, which fall in
part under Nakane’s category (5), the degree to which cultural or institutional gaps are to
be bridged by the interpreter.
As is clear from Nakane’s paper, and as Hale also makes clear in her chapter on court
interpreting in this volume, even high-level proﬁciency in the languages concerned
combined with two-way interpreting skills, do not necessarily guarantee the provision of
high-calibre communication in the legal system. Many aspects, some of them not directly
related to the interpreting itself, play a role in determining the quality, and hence
eﬀectiveness or otherwise, of interpreting. Thus, Gibbons (2001a: 443) reports that in
KREDENS AND MORRIS
460

New South Wales, the police were found to be reluctant to use interpreters, for a
number of reasons, including delays, ﬁnancial aspects, and the perceived negative eﬀects
of interpreter mediation (impeding police oﬃcers’ reading of non-verbal signals and the
suspect’s gaining of extra time to answer questions). Gibbons identiﬁes past ‘gross under-
use’ of interpreters by NSW Police. A new version of the force’s Code of Practice was
subsequently produced on the basis of input from a range of people, including Gibbons.
It reads: ‘Use an interpreter when someone cannot understand and speak the English
language well enough to enable them to fully understand and fully reply to questions. If in
doubt, get an interpreter (Gibbons 2001a: 444, though the italicization has been added for
this chapter). Gibbons further makes the point that even apparently clear-cut instructions,
for example on how to question suspects, often fail because they lack explicitness.
Clearly this was the case in Beck v. Sager, discussed above, where even the defendant
failed to realize that he did not understand the whole purpose of the police procedure.
The point is that communication is a continuum from unattainable perfection to total
non-communication. As the ﬁnal NSW Police Code of Practice cautions: ‘Do not presume
that people understand even the most simple [sic] questions’. This means that even the
most competent interpreter cannot necessarily overcome a lack of comprehension on the
part of the suspect. Gibbons makes the point that yes/no questions are not a good way of
checking comprehension (as can be seen in extract (4)). In fact, he argues that encoura-
ging narrative accounts of a sequence of events when interviewing (rather than ‘inter-
rogating’) suspects is more likely to prove eﬀective (Gibbons 2001a: 446).
Gibbons also suggested to the New South Wales Police that the new Code of Practice
include a reference to the new NSW Procedures for Evidence Act, which are far more
extensive and considerably more explicit. With regard to criteria for using an interpreter,
the latter read:
Use an interpreter if the person (suspect or witness) you are interviewing: is unable
to communicate in English; has a limited understanding of English; is more com-
fortable communicating in their own language. NB: Just because someone can
speak English to do everyday tasks does not mean they can cope with the added
stress of a police interview.
(Gibbons 2001a: 445)
As Russell (2000) shows, when the caution is being administered by English police oﬃcers,
they are supposed to check that the second-language speaker has understood its implica-
tions, by paraphrasing the caution and lowering the register. However, as she points out, the
catch is that the police, being untrained in linguistics, are often unable to make the switch
from the ‘legal’ caution to the ‘in your own words’ version. As a result, as Russell says, ‘the
burden for lowering the register falls squarely, if not fairly, upon the interpreter.’ The
drawback, of course, is that interpreters manage this with varying degrees of success,
depending, of course, upon their competence and experience, but also upon their own
understanding of the caution, particularly as many interpreters are simply native speakers of
the language and are as untrained as the oﬃcers themselves (Russell 2000: 42–43). The
whole process is therefore fraught with dangers, as testiﬁed to by the number of cases in
which defence claims are advanced that the defendant failed to understand the adminis-
tration of the caution or Miranda rights and expert witnesses testify on the issue (see
Berk-Seligson 2000). Even when, as Rock points out, the police have made other lan-
guage versions of the caution available in written and sometimes spoken versions (Rock
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
461

2007: 145), ﬁrstly not all languages are covered, and, secondly, without the presence of an
interpreter there is nobody to act as intermediary between the second-language speaker
and the duty oﬃcer in order to clarify implications and ask for rights to be enforced.
Sourcing interpreters
Police forces have three main ways to source interpreters, if they do not have within-
force individuals able to act as interpreters. There may be a professional association of
police interpreters, a register of qualiﬁed interpreters, either public or held by the police,
or they may outsource the provision of interpreters to an agency. In the Republic of
Ireland, for example, the latter arrangement applies to the entire police force, the Garda.
An April 2009 article in the Irish Times reported a highly negative assessment of the
interpreting services provided to the Irish police, which since January 2009 have been
outsourced to agencies on the basis of tender. The resultant selection of interpreters is so
poor that not only have their overseas criminal records not been checked, but some
reportedly lack basic accreditation and language proﬁciency. Thus, a Chinese interpreter
hired to assist in interviewing a suspect was found to be an illegal immigrant. The Irish
Times report indicated that the Irish police representative association (GRA) wants out-
sourcing to be abolished. Furthermore, according to Detective Tom O’Sullivan, who is
attached to the Interpol National Central Bureau at Garda HQ and is also a qualiﬁed
interpreter and translator, feedback within the police force indicates that individual
interpreters are frequently of poor quality. In addition, while the agencies are earning
considerable proﬁts, the individual interpreters are being paid extremely low rates.
O’Sullivan made the point that by removing agencies from the equation, interpreters
could be paid decent wages and the police force could make signiﬁcant savings. Instead
of the agency system, the GRA would, reportedly, prefer police oﬃcers to be provided
with a list of interpreters in their areas whose academic qualiﬁcations, language skills and
criminal records have been veriﬁed. O’Sullivan also claimed that a system of using vetted
individuals is in place in the UK and Australia and works well (Lally 2009).
Sadly, the glowing picture painted by O’Sullivan of the situation on the other side of
the Irish Sea is not entirely accurate. Of the 43 police forces in England and Wales, a
number use outsourcing to agencies. As in Ireland, the result of these arrangements is
that the rates paid to interpreters drop, agencies preferentially use unqualiﬁed individuals
and, concomitantly, qualiﬁed competent interpreters are less likely to want to work
for agencies, so the upshot is a deterioration in the quality of interpreting. In a British
parliamentary debate (11 March 2009), the government representative stated:
Police forces are outsourcing their requirement for interpreters as a pragmatic
approach because they need to progress investigations. They have to get the
balance right, to make sure that investigations are carried out fairly, with a high
level of proof, and to make sure that people are not spending time in custody
unnecessarily. We must all recognize that those issues are diﬃcult to balance, while
ensuring that we maintain the quality of interpreting.
(Hansard, 11 March 2009: Column 136WH, online)
No speaker made the point that administrative staﬀ, possibly civilian, could handle the
sourcing of properly qualiﬁed interpreters, thereby avoiding or at least minimizing the
need to outsource engagements.
KREDENS AND MORRIS
462

Transcript issues
So far this chapter has focused on common-law systems encountering second-language
speakers outside the courtroom. Komter (2002) explains how in Dutch trials, suspects are
confronted with the written statements they made to the police and the investigating judge,
earlier in the criminal law process. These statements are supposed to be written down as far
as possible in the suspect’s own words, but they are in fact the police oﬃcers’ written ver-
sions of what was said in the interrogating room. They are simultaneously reports of previous
talks held in the police interrogating room and part of the interaction in the courtroom, both
of which are conducted for a diﬀerent purpose. Thus, suspects are held accountable for what
they supposedly told the police, and if they argue with this, judges can rebut their protests by
pointing out that they themselves have told this to the police. The implications where a third
party, the interpreter, has been present in the police interview room and where either the
same or another interpreter subsequently mediates the courtroom interaction can be ima-
gined. Since police interrogations are not usually audio- or video-taped in the Netherlands,
and because the records are made by the police themselves, Komter indicates, it is impossible
to prove what the suspect actually said to the police.
A related problem exists in England, where – although interviews with suspects are
routinely tape-recorded – only monolingual (English) transcripts of interpreter-mediated
interviews are prepared by the police and may have to be subsequently (back-)translated
into the second language for the beneﬁt of the non-English speaking suspect. This kind
of document, normally sourced by the suspect’s lawyers, poses interesting strategic
questions per se but is fraught with problems when, as is commonly the case, the trans-
lator has no access to the original recordings and relies solely on the police transcript,
which may in turn be inaccurate or incomplete.
In such cases, due to the almost inﬁnite number of linguistic permutations available,
the back-translated version in the suspect’s language is highly likely to diﬀer, perhaps
signiﬁcantly, from the actual words they uttered. If a second-language speaker is con-
fronted with what he supposedly said at a police interview, in a variation on ‘Chinese
whispers’, it is highly likely that anything the interpreter in the second language produces
will diﬀer from what was actually said at the police interview. The only way to avoid
such issues is to insist on obtaining an acoustically clear tape recording of everything said
in both languages, without any overlapping material, accompanied by an accurate
transcript.
In the following transcribed and translated excerpt (5) from a videotape of police
questioning of a mother in a baby abuse case, the interpreter (a police oﬃcer):
 uses the third person (she) instead of the ﬁrst (I);
 completes an incomplete statement;
 changes intensity (from ‘grab’ to ‘yank’);
 changes a possibility into a certainty (‘could’ to ‘going to’);
 does not reproduce repetitions (agarrar is once rendered as ‘pick up’, once as
‘yank’);
 fails to render a diminutive (bracito is rendered as arm, not ‘little arm’);
 omits material (‘it wasn’t on purpose’);
 renders a pronoun (ella) as a noun (‘this lady’);
 renders something less speciﬁc (‘you could do something’) with a more speciﬁc
formulation (‘you’re going to hurt the baby’);
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
463

 changes the order of phrases and modiﬁes the wording (starts with ‘Don’t pick
him up like that’, when this is in fact material towards the end of the suspect’s
version).
In sum, this is an unprofessional performance which in fact led to no charges being
brought.
(5)
Suspect:
Que no lo, que no lo agarrara así, porque yo luego lo agarré por el
bracito. No fue a propósito, pero, lo agarré por el bracito, y ella me
dijo, ‘No lo agarres así que eso, esto, a lo mejor, tú agarrándolo así,
tú le pudiste hacer eso, las … los … ’
Translation:
That I shouldn’t, that I shouldn’t grab him up like that, because then
I did grab him up by his little arm. It wasn’t on purpose, but I
picked him up by his little arm, and she said to me, ‘Don’t pick him
up like that, since that, this, maybe you picking him up like that,
you could do something to the, the … ’
Interpreter:
(Over suspect’s words) Don’t pick him up like that. So she yanked
him by one arm. And she … Okay … This lady told her, saw her
picking her up the baby up, and told her don’t, don’t pick the baby
up like that. You’re going to hurt the baby like that.
Lawyer–client interaction
The lawyer–client consultation meeting is likely to pose fewer problems for the inter-
preter. The context is not as formal as that of the police interview and certainly more
relaxed than emergency situations, prisons or probation oﬃces, with the goals of the
parties common rather than divergent. Most problematic seem to be the usual pitfalls of
legal–lay communication; as Gibbons (2003:172) notes, ‘much lawyer–client interaction
is spent negotiating ways round this lack of shared [legal] knowledge’. If this is the case,
even more eﬀort has to be expended where second-language speakers are involved,
because of the need to explain legal concepts that do not necessarily exist in their culture.
Most second-language speakers are unable to pay for legal representation themselves
and have to rely on state-provided solutions. This has obvious consequences for power
issues in lawyer–client interactions. Additionally, because providing state-sponsored legal
aid is not as well remunerated as representing individuals of independent means, solicitors
working with second-language speakers may have limited ﬁnancial resources, which in
turn could have a negative impact on the quality of the interpreting. In England, there is
no requirement for solicitors to use accredited interpreters and, as a result, law ﬁrms may
choose cost, as a primary consideration when sourcing interpreters, even at the expense
of quality,
When it comes to the interaction between lawyers and interpreters, a revealing study is
that by Foley (2006), who investigated perceptions of duty and partiality among the two
professions, and found that they ‘have markedly diﬀerent cultural notions as to who their
client is (and whether duties are owed and to whom)’ (Foley 2006: 99). While the
lawyers spoke of ‘a delicate balancing act’ between their duties to the person they
represent, to the court and to the profession, some of the interpreters rejected the notion
KREDENS AND MORRIS
464

of a ‘client’, and others said that even if they did have a client – be it the second-
language speaker, the court, the police or the lawyer – they owed no duty to them in
the sense that lawyers did. Ahmad (2007: 1002), a lawyer, sees the interpreter’s presence
as ‘inject[ing] the subjectivity of a third person – her thoughts and feelings, attitudes and
opinions, personality and perception – into what previously had been the exclusive
province of the lawyer and client’ and addresses his colleagues thus:
Once we acknowledge the subjectivity that inheres in interpretation, we can move
in one of two directions: either to squelch that subjectivity and attempt to force the
interpreter back into the ﬁctive box of technology; or to embrace the subjectivity,
draw it out further, scrutinize it rigorously, and engage it dialogically. Most law-
yers, and the legal system as a whole, attempt the former. I argue unambiguously
for the latter.
(Ahmad 2007: 1003)
Finally, the diﬃculties faced by defendants working with lawyers are exempliﬁed by the
English case of Iqbal Begum. After Mrs. Begum had been sentenced to life imprisonment
for murdering her husband and served some ﬁve years in prison, her conviction was
appealed, on the grounds that she had pleaded guilty without understanding with what
she was charged. In point of fact, it turned out that there had been no eﬀective com-
munication between her and her legal representatives from the very beginning, since she
did not understand the individual engaged to interpret at the pre-trial and trial stages. She
had remained silent throughout the entire time that she was in custody, even in sessions
with her legal representatives. In its ruling that the trial had been a nullity, since no
proper plea had been made, the appellate court observed that
unless a person fully comprehends the charge which that person faces, the full
implications of it and the ways in which a defence may be raised to it, and further
is able to give full instructions to solicitor and counsel so that the court can be sure
that that person has pleaded with a free and understanding mind, a proper plea has
not been tendered to the court.
(Iqbal Begum (1991) 93 Cr.App.R. 96 at 100)
Probation ofﬁces
In many jurisdictions around the world, individuals convicted of a relatively minor crime
may be placed under probation supervision and thereby avoid incarceration, provided
that they complete a course of action intended as punishment and designed to prevent
them from re-oﬀending. This may involve community service work, completion of a
drug rehabilitation programme, ﬁnding a job, or staying away from known criminals.
Imposed by the court, such measures are enforced by probation oﬃcers, who meet their
supervisees on a regular basis throughout the probation period. Particularly important is
the ﬁrst of such meetings, where the conditions of the court order are explained and
provisions made for them to be adhered to. At this early stage, eﬀective communication
plays a particularly important role because, if the oﬀender misunderstands the probation
conditions and breaches the order, he or she may have to return to court and end up in
prison after all. This is illustrated by the case of Alex Ramirez, a Mexican immigrant to
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
465

the USA. On 13 April 2006 in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Ramirez, having
pleaded guilty to violating probation, said in his defence that an important reason for the
violation was his inability to communicate with his probation oﬃcer. It is sobering to
read the judge’s response to Ramirez:
Now, so let me understand this. Not only do we have to let him come into the
country illegally and stay here, not only do we have to provide him with public
assistance, not only do we have to provide him with free health care, not only do
we have to provide him with a free attorney when he gets in trouble, now he
wants a bilingual probation oﬃcer, because otherwise it’s inconvenient for him.
(http://pdfserver.amlaw.com/nj/citta-complaint040109.pdf)
Probation supervision meetings are interesting from a linguistic point of view as they seem
to occupy middle ground between legal and ‘lay’ language. The probation oﬃcer’s primary
aim is determined by legal requirements, but to achieve it certain communicative goals
have to be pursued with only limited use of specialized discourse. The institutional is thus
combined with the interpersonal, a situation with potentially adverse eﬀects for the judi-
cially unversed oﬀender: what seems like a friendly chat can in fact have serious legal
repercussions. All this means that the interpreter must be sensitive to even the slightest
changes in register and respond accordingly, because, when used in a legal context, certain
lexical items take on new meanings. In England, when a police oﬃcer uses the verb
‘caution’ at the beginning of an interview with a suspect (‘I’m going to caution you now’),
the most frequently encountered deﬁnition (‘warn or advise’) has little to do with the legal
meaning of ‘formally inform one of one’s legal rights and consequences of one’s decision
to withhold information from the interviewing police oﬃcers’.
Another interesting aspect is the seemingly limitless semantic scope of the supervision
interview. While interpreters can expect some legal terminology, the fairly unstructured
nature of the interaction is conducive to the emergence of unexpected topics with their
domain-speciﬁc vocabulary. Fairly frequent are for example medical terms, whose accurate
rendition is essential if the probation oﬃcer is to make a fully informed decision about the
oﬀender’s ability to perform certain actions. This can be illustrated with an example from a
recent supervision meeting interpreted by one of the present authors. When the oﬀender
was asked a routine question about health issues preventing him from undertaking com-
munity work at a building site, he answered with the story, complete with specialized
medical vocabulary, of a meniscus cartilage tear he had suﬀered several years before.
Another surprise aﬀorded by probation supervision meetings may be the necessity to
switch modes of interpreting. In many probation oﬃces in the UK for example, prior to
starting community service, oﬀenders are asked to watch health-and-safety videos. Given
the related temporal and technical constraints, simultaneous interpreting may then be the
best option. Finally, sight translation, that is delivery of a spoken version of a written
text, provided on the spot, is routinely used when the content of a form ﬁlled in by
probation oﬃcers with input from supervisees needs to be relayed back to them.
Prisons
Interpreting in prison settings is arguably the most under-explored topic in the literature.
There appear to be no systematic studies dealing with the nature and/or problems of
KREDENS AND MORRIS
466

interpreter-mediated communication in correctional institutions.2 The considerations
that follow are thus based on the experience of one of the authors working in the UK.
On the face of it, by this stage of the law enforcement chain, second-language
speakers, already familiar with the role of the interpreter, should create few problems.
Yet, prolonged isolation in a linguistically alien environment often means that inmates
treat interpreter-mediated visits not only as a welcome change in the daily routine, but
also as an opportunity to interact with someone of the same or similar cultural back-
ground (see also English, this volume). Viewed as an ally or conﬁdant, the interpreter is
then erroneously expected to take on roles outside of the professional remit (Morris
1999). An inmate may address him or her directly with questions regarding the latest
news, or ask for a message to be passed on to someone outside. Linguistically the pro-
blems are similar to those characteristic of probation supervision meetings, with the
notable diﬀerence that inmates with long sentences gradually learn the language of the
jurisdiction, including prison argot, which they may use when code-switching. Not
infrequently, they also attempt to ask or answer some of the questions themselves, still
relying on the interpreter for more complex meanings and legal jargon.
A rarely mentioned aspect of prison interpreting is the inﬂuence of the culturally
conditioned stigma of imprisonment. Inmates from some cultures when confronted with
an interpreter, who they assume shares the same values, may try and exculpate
themselves in front of the interpreter for fear of losing face. In such situations, the
inmate’s visitors are mere hearers and the interpreter becomes the addressee for the
message, to use Hymes’s (1977) terms. Needless to say, in such cases the presence of
the interpreter aﬀects not only the dynamics of the conversation, as is normally true of
any interpreter-mediated exchange anyway, but also its content.
Finally, it needs to be said that extralinguistic factors play a signiﬁcantly greater role in
the prison setting than elsewhere. The negative impact of the physical environment, the
discomfort of the entry procedure, and contact with potentially dangerous individuals
can all contribute to the interpreters’ increased stress levels (as can some aspects of the
interaction itself) and, consequently, can aﬀect the quality of the job.
Conclusions
There is nothing basically new about the issues of interpreting in non-court settings in the
early twenty-ﬁrst century. Technology can sometimes oﬀer solutions which, although not
necessarily perfect, nevertheless enable interpreters to assist in communication where
otherwise nothing could have been done. However, the need for competent interpretation
remains as vital as ever. Having an incompetent telephone interpreter mediate between
prisoner and counsel is potentially worse than having no interpreter at all. In today’s cash-
strapped situation, the eﬃcient use of resources is vital. Bowing to the pressure to outsource
and award a contract for the provision of interpreters in the legal system to the cheapest
bidder is often the opposite of a wise allocation of resources. Employing correctly trained
civilian staﬀto source quality interpreters for police forces would be a time- and money-
eﬃcient use of resources. Interpreters should be viewed as a quality resource which must
be sourced appropriately for the particular task to be dealt with, not as faceless voices to be
bought in bulk through for-proﬁt companies who treat interpreters as commodities to be
exploited in order to maximize their revenues, not to serve the ends of justice. The equal
access principle, which has increasingly come to underpin the modern criminal justice
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
467

system, requires legal systems to expand their framework of reference beyond the narrow
view, so that linguistic equality must also include such matters as pre-sentencing reports
and correctional programmes. To expect interpreters to undertake costly training and then
not be appropriately compensated is unrealistic.
The future, if not exactly bright, seems quite promising. In England and Wales for
example, thanks in no small measure to the rapid growth of forensic linguistics and its
more and more visible social presence, some police forces are beginning to recognize and
respond to at least some of the problems discussed here, although the outsourcing phe-
nomenon, with its negative ramiﬁcations, is a worrying trend in various jurisdictions.
The perspective of the legal profession, however, is still one of impractical expectations,
with the interpreter viewed as a passive, machine-like entity.3 This kind of perception is
not new. In 1979 in United States v. AnguloaI, the Court instructed the jury following the
replacement of an incompetent interpreter that ‘[a]n Interpreter really only acts as a
transmission belt or telephone’; a former Australian Supreme Court judge, in turn, stated
that ‘[t]he interpreter should look upon himself rather as an electric transformer, what-
ever is fed into him is to be fed out again, duly transformed’ (Wells 1991, in Hale and
Gibbons 1999: 207). As a result, the tacit assumption in the legal system has been that the
interpreter’s version is always a faithful reﬂection of the original. Meanwhile, a more
ﬁtting metaphor of the interpreting process in legal and forensic contexts is possibly that
of a shattered mirror: the contours, shapes and colours can still be discerned in the frag-
mented reﬂection but some ﬁne, but potentially crucial, details may be missing because
of the cracks. Some of the damage is inevitable: typological diﬀerences between lan-
guages and the presence of language-speciﬁc pragmatic assumptions mean that it may be
simply impossible to reproduce some meanings successfully. There is then an unavoidable
tension between the law needing absolutes and meaning being inexact. However, as
demonstrated in this chapter, there are a number of extralinguistic factors that result from
work-related pressures, disparate expectations, ignorance and inadequate professional
practice, which, unlike the linguistic issues, could be addressed by institutional, or possi-
bly even legislative, solutions for all stages of the judicial process, minimizing the distor-
tion in the semantic mirror.
A more detailed account of the case State of Ohio v. Alejandro Ramirex can be found on
the Handbook’s accompanying website available at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/
Notes
1 A 2009 position paper of the US-based National Association of Judiciary Interpreters and Transla-
tors discusses numerous issues to do with appropriate use of telephone interpreting in the legal
system. See http://tinyurl.com/najit-paper.
2 But see Milton and de Sena França (2001), writing about the situation in Brazil.
3 This is the picture that emerges following the authors’ own professional experience as well as dis-
cussions with members of the Aston Interpreter Network, a group of practising interpreters and
academics meeting regularly at Aston University to exchange ideas and best practice.
Further reading
Berk-Seligson, S. (2000) ‘Issues in pre-trial phases of the judicial process’, Forensic Linguistics: The International
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 7(1): 213–38.
Colin, J. and Morris, R. (1996) Interpreters and the Legal Process, Winchester: Waterside Press.
KREDENS AND MORRIS
468

Cooke, M., Eades, D. and Hale, S. (eds) (1999) Forensic Linguistics, 6(1) (special issue devoted to
interpreting in legal contexts).
Morris, R. (1995) ‘The moral dilemmas of court interpreting’, The Translator, 1(1): 25–46.
Cases cited
Beck v. Sager [1979] RTR 475.
Chief Constable of Avon and Somerset Constabulary v. Singh [1988] RTR 107.
Commonwealth v. Vose (1892) 157 Mass. 393, 32 N.E.355.
Iqbal Begum (1991) 93 Cr.App.R. 96.
R. v. Attard (1958) 43 Cr.App.R. 90.
State of Kansas v. Van Pham 675 P.2d 848 (Kan. 1984).
State of New Jersey v. Alex Ramirez 04-06-1127(2006).
State of Ohio v. Alejandro Ramirez 135 Ohio App. 3d 89; 732 N.E.2d 1065 (1999).
State of Florida v. Eulalia Miguel a/k/a/ Petrona Tomas Case No. 02–11821 CF A02.
State of New Jersey v. German Marquez, A-5044-07T4, July 1 2009.
State of Ohio v. Speer, 180 Ohio App.3d 230, 2008-Ohio-6947 (2008).
United States v. Anguloa 598 F2d 1182 No. 78–1183 (1979).
United States v. Santana 503 F.2d 710 (1974).
Ulibarri et al. v. City & County of Denver et al., Civil Action No. 07-CV-01814-WDM-MJW (D. Colo.
2007) (Second Amended Complaint ﬁled February 4, 2008).
www.ccdconline.org/ﬁles/2008.02.04amendedcomplaint – ﬁnal.pdf, accessed 13 July 2009.
INTERPRETING OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM
469


2.3
Authorship and opinion


31
Experts and opinions
In my opinion
Malcolm Coulthard
Prof Meadow wrongly stated in Mrs Clark’s trial in 1999 that there was just a ‘one in 73 million’
chance that two babies from an aﬄuent family like hers could suﬀer cot death. The actual odds
were only one in 77.
(The Guardian, 15 July 2005)
Introduction
The vast majority of witnesses who give evidence in court have some personal involve-
ment in the case and are there to recount relevant facts and experiences. However, there
is a second category of witness, the expert witness, who has no personal involvement and
who is there to help the court by giving their opinion, based on professional expertise,
about some aspect(s) of the forensic evidence – be it the time and manner of death,
footprints, DNA traces, recorded conversations or text messages. Few experts are
engaged full time with court work. They are professionals across a wide range of dis-
ciplines – archaeologists, doctors, dentists, engineers, research scientists and of course
linguists and phoneticians. I know of only one forensic linguist and a very small number
of forensic phoneticians who work full-time on casework. The majority of expert lin-
guists are academics who do occasional casework and rarely go to court: most of them
average fewer than ten cases a year and one court appearance every two years. For this
reason, giving evidence in person in court can be a stressful experience. As Shuy
observes: For those who have never experienced cross-examination, there is no way to
emphasise how emotionally draining it can be. … Testifying is not for the weak at heart’
(Shuy 2002: 3–4).
Nor indeed for the weak at stomach – one of my former colleagues eventually gave
up acting as an expert document analyst after some 25 years, because he could
no longer cope with the vomiting which preceded most of his appearances in the
witness box.
Giving evidence can also be profoundly frustrating for the academic expert. As Maley
observes, in an excellent paper examining linguistic aspects of expert testimony,
473

expert witnesses, particularly if they are new and inexperienced, tend to be quite
unaware of the extent to which shaping and construction of evidence goes on. …
All too often they emerge frustrated from the courtroom, believing that they have
not been able to give their evidence in the way they would like and that their
evidence has been twisted and/or disbelieved.
(Maley 2000: 250)
And this despite the fact that experts are generally allowed speaking turns that are, on
average, some three times longer than those of ordinary witnesses (Heﬀer 2005).
In the past twenty years, there has been a rapid growth in the frequency with which
courts in a number of countries have called upon the expertise of linguists. The cases
range from determining whether a Greek doctor said ‘can’ or ‘can’t’ (Baldwin and
French 1990), through disputes about the meaning and ownership of individual mor-
phemes in a trademark case (Shuy 2002), the degree of similarity in pronunciation and
therefore the confusability of two trademarks (Gibbons 2003) and the opacity of indivi-
dual words in jury instructions (Levi 1993), to the ‘ownership’ of particular words and
phrases in a plagiarism case (Turell 2004) and accusations of the fabrication of whole texts
in two murder cases (Coulthard 2002). Many more examples of expert linguistic evi-
dence can be found in Section 2 of this Handbook, particularly the chapters by Butters,
Dumas, Eades, English and Jessen and also in Coulthard and Johnson (2007), particularly
chapter 6.
Usually the linguist uses standard analytic tools to reach an opinion, although very few
cases require exactly the same selection from the linguist’s toolkit. However, occasion-
ally, cases raise new and exciting questions for descriptive linguistics, which require basic
research, such as how can one measure the ‘rarity’ and therefore the evidential value, of
short sequences of words (see Coulthard 2004), or of shared hapaxes, that is words which
only occur once (Woolls and Coulthard 1998) or the reliability of verbal memory
(Coulthard and Johnson 2007, 132–35) or how can one calculate the probability of two
diﬀerent authors having produced a set of disputed texts messages (Grant this volume).
Once the analysis has been done and an opinion reached, the expert is faced with two
communicative problems: ﬁrstly, how can s/he best explain the analysis and express the
derived opinions in a report written for an audience of legal professionals; and, secondly,
if later called on to give oral evidence in court, how can s/he cope with the unusual
interactional rules?
All experts face these challenges, but expert linguists have two additional and unique
problems: lawyers and judges are also professionally and centrally concerned with
detailed analysis of language and thus regard themselves as experts too, and also all native
speakers are in some sense experts on the structure and meaning of their own language.
So, for instance, it is very diﬃcult to call a linguist to give evidence on word meaning,
because courts are mainly interested in two kinds: technical and commonsense meaning.
Technical meaning is specialised legal meaning, which can be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
denotative meaning in non-legal settings. Thus, the British Road Traﬃc Act (1972
c.20 ss.82) requires the use of speciﬁed lights on vehicles during the ‘hours of darkness’.
The meaning of the phrase ‘hours of darkness’ is not negotiable, that is, it is not some-
thing that someone accused of an oﬀence can try to deﬁne to his advantage by using a
dictionary or even a corpus, with or without the help of a linguist. The Act itself gives the
deﬁnition ‘“hours of darkness” means the time half-an-hour after sunset and half-an-hour
before sunrise’. Whether the accused considered it to be dark or not at the time of the
MALCOLM COULTHARD
474

oﬀence is irrelevant. Then there is commonsense meaning, which is what a jury, being
representatives of the common man, collectively think a word means – so much so that
juries have traditionally been denied dictionaries inside the jury room. Again no need for
a linguistics expert.
Solan (1998) argues that even so, there is a role for the linguist, which is to explain and
elucidate facts about language and usage as a result of which judge and jury will then be
in the same position as the linguist and so can make linguistically informed decisions. In
Solan’s words:
my linguistic training has made me more sensitive to possible interpretations that
others might not notice and I can bring these to the attention of a judge or jury. But
once I point these out and illustrate them clearly, we should start on an equal footing.
(Solan 1998: 92)
Thus, for instance, linguists have been allowed to give evidence about textual ambiguity,
for example Kaplan et al. (1995) and Prince (1981). To rephrase Solan’s observation,
linguists are experts not only in the nature of interpretation, but also in the nature of
linguistic encoding. One British example of an expert sensitising the lay audience comes
from my own evidence in the Appeal of Robert Brown. Brown claimed that a mono-
logue confession attributed to him had in fact been elicited by question and answer and
then transformed by the interviewing oﬃcers into monologue form. As one part of my
evidence in support of Brown’s claim, I focused on the two clauses:
‘I was covered in blood, my jeans and a blue Parka coat and a shirt were full of
blood’.
To a linguist it is clear that the phrasing of the subject of the second clause, ‘my jeans and
a blue Parka coat and a shirt’ is most unnatural; no one would refer to an item of their
own clothing with the indeﬁnite article ‘a’ once they had begun a list with the possessive
determiner, ‘my’. The most likely use of ‘a’ in this context would be to distinguish
between ‘mine’ and ‘not-mine’. For example, the utterance “I looked round the room
and I saw my jeans and a blue Parka coat and a shirt, they were full of blood”, would be
perfectly natural in a context where some of the clothes belonged to someone else, but
this, of course, was not the meaning intended in this narrative, where all the clothes
belonged to the narrator. The phrase “a blue Parka coat and a shirt” could occur, again
quite naturally, as a result of the careless conversion of a sequence of short questions and
answers into monologue form. One could see how this might indeed have happened in
this case by looking at the following actual sequence taken from the record of a
preceding police interview with Brown:
What were you wearing?
I had a blue shirt and a blue parka.
In this context the use of the indeﬁnite article is normal – as noted above, when items
are introduced for the ﬁrst time, the indeﬁnite article is the natural choice. Once the
oddity of the phrase and the occurrence of a similar phrase in the interview had been
pointed out to the Appeal Court judges, they were as competent as any linguist to draw
inferences from the linguistic oddity.
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
475

Another of Solan’s points is that, although juries and judges may well be able to ana-
lyse individual words, phrases and even sentences as well as any professional linguist, they
may have problems analysing longer documents:
Of course a jury can read the document[s]. … But not all jurors, without help, can
focus on a phrase in paragraph 24 of a contract that may have an impact on how
another word should be interpreted in paragraph 55.
(Solan 1998: 94)
In the Brown Appeal it was important to draw the attention of the judges to two pairs of
phrases occurring in two diﬀerent documents, one a record of a dictated statement, the
other a record of an interview:
i) Statement: I asked her if I could carry her bags she said “Yes”.
Interview: I asked her if I could carry her bags and she said “yes”.
ii) Statement: I picked something up like an ornament.
Interview: I picked something up like an ornament.
Linguists of most persuasions are in agreement that the likelihood of two speakers inde-
pendently producing exactly the same phrasing reduces dramatically with the length of
the expression, as does the likelihood of one speaker choosing two identical phrasings on
diﬀerent occasions. However, this linguist’s ‘knowledge’ does not coincide with lay
belief – there is a common mis-conception, for instance, that people can remember
word-for-word stretches of conversations and report them verbatim later. When faced
with the problem of convincing the Appeal Court judges of the evidential signiﬁcance
of the identical expressions occurring in supposedly independent verbatim records of
separate interactions, I chose the following procedure.
Firstly, by looking at the occurrences of the words ‘I asked her if I could carry her bags’
in a series of Google searches of some 6 billion documents, I demonstrated that even short
sequences of words can be unique encodings. The results at the time were as follows:
Using these examples, I argued that, if there was not a single instance of anyone
having ever produced this nine-word sequence, the chances of even longer sequences
occurring twice in diﬀerent documents was inﬁnitesimal, unless, of course, one sequence
Table 31.1 Word sequence length and frequency
Sequence
No. of Occurrences
I asked
2,170,000
I asked her
284,000
I asked her if
86,000
I asked her if I
10,400
I asked her if I could
7,770
I asked her if I could carry
7
I asked her if I could carry her
4
I asked her if I could carry her bags
0
MALCOLM COULTHARD
476

was derived or copied from the other. When writing this chapter, I re-checked the
Google ﬁgures above for ‘I asked her if I could carry her bags’, I found, to my horror, six
instances of the phrase. However, as the adage goes, ‘it is the exception that proves the
rule’. There is now a website devoted to Robert Brown’s case, which carries the dis-
puted statement (www.eamonnoneill.net/c&p.htm [accessed 28 August 2009]), so one of
the instances is the original saying; three of the others are web-versions of Coulthard
(2004), an article which I wrote about the case; one is from Coulthard and Johnson
(2007) where I also mention the case; and the ﬁnal instance is in a Dutch university
PowerPoint presentation which quotes the example from my article. In other words, all
six instances are quotings of the same single saying.
On becoming a linguistic expert
For linguists wanting to move into expert witness work the criteria vary from country to
country. Up to now, Australia and Britain have shared essentially the same position,
which is that it is the expert rather than the method that is recognised and so courts can
allow opinion evidence from anyone considered to have ‘specialised knowledge based
on … training, study or experience [provided that the opinion is] wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge’ (Australian Evidence Act 1995 Sec 79).
Usually, once an expert has been accepted by one court, s/he will be accepted
by other courts at the same level and rarely challenged. The expert is retained and paid
by one side, but, even so, is legally appointed by the court. Indeed, since 2007, experts
in Britain have been required to state explicitly in their written reports that they are
aware of their duty to the court and of the necessity to make the court aware of any
counter-evidence in the data they have analysed (see also Solan in this volume).
So far, there have been no explicit requirements, as there are in the USA following
the Daubert ruling (see below), about the nature of the expert’s theoretical position
nor about the particular methodology and evidence on which the expert bases his/her
opinion. So, once an expert has been retained, it is up to the court to determine, ‘ad hoc,
the suﬃciency of [his/her] expertise and the relevance of that expertise’ (Bromby
2002: 9). As part of this process both the competence of the expert and the reliability of
the method(s) s/he has used can be subjected to detailed examination in court and this
can last for many hours, as I know from recent experience. In the most recent case in
which I was called to give evidence, the judge sent the jury home before lunch and took the
whole afternoon to hear legal argument about the admissibility of my evidence and then
had me examined and cross-examined for over an hour, before he eventually decided to
allow me to give my evidence in open court the following day. For details of the case, see
Northern Echo, 21 Feb 2008, available at: www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/indepth/
jennynicholl/2061834.Snared_by_texts_meant_to_throw_police_oﬀ_scent/ (accessed 21
August 2009). Following the conviction of the accused, the defence lodged an appeal,
solely on the grounds of the admissibility of the linguistic evidence, but the appeal was
not allowed.
Even after an expert has been allowed to give evidence, the judge(s) and/or the jury
may decide that the evidence was not helpful, persuasive or even relevant and choose to
ignore it. Indeed, occasionally, at the end of a trial, experts are censured by the court –
‘in our judgment, although Professor Canter is clearly an expert in his ﬁeld, the evidence
tendered from him was not expert evidence of a kind properly to be placed before the
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
477

court’, (Gilfoyle (No 2) [2001] 2 Cr App R 5 (57), para 25). At other times, particular
methodologies, like CUSUM (Hardcastle 1997), have been deemed to be unacceptable,
while Professor Meadow, whose statistical error is referred to in the quotation at the
head of the chapter, was subsequently disciplined by his professional body and struck oﬀ
the medical register.
As I write, the situation in Britain is changing rapidly and radically. In 2008, the British
Government appointed a former Police Detective Chief Superintendent as the ﬁrst Forensic
Science Regulator. His brief is to ‘operate independently to ensure that quality standards
apply across all forensic science services’ (http://police.homeoﬃce.gov.uk/operational-
policing/forensic-science-regulator/about-the-regulator/ [accessed 1 August 2000]). In
2009, the Regulator published a consultation paper on forensic practitioner registration,
which recommended that an accreditation system be set up based on internationally
recognised ISO standards and assessed by the UK Accreditation Service (UKAS).
At the same time the UK Law Commission also published a consultation paper on the
admissibility of expert evidence in which they observed ‘We believe the current
approach to the admissibility of expert evidence in criminal trials is in need of reform’
(Law Commission 2009: iii). In their opinion
The criminal courts have … adopted a policy of laissez-faire. In eﬀect [they] permit
the adduction of any expert evidence, so long as it is not patently unreliable, [as a
consequence] juries are not denied access to evidence which might be helpful.
(Law Commission 2009: 22)
They attributed this problem, at least in part, to a basic ﬂaw in the system: ‘there is little
if any guidance for trial judges … faced with the task of having to screen expert evidence
to determine the question of admissibility’ (Law Commission 2009: 16). The solution the
Law Commission went on to propose was the creation of a new statutory test for
determining the admissibility of expert evidence in criminal proceedings, which is likely
to be modelled on the system currently in force in the United States, embodied in
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, referred to informally as the Daubert test.
British forensic linguists await the outcome with great interest and in some quarters some
trepidation, after reading Tiersma and Solan (2002). If a Daubert-type system is intro-
duced, some currently accepted methodologies may be disallowed and others may need
to be modiﬁed to meet the Daubert criteria (though see McMenamin, this volume, for
some pragmatic discussion).
The American legal system, unlike the current Anglo-Australian, approves the tech-
nique(s) that a witness uses rather than the witness him/herself. Rule 702 allows any
expert to testify as a witness if and only if:
the testimony is based upon suﬃcient facts or data, [and]
the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and
the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.
Rule 702 is designed to take account of the 1993 Supreme Court ruling in the appeal
case Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, which dramatically changed the nature of
admissible evidence. The main argument in the appeal was whether expert evidence
could be rejected on the grounds that the expert(s) involved had not published their
work. In their ruling the Supreme Court observed that ‘the adjective “scientiﬁc” implies
MALCOLM COULTHARD
478

a grounding in the methods and procedures of science’ and then went on to propose
four criteria with which to evaluate ‘scientiﬁc’-ness:
1. whether the theory … has been tested;
2. whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication;
3. the known rate of error; and
4. whether the theory is generally accepted in the scientiﬁc community.
(509 U.S. at 593 as quoted in Tiersma and Solan 2002: 224)
This ruling left open the question of whether it covered evidence which was descriptive
rather than theoretical, but a ruling in 1999, in the case of Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael,
conﬁrmed that it did: ‘the general principles of Daubert apply not only to experts
oﬀering scientiﬁc evidence, but also to experts basing their testimony on experience’
(119 S.Ct. 1173 as quoted in Tiersma and Solan, 2002: 224).
So, where does that leave the American forensic linguist and, at some point in the future,
the British forensic linguist? On the positive side, Tiersma and Solan note that, ‘courts have
allowed linguists to testify on issues such as the probable origin of a speaker, the compre-
hensibility of a text, whether a particular defendant understood the Miranda warning, and
the phonetic similarity of two competing trademarks’ (Tiersma and Solan 2002: 221).
However, in other areas the situation is more problematic, partly, perhaps, because
non-linguists have claimed ownership of the labels for linguistic concepts. The Van Wyk
case in 2000 seemed to set a precedent for excluding stylistic analysis, as the court refused
to allow the expert to give evidence about the authorship of disputed documents;
however, as McMenamin (2002) points out, the expert in the case had at the time no
qualiﬁcations in linguistics. McMenamin (2004 and this volume) argues a strong case for
the scientiﬁc nature of his own brand of forensic stylistics and therefore for its accept-
ability under Daubert. Indeed, he shows how to express opinions statistically in terms of
mathematically calculated probabilities, in a case study of the signiﬁcant documents in the
JonBenét Ramsey case (McMenamin 2004: 193–205).
Even so, it must be conceded that, in cases where conclusions depend on observations
about the frequency or rarity of particular linguistic features in the texts under exam-
ination, many linguists would have considerable diﬃculty in stating a ‘known rate of
error’ for their results, even if this phrase is interpreted as a likelihood ratio. It is for this
reason that some British linguists will be forced to change their way of reaching and
presenting their opinions (see French and Harrison 2007). Other forensic linguists, who
previously would have given an opinion, may choose to restrict their role to that of
educator/teacher/‘tour guide’ (Solan 1998). For instance, they might provide the jury
with linguistic facts like those in Table 31.2, which the jury could not possibly have
Table 31.2 Comparison of suspect and candidate author choices
Intended
Suspect
Candidate Author
Item
Choices
Choices/occurrences
be
be
b (7)
come
come
com (14)
I will +verb
I will
ill (10)
they
they
dey (3)
Yes (as one-word response)
Yes
Ya (14)
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
479

assembled for themselves. A set of suspect text messages which had been sent from a
known phone at around the time its owner was murdered did not use abbreviations for
the ﬁve items in the table, but an analysis of some 300 text messages sent by the phone’s
owner over the previous three days showed that she abbreviated all of them con-
sistently – there were 48 occasions when one of the ﬁve items was texted in abbreviated
from and no counter-examples of full forms being used. With this information and some
tutorial input from the expert about linguistic behaviour being rule-governed, the jury
could reach an informed conclusion.
Expressing expert opinions
The majority of forensic linguists and phoneticians have traditionally felt that they were
unable to express their ﬁndings statistically in terms of mathematically calculated prob-
abilities and so have expressed them as a semantically encoded opinion. Indeed, some
experts simply expressed their opinion without giving any indication to the court of how
to evaluate its strength, or of how their opinion ﬁtted with the two legally signiﬁcant
categories of ‘on the balance of probabilities’ and ‘beyond reasonable doubt’. However, a
growing number of experts now use a ﬁxed semantic scale and attach that scale as an
Appendix to their report to enable the reader to assess their degree of conﬁdence in their
opinion.
Until fairly recently I used the eleven-point scale of opinions detailed below, which I
had adapted from a scale used by many members of the International Association of
Forensic Phonetics:
Most positive
5 ‘I personally feel quite satisﬁed that X is the author’.
4 ‘It is in my view very likely that X is the author’.
3 ‘It is in my view likely that X is the author’.
2 ‘It is in my view fairly likely that X is the author’.
1 ‘It is in my view rather more likely than not that X is the author’.
0 ‘It is not possible to express an opinion’.
-1 ‘It is in my view rather more likely than not that X is not the author’.
-2 ‘It is in my view fairly likely that X is not the author’.
-3 ‘It is in my view likely that X is not the author’.
-4 ‘It is in my view very likely that X is not the author’.
-5 ‘I personally feel quite satisﬁed that X is the not author’.
Most negative
If I had set out to use this particular scale to express an opinion in the text messaging
case outlined above, I would have given my opinion as point -3, i.e. that it was likely
that the phone owner had not written the particular text messages, but I would have
agonised long and hard over whether likely or very likely was a better semantic label to
convey my assessment of the strength of the evidence on which I was basing my opinion.
Broeders suggested that what is happening in such cases is that:
experts, in using degrees of probability, are actually making categorical judgements,
i.e. are really saying yes or no. Even if they use a term like probably (not), I think
MALCOLM COULTHARD
480

they are subjectively convinced that the suspect did or did not produce the sample
material.
(Broeders 1999: 237)
That observation would certainly be true for me; in other words I am subjectively con-
vinced that the phone owner did not send the messages, but at the same time I feel the
evidence is not strong enough to allow an opinion of ‘I personally feel quite satisﬁed that’.
Broeders went on to observe that the choice of a given degree of likelihood on a scale
like this is irremediably subjective and experience-based, which is why two experts
might reach opinions of diﬀering strengths based on exactly the same data. Even so, he
stressed that a subjective judgement should not be condemned simply because it is sub-
jective: ‘The crucial question is not whether [it] is subjective or objective, but whether it
can be relied on to be correct’ (Broeders 1999: 238).
Nevertheless, a growing body of opinion is opposed to the use of semantic scales,
especially because, even when they are accepted by a court, an unsolvable problem
remains – how can one be sure that judges and juries will attach the same meanings to the
labels as did the experts who chose and applied them? This point was brought home to me
at a court martial where I expressed my opinion as ‘very likely’ using the above 11-point
scale while another expert expressed her opinion as ‘very strong support’ using a diﬀerent
9-point scale. Neither of us was allowed to tell the jury how many points there were on
our respective scales, let alone show the full scale. We could not even gloss the particular
category we had chosen, even though at the same time the defence lawyer did his best to
persuade the other expert to lower her opinion from ‘very strong’ to ‘strong’.
An added semantic complication is that, at the end of a trial, the triers of fact them-
selves are not allowed the luxury of degrees of conﬁdence; they have to work with a
binary choice of Guilty or Not Guilty. So, however hedged an expert’s opinion is when
s/he presents it, the judge(s) and jury have ultimately to make a categorical judgement.
(See also Gray, this volume on a judge’s viewpoint.)
There is an even more serious problem. Broeders (1999) and later Rose (2002), writ-
ing about the reaching and encoding of opinions, noted that an expert can oﬀer an
opinion on two things: either on the probability of a Hypothesis – so in linguistic cases,
for example, on the hypothesis that the accused is the speaker/author – given the
strength of the Evidence which s/he has analysed, which is what I did above. Or, the
expert can oﬀer an opinion on the probability that the Evidence would occur in the form
and quantity in which it does occur, given the two Hypotheses that the accused is and
also, crucially, is not the speaker/author.
Both authors recommend the second approach. Indeed Rose quotes Aitken (1995: 4)
in arguing that the former type of opinion, which, he says, is tantamount to the expert
deciding on the likelihood of the accused being guilty, is actually the exclusive role of
the judges of fact and for this reason all responsible scientists must conﬁne themselves to
talking only about the likelihood of the evidence. Rose supports his argument by
pointing out that no expert can make an estimate of the likelihood of guilt or innocence
on the basis of the linguistic evidence alone; only those with access to all of the available
evidence can assess the value of each piece of it. And even then, there may be another
piece of evidence that is missing which would have shown it could not have been the
accused and then a miscarriage of justice may occur.
So, for example, a forensic handwriting colleague of mine once concluded, after
exhaustive comparisons, that it was very likely on the basis of the evidence he had analysed,
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
481

that a disputed signature on an Irish will, which had been written with a ballpoint pen, was
genuine. But then, fortunately before committing his opinion to paper, he realised that the
will was dated before the invention of ballpoint technology! Similarly, Hollien (2002)
reports a case where he was fully convinced, after a detailed comparison of the phonetic
evidence, that a voice tape-recorded making a threatening phone call was that of the
accused. The similarities between the samples were so marked that he felt able to discount
one dissimilarity, that is until the twin brother of the accused appeared in the witness box
and Hollien realised that the threatening voice was actually the brother’s.
Broeders and Rose both go on to argue that not only does the approach which focuses
on the probability of the evidence have logic on its side, it also has the added advantage
that it enables probability to be expressed mathematically rather than semantically.
Essentially the method involves calculating the likelihood that for instance a text message
would be in a particular form if an accused had and crucially also had not sent it. For
example, imagine a text message which includes the abbreviation ‘ill’ for ‘I will’. We
discover after analysing a sample of attested texts sent by the accused over the previous
three days that in 100% of the possible messages where ‘I will’ could have occurred the
accused had used ‘ill’. In other words, if the accused had written the text and followed
her normal practice she would almost certainly have chosen to use ‘ill’. (Whatever pre-
vious statistics tell us a language user always has the freedom to make a diﬀerent choice –
sometimes deliberately for the forensically important purpose of disguise.) Imagine that at
the same time we also discover that in a representative sample of text messages produced
by the general population the abbreviation ‘ill’ also occurs, although only 10% of the
time. So, if this particular text had not in fact been sent by the accused there is still a 10%
chance that it would include the ill abbreviation. So, how do we assess the evidential
strength of this ﬁnding? Simply by dividing one percentage likelihood by the other, i.e. 100/10
to get a ratio of likelihoods of 10.
Interpretation of a likelihood ratio, however, is not quite so simple for the jury. It is
certainly true that, as Broeders (1999: 230) expresses it, ‘to the extent that the likelihood
ratio exceeds 1 the evidence lends greater support to the [prosecution] hypothesis,
[while] if it is smaller than 1 it supports the alternative hypothesis’. So in this case, it is 10
times more likely that the item ‘I will’ would occur as ‘ill’ if it was produced by the
accused than if it were produced by a member of the general population. But how does
a likelihood ratio of 10 or 100 or even 1000 help the jury as they work towards a verdict
encoded semantically? We will return to this question later.
Coulthard (2004) and Grant (this volume) suggest that language users can be dis-
tinguished one from another in terms of characteristic but diﬀering preferred linguistic
selections and co-selections. In other words, candidate author A may not simply use the
abbreviation ‘ill’ on all occasions, but may use ‘com’ for ‘come’ and ‘b’ for ‘be’ exclu-
sively as well and is thus distinguishable from candidate author B who uses ‘I will’, and
‘come’ exclusively and ‘be’ and ‘b’ apparently interchangeably. A major advantage of the
method of expressing the weight of evidence statistically by means of likelihood ratios is
that it allows the expert to take account of co-selections by combining several indepen-
dent ratios together to produce a composite likelihood ratio. Independent likelihood
ratios can be combined to make this composite ratio by simple multiplication and thus all
extra ratios which are greater than 1.0 will increase the overall likelihood ratio, while any
ratio of less than 1.0 will reduce it.
So, let us continue our invented example by focusing on the single text message ‘ill
com. b ther n n owa’ (I’ll come. Be there in an hour). We may ﬁnd that ‘com’ and ‘b’
MALCOLM COULTHARD
482

are quite common abbreviations in the general population and thus produce low like-
lihood ratios of 2.0 and 3.5, but when these are combined with the likelihood ratio of 10
already calculated for ill, they produce, by multiplication, the much higher ratio of 70.
So, now after including all three features, we can say that this text message is 70 times
more likely to include these three abbreviations if the accused had sent it than if a
member of the general population had.
However, let us not forget Hollien’s dissimilar feature, which he chose to ignore. One
strong argument in favour of the likelihood ratio approach is that it also allows the easy
incorporation of counter indications. Experts using the ‘evidence-to-evaluate-the-hypothesis’
approach, have to decide ad hoc what weight to give to any evidence which does not sup-
port the indication of the majority of the features analysed – should they, for example, allow
such evidence to reduce their opinion by one or two degrees of certainty or perhaps by
none at all. By contrast, with a likelihood ratio approach, any measurement which shows
that it is less likely that the accused wrote the text than that a member of the general
population did, will simply reduce the cumulative ratio.
So let us now also consider the features ‘ther’, ‘n’, ‘n’, ‘owa’ each of which, we now
discover, the accused does not abbreviate, although some of the general population do.
So we now have to add in four negative likelihood ratios of 0.75, 0.80, 0.95 and 0.66,
respectively. The overall likelihood ratio will now be reduced to 26.33. In other words,
a consideration of all the linguistic evidence in this single text message shows that it is
some 26 times more likely that the message would be in this form if the accused had sent
it than if she had not.
While such a mathematical approach has obvious attractions, it does present very real
problems for both phoneticians and linguists. Firstly, how does one establish what is a
relevant population of speakers or of language samples for comparison purposes and how
does one access and then analyse the data from that population, particularly in a world
where lawyers and courts are not willing to pay for what might be thought to be basic
research.1 At least in the area of forensic phonetics, there are already agreed reference
tables for a small number of features like pitch of voice and stammering and solid evi-
dence about the eﬀects of telephone transmission on the pitch of the ﬁrst formants of
vowels (Künzel 2001). In the area of linguistics, however, there is much less reference
data, although specialist corpora are now beginning to be created: McMenamin (2002:
154), for instance, ahead of his time, reported using a corpus of 742 envelope addresses
for comparison purposes. More recently, specialist text message corpora have been cre-
ated, (see for instance Grant this volume and Tagg 2009), but these corpora are still quite
small at around 10,000 messages. Of course, for some purposes, (see Coulthard 1994a)
evidence can be drawn from general corpora like the Australian National Corpus, the
British National Corpus, the Collins Bank of English and the American National Corpus. Even
search engines like Google and Yahoo, with access to literally billions of texts can, if used
properly, provide useful information about usage. Nevertheless, for much of the work
they have traditionally undertaken, forensic linguists do not have access to population
statistics.
And then, even if we were able to calculate likelihood ratios, we would still need to
know how to evaluate their signiﬁcance. As we have said there is the added worry about
whether a lay jury can actually cope with likelihood ratios, or whether they simply
introduce even more confusion – to date there is no research into whether individual
jury members can cope with large likelihood or probability numbers. But although the
expert may well have accurate ﬁgures in his report, the jury do not see the report and
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
483

most lawyers are not happy with probabilities and, at the end of the day, the jury has to
reach a semantically encoded decision.
Rose (2002: 62) notes, although he does not recommend it, that some experts have
attempted to solve the interpretation problem by collapsing likelihood ratios into ﬁve
semantically labelled groupings:
But criminal courts work with the concept of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ which does not
have a deﬁned likelihood ratio, although a lay juror, along with statistician A. P. Dawid
(2001: 4), might be happy to equate the phrase with ‘one chance in a hundred’. How-
ever, in the absence of agreed semantic labels, some experts may ‘translate’ their ﬁgures
into everyday situations for the jury, so Professor Meadow on one occasion characterised
the rareness of an event by comparing it to the chances of backing long odds winners in
a major horse race year after year. On the other hand, one area of forensic investigation,
DNA analysis, presents its evidence using highly persuasive enormous numbers which
most lay people have diﬃculty dealing with: ‘His counsel, Rebecca Poulet QC,
reminded him of DNA evidence which showed his proﬁle matched that of the attacker,
with the chances of it being anyone else being one in a billion’ (http://news.bbc.co.uk/
1/hi/england/3496207.stm [accessed 1 August 2009]).
Conclusion
So what can and should the linguistics community do? In 2007 a group of UK forensic
phoneticians, produced a position statement on expressing opinions (French and Harrison
2007), in which they noted that while in principle they accepted
the desirability of considering the task of speaker comparison in a likelihood ratio
(including Bayesian) conceptual framework … the lack of demographic data, along
with the problems of deﬁning relevant reference populations [were] grounds for
precluding the quantitative application of this type of approach in the present
context.
(French and Harrison 2007:142)
For this reason they set the goal as that of assessing whether a particular questioned voice
ﬁtted the description of the suspect voice. Such an assessment is a two-stage process.
First, the analyst assesses the voice in terms of the compatibility of its features with those
of the suspect voice. At this stage there are three possible outcomes, a negative decision
that the two voices are ‘not compatible’, in which case the voice is excluded from further
consideration, or ‘insuﬃcient evidence to proceed’, or ‘compatible’. A compatible
Table 31.3 Suggested semantic labels for likelihood ratios
Likelihood ratio
Semantic gloss
10,000+
Very strong
1,000–100,000
Strong
100–1,000
Moderately strong
10–100
Moderate
1–10
Limited
MALCOLM COULTHARD
484

decision essentially means that it is impossible to exclude the voice as a potential match.
There now follows a second stage, in which the degree of compatibility is assessed in
terms of the distinctiveness of the shared items. This is measured on a ﬁve-point scale
ranging from ‘not distinctive’ to ‘exceptionally distinctive’. As Rose and Morrison
observe ‘it is implied that the likelihood that the samples have been produced by [the]
same speaker will be greater if their shared cluster of features is distinctive or unusual’
(Rose and Morrison 2009: 142).
So we have a situation where many UK phoneticians and linguists are aspiring to
use likelihood ratios but are actually using a method which does not provide the sta-
tistical evaluation which Daubert sees as essential for a scientiﬁc approach. There are
three ways forward for the linguistic community. Firstly, as it is already acknowledged
that some experts are more experienced and more skilful than others, it would be
possible to introduce a system of blind testing of individual experts and publish known
error rates for experts rather than for methods. Secondly, the creation of more and
larger databases will enable linguists to derive more reliable population statistics and be
able, in some areas at least, to start to produce likelihood ratios. Thirdly, more
research into other statistical methods for evaluating the signiﬁcance of candidate
author data, of the kind reported by Grant (this volume), will provide a securer
foundation for opinions.
The Law Commission’s consultation document referred to above proposed dividing
expert evidence into two types: scientiﬁc and experience-based. One of the proposed criteria
for determining whether scientiﬁc evidence is suﬃciently reliable to be admitted, is the
production of ‘margin of error data’ (Law Commission 2009: 53). The category of
experience-based evidence seems to allow for the continuing recognition of individual
successful experts, using, among several criteria:
i) the expert’s qualiﬁcations, practical experience, training and publications and his or
her standing in the professional or other expert community; and
ii) whether the expert’s methodology or reasoning has previously resulted in a
demonstrably valid or erroneous opinion.
(Law Commission 2009: 56–57)
The UK forensic phonetics community responded collectively to the consultation
document and one of their observations was on the proposed expert dichotomy:
We consider there to be a continuum between experience based evidence and
narrowly scientiﬁc evidence. … For example, in our own ﬁeld certain methods for
analysing speech samples derive from the physics of sound and are clearly very
much at the narrowly scientiﬁc end of the continuum. However, the conclusion
one arrives at does not arise algorithmically or automatically from applying these
methods. Rather, it relies on experience and bringing to bear knowledge of the
likely eﬀects of factors such as the speaking situation (in terms physical and social
parameters), the range of variation encountered in a particular dialect, the speaking
style used, the state of the speaker and the recording characteristics (e.g. direct
conversation or telephone). In view of this, it must be recognised that evidence
arising from the analysis of speech samples will, inevitably, involve both narrow
scientiﬁc and experience-based elements.
(undated IAFPA response to Consultation document: 1)
EXPERTS AND OPINIONS
485

The interesting question now is how the ﬁnal recommendations of the Law Commission
will inﬂuence British forensic linguists and phoneticians. Provided it is accepted that
some of their work is high quality experience-based evidence the major positive change
will be the introduction of rigorous assessment for experts. If, however, linguists
and phoneticians are grouped with those who provide purely scientiﬁc expertise the
consequences could be very serious indeed.
Note
1 Morrison, in a letter in which he also corrects some inaccuracies in my characterisation of the
likelihood ratio analysis in Coulthard and Johnson (2007), observes: “I do not share [Coulthard’s]
pessimism about the potential for obtaining funds for the collection of databases for forensic appli-
cation, in fact I believe that given the current concerns about crime and terrorism in many parts of
the world this is a research activity for which it should be relatively easy to obtain funding from
national governments and law-enforcement agencies. For example, the Australian Research Council
(ARC) has speciﬁcally identiﬁed safeguarding Australia from terrorism, crime, and other threats as a
priority area for research funding (my colleagues and I are currently preparing a major grant appli-
cation in which we are seeking funding from the ARC and Australian law-enforcement agencies for
forensic-voice-comparison research including the compilation of a database of 1000+ Australian
English voices). Over the last quarter of a century, a great deal of time and money has been
expended worldwide on collecting DNA databases for forensic use, and presentation of evidence
from DNA comparison is now a ubiquitous component of criminal trials. … Similar support must
be given to all credible forensic science disciplines if they are to achieve the degrees of reliability
needed to serve the goals of justice … Over the last decade, the Guardia Civil in Spain has
spent hundreds of thousands of Euros on forensic-voice-comparison research, including the
collection of large databases of Spanish voices, making presentation of likelihood-ratio forensic-
voice-comparison evidence commonplace in Spanish courts (in 2008 the Guardia Civil submitted
98 forensic-voice-comparison reports to the courts)” (Morrison 2009: 8).
Further reading
Aitken, C. (1995) Statistics and the Evaluation of Evidence for Forensic Scientists, Chichester: John Wiley.
French, P and Harrison, P (2007) ‘Position statement concerning use of impressionistic likelihood terms in
forensic speaker comparison cases’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 137–44.
Redmayne, M. (2001) Expert Evidence and Criminal Justice, Oxford: OUP.
Rose, P. and Morrison, G.S. (2009) ‘A response to the UK Position statement on forensic speaker
comparison’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 16(1): 139–163.
Tiersma, P. and Solan, L. (2002) ‘The linguist on the witness stand: forensic linguistics in American
courts’, Language, 78: 221–39.
MALCOLM COULTHARD
486

32
Forensic stylistics
Theory and practice of forensic stylistics
Gerald R. McMenamin
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the theory and practice of forensic stylistics as a
technique that utilizes the linguistic analysis of writing style for the purpose of authorship
identiﬁcation. For a longer, more detailed treatment of the same subject matter, I refer
the reader to McMenamin (2002). As in most of my previous work on forensic stylistics,
I write for readers of varying backgrounds, so linguists may simply want to skip over
sections whose purpose they recognize to be foundational.
Language and linguistic stylistics
Language is the internal system human speakers and writers develop and use to commu-
nicate. A dialect is a variety of language that appears when a particular group of speakers
develops consistent patterns of language use, called “class characteristics” in forensic
science. An idiolect (Bloch 1948: 7) is a variety of language developed by the individual
speaker as a uniquely patterned aggregate of linguistic characteristics observed in his or
her language use, often called “individual characteristics” in forensic science.
Linguistics is the study of the nature and development of the internal system of language as
well as of the ways language is used in all its communicative contexts. One area of linguistics
that is necessary for the understanding of stylistic analysis is the study of linguistic variation. Wil-
liam Labov was the ﬁrst of many researchers who have succeeded in many ways throughout
the last half century in identifying the forces that lead to linguistic diversity and relating them
to the basic system of language as it is aﬀected by non-linguistic events or forces (Labov 2002).
With respect to group diversity, the individual creates his systems of verbal behavior to
resemble those of the groups he identiﬁes with, what Labov (2002: 19) refers to as “the
general tendency towards accommodation and the pressure of community norms.” One can
then examine factors that may cause group (and I would add, individual) divergence from
the norm, that is, change away from the community norm. Labov (2002: 19) indicates that
language diversity can be the result of the need for distinctiveness, breaks in communication
networks, and the individual’s process of language acquisition and learning.
487

Style is seen as that part of human behavior that reﬂects individual variation in activities
that are otherwise invariant. Fashion is a good example of style because, while most
elements of dress are common to a group, structured as they are by social convention
(e.g. “What not to wear!”), individual variation is tolerated, accepted, and even encour-
aged. In much the same way, the elements of language that are common to all members
of a speech community are what enable communication, while linguistic style is the
result of what an individual selects to use from the array of linguistic tools available to his
or her own group or, for that matter, to other groups of speakers. Interestingly, by the
way, the clothes-language analogy is also used in the other direction, that is, language as
a basis for understanding personal style. Recall the sartorial eloquence metaphor in Elton
John’s lyrics:
You’ve a certain sartorial eloquence
And a style that’s almost of your own
William Labov (2002: 8) distinguishes between customs (stable forms) and fashions,
“forms that change rapidly within and across generations.” Citing Katz and Lazarsfeld
(1955), Labov (2008: 2) says, “Change and diﬀusion of fashions – in clothing and cos-
metics – appears to be closer to linguistic change and diﬀusion than any other form of
linguistic behavior.” A professional American work environment requires business attire
for men, with its conventional invariants of shirt, tie, suit, shoes, etc. All these elements
of dress will nonetheless demonstrate endless variation in their cut, size, shape, color,
quality, cleanliness, and condition in the resultingly unique sartorial ensemble of every
given man in that work place. The development of such style in children and adults is
related to the ongoing acquisition of personal criteria for making individual choices, a
lifelong process of learning and development. Style in all realms of human activity is
acquired early by children, and once acquired has signiﬁcant staying power.
Style in language is not always unambiguously deﬁned. Style in spoken language is
linguistic variation that is directly related to the social context of conversation. Style in
written language reﬂects both a writer’s conscious response to the requirements of genre
and context as well as the result of his or her unconscious and habituated choices of the
grammatical elements acquired through the long-term experiential process of writing. Style
is in part, then, the sum of the recurrent choices the writer makes in the process of writing.
Recurrent refers to those choices that become subconscious habits of choice, that is, repeated
selection of one form over other available forms. And choices can be described as variations
within a norm (favor/favour), or deviations from a norm (They know it./They knows it.).
Stylistics is the study of style in language. Traditionally, the focus of literary stylistics
was the aesthetic quality of expression or the prescriptive conformity of language to the
rules of grammatical correctness and social propriety. Linguistic stylistics, in contrast, is the
scientiﬁc interpretation of style-markers as observed, described and analyzed in the language
of groups and individuals.
Style markers are the observable result of the habitual and usually unconscious choices
an author makes in the process of writing. There are two general types:
1. Choice of optional forms:
I give you my heart. / I give my heart to you. / I give to you my heart.
2. Deviation from a norm:
I am working today. / I’m working today. vs. I be working today.
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
488

For further discussion of the nature and occurrence of style markers, see McMenamin
(1993: Appendices 1 and 2), and McMenamin (2001).
Stylistic variation is reﬂected as class characteristics observed in the writing of distinct
social and geographical groups, and also as individual features observed in the idiolect of single
writers who share a language or dialect. Class features in writing are the graphic analog of
dialect characteristics in spoken language. A class feature of adolescent girls, for example,
would be the use of an iconic heart replacing the word love in a text. Among the
most common class features are those that appear as deviations from the norm which are
common to careless or under-educated writers, like mixing homonyms such as its/it’s,
eﬀect/aﬀect, or their/there as in (1), a questioned letter and (2), known writing from a possible
writer of (1).
(1) Questioned letter
Q1:10
… submitting there full Application …
Q1:12
… as part of there D/A …
Q1:15
… as part of there paperwork …
Q13:24
… bells on there cats …
(2) Known writings
K12:11
… I am answering there question …
K26:11
… to seek their approval …
K32:12
… forwarded there letter to you …
K54:16
… on there Companies involvement …
Interestingly, the group characteristics of a spoken dialect may also appear in the writing of
speakers of a particular linguistic variety. For example, diﬀerent words may be homon-
ymous in certain social or regional dialects, therefore appearing as homonyms in the
written language, as may be seen in the absence of contrast between then/than in (3).
(3) Questioned
1:15
…more valuable then the Santa Cruz property
Known Geraldine
16:14
…keep her there any more than a couple of days.
Known Marguerite
10:11
…and took more then what was distributed to her.
10:19
…“the San Leandro property is more valuable” then the Santa Cruz
property.
12:24
…in any one other then her the statements…
12:40
…he would be more then happy to discuss the matter…
13:19
…took care of her mother more then what she did.
On the other hand, individuating features, while not necessarily unique to a writer, are
not commonly observed. For example, in a corpus study of over 1,100 American letter
writers, 514 writers recorded a phone number. Table 32.1 shows the frequency dis-
tribution of their phone-number forms, demonstrating the relative occurrence of each
form, which will constitute the basis for a quantitative determination of where to draw
the line between individual and group.
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
489

The analysis of style is carried out using one or a combination of three models out-
lined by Wachal (1966: 4): resemblance, consistency, and population. The so-called
resemblance model is used when external factors so narrow candidate authors that the
authorship task is to exclude or identify just one or a few suspect writers. For example,
an ex-husband trying to gain custody of his children writes letters defaming his former
wife, and he is the only person other than her who has knowledge of the events related
in the letters. The consistency model is used to determine if various writings were written
by the same author. This can be the principal task in cases involving a group of writings,
one or more of known authorship but others of questioned authorship. Establishing the
consistency of a group of writings is frequently the ﬁrst step in a resemblance case when
external circumstances do not demonstrate common authorship of a body of questioned
writings. The population model is occasionally used in forensic contexts when the pool of
candidate authors is large, that is, not limited to just one or two suspect writers. In this
instance, the resemblance model is used repeatedly on one possible author after another
until all are excluded. For example, a California governor once received a letter
describing the in-oﬃce sexual escapades of the director of a large state agency. (The
letter even contained an elaborate drawing of the red-velvet covered Victorian style
couch in his oﬃce!) The writings of all employees in the oﬃce were analyzed to sys-
tematically exclude all but one as the letter writer.
In the above discussion of models of analysis for questions of authorship, I have used the
terms Questioned and Known. In the forensic sciences, there is a bullet, ﬁngerprint, blood stain,
ﬁber, email, etc., whose origin is questioned. The case only becomes viable if and when a
possible reference source is found for the questioned item, that is, a gun, ﬁngerprint, DNA
sample, piece of clothing, computer, etc., from a possible suspect. The same requirements must
be met in the linguistic analysis of style: a Questioned writing, one whose authorship is in doubt
or unknown vis-à-vis Known exemplars, writings attested to have been produced by one or
more possible authors.
The description of style
The description of style, often referred to as qualitative analysis, is the ﬁrst step in the
analysis of style. Subsequent measurement of style is based on the description and
Table 32.1 Phone number formats (USA)
No.
Format
n
%
1
000, 000-0000
1
0.20
2
0000000000
3
0.58
3
Misc. Forms
3
0.58
4
1+000+0000000
7
1.36
5
000 0000000
7
1.36
6
000.000.0000
11
2.14
7
000/000-0000
15
2.92
8
000 000-0000
29
5.64
9
000 000 0000
29
5.64
10
000-000-0000
159
30.93
11
(000) 000-0000
250
48.64
TOTAL
514
99.99
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
490

categorization of linguistic elements. Qualitative evidence is also generally more
“demonstrable” than quantitative results, and it is the belief of many forensic analysts that
qualitative ﬁndings appeal to the nonmathematical but structured sense of probability
held by judges and juries (Cohen 1977).
Qualitative inquiry can be rigorous if conditioned by careful framing of research
questions, systematic observation, data that are the direct outcome of observation, reliable
methods of description and analysis, valid interpretation of results, and a statement of the
basis for every conclusion (Johnstone 2000).
The most important step for systematic observation in both the description (and sub-
sequent measurement) of linguistic variation is the identiﬁcation of the linguistic variable,
that is, the isolation of structural linguistic units that carry signiﬁcance with respect to
group or individual writing style. Preferred variables, as ﬁrst articulated by Labov
(1966b: 6) are those that are high in frequency, immune from total suppression (and I
would add, conscious suggestion), codable, and widely distributed throughout a parti-
cular population (and I would add, individual). The variable is a class of variants ordered
along a continuous dimension as determined by extralinguistic variables, such as parti-
cular individual authors. The linguistic variant of a given variable is a particular instance
of the variable, and a shift in the distribution of variants reﬂects a change in extra-
linguistic factors aﬀecting the variable (Labov 1966b: 15), for example, diﬀerent authors if
applied to stylistic analysis. Labov indicates further:
The variable is of course an abstraction. In actual texts, we meet with variants only.
However, the move from variant to variable is the basic step which must be taken
here. It implies that the speech performance of the individual or group is best
explained through the assumption of an underlying linguistic continuum, in which
categories form, reform and dissolve.
(Labov 1966b: 21)
The measurement of style
While qualitative and quantitative factors inﬂuence stylistic analysis, it is my view (already
expressed above) that linguistic assessments of style precede their expression as numerical
values and are often a more realistic representation of the facts. If description is not
viewed as the input to measurement, the analyst risks considering the occurrence of any
one variant of a variable to be a random event, when he or she knows that it is or could
be in fact systematically conditioned. Labov (2008:2) articulates this simply as, “the
assumption is that the distribution of its variants is of linguistic interest.”
This being said, the measurement of variation in written language is an important
complement to description and is necessary when using the occurrence of linguistic units
to draw conclusions relative to authorship. Quantiﬁcation of data makes decision-making
related to hypothesis testing easier and more precise, and it meets linguistic and judicial
criteria for scientiﬁc ﬁndings and evidence.
Various researchers (e.g. Grant and Baker 2001) have been working on aspects of
quantiﬁcation of textual elements, especially those related to the selection and signiﬁcance
of style markers. I outline basic tests that lend themselves to evaluating the signiﬁcance of
the relationship of variables across comparison writings: frequency distributions, standard
error of diﬀerence, t-Test, analysis of variance, proportion test, chi square, coeﬃcient of
correlation, and probability of occurrence calculations (McMenamin 2008: 138). An
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
491

example of more signiﬁcant advances in quantiﬁcation comes from the recent work of
Grant (2007), who carefully examines the issues which have complicated attempts to
quantify results in authorship studies and suggests quantitative strategies for identifying
potential style markers (see also Grant, this volume).
Forensic stylistics
Forensic linguistics encompasses applications of linguistic analysis to forensic contexts, for
example, voice analysis, translation and interpretation, dialect identiﬁcation, discourse
analysis, and authorship identiﬁcation, to name a few. Linguists study the habitual varia-
tion represented by any given speaker/writer by observing samples of their spoken and
written language. The constellation of the patterned uses of language of an individual can
be described as a unique set and thereby used to identify the language of that writer.
When applied to items of written language in dispute, the analysis of linguistic variation
is often referred to as forensic stylistics.
At this point, it is important to distinguish between linguistic stylistics and document
examination. The focus of forensic stylistics is on the consistent, variable, idiosyncratic
use of language as such. The focus of forensic document examination is on handwriting,
typewriting, computer-generated documents, paper, ink, etc. While there is some over-
lap between these two ﬁelds of inquiry (e.g. typing habits that reﬂect underlying lan-
guage patterns), their practitioners ﬁnd little practical diﬃculty keeping them separate.
Cases of questioned authorship typically present the linguist with a questioned writing to
be ﬁrst contrasted (for possible exclusion of the author) then compared (for possible
identiﬁcation of the author) to a set of exemplar writings known to have been
written by a writer suspected of authoring the questioned material. The author’s style
is exhibited in a writing sample large enough to demonstrate the individual variation
present in the underlying linguistic patterns internal to the habitual language used by the
author. Individual diﬀerences in writing style are related to individual choices of alter-
native forms made available to the writer by the large stock of linguistic alternatives held
in common by all the speaker/writers of the author’s group, that is, speech community.
Thus, individuality in writing style results from a given writer’s unique position within
the group, as represented by his or her individual aggregate set of habitual linguistic
choices.
Case examples of variables may help to make the concept of style
marker clear:
Case 1:
This is a spelling example (Figure 32.1) resulting from work done for the recent movie,
Zodiac, produced and directed by David Fincher. This is not an issue of misspelling, but
instead one of separation of the diagraph -gh in words like right and night. Fincher sus-
pected a man named Arthur L. Allen as the writer of the threatening letters sent by the
serial killer calling himself the Zodiac. Although this and other features were suggestive
of authorship, no conclusion was possible due to the paucity of Known writings from
the now-deceased Allen. Other examples can be seen at http://www.zodiacmovie.com/.
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
492

Case 2:
This punctuation example (Figure 32.2) comes from a criminal matter related to a
“peeping tom” who wrote letters to his victim in addition to spying on her through her
bedroom window. In the Questioned as well as Known writings, numerous unmotivated
parentheses appear around underlined words. These words, however, are not par-
enthetical to their respective sentences. The writer appears to be using parenthesis in
conjunction with underlining as a means of placing emphasis on these words. (Fewer
examples are presented than appeared in both sets of writings due to the excision of the
most oﬀensive expressions.)
Case 3:
This was a case of adult siblings in dispute among themselves over their mother’s Will.
The son who lived closest to his mother was suspected by his siblings of having created a new
Will with added provisions favoring only him. Known typed writings of the deceased
mother demonstrated an invariable pattern in the use of end-quotes: quote marks
enclosing stated words and phrases appear with punctuation before (inside) the quotes, but
QUESTIONED Zodiac
KNOWN Arthur L. Allen
Q Zodiac 4:16 "right"
Q Zodiac 7:12 "right"
Q Zodiac 8:6 "night"
Q Zodiac 12:5 "night"
K Allen 2:5 “Leigh”
Figure 32.1 Spelling: separation of graphemic units in digraph -gh-
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
493

Q 7-2
Q 7-9
KS 1-9
KS 1-11
KS 2-4
KS 2-8
Q 2-4
KNOWN Writings of Suspect
QUESTIONED Writings
Figure 32.2 Punctuation: unmotivated parentheses
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
494

quote marks used for emphasis appear with punctuation after (outside) the quotes. In
contrast, the punctuation in the Questioned writings as well as in the Known writings of the
suspect son occurs only before (inside) the quote marks in all cases. (Only a few illustrative
examples are provided in Figure 32.3 of the many that occurred for each pattern.)
In the same case, the spelling of already vis-à-vis all ready also varied between the sus-
pect son, his mother, and her purported Will, as can be seen in the data of Figure 32.4.
KNOWN WRITINGS of Deceased Mother
End-quotes used for statements
232
, wrote a terse/“Is this yours?” and sent it to her chagrine
479
off the line, get off the/line.” The electricity was develop
511
for some tools from the house!” He was a new hired man, no
531
and put some more peas on it.” My father did not smoke, an
End-quotes used for emphasis
520
ing B E E R. (Idaho was “dry”, Wyoming "wet)
I was so su
569
ather always went “ﬁrst-class”. Even on a short train trip
715
er she ran so did the “Indian”. He at last caught up with
742
Idaho was “dry”, Wyoming “wet”. My mother worked for Presby
KNOWN WRITINGS of Suspect Son
End-quotes used for statements
65
88 you repeatedly cried “Wolf!” to/your family and friends,
71
the/former love of your life,” James D. Flinner, of various
545
Instead of saying, “How nice!” Marie deftly inserted her/ﬁ
End-quotes used for emphasis
15
s for his “ﬁnal arrangements.” Previously, Ernest/had writt
67
Linford. Your “other brother,” Floyd Whiting, as usual, did
90
t, and the “love of your life,” James D. Flinner,/suffered at
94
Avenue, the Winterland “cabin,” the house at 1940 Juniper St.
QUESTIONED WILL
End-quotes used for statements
50
mind, but I can make YOU mind!” Starting I 1984 I had orgina
66
man said,“The buck stops here.” I also have to/cite the old
168
might as well have the game.” From what I am able to piece
End-quotes used for emphasis
124
and/a Ph.D. from this “school,” evidently without having tak
245
pregnant with her “love child.” We were living in Laramie in
309
Floyd for this absurd “advice,” and he gently reminded Lloyd
326
and me about her “situation.” Larry himself told me next to
Figure 32.3 Punctuation: end-quote marks
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
495

Case 4:
This was a matter involving an estranged married couple, each saying the other wrote certain
damaging letters. These data represent variable use of the relative pronoun in the letter-
salutation, “To whom it may concern.” The Questioned writings (Figure 32.5) contained the
subject form who, but the writings of the wife demonstrated a patterned use of the object
pronoun whom.
Case 5:
This case involved two employees who were both suspected of defrauding their company.
Writings (Figure 32.6) related to the fraud demonstrated similarities (use of which for who) to
the writing of one employee and diﬀerences from that of the other (use of who for who).
KNOWN WRITINGS of Deceased Mother
47
get to work. Since Erne was all ready ﬁt to be tied
47
to be tied because we hadn’t all ready left for Laramie, I
84
were Dorothy/Sayres I would all ready have the solution to
KNOWN WRITINGS of Suspect Son
209
by 1997 she estimated he had already extracted his “1/3”
295
two required meetings have already been held. All of the
312
since Tom Long’s law ﬁrm was already engaged with the legal
565
/stopped. It also makes the already unpleasant job for the
QUESTIONED WILL
06
seems to be over. We had already been thoroughly soaked
18
be stopped. It also makes the already unpleasant job for the
36
at 22 months of age, Judy was already bossy. Our second/
Figure 32.4 Spelling: already
Q1:2
KMP6:7
Q2:2
KMP8:2
KMP16:6
KMP23:7
KMP26:5
Figure 32.5 Word formation: to who it may concern vs. to whom it may concern
QUESTIONED
KNOWN
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
496

Case 6:
In this matter, it was claimed that certain speakers who shared a ﬁrst language other than
English had together concocted a Will for a decedent whose native language was Eng-
lish. The writer(s) of the Questioned Will shared the same variation in sequencing tenses
as the suspect authors of the Known writings (Figure 32.7).
Case 7:
A woman’s existing Will directed her estate to her daughter. After the death of the testatrix,
a more recent Will appeared, naming her husband as beneﬁciary. The data presented
diﬀerences in the positioning of objects within a sentence. Three possibilities for
sequencing the indirect object (IO) and direct object (DO) in English are shown in (4).
(4)
Variation #1
I
give
John
my estate.
S
V
IO
DO
QUESTIONED Letter
0391
another guy from outside the company which left because of fra
0535
he accused of my service director which had recruited me for
0797
by some one from outside the company which was ﬁred after two mon
1010
that involved a closer (Marvin Finch) which he was accused of steal
KNOWN Writing of Suspect #1
3335
general manager with other associates who have the willingness to
3390
deals, however, there are those who you haven't talked to th
3645
and bring a qualiﬁed individual who has no interest but to p
KNOWN Writing of Suspect #2
3804
ﬁnd out from an outsider (customer) which has no relationship with
4161
Steven Bernthal ... June 29th 2005 which leased a car on June
4278
an application of Mr.. Mario Ponce which purchased a 2001 model
Figure 32.6 Syntax: Impersonal relative “which” for personal “who” or “whom”
KNOWN Writings
1:8
I told him that I am a very good cook and
1:17
James kept ... asking me when am I coming back.
1:18
He was saying that he is very attracted to me
1:23
he promised that he will help me look for a job
2:17
He told me that he will make a Will which
2:18
He added that all I had to do is love him.
QUESTIONED Writings
1:16
I made sure that she will be taken care of just in case if I died.
1:18
Frank told me they got engaged and their church wedding will be next year
1:25
He also said that he has a Will that says
2:8
he called Cela his wife, because that’s what she is to him
2:28
He said she is the only one that is worth of it.
2:34
he said that his Will is perfectly good
Figure 32.7 Syntax: sequence of tenses: main clause (past) followed by subordinate clause (present)
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
497

Variation #2
I
give
my estate
to John.
S
V
DO
to + IO
Variation #3
I
give
to John
my estate.
S
V
to + IO
DO
Corpus analysis would probably prove the third variation to be the most marked, and
possibly a more formal form appropriate to the writing-context of a Will. In this case
(Figure 32.8), the Questioned Will demonstrates the marked Variation 3 (with one
occurrence of the less formal Variation 2), the Known existing Will contains only Var-
iations 1 and 2, and the Known writings of the suspect author (the husband) contain
scores of instances of Variation 3 (and some of Variation 1).
Further case examples of linguistic style-markers
The following (Figures 32.9 to 32.21) are linguistic examples from various cases,
presented here to demonstrate some of the potential for stylistic variation of punctuation,
morphology, lexis, syntax and discourse in written language.
Punctuation
QUESTIONED Will
QW1:3
I ... give and bequeath all personal property ... to my husband Will Smith ....
QW1:9
I ... give and bequeath to my daughter Clarice Smith, nothing.
QW1:13
I give to my nephew Marvin Lipp one hundred thousand dollars.
KNOWN Existing Will
EW1:7
I give and bequeath all tangible property ... to my daughter.
EW2:2
All the rest ... I give to my daughter.
EW2:7
It is my wish that she provide my husband a monthly allowance.
EW2:16
I speciﬁcally give all of the powers enumerated to my Executrix.
EW3:4
I hereby give my ﬁduciaries the power to allocate the expenses ....
KNOWN Suspect Writer
KS389:24
Please send to me, a copy of any letter you send.
KS39:6
... she will return to the front ofﬁce, the telephone and the fax machine.
KS297:10
I ... give to my accountant freedom to ....
KS302: 11
I ... give to my beloved husband authority to ....
KS348:12
The management company will send to you the money for ....
Figure 32.8 Syntax: order of indirect and direct objects within the sentence
Questioned Letters
QW1:3
Nina,s [Nina’s]
Known Writings
K98:12
Kerri,s
K140:21
Harrison,s
K140:25
Rose,s
K158:7
Harrison,s
K165:25
Rex,s
Figure 32.9 Comma for apostrophe
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
498

Morphology
Questioned Letters
Q1:16
... to Town Council .
Q1:18
… in the very near future .
Q3:23
... approval from Council .
Q7:23
... and vehicle access .
Known Writings
K6:10
... can enter amicably .
K6:11
... favorable decision .
K7:21
... work reference only .
K8:21
... of Forest Property .
K9:17
... Company seal with date .
Figure 32.10 Sentence-ﬁnal punctuation spaced away from last word
Questioned Letters
Q1:11
as anticipate [anticipated].
Q1:23
the undersign [undersigned].
Known Writings
K65:27
... paddocks that will be remediate .... [remediated]
K138:28
This is the guarantee schedule .... [guaranteed].
K149:15
Your recommend buffer .... [recommended].
Figure 32.11 Absent –ed inﬂections
Questioned Letters
Q2:13
… your several council meeting with council …. [meetings]
Q4:5
... all six structure [structures]
Q9:7
... the various meeting [meetings]
Known Writings
K35:20
... need time and dates [times]
K96:1
... both project [projects]
K97:7
... to discuss the different way stage one .... [ways]
K101:10
... all the six land owner will pay [owners]
K156:22
... all your invoice to works .... [invoices]
Figure 32.12 Absent plural inﬂection
Questioned Letters
Known Writings
Q7:27
sub divisional
K125:21
de stump
Q7:28
sub divisional
K147:15
sub catchment
Q8:15
sub division
K149:9
sub divide
Figure 32.13 Preﬁx separation
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
499

Questioned
Known Writings
3:43
Meyer fax’es his letter dated 3/3/00
16:6
the ﬁnancials that were FAX'd to
4:22
You FAX'd everything
18:7
We FEDEX’d you
23:19
he FAX*d me his version.
23:21
Sean FEDEX'd samples
34:7
I am FAX’ing you a copy
Figure 32.14 Apostrophe inserted before inﬂectional sufﬁx
Questioned Letters
Possessive for plural:
Q1:32
our wife’s will attend [wives]
Q1:33
the lady’s on the council will [ladies]
Plural for possessive:
Q2:19
your friends land [friend's]
Known Writings
Possessive for plural:
K12:18
Malcolm Edward’s [Edwards]
K55:1
boundaries of zoning’s for wetlands [zonings]
K151:9
your good self’s [selves]
K153:1
some area’s [areas]
K153:2
the tree’s near the road [trees]
Plural for possessive:
K1:19
companies [company’s]
K7:15
companies [company’s]
K48:23
other tenants houses [tenants’]
K160:17
their banks permission [bank’s]
Figure 32.15 Plural/possessive confusion
Questioned Letters
Q2:25
... do you real want .... [really]
Q3:8
... he was a complete negative person due to .... [completely]
Q43:5
... encroachment of environmental sensitive areas. [environmentally]
Q46:15
... the regrettably situation .... [regrettable]
Known Writings
K2:5
... worked out in a similarly arrangement if the .... [similar]
K51:20
This is a very ﬁnancial and economically sound decision .... [ﬁnancially]
K69:20
... the environmental sensitive areas .... [environmentally]
K70:34
... the environmental sensitive issues .... [environmentally]
K125:1
was total unfair. [totally]
K125:16
... employ part time workers temporary until [temporarily]
K140:26
... will be full resolved [fully]
Figure 32.16 Adverb/adjective substitution
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
500

Lexicon
Syntax
Phrasal Form
No. in Questioned
No. in Known
1
development application
1
4
2
Development Application
3
19
3
D/A application
10
6
4
D/A
9
56
5
DA
11
65
Figure 32.17 Five variations of form on the same lexical phrase
Questioned Letter
Q1:9
This letter certify that ….
Q1:22
… and should any organization wishes to discuss this matter ….
Q3:14
... with alterations that was necessary in approving ....
Known Writings
K1:9
... and we does not have the army to ﬁght ....
K1:18
If the company sign a agreement with ....
K69:20
... the environmental sensitive areas .... [environmentally]
K5:2
... at present our company still use the project house ....
K13:23
... all his works is ﬁnished.
K17:3
If the owner wish to sell the Sherwood Forest property ....
K18:2
Environmental runoffs ... is the full responsibility of the project ....
Figure 32.18 Subject/verb agreement
Questioned Writings [one example; embedding structure not shown]
Q3:17
“We would like to make recommendation for approval on the 31st May 2000 for
Council to approve the Coastal Stage 1 after it has been on public exhibition for two
weeks this is different to what we told you before but legally council has to, before
approving your DA and then the remaining total stages would be approved after
Council adopts the full LES and LEP and this will not be until mid September 2000 as
we had no difﬁculties in approving the company’s Development Application, how-
ever, we feel it is important that we address all legal and government authority issues
prior to releasing your DA approval from council.”
Known Writings [one example; embedding structure not shown]
K1:26
“I have been asked to step aside from all day to day operations within the Forest
property, there is lots of items to be completed regarding the property and even just
last week end, your house and equipment was damaged in a freak hail storm no
one from Smith Lawyers came out to inspect the property, but I helped out and
looked after tenancy and covered all the broken windows to your premise and other
tenants houses, this is even that I have not been paid this month and even your
staff member was not paid until last week and other creditor have not been paid
and lots of cheques have bounced and you can just think of all the bad rumors
going around.”
Figure 32.19 Long periodic sentences with multiple levels of embedding
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
501

Discourse
Questioned Letters
Q1A1:15
... your professionalism in submitting a lengthy detailed submission ....
Q1A1:20
... working closely with ... Mr Le Fay in resolving all obstacles ....
Q1A1:21
... resolving all obstacles in providing the company a DA approval ....
Q1A2:4
... resolve all problems in allowing our company full approval this ....
Q1:17
I look forward in working closely with the company ….
Example from Known Writings
162:21
We look forward to an good out come
in assuring the company
that Sherwood Forest property has priority
in working closely with council
in making sure
it will be successful
in meeting to the satisfaction of the owner
in producing a township for all
to enjoy in years to come.
Figure 32.20 VERB + in + V-ing
Questioned Letters (3)
Q1A2:6
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
Q2:21
Should you have any quires regarding this enclosed letter please don’t hesitate to
contact the writer ….
Q5:6;
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
Known Letters [10 of 30 instances]
K5:13
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned ....
K6:13
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
K9:14
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
K14:11
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned ....
K17:12
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
K25:14
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
K27:19
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
K30:28
Should you have any queries pertaining to the above please do not hesitate to con-
tact the undersigned.
K31:20
Should you have any queries pertaining to the enclosed please do not hesitate to
contact the undersigned.
Figure 32.21 Identical content of letter-closings
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
502

Limitations of forensic stylistics
Linguistic limitations to the theory and practice of forensic stylistics have been identiﬁed in
recent years and have long been studied in authorship attribution research (McMenamin
1993, 2002). Directly confronting such limitations provides direction to the ongoing
development of stylistic analysis and of forensic authorship analysis. Speciﬁc concerns
presently center around four principal observations, each of which will be considered
here in turn.
Observation 1: The selection of stylistic variables used for comparison and contrast has
been said to be arbitrary and subjective. The criteria for selection of style markers do not
appear to be speciﬁed or justiﬁed.
The selection of stylistic variables is taken from the theory of variation analysis devel-
oped by William Labov and others, and proposed as far back as 1966. I refer the reader
to the discussion of the linguistic variable in The Description of Style section of this chapter.
To be yet more speciﬁc, Labov (2008: 3) outlines the process for deﬁning the linguistic
(dependent) variable:
Step 1. Notice variation: alternative ways of saying the same thing.
Step 2. Deﬁne the envelope of variation: the largest environment in which the
variation occurs.
a. Accompany reports of occurrences of a variant with reports of all non-
occurrences.
b. Set aside neutral cases: environments where it is not possible to dis-
tinguish variants.
c. Note exclusions: individual items that behave in idiosyncratic fashion.
Step 3. Deﬁne the (independent) constraints on the variable (e.g. writing context
or author).
Observation 2: The frequency of occurrence of stylistic variables is not well deﬁned,
resulting in analytical methods that do not include rigorous statistical analysis of written
texts.
Frequency of occurrence is, in fact, well deﬁned if one follows the steps just outlined
for coding variants of style variables. Successful statistical approaches to the general and
forensic analysis of style go back decades (see McMenamin 1993). More recently, Grant
and Baker (2001) describe the statistical and linguistic bases of Principal Component
Analysis, a method for measuring the collective range of variation needed for authorship
identiﬁcation. In addition, I outlined some basic measures in McMenamin 2002. Among
the many researchers now working to develop more reliable measures of style, the work
of Tim Grant (2007) is the most promising, wherein he proposes a text-sampling strategy
to identify potentially useful, reliable, and valid style markers.
Observation 3: Given that reference to a linguistic norm is needed for the analysis of
linguistic variation, a norm that is inaccessible for any reason weakens the analysis.
Recall that style variables can be of two types: deviations from a norm and variations
within a norm. The clear cases, often those not requiring reference to a corpus, are
variables that are prescriptive errors, that is, deviations from the conventions of an
established norm. However, many useful style markers represent variation within a norm,
that is, multiple error-free ways of saying the same thing. It is here that corpus-based
determination of style-marker signiﬁcance is important.
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
503

Another seldom mentioned linguistic limitation of current practice in authorship
attribution is the inability to clearly diﬀerentiate between group vs. individual variation,
commonly referred to in the forensic sciences as class vs. individual features. A corpus-
based approach to style-markers that will ﬁrst identify group variables makes it then
possible to assign remaining variables to the set of individuating style markers (i.e. those
associated with individual identiﬁcation) based on relative frequencies of occurrences of
identiﬁed linguistic variables.
With respect to the need to refer to a community norm in order to establish individual
variation, it has long been clear that such work is indispensable to successful stylistic analysis.
Labov (1966b), for one, clearly makes this case: “The central ﬁnding of sociolinguistics is
that the community is the stable and systematic unit, and that the behavior of individuals
cannot be interpreted without prior knowledge of the community pattern.”
Other more detailed outlines of the need to use tools from corpus linguistics to
describe and establish group norms in particular cases are found in Coulthard (1994a),
McMenamin (2004), and Solan and Tiersma (2004).
Recognition of the need for a reference corpus does not mean that establishing a norm
for any given analysis is in any way easy. The corpus for a given case should match as
much as possible the context of writing of the text(s) under scrutiny, meaning that an ad
hoc corpus may have to be assembled in the event that one enabling a pares cum paribus
analysis does not already exist.
Observation 4: The relative signiﬁcance of stylistic variables cannot be determined because
it is not yet possible to determine levels of conscious intervention as stylistic choices are made
in the writing process, assuming that the most telltale markers are those least consciously used.
It would, of course, be very useful to ﬁnd a method to test a writer’s level of consciousness
at any given point in the writing process. However, a performance approach to the observation
and analysis of writing behavior appears to be as adequate as it is for the description of spoken
language. Labov’s research related to levels of style (casual to formal) has demonstrated
that variation is more consistent in casual speech, so this may be a place to begin research
on writing, that is, attempting to study an individual’s writings that are grouped by level
of attention paid to the process of writing itself or to other aspects of the writing context
that would result in text that is formal (more conscious) or casual (less conscious).
Legal limitations to forensic stylistics relate to the standards for the admissibility of sci-
entiﬁc evidence. Forensic stylistics presents no real limitations in countries or venues that
rely on a “general acceptance” test like that ﬁrst laid out in the US by the District of
Columbia Court of Appeals in Frye v. United States (1923), wherein expert opinion based
on a scientiﬁc technique was admissible if the technique was generally acceptable in the
relevant scientiﬁc community. However, starting with the US Supreme Court’s decision
in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals (1993), the reliability of scientiﬁc evidence in
federal and many state venues is now to be judged on ﬁve speciﬁc factors:
1. whether the theory or technique can be tested;
2. whether the theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and publication;
3. the known or potential rate of error;
4. the existence of standards controlling the operation of the technique; and
5. general acceptance in the relevant scientiﬁc community.
Stylistic analysis stands up to the Daubert criteria (Coulthard 2004; McMenamin 2004),
although the research area of immediate need is the establishment of error rates for
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
504

stylistic analysis. However, the fact that forensic stylistics meets to a greater or lesser
extent all but one Daubert criterion makes the technique reliable even while error-rate
research is being done. In fact, in the later decision of Kumho Tire v. Carmichael (1999),
the US Supreme Court emphasized ﬂexible application of the Daubert criteria as
opposed to rigidly applying any particular Daubert factor in a given case.
However, this does not mean that judicial criteria external to the academic discipline of
forensic linguistics, such as those set out in Daubert, cannot provide impetus for improve-
ment in the methodology of forensic stylistics. On the contrary, Grant (2009: 3), for
example, correctly observes, “Because of the American pressure [from Daubert] it is likely
that the number and variety of quantiﬁed approaches will increase in forensic authorship
analysis.” However, I see the increased rigor of quantiﬁcation as second in importance to
the resolution of another thorny problem: the reconciliation of two distinct approaches to
the identiﬁcation of style markers. If the judicial requirements are to be fully realized, that
is, (1) having standards controlling the analysis of style and (2) achieving general acceptance
of forensic stylistics in the scientiﬁc community (linguistics), it will be necessary to ﬁnd a
middle ground between those who pre-select style markers for analysis, based on whatever
criteria, versus those who hold that the style markers used for analysis of a particular set
of writings must be ﬁrst observed as linguistic variables in those very writings. I have
previously referred to these respective approaches as top-down vis-à-vis bottom-up.
My position is known: the basic data for linguistic analysis is language as it is used by
speakers and writers as they communicate with each other. Therefore, objective stylistic
analysis of language structures is to be based directly on the language being observed and
analyzed. Such a data-driven approach precludes the introduction of predeﬁned language
features (variables). Some consequent advantages to this approach are that the analyst can
take full advantage of all variation presented, it may be easier to separate variation related
to authorship vs. that resulting from context of writing, and high levels of variation may
make it possible to work with shorter samples.
Another position is one taken by a number of analysts (e.g. most recently Grant 2009)
that as long as the variables are demonstrably discriminating and applied in the same
fashion to all writings under study, they can be used as reliable style markers. The
obvious value of such an approach is that, if and when the ultimate list of diagnostic
variables is discovered for a particular context of writing within a given speech commu-
nity, it can be universally and reliably applied by any analyst.
It is my view that the identiﬁcation of a context-free set of style markers is not presently
a realistic goal for forensic stylistics. Consider forensic sciences such as DNA proﬁling,
ballistics, ﬁngerprints, footwear or tyre track impressions, forensic anthropology, archae-
ology, geology, entomology, odontology, pathology, toxicology, or psychology. DNA
proﬁling, used to identify individuals on the basis of varying sequences of DNA, is the only
forensic science that I am aware of that is able to pre-specify those polymorphic loci on the
genome that will apply in every laboratory case. DNA is a lot like language: compared to
what all individuals share, very little of DNA or language varies from person to person.
However, it is not possible to determine what linguistic elements (what on the genome of
linguistic competence—just allow me the metaphor!) will present variation without ﬁrst
observing the language in question. While I do not expect that a functional short-list of
reliable style markers for any given language will be found soon, I am certain that further
research will identify a middle ground between these two positions.
Putative limitations are imagined limitations articulated by linguists who write or speak
with an agenda toward something other than that of usual scientiﬁc inquiry. For
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
505

example, a linguist who once testiﬁed that the generally accepted methods of stylistics are
not based on well established theoretical principles, proposing instead a theoretical posi-
tion viewing linguistic variation as a feature of linguistic performance, simply overlooked
the inherent variability of language (McMenamin 2001). Such a position cannot be taken
seriously because it reﬂects woefully inadequate knowledge of variation theory and ana-
lysis, that is, seeing language as an object inherently possessing ordered heterogeneity.
This approach to variation was articulated early on by Weinreich, Labov and Herzog:
The key to a rational conception of language change – indeed of language itself –
is the possibility of describing orderly diﬀerentiation in a language serving a
community. … nativelike command of heterogeneous structures is not a matter
of … “mere” performance, but is part of unilingual linguistic competence.
(Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 1968: 101)
It has also happened that the expert linguist simply asserted her position in a case rather than
empirically proving it, even simultaneously resorting to arbitrary ad hominem arguments
in the often strained context of the courtroom. Such behavior threatens the admissibility of
any and all linguistic evidence more than the method being argued for or against ever could.
Other cases of imagined limitations are associated with linguists who are distracted by
irrelevant issues, for example the strongly stated objection by Crystal (1995: 382) that if
he were dead he would be turning over in his grave because his published theory of style
was being applied to written language, to the momentary exclusion of spoken language.
A more serious artiﬁcial limitation is the occasional arrogance of the expert who
simply does not allow for an approach other than the one he or she proposes. See, for
example, a discussion related to this problem in McMenamin 2001, wherein I examine a
proposed approach to authorship analysis that rejects as unscientiﬁc and irrelevant to
current theory and practice hundreds of studies over a century of previous work in sty-
listics. Science by nature allows for simultaneous study and testing of multiple hypoth-
eses, without regard to the burning desire of one researcher to be right or to the external
(e.g. legal) need for immediate methodological agreement and procedural standards.
It is also my belief that objections to stylistic analysis have at times been occasioned by
analysts’ inability to separate science from business. For example, a researcher may
develop what appears to be an interesting method of authorship identiﬁcation. However,
if he or she neglects to present the work to the “relevant scientiﬁc community” in such a
way that it can be peer reviewed, and even goes so far as to seek a patent on the method,
such actions speak to a reversal of expected priorities, by putting personal pecuniary
interests before one’s commitment to scientiﬁc inquiry.
Conclusion
Neither the more important challenges for forensic stylistics, like quantiﬁcation and style-
marker identiﬁcation, nor the mere pesky problems related to the occasional misguided analyst,
have to stand in the way of progress. The research needed to strengthen the science is clearly
speciﬁed here and elsewhere for anyone who takes it up. However, the condition for doing the
research necessary to meet any of these challenges is cooperation, and as Gawande observes,
when there is a mixture of views within communities of researchers and professional
GERALD R. MCMENAMIN
506

practitioners, it is the collaborative leaders of the particular scientiﬁc community who set
the norms and thereby deﬁne the character of the community:
[Those] that set norms encouraging the free ﬂow of ideas and collaboration, even
with competitors, produced enduringly successful communities, while those that
mainly sought to dominate did not.
(Gawande 2009: 42)
Further reading
Coulthard, Malcolm (2004) “Author identiﬁcation, idiolect and linguistic uniqueness,” Applied Linguis-
tics, 25(4): 431–47.
——(1994) “On the use of corpora in the study of forensic texts,” Forensic Linguistics: The International
Journal of Speech Language and the Law, 1(1): 27–41.
Grant, Tim D. (2005) Authorship Attribution in a Forensic Context, Unpublished PhD Dissertation,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham.
Kniﬀka, Hannes (2007) Working in Language and Law: A German Perspective, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
FORENSIC STYLISTICS
507

33
Text messaging forensics
Txt 4n6: Idiolect free authorship analysis?
Tim Grant
Introduction
Danielle Jones disappeared on 18 June 2001; she has not been seen since and her body
has never been found. Within hours of her disappearance two text messages were sent
from her phone which, the police suspected, might have be written by her Uncle, Stuart
Campbell. In the ﬁrst case of its type to reach the UK courts, Malcolm Coulthard oﬀered
a linguistic analysis which showed that the messages were unlikely to have been written
by Danielle. Stuart Campbell was convicted of Danielle’s murder on the 19 December
2002 at least in part because of the linguistic evidence. In a parallel case, Jenny Nicholl
disappeared on 30 June 2005. Once more Malcolm Coulthard was able to oﬀer a lin-
guistic analysis suggesting that she was unlikely to have texted the ﬁnal messages sent
from her phone and that her lover, David Hodgson, was one of a small group of possible
authors. Hodgson was convicted of Jenny’s murder on 19 February 2008.
Further evidence of the potential utility of forensic linguistics in the examination of
text messages was provided in 2007 when I was given permission to carry out a survey
of mobile telephone seizures by the Northamptonshire Police, a medium-sized semi-
rural force, located in the East Midlands of the UK and covering about 900 square
miles and a population of 640,000. The police in the UK have powers to seize mobile
phones and the information they obtain ranges from the location of the phone at any
particular time, to the call record and details of the SMS text messages sent and
received. I was given access to all 186 phones seized during a three-month period,
from which a total of some 10,000 text messages were recovered. Further analysis of
the case ﬁles showed that for only twelve of these phones was there any suspicion that
the owner had not sent all of the messages. Perhaps unsurprisingly in none of the cases
was a forensic linguist employed to resolve these potential disputes. However, the
degree of actual and potential investigative interest in the authorship of text messages
appears to be growing and this raises some very real theoretical and methodological
problems, not least whether such short and fragmentary texts are amenable to any form
of authorship analysis.
508

Coulthard makes the strong claim that
The linguist approaches the problem of questioned authorship from the theoretical
position that every native speaker has their own distinct and individual version of
the language they speak and write, their own idiolect, and … this idiolect will
manifest itself through distinctive and idiosyncratic choices in texts.
(Coulthard 2004: 432)
Even if the ﬁrst claim here, that every speaker has their own idiolect, can be sustained,
there is no necessary implication from it that an individual’s idiolect will be measurable in
every text produced by that person, whatever its length. It would be perfectly rational to
hold Coulthard’s view and to also hold that a substantial and varied body of text would be
required before manifest idiolectal features became noticeable or measurable. Coulthard’s
working deﬁnition of the idiolect as a ‘distinct and individual version of language’ only
becomes useful to the authorship analyst if an idiolectal feature repeats itself, either within
one text or across several texts by the same author. In the context of text messaging it may
be that individual messages are considered too short to allow the possibility of idiolectal
analysis, but conversely it may be possible to analyse idiolect in text messages by examining
many messages written by the same individual. Further to this, although Coulthard claims
his deﬁnition to be a ‘theoretical position’, a distinction must be made between observa-
tion and theory. On the one hand, there is the observation of features which might
comprise an idiolect, that is to say idiolectal analysis requires an empirical study which
produces evidence of consistency and distinctiveness. On the other hand, a linguistic
theory of idiolect is required, which would provide explanation of any empirical evidence.
The analysis of authorship may depend conceptually on theories of idiolect as distinctive
versions of language but practically and methodologically authorship analysis depends on
the facility to detect consistent patterns of language use. If consistent patterns can be
detected, then the next step will be to determine how distinctive any such patterns are.
Practical authorship analysis may depend less on a strong theory of idiolect than on the
simple detection of consistency and the determination of distinctiveness.
The principal theoretical question this chapter addresses is whether authorship analysis
can be valid as the mere detection of degrees of consistency and the determination of
degrees of distinctiveness, or whether in its practical application it must rest implicitly or
explicitly on a particular and strong theory of idiolect. Consistency and distinctiveness may,
of themselves, be evidence that an idiolect exists, but they do not constitute an explanatory
theory of idiolect. In this theoretical sense, authorship analysis based only on consistency and
distinctiveness can be considered idiolect free, or at least idiolect light. Below, following a
theoretical discussion of diﬀerent theories of idiolect and their explanatory usefulness, a
method will be demonstrated that measures consistency and distinctiveness in text messa-
ging authorship analysis. The chapter then concludes with a discussion of whether such an
analysis in fact depends upon or requires the practitioner to subscribe to a theory of idiolect,
and whether one particular theory of idiolect has advantages over any other.
Authorship analysis and theories of the linguistic individual
Current work in forensic authorship analysis has tended to polarise between those who
argue that work on authorship requires a strong understanding of the cognitive
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
509

mechanisms of textual production on the one hand (Chaski 2001; Howald 2009), and on
the other those who believe a stylistic understanding of language production is suﬃcient
to explain authorial consistency and distinctiveness (McMenamin 2001). This debate has
proved important in the United States Court system. Howald (2009) supporting Chaski’s
(2001) position, argues that stylistic approaches to authorship analysis are theoretically
weak and therefore should fail the legal admissibility tests applied by the American
courts. Some of this debate seems to rest on alternative conceptions of the idea of the
linguistic individual and indeed on diﬀerent theories of idiolect.
Cognitivist theories of idiolect
A set of theories of idiolect (which I shall refer to as cognitivist theories) suggest that
individual language production is largely determined by linguistic competence. Compe-
tence is conceptualised here as the cognitive capacity of an individual to produce language
and as such is reﬂected in linguistic performance. If one holds a cognitivist view of the
linguistic individual then one good approach for authorship analysis involves trying to
measure their cognitive capacity. Such approaches analyse particular aspects of language
which are well explained by cognitive models of language production; aspects such as
syntactic complexity or measures of the mental lexicon. It is possible in a general sense to
measure such features and demonstrate variation between authors and groups. For
example, quantitative and computational linguists can, at least with longer texts, describe
mathematically, features of individuals’ language production in terms of word frequency
distributions (Baayen 2001; Holmes 1998; Grant 2007) syntactic structures (Chaski 2001;
Spassova and Grant 2008) and other observable markers of authorship. The successful
employment of these approaches in the resolution of authorship attribution problems
does in fact depend upon, and thus demonstrate, degrees of consistency and distinctive-
ness. However, the cognitivist theories of language production upon which these
approaches rest do not of themselves explain consistency within an author’s textual pro-
duction, nor distinctiveness between any two authors. To have a well worked out theory
of language production is diﬀerent in this sense from having an explanatorily strong
theory of idiolect. A theory of idiolect must provide an explanation as to why one
individual’s production is consistent across texts, and must also explain why that indivi-
dual’s language is distinctive as compared with that of other individuals. Cognitivist
theories may be better at explaining consistency within an individual’s textual production
but it is more diﬃcult to elaborate cognitive explanations of distinctiveness between
individuals. In describing language production systems cognitivist theorists tend to assume
minimal individual diﬀerences or assume that diﬀerences between individuals are
relatively uninteresting.
A good example of this cognitivist reduction in interest in individual linguistic varia-
tion is Chomsky’s move from his earlier interest in the dichotomy between competence
and performance to his later, allied but distinct theoretical dichotomy between internal
and external language; L-I and L-E, respectively (Chomsky 1985). Theories of language
competence can incorporate the possibility of variation between individuals, however,
the more recent dichotomy between L-I and L-E holds less explanatory power in this
respect. In these theories, theoretical primacy is given to understanding individual inter-
nal language capacity, L-I, rather than the less essential L-E, where distinctions between
natural languages and their variants are seen as rather uninteresting. The research focus is
not on diﬀerences between diﬀerent individuals’ L-I (arguably there are none) but rather
TIM GRANT
510

on what is common to all individuals in L-I. This theoretical work is one of the foun-
dations for the development of cognitive science in the late 1980s and early 1990s and
cognitive science has in turn informed the more recent biologically focused project of
cognitive neuroscience. Where cognitive linguists proposed information processing
models or architectures for language production the neuroscientists looked to realise
these models in terms of particular brain locations and processes.
In order to understand the implications of this to forensic work, we need to trace a
brief history of an area where cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists have made
some progress in explaining just one small part of language production. One such area is
child language acquisition and a small part of this literature focuses on the way children learn
irregular past tense verbs which is sometimes said to demonstrate a U-shaped learning
curve. Initially children produce these irregular forms accurately, for example, English
‘went’ as a past tense for ‘go’ and ‘was’ for ‘is’. In the next stage of learning, however,
children appear to unlearn these verb forms now creating errors such as ‘goed’ or
‘wented’. This stage represents the ‘dip’ in the U-shaped learning curve. In the ﬁnal stage of
learning, representing a rise out of the learning curve dip, children’s performance improves
again and they begin to use the correct forms for irregular past tense verbs again.
Beretta et al. (2003) examined alternative cognitive models attempting to explain this
U-shaped learning curve. Some cognitive models propose a rule-based system whereby
the ﬁrst language learner produces regular verbs using a stem+ed production model and
there is also an entirely separate part of the model devoted to simply memorising the
small number of irregular verbs (e.g. Pinker and Ullman 2002). This type of model is
referred to as a ‘rules plus memory model’ and it is argued that the developmental interac-
tion between these two elements can explain the U-shaped learning curve. A less recent
and entirely diﬀerent model, based on neural networks, is provided by Rumelhart
and McClelland (1986) who argue that associative learning alone can account for the
U-shaped learning curve. Their model contains only a single processing network and is
uniﬁed in the sense that regular and irregular forms are learnt in a single system.
These two models both appear to accurately explain the observable data but at this
stage in the historical development of the ﬁeld, they both faced the same reasonable
criticism; this is that although each model was conceived to be consistent with experi-
mental results, there is no strong sense in which they could have claimed to be real. That
is to say, neither model could claim to be related either to the biological foundations of
language production, or to the social reality of language use. Choosing between two
models which are both consistent with the available experimental data is entirely arbi-
trary. The solution to this problem came with the development of brain imaging tech-
niques over the last ten years. This has made real the understanding that there are very
speciﬁc brain locations through which diﬀerent aspects of language are produced. In the
case of learning past tense verbs, Beretta et al. (2003) report the discovery that the pro-
duction of regular and irregular verbs actually occurs at two separate brain locations. This
new evidence can provide a reason for choosing Pinker’s rules plus memory model over
Rumelhart and McClelland’s associative model with its implication of a single structure.
Developments such as these in cognitive neuroscience have important implications for
discussions of idiolect which in turn, are important for work in authorship analysis. With
regard to idiolect, the main implication is that, just as we as a species share biological
structures, so too we share brain structures in language production. The general focus of
cognitive neuroscience is not on variation between individuals, but on shared com-
monalities. If I as a speaker of English have two neurological structures for the
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
511

production of past tense verbs then so too will you. Adopting a cognitive view of lan-
guage production tends to make the explanation of idiolectal variation more diﬃcult
rather than easier. Of course, it is not impossible to develop a cognitive neuroscience of
idiolectal variation. Just as we recognise minor biological diﬀerences between individuals,
so we may argue for similar individual diﬀerences in cognitive structures. To ignore
cognitive neuroscience in discussions of idiolect would be reckless, but it is extremely
diﬃcult to use this body of work to explain actual individual diﬀerences between texts
written by the same or diﬀerent authors. By contrast stylistic theories of idiolect can and
indeed do explain individual diﬀerences between authors.
Stylistic theories of idiolect
Forensic stylistics is sometimes seen as being in opposition to more cognitivist approaches
to idiolect. From the cognitivist perspective, it has been suggested that those who take a
more stylistic approach to authorship analysis have a weaker theory of idiolect and that
the variables used are not on as solid a foundation in terms of linguistic theory (Howald
2009). Proponents of the more stylistic approaches naturally take issue with such an
evaluation arguing that theories of stylistic variation are essential to understanding dif-
ferences which occur between individuals (McMenamin 2002). My argument is that
understanding language variation stylistically, as the interaction between habit and con-
text, does not imply a lack of linguistic theory so much as an alternative linguistic theory.
Stylistic and variationist theories of language are less focused on providing species-wide
explanations of language production than on developing explanations as to how and why
language varies and/or remains constant across sociolinguistic contexts. Such an approach
may in fact be able to provide a better explanation of variation between individuals than
cognitivist approaches. Individuals will have diﬀerent linguistic experiences and these will
be revealed in their language production. This is not idiolect free authorship analysis, but
rather authorship analysis which has a diﬀerent conception of the nature of idiolect.
Johnstone (1996, 2009) studying the language of Barbara Jordan, and Kredens (2002,
2003) studying the language of Morrissey, separately describe the consistency of individual
linguistic stance across texts, contexts and indeed across a lifetime of textual production.
In these detailed descriptions, it is possible to draw some individual historical and social
explanations for consistent features of language use. For example, Johnstone (1996: 155)
concludes of some low-level aspects of Barbara Jordan’s style that her language reﬂects
‘her disregard for appearances, and her lifelong refusal to adapt to social expectations
about how a southern black woman should live and behave’. In other words, Johnstone
is arguing that, Jordon’s language draws upon her individual social history and upon a
construction of herself as a participant in that history. Such case studies are invaluable in
demonstrating the development and persistence of a linguistic individual across a variety
of sociolinguistic contexts. Perhaps even more important for theories of idiolect and for
forensic authorship analysis such insights allow us to develop explanations for the speciﬁcs
in an individual’s style. In this respect, one possible criticism of these studies might be
their choice of interesting individuals; Johnstone’s case study of Barbara Jordan, a United
States political ﬁgure famous for her oratory, and Kredens’ case study of singer song-
writer, Morrissey, known for his imaginatively gloomy lyrics, are together somewhat
elitist choices, perhaps unrepresentative of the average language user. Both individuals
may in diﬀerent ways be aiming to project a particular persona through their public
language and have the talent and linguistic skill to achieve this. These concerns aside, the
TIM GRANT
512

approach taken by both Johnstone and Kredens suggests that individuals taking a constant
or repeated linguistic stance can create stylistic traits which in turn can be construed as
the creation of a linguistic individual.
In so far as these stylistic approaches only identify consistent and distinctive features of
linguistic output for an individual, they fare no better than cognitivist approaches in
suggesting a strong theory of idiolect. There is, however, rather more of an attempt at
explanation for the creation of a linguistic individual amongst these theorists and in
particular a live debate as to whether the intersection of sociolinguistic factors determine a
linguistic individual (as discussed by Kredens 2002) or whether an individual’s history and
context are resources which can be drawn upon, a position preferred by Johnstone (1996,
2009). One advantage of this idea that we might draw upon our individual sociolinguistic
resources in the creation of a linguistic persona is that it allows for the additional possi-
bility that we might also draw upon other language resources. In particular, it is possible
to speculate that a linguistic individual might draw upon a combination of sociolinguistic
resources and cognitive resources. Accepting that an idiolect may not be determined by
either cognitive capacities or sociolinguistic history, but that each may provide resources
and constraints in the creation of a linguistic individual suggests the possibility of a more
uniﬁed theory of idiolect.
A uniﬁed approach to the linguistic individual
Coulthard (2004) demonstrated just how individual an apparently everyday utterance can
be. Using a series of Google searches he shows how the apparently everyday phrase
‘I asked her if I could carry her bags’, is probably a unique utterance. He points out
that at each stage in the construction of the phrase from a one-word utterance, to a
two-, three-, four- and eventually nine-word utterance it increases in rarity to become
apparently unique. He suggests ‘I asked her’ may be a pre-formed idiom, and so too, ‘if
I could’ but where these appear together to form, ‘I asked her if I could … ’, this showed
only 7,740 Google hits in 2004. There is apparently a fairly open choice as to the verb
which might follow this construction. In Coulthard’s example, the word ‘carry’ is used
and shows its rarity by scoring only seven Google hits. A range of alternative words
might have replaced it. These include, ‘take’, ‘hold’, ‘bring’, etc. One idiolectal question
is why one individual would use ‘carry’, whilst another individual might use ‘bring’.
Work on lexical priming oﬀers one answer to such a question.
Hoey’s (2005) work on lexical priming is situated ﬁrmly in a corpus-based tradition and
yet aspects of lexical priming have long been researched by cognitive psychologists inter-
ested in the mental lexicon. Hoey’s work concentrates on collocation, and details how one
word primes the occurrence of its collocates. Although Hoey is not, in this work, interested
in theories of idiolect he does discuss how such collocates emerge and from this one can
infer how priming and collocation can spread from one individual to another and how an
individual’s own language can be aﬀected by these collocational pressures. In contrast,
cognitive psychologists’ interest in priming has been experimental, and has described sys-
tematic patterns in reaction time as to how a word’s frequency, rarity and semantic relation
aﬀects our ability to recognise or recall it (e.g. Sloboda 1986). These two perspectives on
lexical priming might be seen as coming together in the developing interest of the
cognitivist neuroscientists in the malleability or plasticity of the brain.
Recent work in cognitive neuroscience considers not only the cognitive structures
common between individuals but also how the brain is altered by environmental stimuli.
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
513

Greenﬁeld (2008) describes the plasticity of the brain to external stimuli. At a gross level
this can be illustrated by the example of how London taxi drivers, who have to mem-
orise ‘the Knowledge’ of the driving geography of London before obtaining a license,
develop an expanded area of the hippocampus. A more linguistic example might include
evidence that bilinguals develop diﬀerent parts of their brain to speak their diﬀerent
languages (e.g Ibrahim 2008). Using evidence such as this Greenﬁeld elaborates a
description of the mind as the ‘personalisation of the brain’ by individual external stimuli
each making tiny incremental changes to neuronal activity and structure. Extrapolating
from such a model it is possible to conceive the beginnings of a theory of idiolect as the
personalisation of the language systems by exposure to diﬀering linguistic stimuli. One
potent force of such personalisation would be the statistical weight of collocation. My
exposure to a certain variety of language containing one set of collocates would be dif-
ferent from my neighbour’s and this personalisation would gradually cause individual
diﬀerences in our language production. Idiolectal consistency and variation would draw
on the resource of my cognitive capacity for language production and also draw on the
complexity of my personal sociolinguistic history. According to this potential theory of
idiolect, the cognitive capacity is itself structured but malleable and the sociolinguistic
history is realised in incremental changes to that neuro-cognitive capacity.
In conclusion, theories of idiolect cannot merely notice consistent and distinctive fea-
tures of the language of an individual. They should also attempt to provide explanations
for these facts. We have seen that although cognitivist theories can provide convincing
explanations for some aspects of language production these theories hold less power in
and of themselves in explaining individual variation. Conversely, while stylistic approa-
ches to the linguistic individual do concentrate on providing explanations for language
variation between individuals they are perhaps less interested in explaining how these
might be realised psychologically. I have speculatively indicated a possible future path
which might help these diﬀerent and sometimes competing theories of idiolect to pro-
vide complementary explanations for the construction of an individual. The question
that remains is how far these theoretical discussions of idiolect can or should impact on
forensic authorship analysis.
Text messaging authorship analysis
In the two text messaging cases referred to at the beginning of the chapter, the problem
brought to the linguist by the police was to determine which of two authors was more
likely to have written a series of messages. In forensic casework, this is perhaps the most
common type of problem, at least when the linguist is commissioned by the police.
Typically, by the time the police approach a linguist they will have identiﬁed a suspect
and are trying to build an evidential case to put to the suspect in interview. In the
Danielle Jones and the Jenny Nicholl cases, the question put was whether it was more
likely that the queried messages were written by the suspect or by the supposed victim.
The police investigators may have, or believe they have, other non-linguistic evidence
which makes the possibility of a third unknown person, already very unlikely or even
impossible. It is of course possible to write a conditional opinion of the sort that, if it is
known that one of the two candidate writers did write the disputed text message, then of
these two X is a more likely author than Y. Clearly, however, such a conditional opi-
nion is not ideal. In the UK system the expert works for the Court even if instructed by
TIM GRANT
514

the police and it would be better practice ethically and methodologically to step back
from the expectations of the police and truly account for the possibility of other potential
authors. This raises the question of how rare one person’s text messaging style might be,
or even whether it could be unique.
The issue of linguistic distinctiveness between individuals has two levels which may be
independent. If it can be demonstrated that the suspect exhibits a consistent style in text
messaging and also that the victim has a consistent but diﬀerent style then the ﬁrst level
of distinctiveness will have been proved. I shall refer to this as pair-wise distinctiveness
and I will argue that answering this question does not depend upon a strong theory of
idiolect, but only upon the degree of consistency of style within each author and the
diﬀerence which is demonstrable between them. To this extent, any such analysis might
be characterised as idiolect-free authorship analysis. The second possible level of distinc-
tiveness, however, may have more profound implications for theoretical discussions of
idiolect. This would occur if one person’s text messaging style can be said to be dis-
tinctive, unusual or even unique against a reference population of text messages. This I
shall refer to as population-level distinctiveness. As we shall see, it is possible to explore
questions of consistency of style and both pair-wise and population distinctiveness using
statistical methods. These methods were in fact developed in forensic psychology for the
investigation of serial crime (e.g. Bennell and Canter 2002; Woodhams and Toye 2007).
The issue of consistency is also one of degree and has to be judged in the context of
pair-wise as well as population-level distinctiveness. In a recent text messaging case in
which I was involved, the linguistic issue involved determining which of two people was
the more likely writer of a sequence of 20 text messages. For each writer I was provided
with about 200 messages of known authorship. Within this known set, some features
appeared to be absolutely consistent and absolutely discriminating. For example, every
time Author A used the word ‘don’t’ they spelt it ‘dont’, i.e. without the apostrophe. In
contrast, every time Author B used the word ‘don’t’ they used the abbreviation, ‘dnt’.
Other features demonstrated only degrees of consistency; Author A for example, always
used the standard spelling, ‘just’, while Author B used ‘just’ about one third of the time,
‘jst’ two thirds of the time. The spelling ‘jst’ in a particular message obviously contains
some authorship information but, it can be argued that, in the context of pair-wise dis-
tinctiveness, so too does the spelling ‘just’. This spelling is more consistent with author
A than B. Calculating the degree to which this can be used in determining an opinion,
however, requires statistical sophistication (see Lucy 2005 for a good introduction on the
application of Bayesian inferencing to resolving this sort of problem).
In the Jenny Nicholl murder case, Coulthard took a more traditional descriptive lin-
guistic approach. He initially analysed a series of messages known to have been written
by Nicholl and later also a series of messages known to have been written by Hodgson.
From this examination, he identiﬁed nine low-level stylistic features which were seen to
discriminate between the text messaging styles of the two possible authors. Some of these
messages are now in the public domain and these include eleven messages known to
have been written by Nicholl (reproduced in Table 33.1) and seven known to have been
written by Hodgson (reproduced in Table 33.2). A further complication with Hodgson’s
messages was that two of the messages were produced on request in a police interview
thereby giving Hodgson the opportunity to deliberately disguise his style. Finally, there
were four disputed messages (reproduced in Table 33.3).
Example features used by Coulthard in this case include the abbreviation ‘im’ for
‘I am’, a lack of a space after using ‘2’ for ‘to’ (both used by Nicholl and not Hodgson)
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
515

and the use of ‘me’ and ‘meself’ rather than ‘my’ and ‘myself’ (used by Hodgson and not
Nicholl). He judged these to be consistently used by each of the two candidate authors.
Coulthard was the only linguist to give evidence at trial and his opinion was careful
and correct. He was able to say that the suspect messages were inconsistent with the
described style of Jenny Nicholl. A slide demonstrating this point and used by Coulthard
in presenting his analysis can be seen at http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/7600769.
stm. His conclusion with regard to Hodgson was measured. He gave the opinion that
‘Linguistic features identiﬁed in Mr Hodgson’s and the suspect texts are compatible with their
Table 33.1 Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny Nicholl: Known messages
of Jenny Nicholl
Sum black+pink k swiss shoes and all the other shit like socks.We r goin2the Indian.Only16quid.What u
doin x
Yeah shud b gud.i just have2get my ﬁnga out and do anotha tape.wil do it on sun.will seems keen2x
Shit is it.fuck icant2day ive already booked2go bowling.cant realy pull out.wil go2shop and get her sumet
soon.thanx4tdlin me x
No reason just seing what ur up2.want2go shopping on fri and2will’s on sun if ur up2it
Sorry im not out2nite havnt seen u 4a while aswel.ru free2moro at all x
No im out wiv jak sorry it took me so long ive had fone oﬀcoz havnt got much battery
Only just turned my fone.havnt lied bout anything.no it doesnt look good but ur obviously jst as
judgmental than the rest.cu wen I cu&I hope its not soon
I havnt lied2u.anyway im oﬀback2sleep
I know I waved at her we wer suppose2go at4but was a buﬀet on later on so waited.anyway he had a
threesome it was great cu around
Im tierd of defending myself theres no point.bye
Happy bday!will b round wiv ur pressent2moz sorry i cant make it2day.cu2moz xxx
.
Table 33.2 Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny Nicholl: Known messages
of David Hodgson
has he got his phone on him
ave dun he aint got it he will b in witherspoons she in
got puddings and tissues in me pnckets.ave2 hope he rings b4 he goes up back in 30
put it on at 3.30 at 150 ok and top on at 4.45 but dont put glass lid on just the suet ok and the spuds
separate
put them on at ten 2 ok thats 4.50 ok
Messages produced in police interview
HI JENN TELL JACKY I Am KEEPING My PhONE of because I am living in Scotland with my
boyfriend I mite be in trouble with my dad myself. DaDs going to kill me I told him I was leaving
Keswick why Does he hate me everyone hates me in RICHMOND you are the only mate I have got
Have to go see you.
Hi jenn tell jacky i am keeping my phone of because i am living in Scotland with my boyfriend i might
be in trouble with dad myself dads going to kill me i told him i was leaving Keswick why does he hate me
everyone hates me in Richmond you are the only mate i have got have to go see you
TIM GRANT
516

having been produced by the same person’ and when pressed at trial he emphasised that
Hodgson was one of a group of possible authors, and that the linguistic evidence could
not go further than that (personal communication). The description of the consistencies
in style and this pair-wise distinctiveness contributed to the case which convinced the
jury to convict David Hodgson of Jenny Nicholl’s murder and an appeal on the grounds
that the linguistic evidence was unsound failed.
One challenge for forensic authorship analysts when considering text messages is to
adopt something like the approach demonstrated in Coulthard’s method and expression
of opinion and to develop this approach further. In particular, comparisons between
authors could be enhanced if the descriptive methods used by Coulthard can be
developed to enable the quantiﬁed comparison of degrees of consistency and distinc-
tiveness. Fortunately, forensic linguistics can borrow from its sister discipline of forensic
psychology to achieve this aim.
Forensic psychology and case linkage work
Forensic psychologists have been involved in developing methods to determine whether
a particular crime is an independent event, or alternatively, whether it is in fact part of a
series of linked crimes committed by the same oﬀender. This work, known as case
linkage, typically relies on the statistical or computational analysis of oﬀenders’ beha-
viours in databases of oﬀences and depends upon the twin principles of behavioural
consistency and behavioural distinctiveness. The parallels with authorship analysis as
described are clear. These case linkage principles have been investigated and demon-
strated across a series of types of crime including car crime (Tonkin et al. 2008), com-
mercial burglary (e.g. Bennell and Canter 2002; Woodhams and Toye 2007), sexual
crime (e.g. Santtila et al., 2005b; Woodhams, Grant and Price 2007), arson (Santtila et al.
2005a) and murder (Salfati and Bateman 2005) and a theoretical discussion exploring the
nature of behavioural consistency in forensic work is beginning to be well developed
(Woodhams and Toye 2007; Woodhams, Hollin and Bull 2007). Methods taken from
this body of work can be adapted and applied to text messaging authorship analysis.
Instead of scoring the presence and absence of crime scene behaviours, we can score the
presence and absence of stylistic features.
Table 33.3 Messages from the trial of David Hodgson for the murder of Jenny Nicholl: Disputed
messages
Thought u wer grassing me up.mite b in trub wiv me dad told mum i was lving didnt giv a shit.been2
kessick camping was great.ave2 go cya
Hi jen tell jak i am ok know ever 1s gona b mad tell them i am sorry.living in Scotland wiv my boyfriend.
shitting meself dads gona kill me mum dont give a shite.hope nik didnt grass me up.keeping phone of.tell
dad car jumps out of gear and stalls put it back in auction.tell him i am sorry
Y do u h8 me i know mum does.told her i was goin.i aint cumin back and the pigs wont ﬁnd me.i am
happy living up here.every1 h8s me in rich only m8 i got is jak.txt u couple wks tell pigs i am nearly 20
aint cumin back they can shite oﬀ
She got me in this shit its her fault not mine get blame 4evrything.i am sorry ok just had 2 lve shes a bitch
no food in and always searching me room eating me sweets.ave2 go ok i am very sorry x
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
517

Statistical consistency and distinctiveness
Returning to the Nicholl case, these methods can be exempliﬁed even with the rela-
tively small number of publicly available text messages. Because of the small number of
messages, it is a simple matter to code each text as having or lacking each of the features
noticed by Coulthard. The presence of each feature in each text message is scored as a
one and its absence is scored as a zero. This creates an array of zeros and ones for every
message sent. An example is shown as Table 33.4.
Using these representations, pairs of messages can then be compared for similarity or
dissimilarity using a binary correlation analysis called Jaccard’s coeﬃcient. Jaccard is a
statistical tool for measuring the degree of similarity. It produces results ranging from zero
to one, with zero indicating total dissimilarity and one indicating identity. For the pur-
poses of this worked example, I wish to follow Coulthard’s analysis and this produces a
slight peculiarity in results. Coulthard’s method is to use reciprocal coding to create a
series of contrasts, for example, Nicholl’s use of ‘im’ with the suspect’s ‘I am’ and this
produces two coding columns which indicate the presence of ‘im’ in some of Nicholl’s
messages but none of Hodgson’s whereas for ‘I am’ the reverse pattern is true. This
choice of features, along with the small number of messages, together produces the
mathematical eﬀect of reducing some of the Jaccard scores to zero and this in turn
requires the use of one-sample t-tests (with a test score of zero) to make some of the
comparisons. This, however, does not aﬀect the theoretical or practical implications of
the method more generally. Calculations for both t-tests and Jaccard coeﬃcient will be
performed by most statistics programme (such as SPSS) and described in their manuals
and help ﬁles and also in most introductory text books on statistics (e.g. Dancey and
Reidy 1999).
One feature of Jaccard which is crucial for both the analysis of text messages and for its
parallel use in criminal case linkage is the fact that the occurrence of two absence scores,
two zeros, has no eﬀect on the overall similarity metric. A writer may be consistent in their
preference of ‘im’ over ‘I am’ but this consistency will not be revealed in every message. In
a similar vein in crime analysis, the absence of evidence of the carrying of a weapon at a
scene is not evidence of its absence from that scene and Jaccard allows for this.
Having calculated Jaccard’s coeﬃcient between pairs of messages it is very straightfor-
ward to statistically demonstrate consistency of style and pair-wise distinctiveness
between authors. To demonstrate the degree of consistency in Nicholl’s messages using
this coding system it is possible to take all of Nicholl’s eleven messages and pair each
message with every other. This produces 110 pairs and subsequently 110 Jaccard scores
(mean = 0.23, SD = 0.20). A similar process can be carried out with Hodgson’s seven
messages creating 42 Jaccard scores (mean = 0.11; SD = 0.19). Removing the messages
which Hodgson produced at interview leaves 20 Jaccard scores and raises the mean
Jaccard score slightly and reduces the standard deviation (mean = 0.15; SD = 0.12).
If we move to examine all the pairs of messages where each pair contains a Nicholl text
and a Hodgson text the Jaccard scores fall to zero for each and every one of these pos-
sible between-author pairs. (Included in this analysis are those text messages elicited from
Hodgson during police interview.) This zero score is a representation of the diﬀerence in
style between Hodgson and Nicholl. It is atypical to score zero, rather than a low deci-
mal close to zero, but as commented above this is at least in part an artefact of using
Coulthard’s features which result in reciprocal coding. The zero result perhaps argues for
a broader description of the messages than the nine features chosen by Coulthard for
TIM GRANT
518

Table 33.4 Example coding of text message
Text message
im
I am am not /
I'm not/
aint/ ive/
ave/ my/
myself/
me/
meself/
of/ off/ to=2 -
space/
to=2 +
space/
cu/
cya/ fone/
phone
shit/
shite/
got puddings and
tissues in me
pnckets.ave2 hope
he rings b4 he
goes up
back in 30
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

their absolute discriminatory power. Nevertheless, the zero score makes the point statis-
tically that Coulthard was making descriptively; Nicholl’s and Hodgson’s texts are
demonstrably stylistically distinct from one another. We have demonstrated that pair-
wise distinctiveness exists in this case. It is possible to reinforce this assertion by statistical
testing. The appropriate test is a one-sample t-test and this shows a signiﬁcant reduction
in similarity when messages paired between the two authors are compared with Nicholl’s
within-author pairs (t(109) = 12.02, p < 0.01, Cohen’s d = 1.55). There is also a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in similarity when the between-author pairs are compared with
Hodgson’s within-author pairs (t(41) = 3.79, p < 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.81). Collectively
these results demonstrate statistically consistency of style within the text messages of
Nicholl and consistency in the style within the text messages of Hodgson and also
distinctiveness between the two styles.
Thus far, only texts of known authorship have been examined. The forensic questions
require consideration of the disputed messages. When these disputed messages are paired
with Nicholl’s messages these mixed pairs are shown to be signiﬁcantly less similar than
the Nicholl-only pairs of messages (t(145) = 9.38, p < 0.01, Cohen’s d = 1.41). In contrast
to this result there is no signiﬁcant reduction in similarity when pairs of texts known to
have been written by Hodgson are compared with pairs with one Hodgson text and one
disputed message (t(62) = 8.36, p = 0.41, Cohen’s d = 0.14). In summary, Nicholl’s and
Hodgson’s styles each demonstrate a degree of internal consistency and distinctiveness
from one another. Nicholl’s texts can also be shown to be distinctively diﬀerent from the
disputed texts but Hodgson’s texts cannot.
This statistical demonstration of pair-wise distinctiveness and its post hoc application to
Coulthard’s case supports but adds little evidential weight to Coulthard’s own descriptive
analysis. Being able to measure consistency and distinctiveness is a methodological
advance in that it allows some quantiﬁcation of stylistic distance between groups of texts
and thus some quantiﬁcation of probabilities that one group of texts is inconsistent with
another. The method however is intended to address only pair-wise distinctiveness. This
distinctiveness can be shown to exist irrespective of whether there is any strong
explanation for it and in this sense the method might be said to be idiolect free.
The pair-wise approach, does, however, suggest a further method for demonstrating
population-level distinctiveness. The forensic psychology studies investigate which sets of
features are most discriminating at a population level (e.g. Woodhams and Toye 2007)
and a similar analysis can be carried out on text messaging features. Such an analysis
would help determine empirically which sorts of features are most useful in idiolectal
discrimination. Such an empirical ﬁnding might then have theoretical implications. For
example, it might be shown that in text messaging a tendency for abbreviation is more
generally discriminating between authors than the use of grammatical ellipsis. If such a
ﬁnding arose, it would provoke questions as to why one type of feature might show
more between-author variation than another.
This is just one aspect of the considerable further work to be carried out on these
techniques and some of it is already underway. A general description of texting language
is already developing outside of the forensic ﬁeld (e.g. Crystal 2008) and this is already
proving useful in exploring the population-level questions. In addition the statistical
techniques used in case linkage are also under rapid development not least with the
creation of a taxonomic similarity measure (Woodhams et al. 2007a) developed in relation
to sexual crime. The application of this taxonomic similarity to text messaging forensics is
also being explored. In spite of the speed of development, it is already possible to reﬂect
TIM GRANT
520

on the implications of methods such as these for understandings of idiolect and of the
role of idiolectal theories in forensic casework.
Implications for theories of idiolect
As we have seen, it is possible to construct a method for authorship analysis based on
stylistic variation. The steps which comprise this method can be clearly described and
followed to produce replicable results on the same data set and can also be applied to
diﬀerent data sets. The method primarily demonstrates that diﬀerent authors can be
consistent and distinctive in their style of textual production. This does not mean that
individuals are absolutely consistent; language is naturally variable. Neither does it mean
that every author will be consistent in the same way. This method allows for and detects
the fact that one author may be consistent in, for example, a form of abbreviation, whilst
another author may tend to punctuate in an idiosyncratic manner. This is a strength
of this method and it is a contrast with more traditional stylometric approaches. The
stylometric approaches tend to carry with them the assumption that a ‘good’ marker or
feature of authorship is one which will show between-author variation and within-author
consistency across a sample of authors (e.g. Chaski 2001; Grant 2007). Examples of
such stylometric markers might include measures involving word frequency distributions,
frequency of use of functional words, or measures of syntactic structures. Many stylo-
metric approaches are very successful in dealing with longer texts written in standard
language variants but they do tend to struggle with the short and fragmentary language
of text messaging.
Using the technique described here, it is possible to demonstrate not only consistency
but also to show pair-wise distinctiveness between text messages by two authors.
Observation of stylistic consistency and distinctiveness in this way is good evidence that
idiolect exists. Observation that the writings of some, many or most authors can be dis-
criminated using stylometric markers of authorship is also good evidence that idiolect
exists. As I have argued above, however, mere observation and description of consistency
and distinctiveness is not a theory of idiolect. Theories have to have explanatory power.
Any investigation limiting itself to observation and description of consistency and dis-
tinctiveness in authorship style might fairly be considered idiolect free authorship analysis.
It is possible to draw separate parallel conclusions outlining the possible contribution to
a theory of idiolect of both the stylistic and the cognitivist stylometric approaches to
authorship analysis.
Using a more stylistic, sociolinguistic or variationist approach in observing speciﬁc
features of a particular author’s language we may be able to explain some of those fea-
tures by appealing to that author’s social and linguistic background. The use of ‘me’ for
‘my’ in a text message might, for example, be explained in terms of the dialect back-
ground and pronunciation of that writer. Such speciﬁc explanations, however, may not
always be available to us. Why a second individual with a similar social and geographic
background, and perhaps with a similar pronunciation, chooses to follow the more
standard spelling may well seem inexplicable. At a general level, however, we can
provide some explanation of stylistic variation between individuals. This explanation rests
on the fact that individuals vary in their social and linguistic history, and in their lexical
priming, and this produces variation in the sociolinguistic resources upon which they
draw for language production.
TEXT MESSAGING FORENSICS
521

Using a more stylometric approach in observing speciﬁc features in an individual’s
language may not commit one to an interest in cognitivist theories of language produc-
tion but many stylometric measures will be based on insights derived from such theories.
To claim that a measure is based on a cognitive or neuropsychological understanding of
language production does not of itself explain between-author variation in that measure.
Without relying on sociolinguistic explanations, why two individuals with similar cog-
nitive and neurological structures vary in such a measure may well seem inexplicable. At
a general level, however, we can provide some explanation of cognitive variation
between individuals. This explanation rests on the fact that individuals may show some
variation in their biology, but there will also be variation in sociolinguistic history and
thus in lexical priming, and this produces personalisation of the neurological and cognitive
resources upon which they draw for language production.
With regard to theories of idiolect, I would argue that consistency and pair-wise dis-
tinctiveness are matters of empirical observation upon which forensic authorship analysis
can rely. Any such comparison must be based in sound methods which can convincingly
demonstrate the degrees of consistency and distinctiveness found in a particular comparison
of texts known to have been written by the authors but the results of such comparison
have little to contribute to theoretical discussions of idiolect. Such matters of fact do not of
themselves explain idiolect. The possibility of pair-wise distinctiveness, wider distinctiveness
or even population-level distinctiveness, however, does seem to demand some explanation.
To the extent that it can be shown that one individual’s language is measurably unique in
the population of all language users, this is, or would be, an astounding fact. Even less
extreme individual linguistic distinctiveness demands a combination of cognitive and social
investigation and demands a combination of cognitive and social explanations. Observable
individual linguistic uniqueness demands a theory of idiolect.
Further reading
Crystal, D. (2008) Txtng: The Gr8 Db8, Oxford: OUP.
Grant, T. (2007) ‘Quantifying evidence for forensic authorship analysis’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 14: 1–25.
Greenﬁeld, S. (2008) ID: The Quest for Identity in the 21st Century, London: Sceptre.
Howald, B.S. (2009) ‘Authorship attribution under the rules of evidence: Empirical approaches in the
layperson legal system’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 15: 219–47.
Johnstone, B. (2009) ‘Stance, style, and the linguistic individual’, in Jaﬀe, A. (ed.) Sociolinguistic Perspec-
tives on Stance, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
TIM GRANT
522

34
Plagiarism
Four forensic linguists’
responses to suspected plagiarism
Malcolm Coulthard, Alison Johnson,
Krzysztof Kredens and David Woolls
Introduction
Although according to Angélil-Carter (2002: 2) ‘plagiarism is a modern Western concept
which arose with the introduction of copyright laws in the Eighteenth century’, its
avoidance is now a basic plank of respectable academic scholarship. Student plagiarism is
currently a hot topic, at least for those who teach and study in British and American
universities. There are companies selling both oﬀ-the-shelf and written-to-order term
papers and others, like Turnitin.com, oﬀering electronic detection services in an attempt to
prevent the use of such essays. In 2002, the Vice Chancellor of Monash University was
forced to resign when examples of frequent plagiarism were discovered in his earlier
academic work (www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/200207/s604549.htm [last accessed
18 August 2009]) and most Anglo-American universities have warnings against and
deﬁnitions of plagiarism on their websites. Indeed, Pennycook (1996: 213) notes that in
the mid-1990s Stanford University’s documents about plagiarism were reproduced by the
University of Oregon, apparently without attribution, and suggests, whimsically, that
there is ‘one set of standards for the guardians of truth and knowledge and another for
those seeking entry’.
At its simplest, plagiarism, or more accurately the type of plagiarism linguists are
competent to deal with, is the theft, or unacknowledged use, of text created by another.
Part of the deﬁnition on the University of Birmingham website when Coulthard and
Johnson worked there in the late 1990s was as follows – the highlighting in bold is ours
as we wish to focus on those phrases.
PLAGIARISM AND CHEATING IN EXAMINATIONS
Plagiarism is a form of cheating in which the student tries to pass oﬀsomeone
else’s work as his or her own. … Typically, substantial passages are ‘lifted’
verbatim from a particular source without proper attribution having been
523

made. To avoid suspicion of plagiarism, students should make appropriate use of
references and footnotes.
(University of Birmingham http://artsweb.bham.ac.uk/arthistory/
declaration_of_aship.htm [accessed 1 August 2009])
A ﬁrst problem is that, in the University of Birmingham deﬁnition, plagiarism is pre-
sented as a conscious attempt to deceive – ‘tries to pass oﬀ’ – however, teachers and
markers cannot evaluate intentions, but only whether a text actually does pass oﬀ– in
other words many students may indeed be guilty of ‘passing oﬀ’ without being guilty of
intending or ‘trying to pass oﬀ’. For this reason the responsibility of knowing how to
attribute properly and checking that one has done so, must be passed over to the student,
so that no teacher has to decide if the unacknowledged borrowing was deliberate or not.
University departments now tend to insist that students sign a cover which they attach to
all work submitted for assessment which says something like the following:
I know what plagiarism is and I conﬁrm that none of this work is plagiarised.
Semantically, the most diﬃcult part of the Birmingham deﬁnition of plagiarism is:
‘typically, substantial passages are lifted verbatim’. What in fact do ‘substantial’ and ‘ver-
batim’ mean? Certainly, the detection program Turnitin works by searching for longish
identical strings, but much deliberate plagiarism is not of this kind at all. In the two short
passages (examples 1a and 1b), taken from published biographies of the American phi-
lanthropist Andrew Carnegie (one by J. F. Wall 1970 and one by J. Mackay 1997), we
can see substantial similarities, which we have highlighted with bold for identical words
and italic for close paraphrases, but Mackay strenuously denied plagiarism and would
certainly not be considered guilty under the University of Birmingham characterisation.
(1) Two biographies of Andrew Carnegie
(1a) With all of these problems it was little short of a miracle that the “stichting”
board was ready to lay the cornerstone for the building in the summer of 1907 at
the opening of the Second Hague International Conference. It then took
six more years before the Palace was completed during which time there continued to
be squabbles over details, modiﬁcations of architectural plans and lengthy discussions about
furnishings … For ten years the Temple of Peace was a storm of controversy, but at
last, on 28 August 1913, the Grand Opening ceremonies were held.
(Wall 1970, Andrew Carnegie)
(1b) The foundation stone was not laid until the summer of 1907, in nice time for
the opening of the Second Hague International Conference. Actual
construction of the palace took a further six years, delayed and exacerbated by
constant bickering over details, speciﬁcations and materials. For an entire decade the
Peace Palace was bedevilled by controversy, but ﬁnally, on 28 August 1913, the
opening ceremony was performed.
(Mackay 1997, Little Boss: A Life of Andrew Carnegie)
Nevertheless, many academics would want to classify the Mackay text as plagiarism on
the grounds that it presents very similar content, in the same sequence, using many of the
same words. Over the last decade, linguistic studies have focused on manual and
524
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS

computationally assisted detection of plagiarism with particular reference to lexical
similarities in authorship in student writing (Coulthard 2004; Johnson 1997; Woolls
2003, 2006). As we will see below, we now have a computer program which will enable
plagiarism of the similar but not always identical type to be detected.
Academic and non-academic plagiarism is widely discussed in the media and is a
constant cause for concern at exam boards in the compulsory and post-compulsory
education sectors and, despite widespread use of plagiarism detection services and
implementation of plagiarism guidelines, policies and learning contracts across uni-
versities, plagiarism continues to exist there and in the wider world too. Most notorious
in recent times was the Da Vinci Code case, which Coulthard and Johnson (2007: 3)
discuss brieﬂy. In this chapter we examine what the practice actually entails, focusing on
lexical, grammatical and textual features that contribute to making texts linguistically
similar enough to be considered plagiarised. We ask similar questions to the two posed
by Johnson (1997): how diﬀerent are separately authored texts on the same topic and
how similar must two texts be before one can assert with conﬁdence that one was
derived from the other or both from a third text? And we examine plagiarism in both
pedagogic and non-pedagogic contexts in student writing and in writing in the wider
world and in publishing. We detail some of the practical issues that arise when we
examine what writers actually do with material they share between each other or take
from electronic sources. After our linguistic analysis of what plagiarism is, we include a
number of case studies from the work of each of the authors. These exemplify some of
the diﬀering strategies used when writers take and adapt material from web sources: cut-
and-paste, re-arrangement, insertion, omission, rewriting and ‘patchwriting’ (Howard
1999; Pecorari 2002). One case looks at student responses to an essay task and a second
case considers the rewriting of extended unacknowledged passages from a published
book, identifying the problematic adaptive strategies used by the student. Two more
come from the area of translation studies and another two from court cases.
The implications of these case studies are considered, and we suggest that the lessons
learned have preventative potential. By examining what happens when writers fail to
acknowledge their borrowings properly, it is possible to equip future learner-writers for
the challenging task of writing successfully. But ﬁrst, we oﬀer a brief example of
some casework in student plagiarism, which illustrates the kinds of claims that suspected
plagiarists make and the kinds of responses that forensic linguists can give.
Writer claims and forensic linguists’ responses
At one point in fairly quick succession two of us, Coulthard and Woolls, worked on
three similar cases of student plagiarism. In all three, the student had been found guilty
by their university and penalised severely. All three protested their innocence and asked
for our help; two had already hired solicitors and indeed paid us for our work. One, a
law student, having sent us copies of the claimed plagiarised texts, made the mistake of
going on holiday and leaving us with the phone number of her mother. We asked these
mother for more comparative data and she obligingly sent a set of ﬂoppies containing not
only most of her daughter’s assessments for the year, but also other documents authored,
according to the Properties ﬁle, by ‘A satisﬁed Microsoft User’ a year earlier. Two of
these documents were obviously sources for two of the submitted assessments.
A second, a student nurse, accused of plagiarising from a fellow student, admitted that
she had plagiarised from the same student the previous year and indeed sent us two pairs
PLAGIARISM
525

of essays, so that we could see what she did when she really was plagiarising! In this case,
there was no doubt that the two students had produced texts that were too similar to be
independent. The only question was the direction of the borrowing, as both claimed the
other was the guilty one. On the face of it, our client was the less likely – her text had
fewer spelling mistakes and more cited references with dates and page numbers. How-
ever, an hour in the Medical library (how much time Google would have saved) showed
that the nurse had simply taken attributed, but not cited, reports from the other essay and
turned them into quotations with invented page numbers. So the opening of this
paragraph could have been rewritten with a false attribution as:
A second, a student nurse, accused of plagiarising from a fellow student, admitted
that she ‘had plagiarised from the same student the previous year’.
(Coulthard 2001: 79)
A third student provided perhaps the case with the most unexpected resolution.
Plagiarism from a published source had been identiﬁed and the student acknowledged
that the work was plagiarised but claimed that he had not written the essays in question.
This case required stylometric analysis and from both the analytical and computational
perspectives, we found that the disputed work looked very similar to the undisputed
work provided to us. When we reported this to our client’s lawyers and explained that
we could not oﬀer any support to him, they said their client was unhappy with this
opinion and enclosed further undisputed material for our analysis to reinforce his claims.
Both the original and additional material was in hard copy rather than electronic
format and, during the preparation process of the second batch for electronic entry,
Woolls noted a peculiarity of this printed material. While the text lines were absolutely
straight against the top and bottom edges of the paper, the left and right margins were
not vertically parallel but gradually moved from left to right, forming a slight but
measurable rhomboid shape rather than the perfect rectangle justiﬁed text should pro-
duce. Checking back against the disputed texts, the same pattern was found in them.
Although we obviously could not deﬁnitively say that the same printer had been used,
the presence of the same printing idiosyncrasy in both disputed and undisputed material
led us to return all the material to the client’s lawyers, as the presence of a consistent
mechanical fault simply reinforced our opinion that there was common authorship.
The linguistic analysis of textual similarity and plagiarism
Johnson (1997) established that a quantitative statistical comparison of the vocabulary used in
two or more texts can support a qualitative textual analysis, in order to establish whether a
case of plagiarism has occurred. Using software available to her (Vocalyse and File Comparison,
both early programs written by Woolls which developed into Copycatch Gold 2002), she
showed that comparing the use of particular vocabularies between writers was helpful in
deciding whether texts were uniquely produced. The most signiﬁcant ﬁnding of her research
was that measures of the following lexical features provided useful conﬁrmatory results:
i) a high percentage of shared vocabulary;
ii) a high number of shared hapax legomena (words that occur only once in a text);
iii) a low number of unique hapax legomena.
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
526

In Case Study (1) of Bill, Bob and Barry discussed below, the three student writers main-
tained that they had written their texts independently and no plagiarism or collusion had
occurred, but the lexical and structural similarities between the texts suggested the oppo-
site. The question in this, as in all cases of suspected plagiarism and disputed authorship, is:
what linguistic evidence is there that leads to an opinion about the signiﬁcance of the
similarity of the texts and therefore suspected plagiarism and what counter-evidence is
there that the texts are diﬀerent and therefore uniquely authored? Next, we outline the
ways in which a computer can be programmed to look for plagiarism, by examining lexis.
Looking for plagiarism electronically
Coulthard and Johnson’s (2007, Chapter 9) discussion of plagiarism draws attention to
the need for electronic assistance to handle the task of identifying and verifying textual
authorship because of the massive amount of relevant material that is available electro-
nically. They explicitly mention one program, Copycatch Gold (Woolls 2002), which
implements the principles for identifying suspicious matching across texts. Woolls (in this
volume) explores the underlying concept of similarity which underlies all automated
eﬀorts in this ﬁeld.
Identity
If anyone takes the immediately preceding paragraph in its entirety and inserts it into
another text, human readers who have already read it will normally recognise it when
reading the other text. They might also detect a style shift between the transported para-
graph and its new surrounding co-text. They might then be suﬃciently intrigued to track
down the source text to conﬁrm their suspicions. But there is another way of approaching
the task and here a computer program can come into play. Several things will be true:
1. the number of characters will be identical (576, including spaces)
2. the frequency count of each character will be identical (i.e. < a > = 34, … < x > = 4)
3. the number of words will be identical (83)
4. the number of sentences will be identical (3)
5. the sentence lengths will be identical
6. all sequences of characters will be identical
7. all sequences of words will be identical
8. all sequences of sentences will be identical
Notice that all the above require no comprehension or knowledge of the prior existence
of the text and are features which would not be used by a human at all, as they are not
readily accessible, nor required for the task. For a computer programmer, on the other
hand, these features all have the property of being countable and readily identiﬁable, and
using any one of them provides a means of recognising that the two paragraphs are
related. In the ﬁeld of information retrieval, this aspect of texts is frequently called a
ﬁngerprint. Using mathematical techniques, it is possible to produce a single number for
a document which will uniquely identify it. Producing such a ﬁngerprint and looking in
other locations which store each document by its ﬁngerprint code, a computer system
can identify or retrieve duplicates. By extending the principle to paragraphs, to sentences
or to short sequences of words, individual sections of texts can be located in the same way.
PLAGIARISM
527

Handling change
As we have pointed out above, wholesale copying is the exception rather than the rule
in plagiarism cases. The reason for this becomes obvious if we consider an example. In
the paragraph above we have a sentence starting ‘Woolls (in this volume) … ’. The
opening of this sentence is going to need changing by anyone borrowing the paragraph.
The simplest option might be to omit the sentence altogether, which would change the
paragraph and document level ﬁngerprint. Another option would be to re-write the
sentence as, for example: ‘Underlying all automated eﬀorts in this ﬁeld is the concept of
similarity, as discussed in Woolls (forthcoming).’ This has produced some re-ordering,
the omission of some words and the insertion of others. The sentence count for the
paragraph remains the same as in the original, but all the other identical features are lost.
However, it can be seen from the items highlighted in bold in example (2) below, that
two sequences, one six words long and the other three words long, are present in both
sentences; in addition the word ‘underlying’ has been retained but moved.
(2) Similarity and change
2a Original sentence:
Woolls (in this volume) explores the underlying concept
of similarity which lies behind all automated eﬀorts
in this ﬁeld.
2b Changed sentence:
Underlying all automated eﬀorts in this ﬁeld is the
concept of similarity, as discussed in Woolls (2010).
The retention of some word sequences is typically necessary for anyone attempting to
conceal copying, because their primary need is that the sentences they modify are still
coherent and it is diﬃcult to borrow even just two successive sentences from a source
text and to do so without reproducing at least some of the phrases in their entirety. And
it is this fact that underlies the success of most of the web plagiarism detection tools,
which generally operate by looking, using ﬁngerprinting or simple word sequences of
between six and eight identical words. As can be seen, only one such sequence exists in
(2b) (the other sequence is of only three words), but that would be suﬃcient to identify
the sentence as a candidate for plagiarism, as we will see below.
Web plagiarism
Web plagiarism detection provides a particular challenge because of the sheer amount
of data available on the internet. Although it is obvious that only a small subset of the
billions of pages of electronic material held in both public and private sites is likely to be
appropriate for any particular academic or commercial assignment, ﬁnding related mate-
rial is extremely challenging. A human reader ﬁnding a suspect passage has recourse to
search engines which, at the time of writing (2009), allow searching on the basis of a
single word, an unordered set of words, or a running sequence of words, which are
identiﬁed by enclosing the sequence in inverted commas, and these words are indexed at
the full document level. Staying with example (2), while we were writing a draft of this
chapter on 1st August 2009, we performed a web search, using GoogleTM, for “all
automated eﬀorts in this ﬁeld” as a complete phrase. No exact matches were returned.
This contrasts with 64,700 results for a search on “concept of similarity”, which reduced
to 41,200 when expanded to “the concept of similarity”. When we searched for
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
528

“underlying concept of similarity” only ﬁve matches were found, four from the ﬁeld of
information retrieval and one from the ﬁeld of secondary education. With this search
information, we have ascertained that the original sentence (2a) doesn’t have a recorded
source outside this chapter.
But this doesn’t help us with the problem of the re-written sentence (2b), a problem
facing both human analysts and computer programs. We were only able to reﬁne our
search to include “underlying” because we had access to the source text. Knowing that
we have at least 41,200 potential sources for our suspect text doesn’t help us much at all,
nor does the complete absence of a match for the second phrase, since we cannot even
work on the assumption that both phrases occur in the same document, let alone in the
same sentence in both documents. Yet that is what we need for accurate identiﬁcation of
plagiarism. Humans and computer programs alike have to be able to identify suitable
sequences, perform searches and assess the results. Humans will tend to home in on
particularly interesting or signiﬁcant passages, but will not know whether or to what
extent they have been changed. Computer programs are capable of looking for any or all
sequences in a whole document, given suﬃcient computational time and resources, but
they can only determine signiﬁcance based on rules provided by the programmer.
However, this does not mean that web plagiarism detection is impossible. Rather the
contrary. The usefulness of sequence identiﬁcation in programmatic terms is that it
doesn’t have to occur more than once in a given document for that document to be
identiﬁed as a candidate source. Given the need we mentioned above for writers who
borrow (and plagiarise) to retain phrases in order, we have an explanation for why such
computer programs have been successful in identifying web sources. But to control the
computational load it is necessary for such systems to impose some minimum word
sequence level on the task, as our example indicates, and a minimum length of between
six and eight words is currently the most likely mechanism used, although the actual
details of commercial detection engines are clearly not generally available. But, as
example (2) also shows, it does not take too much alteration of the basic text to make
the task of the detection program extremely diﬃcult. One way of tackling this problem
is to build a corpus of the most likely sources for any given ﬁeld, be it academia, jour-
nalism or law, and then use that as the primary area of search with specialist detection
methodologies. This approach was pioneered by iParadigms Inc., a company with its
origins in Berkeley, California. It requires all data submitted for comparison to be made
permanently available for future comparisons, so providing a growing and broad base for
future source identiﬁcation, and this has the advantage that it greatly reduces reliance on
the indexing and search methodologies of general search engines. When all the data is
available, it is possible to build indexes which are speciﬁcally geared around the nature of
the problem, which in this case is generally the identiﬁcation in two or more supposedly
independently produced texts of identical word sequences. Woolls (this volume) explores
what can be done when this type of data is available.
Case studies
Case study 1 – Bill, Bob and Barry
Johnson’s (1997) study investigated a case of suspected plagiarism among three student
texts and three further control texts (students who answered the same question but
PLAGIARISM
529

where no plagiarism was suspected). Her labelling of the six texts as T1, 2 and 3 for the
suspect Texts and C1, 2 and 3 for the Control texts has since been replaced in plagiarism
talks given by Johnson and Woolls, the suspect texts becoming Bill, Bob and Barry and
the control texts Gill, Gerry and George (it is easier to remember them as Baddies and
Goodies). In a 500-word sample from the beginning of each essay, Johnson found
identical words and sequences of words. Table 34.1 shows the identical sequences in
bold that were easily observed. However, we can also see that there is much more
similarity between the texts than just identical sequences, because some of the alterations
discussed above have been made. Bill and Bob share ‘it is essential’ and ‘to understand
the history of Britain as a multi-racial, multi-cultural nation’, though one of them, Bob,
uses the 14 words in a continuous sequence, whereas the other, Bill, has a sequence of
three and then shortly afterwards a sequence of eleven lexical items. Barry has only one
shared identical string a mere three words long, ‘Britain as a’ but has made major changes
to the lexis which means that his text paraphrases, rather than directly repeats, those of
Bill and Bob. Nevertheless, it is clearly the same sentence. ‘Essential’ is semantically
equivalent to ‘important’, ‘multiracial and multicultural’ are not hyphenated, their order
is reversed and they are linked by ‘and’. Any measure of identity therefore will under-
report the degree of similarity between the texts and a more subtle measure of similarity
has to be devised, as Woolls (this volume), demonstrates.
This kind of qualitative analysis gives the reader a general impression of the scale of
similarity, but a quantitative analysis of vocabulary is more accurate and is essential for
any serious allegation of plagiarism outside teaching and learning. Johnson’s (1997)
quantitative analysis of the ﬁrst 500 words of each of the six essays allowed some eva-
luation of diﬀerent measures of identity between texts and also provided an opportunity
for comparison. Some of her results are shown in Table 34.2.
Table 34.1 Lexical similarities between Bill, Bob and Barry
Bill
Bob
Barry
It is essential for all teachers
to understand the history
of Britain as a multi-racial,
multi-cultural nation.
In order for teachers to
competently acknowledge
the ethnic minority, it is
essential to understand
the history of Britain
as a multi-racial,
multi-cultural nation.
It is very important for us as
educators to realise that
Britain as a nation
has become both multiracial
and multicultural.
Table 34.2 Similarity and uniqueness of voice in six student essays as percentages
Bill
Bob
Barry
Gill
Gerry
George
Lexical hapaxes as % of total
lexical items
79.7%
76.4%
81.9%
82.1%
77.9%
75.0%
Unique lexical tokens as a
% of tokens in ﬁle
16.6%
15.3%
39.1%
61.1%
54.3%
54.4%
Shared lexical types/tokens
as % of total tokens
12.5%/49.3%
2.6%/17.9%
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
530

The percentage of lexical hapaxes in the essays (the nouns, verb, adjectives and adverbs
that are used only once by each writer, in row 1) did not vary a great deal between the
writers, but Johnson compared the wordlists for these hapaxes and found that while Bill,
Bob and Barry shared a large number of once-only items, Gill, Gerry and George had
overwhelmingly individual once-only vocabularies. The uniqueness of Gill, Gerry and
George’s voices was highlighted when the lexical tokens unique to each writer were
calculated as a percentage of the total tokens in each ﬁle (Table 34.2, row 2) and the
similarity between the suspect texts was seen to be high when compared with the lexical
words in common between the ‘Goodies’. Even writing on the same topic, these writers
shared only 17.9% of lexical tokens, compared with the ‘Baddies’ who shared very
nearly half.
Case study 2 – plagiarising a translation
There is a long tradition of people translating texts into other languages without
acknowledgement, which started well before there was a concept of the ownership of
ideas and their textualisations and before plagiarism came to be seen as an academic sin. It
is obviously more diﬃcult to demonstrate plagiarism through translation than same-language
plagiarism, although one looks ﬁrst for the evidence of shared content and the very
similar sequencing of the content typical of same-language plagiarism that we noticed in
the Carnegie example (1).
Of more linguistic interest are cases where we have not one but two or more trans-
lations of the same text for comparison purposes. One would naturally expect more
similarity between two translated texts that between two original texts written on the
same topic, because the translations are necessarily constrained by the wording of the
original. Thus, for example, one would expect translations of the same text to have more
shared hapaxes and even more shared phrases and consequently for it to be more diﬃcult
to demonstrate plagiarism.
Turell (2004) discusses the case of one Spanish translator of Shakespeare’s Julius
Caesar accusing the author of a later translation of plagiarism and outlines the linguistic
strategies she used to demonstrate it. She was fortunate in that there were also two
earlier published translations in addition to the supposed plagiarised text itself and the
one from which it was claimed to have been plagiarised. She could thus compare all
four translations (using Copycatch Gold, Woolls 2002), each with every other one, a
total of six comparisons, and then work out an expected baseline for shared vocabulary,
for shared hapax words and for shared hapax phrases. Table 34.3 is a summary of her
ﬁndings.
Table 34.3 Comparisons between four translated texts
Criterion
Non-suspect comparisons
Suspect comparison
% of shared
vocabulary
64.3; 67.3; 67.7; 73.5; 75.3
83.9; i.e. 11.4% greater than next
largest.
No. of shared hapaxes
393; 432; 445; 668; 698
1049; i.e. 50.3% greater than next
largest.
No. of shared hapax
phrases
31,
46,
46,
47,
48
164; i.e. 242% greater than next
largest
PLAGIARISM
531

Case study 3 – plagiarising a dictionary
If plagiarism in student writing or in translations of literary texts raises interesting questions,
matters get even more complicated in the case of lexicography. Surprisingly, plagiarism
in dictionary making is rarely discussed in the literature (though see Williams 1992).
Single words, with the exception of trademarked ones, are not protected by copyright.
Also, crucially, deﬁning the same lexical items for diﬀerent dictionaries is bound to
involve similar word choices and all lexicographers consult previous dictionaries, so the
essential question that arises is the degree of creativity possible within the editorial con-
ventions and typographical constraints characteristic of dictionary entries. In the case of
bilingual dictionaries, plagiarism of a signiﬁcant proportion of entries cannot be detected
let alone demonstrated – for example, the majority of the names for plants, animals, and
geographical locations have only one equivalent in the target language.
All this is inevitably exploited by some dictionary-makers. Burchﬁeld (1992) discusses
the case of the Australian Macquarie Dictionary (1981), which he found to be based on the
Hamlyn Encyclopedic World Dictionary (1971), which in turn he traced back to The Amer-
ican College Dictionary (1947). He evaluated the amount of material shared by all three
dictionaries at about 93 per cent and commented that ‘the exact wording and ordering of
senses has been carried over, and deemed appropriate, from an American dictionary of 1947
to a British one of 1971 and then to an Australian one of 1981’ (Burchﬁeld 1992: 153).
One notable case with a judicial ﬁnale involved a nine-year legal battle in Polish
courts between PWN (Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers) and Kurpisz Publishing House. PWN
claimed that a signiﬁcant proportion of the entries in the Practical Dictionary of
Contemporary Polish (1994) published by Kurpisz were identical to those found in PWN’s
Dictionary of the Polish Language (1978). Kurpisz contended that all dictionaries are alike by
their very nature and hence cannot be original creations, and that in any case the Polish
language belonged to the whole nation. The court of the ﬁrst instance rejected PWN’s
claim, a verdict upheld by the Court of Appeal. The case then went to Poland’s Supreme
Court, which in November 2002 opined that
The choice of headwords, the way of deﬁning, and the composition of diﬃcult
entries are instances of creative activity of authors of Polish language dictionaries, as
deﬁned in Chapter 1 of the Copyright Act of 4th February 1994.
(Supreme Court of the Republic of Poland, PWN
v. Kurpisz, II CKN 1289/00)
The relevant section of Chapter 1 of the Polish Copyright Act, which is Article 3 reads:
Collections, anthologies, selections and data bases are subject to copyright, even if
they contain unprotected material, if the selection made, arrangement or composition
are creative in character.
(Polish Copyright Act 1994 (1.3))
The Supreme Court’s opinion was binding on the Court of Appeal, which then
reviewed the case in 2004 and returned a verdict ordering Kurpisz to pay substantial
damages to PWN.
In November 2002, one of the present authors, Kredens, was approached by the
creator of a software package consisting of both a Polish–English and an English–Polish
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
532

translation tool and a Polish–English and English–Polish dictionary. He claimed that an
overwhelming part of his two dictionaries had found their way into a competitor’s
translation program, which also included two dictionaries, and was published after the
said software package. What follows is a brief description of the analysis undertaken on
the English–Polish parts of the competing sets.
A simple qualitative analysis revealed obvious similarities, but, even if the two dic-
tionaries had been produced independently, one would expect, from what was said
above, signiﬁcant similarity. However, in this case, most of the entries examined were
identical and the dictionaries shared a number of other signiﬁcant attributes. One of
them was the overrepresentation in both dictionaries of medical terms starting with the
morpheme hyper (e.g. hyperthermaesthesia, hyperthermalgesia, hyperthermia, etc.). The
client’s dictionary had 336 of those, the competitor’s 326, and two English–Polish
dictionaries chosen as reference material (see below) contained only two. Also
overrepresented were biblical terms and Scottish dialect forms. These impressionistic
observations obviously had to be backed up by substantive ﬁndings, in essence by
obtaining quantitative data.
The two English–Polish dictionaries both contained some 110,000 entries. A statisti-
cally representative sample of 1,200 randomly generated entries was ﬁrst examined,
revealing that 70 per cent of the entries were translated identically. To ensure that ﬁgure
was not the result of chance and could be safely extrapolated onto the dictionaries in
their entirety, four more analytical categories were chosen, which included:
 most frequent words; these normally have many senses, which are diﬃcult to
categorise and order, and the relevant entries are thus unlikely to be identical
across any two dictionaries;
 verbs of movement (walk, run, swim, etc.); motion events are lexicalised diﬀer-
ently in English and Polish, with the latter making extensive use of reﬂexive verbs.
A thesaurus was used to identify such entries, which were then cross-checked;
 evaluative adjectives (ugly, beautiful, great, etc.); these were also identiﬁed with
the help of a thesaurus and then cross-checked;
 culture-bound terms (e.g. cider, quango, tabloid, Oxbridge), which often do not exist
or have no direct equivalent in the target language and so have to be explained.
Subsequently, the ﬁgures obtained were compared with those derived from two other
dictionaries – Practical English–Polish Dictionary (Stanisławski et al. 1986) and English–Polish
Dictionary (Fisiak 1996) – and are presented in Table 34.4 below (where A is the
Table 34.4 Comparisons between the two competing dictionaries and two reference dictionaries (ﬁgures
show percentages of shared deﬁnitions between pairs of dictionaries)
A–B
C–D
A–C
A–D
B–C
B–D
Sample
70
16
11
12
12
12
Most frequent
65
14
8
8
7
6
Verbs
55
15
9
11
8
10
Adjectives
60
12
7
11
7
9
Culture-bound
terms
95
4
4
6
4
6
PLAGIARISM
533

client’s dictionary, B – the allegedly oﬀending dictionary, C – Stanisławski et al. 1986
and D – Fisiak 1996).
Following this simple statistical analysis, an error analysis was carried out and identical
spelling mistakes as well as instances of shared inadequate lexicographic practice were
identiﬁed, as exempliﬁed in the following:
a) Spelling mistakes common to both dictionaries1 – these were identiﬁed following
close reading of randomly chosen entries.

desintegration [disintegration]

gairish [garish]

metting-pot [melting-pot]

oi-quenching [oil-quenching]
b) Inadequate lexicographic practice:

oﬀ-licence – koncesja alkoholowa, koncesja na wynos (A and B)
(the most obvious translation of sklep monopolowy [a shop where alcohol is sold] is
missing; it is absent also from Stanisławski et al. 1986 but present in Fisiak 1996)

convertible – samochód otwarty (A); kabriolet, samochód otwarty (B)
(samochód otwarty [open car], though grammatically and semantically correct, is
a made-up phrase with no evidence of usage in the sense of ‘a convertible’” in the
two most popular corpora of Polish (NKJP and PELCRA2); that sense is missing
from Stanisławski et al. 1986 and present in Fisiak 1996 as kabriolet only).
The totality of these ﬁndings allowed the forensic linguist to produce the following
conclusions:
Either:
The author(s) of dictionary A used lexicographic substance most of which
had been created by the author(s) of dictionary B;
Or:
the author(s) of dictionary B used lexicographic substance most of which
had been created by the author(s) of dictionary A;
Or:
the author(s) of dictionary A and the author(s) of dictionary B used lex-
icographic substance most of which had been created by the author(s) of
a third, unknown source.
After eight years, the case is still ongoing, although for reasons better suited to a volume
on civil law procedure.
Case study 4 – a plagiarised police statement
There are many examples in the UK from pre-PACE (1994) times of the police creating
confession statements or interview records by copying and adapting text from other
documents – a process parallel to plagiarism and detectable in the same way. One of the
most famous is the police interview with Molloy which was a crucial part of the Carl
Bridgewater murder investigation; for details see Coulthard (2004) or Coulthard and
Johnson (2007: 191–96). Example (3) is another example, this time road rage incident
statements written by two police oﬃcers with, it was claimed, no collaboration, consulta-
tion or even underlying notes. It is evident that while there is some information that is not
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
534

shared between the statements, much of the wording is identical (note these statements
have been anonymised, but the crucial linguistic features are authentic).
In the extracts from Statements F and M in example (3), which have been inter-
lineated to facilitate comparison, bold is used to mark those morphemes, words and
phrases which are shared by the two statements and italic is used to indicate text which is
a simple substitution caused by the change of narrator, e.g. I/we, my/our.
(3) Statement F and Statement M interlineated
F:
The driver did not indicate and did not leave a safe distance between our two
M: The vehicle didn’t indicate and the driver didn’t leave a safe distance between our
F:
vehicles, which meant I had to brake hard in order to avoid colliding with the rear of
M: vehicles, causing Miss Ford to break hard to avoid a collision. I felt the front of
M: our car lower and the seat belt tighten across my chest, as I physically moved forward in
F:
this vehicle. I sounded my car horn alerting the driver of this vehicle to my presence
M: my seat. Miss Ford sounded our car horn to alert the driver of the Peugeot of our presence.
Of course, in justifying one’s opinion that one text was derived from the other, it is good
to have other supportive observations. In this case
a) both oﬃcers made the same spelling mistake ‘quite’ for ‘quiet’ in the same context
F:
became suddenly quite
M: became very quite.
b) at the same point in the narrative they both used the same non-standard past tense
‘broke’ for ‘braked’.
F:
the driver of the white saloon broke hard
M: Miss Ford broke hard
c) they chose on four separate occasions to make the same decision about the need
or otherwise for an area code, for example:
M: travelling south on Brighton Hill, NW4.
F:
travelling South bound on BRIGHTON HILL NW4.
M: I continued south along Brighton Hill.
F:
We continued along Brighton Hill
Case study 5 – suspect witness statements
A similar example comes from an asylum case where Coulthard was requested by the
Refugee Legal Centre to undertake a linguistic examination of a series of 49 witness
statements concerning the alleged participation of Celestin Ugirashebuja, the former
bourgmestre of Kigoma in Rwanda, in the killings of Tutsi civilians in 1994 (see www.trial-
ch.org/en/trial-watch/proﬁle/db/facts/celestin_ugirashebuja_610.html [accessed 17 August
2009]). Coulthard was asked to comment on any linguistic oddities in the statements and
to evaluate their signiﬁcance. Surprisingly, he was originally asked to work on English
translations of the statements, even though the originals were written in French, though
some of them may have been taken through an interpreter. The court insisted on
working with translations, but Coulthard’s evidence was based on the French originals of
which selections are presented in (4a and b). As in (3) bold is used to indicate identity
across several statements, italic to indicate paraphrases and/or identity across two state-
ments and statements have been interlineated to aid comparison.
PLAGIARISM
535

(4a) … ordonné la mise en place des barrières …
38 M UGIRASHEBUJA a ordonné la mise en place des barrières aﬁn que les
personnes persécutées ailleurs ne viennent pas s’y réfugier
47 Il a aussi ordonné la mise en place des barrières, aﬁn qu’aucun Tutsi ne puisse
s’échapper
45 Il a aussi ordonné la mise en place des barrières, pour empêcher la fuite de l’en-
nemi.
46 Il a ordonné la mise en place des barrières pour empêcher la fuite des traîtres
(4b) Hilux/couleur
19 le véhicule communal, un véhicule de marque Hilux de couleur blanche
20 du véhicule communale, une voiture
de couleur blanche
23
Il s’agissait d’ une camionnette de marque Hilux de couleur blanche
22 du véhicule de la commune, une camionnette de marque hilux de couleur rouge.
12
Il s’agissait d’ une camionnette Toyota Hilux de couleur rouge
16
j’ai pu remarquer la camionnette de marque Toyota Hilux de couleur rouge,
8
une camionnette de marque hilux
18.
un véhicule de marque Toyota
de couleur rouge
On the basis of these and similar examples Coulthard argues that the statements could
not have been produced independently, which did not of course mean that they were
untrue, nor even that they were created like the police statement above by one being
based on a pre-existing written text. One could for instance imagine a lawyer who went
to interview with a set of common detailed questions to many of which he elicited
conﬁrmatory answers producing statements with signiﬁcant numbers of shared phrases.
What the court needed to know in this case was that, whatever else these statements
were, they were not produced by witnesses freely recounting events to someone who
simply noted down what they said.
Case study 6 – handling complex documents electronically
Special consideration needs to be given to some documents, either because of issues
arising during conversion between word processed format and the plain text frequently
required between comparison programs, or because of the requirement to compare only
individual parts of answer papers with their equivalent parts in other answer papers. In
regard to the ﬁrst problem, Woolls has found that embedded tables, charts and spread-
sheets oﬀer particularly diﬃcult challenges when using formatted document to text
converters, because most such converters tend to output each cell of a table or spread-
sheet as a separate line. For programs based either on paragraph breaks or full sentence
identiﬁcation, this produces a very large number of one word paragraphs or sentences,
and most comparison methods require more than one word to provide meaningful
results. Users of comparison programs need to be clearly advised as to what particular
programs will and will not be able to compare.
As an example of the second problem, in professional examinations done online students
are frequently tested on their knowledge of the complexities of a business decision by use of
a scenario, setting out the full ﬁctitious but realistic history of a particular business or medical
issue. They are required to read this scenario, and then answer a series of questions dealing
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
536

with legal or ﬁnancial aspects of a business scenario, or the diagnostic or ethical aspects raised
in a medical scenario. In such cases, the comparison requirement is not document with
document, but question with question. This is partly because the underlying level of repe-
tition will obviously rise if several answers refer back to the same base scenario, so many
answers will accidentally look more like several of the answers in comparison documents if
not treated separately, and partly because the questions frequently cover discrete areas of the
problem and some might lend themselves to plagiarism from source data more than others.
While human assessors can normally identify which answers relate to which questions,
however unclear or inconsistent the signals provided by the candidates, it is by no means
easy for a computer program designed to handle large quantities of electronic data to do
the same. For example, here are some possibilities for referring to the ﬁrst question in
such a paper. ‘Question 1’, ‘quest 1’, ‘Q 1’, ‘Q1’, ‘Question One’, ‘One’, ‘Answer 1’,
‘1.’. None of these is incorrect, all are capable of interpretation by a human reader, but
all oﬀer diﬀerent problems to a computer system: space or no space between words and
numbers, words for numbers, diﬀerent forms of reference to the answer, upper and
lower case use, punctuation and many other variants. Then, assuming a program can
identify the ﬁrst question, a programmer has to devise a way of ﬁnding out where
questions 2, 3, etc. start and ﬁnish and indeed whether all the questions have been
answered and if they have been answered in sequence.
So, it is vital that any plagiarism detection solution for multiple online examination
answers to a common scenario is as accurate as possible and contains a reporting mechanism
detailing where disruption to the identiﬁcation process might have happened (for example, if
the student didn’t identify the question they were answering). If this is not done, then an
answer to question ﬁve, which might be on ﬁnance, might well end up being compared
with an answer to question three, which might cover legal issues. Comparison of this false
pair would produce a low level of similarity, and once the error has been made, the imbal-
anced comparison would continue throughout the answer paper, missing any direct copying
between the true answers to questions three and ﬁve in a pair of answer papers.
The lesson from this is that any set of documents where direct comparison of the full
text is unsuitable needs to be closely examined for internal reference consistency and
completeness, and it must be expected that not all such documents will be capable of
reliable comparison by electronic methods.
Conclusion
The case studies have demonstrated just a few of the ways in which writers plagiarise and
have shown some of the forensic linguistic responses and solutions to suspected plagiarism.
We have also demonstrated a range of methodologies that are innovatively generated in
the course of investigating problematic and suspect texts. These include increasingly more
ingenious and accurate software solutions, or more precisely software that produces sen-
tence level and lexical outputs for forensic linguists to interpret and which enables us to
make decisions and provide opinions in allegations of plagiarism. The reader will have
recognised that responses to plagiarism are necessarily both quantitative and qualitative and
involve manual and computational generation of results and careful analysis and inter-
pretation in order to provide an opinion. What the reader will also have recognised is that
techniques are rigorous and increasingly sophisticated and this alone ensures that plagiarism
prevention is possible, if writers are aware of the power of forensic linguistics and linguists
PLAGIARISM
537

to analyse their writing. Woolls (this volume) provides concrete evidence of the power of
detection to be preventative in the case of his Universities and Colleges Admissions Service
(UCAS) work. After running a pilot project and then implementing a detection program
for two full years of admissions, the number of applicants who plagiarised their personal
statements fell between January 2008 and January 2009 by 26%. Prevention and detection
of plagiarism therefore work hand-in-hand and an ultimate goal is to reduce levels of pla-
giarism even further, by ensuring the continuation of sophisticated detection programs,
warning users of their existence and eﬀectiveness and educating writers to have conﬁdence
in their own powers of expression.
Notes
1 Cf. Williams’ discussion of ‘bugwords’, i.e. ‘non-existent word[s] deliberately included in a dic-
tionary, so that it can be used to support allegations of copying if it reappears in the dictionaries of
other publishers’.
2 See http://nkjp.pl and http://korpus.ia.uni.lodz.pl, respectively.
Further reading
Buranen, L. and Roy, A.M. (eds) (1999) Perspectives on Plagiarism and Intellectual Property in a Postmodern
World, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Howard, Rebecca Moore (1999) Standing in the Shadow of Giants: Plagiarists, Authors, Collaborators,
Stamford, CT: Ablex.
Love, H. (2002) Attributing Authorship: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pecorari, D. (2008) Academic Writing and Plagiarism: A Linguistic Analysis, London: Continuum.
COULTHARD, JOHNSON, KREDENS AND WOOLLS
538

Section III
New debates and new directions


35
Multimodality and forensic linguistics
Multimodal aspects of victim’s narrative in
direct examination
Gregory M. Matoesian
Introduction
Despite the recent spate of excellent textbooks, monographs and review essays on lan-
guage and law or what is often referred to as forensic linguistics (Conley and O’Barr
2005; Gibbons 2003; Coulthard and Johnson 2007; Travers 2006; Conley 2006; May-
nard 2006; Ehrlich 2001; Eades 2008b; Solan and Tiersma 2005), researchers rarely
mention the role of bodily conduct and how it relates to language use in legal settings. In
fact, the ﬁrst major textbook in the ﬁeld, Just Words (now in its second edition) is quite
revealing in its title, representative of prevailing sentiments that legal discourse consists
solely of verbal conduct.
In this chapter I demonstrate that legal discourse involves much more than just words
and that language and embodied conduct work together as co-expressive semiotic part-
ners – as multimodal resources – in utterance construction and the production of
meaning in courtroom talk. Although multimodality encompasses written texts, material
artefacts, technical devices, gesture and other semiotic forms, I limit my focus in this
chapter to gesture, gaze and postural orientation and how these are interwoven into the
stream of verbal activity in a rape victim’s narrative during direct examination. Incor-
porating a broader contextual focus, I also display how multimodal resources function in
the ascription of blame, constitution of identity, and the emergence of multiparty parti-
cipation frameworks in her narrative performance. Focusing on just words neglects the
role of multimodal activities in legal proceedings – how both language and embodied
conduct mutually contextualize one another in a reciprocal dialectic – and leaves the
study of forensic linguistics with an incomplete understanding of legal discourse. To
borrow a line from Doug Maynard’s recent work (2006: 477), studying courtroom lan-
guage without the visual component “loses the phenomena” and erases relevant activities
that participants orient to in legal performance. In a similar vein, Jones and LeBaron
(2002: 512) note: “To systematically ignore either vocal or visible behaviors in a study of
face-to-face interaction is to stunt understanding of the phenomena under investigation.”
541

And, in his study of legal gestures, Hibbitts (1995: 51) mentions that “a fully-accurate
and nuanced understanding of how the law actually works requires an appreciation of
other texts in law’s semiotic ﬁeld.”
To provide a more detailed understanding of its signiﬁcance, I analyze an instance of
multimodal activity from a victim in a rape trial as she addresses motivational issues
during redirect examination. As Ehrlich (2001: 108–9) notes, direct examination permits
the victim to construct a narrative in her own voice, making the narrative come “alive”
and captivate the jury’s attention, in contrast to cross-examination which involves
deconstruction by the defence attorney. Re-direct (also called re-examination) exam-
ination, in particular, is of crucial signiﬁcance because it allows the prosecution and
victim to rebut the defence attorney’s impeachment from the immediately prior cross-
examination. Considered by some as the penultimate moment in the prosecution’s case,
the victim’s narrative in this instance creates an emotionally charged moment of high
drama as she discusses ulterior motives for going forward with charges against the
defendant. But her narrative consists of quite a lot more than just speech. She synchro-
nizes talk, gesture and gaze as co-expressive resources to shape a rhythmically integrated
and aﬀective form of persuasive discourse. In the process, she grounds victim resistance in
a sophisticated multimodal constellation of multiple participation frames to forge identity,
orchestrate epistemic stance and distribute responsibility in the sociolegal organization of
sexual assault.1 More generally, we will see how multimodal conduct is brought to bear
on the local contingencies confronting the victim’s motivational narrative and the
incremental alignments and realignments she deploys to shape a coherent accusation
against the defendant, rebutting the defence attorney’s impeachment attempt in the
process.
The chapter begins with a selective overview of the literature on multimodal resources
(limited to gesture, gaze and postural orientation) and a discussion of the dynamic inter-
play between speech and bodily conduct in the production of utterances, participation
and identity. I discuss theoretical advances in the study of gesture and other forms of
bodily conduct to show their relevance and signiﬁcance for analysing legal discourse, as
well as their limitations. The next section provides background information on the rape
trial and the motivational issues surrounding the case. The ensuing analysis of motiva-
tional data demonstrates not only how multimodal conduct is relevant to the study of the
victim’s narrative in direct examination, but also how institutional forms of speech syn-
chronized gestures may reveal novel directions for the study of gesture, gaze and talk as
situated forms of activity.
The role of gesture, gaze and posture in courtroom talk
Gesture in courtroom talk
A ﬂeeting glimpse into any courtroom will reveal participants talking – and much more.
Attorneys gaze at witnesses when addressing them, beat out the rhythm of their talk with
distinct hand movements, and extend an open palm facing upward when posing a con-
trastive question to reveal an inconsistency in testimony. By the same token, witnesses
raise their right hands when taking the oath, spread both palms upward and horizontally
as if pleading to “give me a break”, and curl their ﬁngers under the thumb while
extending an arm and index ﬁnger to point out the accused among co-present
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
542

participants. And judges may raise a spread, outward facing palm while admonishing a
witness to stop talking while they rule on a pending objection.
The orthodox way of referring to these gestural and embodied activities is to call them
“nonverbal”, but that implies that they, ﬁrst, occur isolated from speech and, second,
play a subordinate role relative to speech, little more than aﬀective ornamentation to the
more central verbal modality (Norris 2004; Jones and LeBaron 2002). Let me address
both issues in turn.
According to Kendon (2004) and McNeill (1992: 37) gestures or gesticulations refer to
ad hoc hand motions that generally, though not invariably, co-occur with speech; that is
to say, gestures lack the speciﬁc form-meaning or arbitrary signiﬁer-signiﬁed conventions
of language. This omits from the category “gesticulation” language like systems that rely
on form-meaning conventions such as emblems or quotable gestures (for example the
“OK” sign or sign languages of the deaf, which convey meaning independently).
Whereas speech is sequential, segmental, arbitrary and combinatory (that is, lower-level
constituents combine to form higher-level constituents), speech synchronized gestures
convey meaning instantaneously – “on the spot” as it were – and synthetically; they
convey visuospatial images in co-temporal, spontaneous movements with speech,
movements in which the parts derive their meaning “globally” from the whole (McNeill
2005: 10). In Figure 35.1, for example, when the victim states: “What he did to me
was wro:::ng” and points to the defendant on “he”, the meaning of such visual action is
“co-expressive” with her words, obtaining its gestalt-like sense and signiﬁcance only
when combined with speech. Moreover, the deictic vector of the point begins prior to
production of its lexical counterpart to synchronize their co-temporal interplay; that is,
the gesture stroke (or meaning conveying phrase of the gesture) accompanies its speech
counterpart so that both arrive simultaneously at the climactic moment of meaning-
making (McNeill 1992). As Kendon (2004) has shown in some detail, and as we will see
in the analysis later, speakers continually adjust and readjust “speech-gesture ensembles”
so that one coordinates with the other to achieve discursive balance and semantic
coherence – coherent courses of improvisational action.
Thus, rather than being separate or isolated sign systems, gesture and speech
constitute dynamically fused multimodal signal streams that feed into utterance con-
struction and the production of discourse coherence. If this is true, then nonverbal and
verbal are inaccurate and misleading terms to conceptualize what is more accurately
referred to as multimodal discourse, of which speech and gesture function as equal
partners in the embodied materialization of meaning (Kendon 2004; McNeill 1992,
Figure 35.1 What he did to me was wro:::ng
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
543

2005; Goldin-Meadow 2003). Jones and LeBaron (2002: 499) capture this point
forcefully when they state: “verbal and nonverbal messages have been studied sepa-
rately, as though they were independent rather than co-occurring and interrelated
phenomena.”
We can see why gesture and speech play a reciprocal role in co-present interaction if
we address the second item above: the misconception that gesture plays a subordinate
role to speech. If gestures were minor embellishments of verbal action then we could
perhaps dispense with a description of their contribution to discourse on the grounds that
they are mere redundant supplements to speech. However, gestures may be subordinate
to speech on some occasions, superordinate on others, and may work equally on still
others (Norris 2004). Whatever the degree of interplay, speech synchronized gestures
rarely convey the same information as their lexical counterparts, often producing infor-
mation not captured adequately or as vividly in speech. Because they perform meaning
visually, gestures add another dimension to speech: complementing or clarifying verbal
messages, performing distinct speech acts, intensifying commitment to an assertion
(functioning as stance markers), foregrounding information, coordinating the rhythm of
speech – parsing it into signiﬁcant segments – and pointing out objects of attention in
the extralinguistic world via spatial–temporal proximity (Kendon 2004: 281–82).
According to Cassell and McNeill (1991: 376): “certain aspects of events may be con-
veyed in gesture and not in speech, or vice versa, or diﬀerent aspects may be conveyed in
each medium, giving us a more complete view of the speaker’s conception of the event.”
For example, we will observe (see Figure 35.1) when the victim states, “what he did to
me was wrong”, she simultaneously
1. points towards the defendant to create a focus of joint attention,
2. beats out the rhythm of her words using the same pointing gesture to foreground
points of signiﬁcance, and
3. in so doing bestows an emotionally charged epistemic stance to her words:
performs an accusatory speech act.
Focusing on the verbal component of her message alone would exclude the dramatic
features of this interactional episode and the aﬀective lesson it imparts (to the jury) in the
motivational dialogue. Indeed, as Goldin-Meadow (2003: 3) notes: “To ignore gesture is
to ignore part of the conversation.”
In the semiotic division of labor, gestures do not merely encode or represent spatio-
visual information; they constitute embodied actions that elaborate or even transform the
content of verbal conduct, creating a dynamic fusion of disparate yet complementary
modes of expression to yield a more vivid, coherent and integrated performance of
meaning in social interaction.
Gaze and postural orientation in courtroom talk
Along with gesture, gaze and postural orientation (the direction in which people position
their bodies) often accompany speech (but not as the same necessary accompaniments as
gestures) to create multimodal laminations of meaning construction in discourse (Good-
win 1981). Although the study of gesture has received the most theoretical development
in recent scholarship, gaze and postural orientation often coordinate with both speech
and gesture in interaction to:
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
544

(1) select the recipient of an utterance,
(2) create a focus of joint attention,
(3) display engagement with or disengagement from select participants, and
(4) most important for the chapter, contextualize emergent forms of participation
in the temporally unfolding rhythms of situated activity, distributing multiple
layers of multiparty involvement simultaneously based on institutional roles and
responsibilities.
As we will see shortly, the victim deploys gaze and postural orientation – in concert with
talk and gesture – to distribute diﬀerential legal obligations to speciﬁc participants and
assign their emergent relevance in the ongoing narration, revealing an improvisational
density and ﬂexibility in the interpenetration of multiple sign systems.
As I demonstrate in the ensuing analyses, a more adequate conceptualization of legal
language requires a detailed appreciation and understanding of the role of multimodal
channels of interaction and their meaning making potential in context. If courtroom
discourse is multimodal and if multimodal conduct conveys meanings not necessarily
transmitted by verbal means alone, then it follows that omitting such information may
obscure a more comprehensive and robust description of what people are actually doing
in legal proceedings – and thus “lose” the phenomenon.
Limitations and methodological implications of
multimodal analysis
Before turning to the data and analysis, two methodological issues – perhaps speciﬁc to
courtroom discourse – need to be broached.
(1) There are practical and logistical considerations that ﬁgure in the use of multi-
modal forms of data. In their informative overview, Jones and LeBaron (2002)
recommend that ‘future studies of face-to-face interaction be grounded in audio-
visual records’. While this would be an optimal scenario for studying courtroom
interaction, it is often not feasible. Frequently, video recordings of the proceedings
are not permitted (at least not in the US nor in the UK) and even in those cases
where they are, it is quite diﬀerent from videotaping everyday conversations
where researchers can position camera angle (or even deploy multiple cameras) to
include the entire set of participants. Instead, researchers have to rely on third
parties (like Court TV), which means that the available visual record will be
selective in what is recorded, and rarely will all engaged participants and relevant
interactive contours of bodily conduct be captured on video. And such limitations
apply to the current data also.
(2) Except for doctor–patient encounters (see Heath 1986), most studies of gesture
and multimodal conduct have been carried out on everyday conversations on the
one hand or in experimental settings on the other (see Matoesian 2008a, 2008b for
exceptions in trial talk). Neither institutional interaction in general nor multimodal
interaction in the adversary context in particular has been the topic of systematic
description and analysis, leaving researchers with a host of empirical questions to
contemplate. Does multimodal conduct operate in distinct ways in the courtroom,
speciﬁcally tailored to the local contingencies and combative logic of trial talk?
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
545

Similarly, most studies of speech synchronized gesture have analysed how they
ﬁgure as integrated meaning-making resources in utterance construction and in
the production of coherent courses of action. But in the highly adversarial setting
of the rape trial does multimodal conduct organize more substantive strategies,
such as the production of accusations, blame and motivation? Does it circulate in
the articulation of moral stance and social identity, indexing broader forms of
sociolegal organization? In the conﬂict laden exchanges in the courtroom, do
hybrid and multifunctional forms emerge, often simultaneously? These are just a
few of the issues relevant to both the study of legal discourse and gesture.
I turn now to the main analysis of the chapter. In the ensuing case, we will see in con-
crete detail how the victim’s ulterior motives during re-direct materialize in the syn-
chronization of speech, gaze and gesture and how incorporating the integration of these
semiotic resources into the analysis of legal discourse oﬀers a new direction for future
studies in forensic linguistics in general and for direct examination in particular.
Direct examination of the victim in the William Kennedy Smith
rape trial
Background to data extract (1)
The William Kennedy Smith rape trial was one of the most infamous and widely
publicized trials of the last century, involving a member of the famous Kennedy family and
the daughter of a wealthy industrialist in West Palm Beach, Florida. Patricia Bowman met
Smith at the trendy Au Bar nightclub in the early morning hours of March 30, 1991. After
the club closed around 3 a.m., she gave Smith a ride home to the Kennedy estate, where
(a short time later) she claimed he raped her while the two were on the lawn.
A crucial part of the rape case, like most date and acquaintance cases, involved the
issue of motivation for making the charges. The defence (represented by Roy Black)
proposed that Bowman had ulterior or extra-legal motives for making the charges: that
she disliked men, that she was interested in fame or money, that she was mentally
unbalanced, and that she felt rejected or betrayed by the defendant, who had “led her
on” regarding his true intentions during the course of the evening (to mention but a
few). On the other hand, the prosecution claimed that the victim was motivated solely
by legal factors relevant to the sexual assault. After a lengthy cross-examination, in which
the defence attributed a host of unsavoury ulterior motives to the victim (see Matoesian
2001), the prosecuting attorney (in re-direct) posed the following question, in extract (1),
to the victim. (There is an accompanying DVD clip of the entire data set on the website
accompanying this book available at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/.)
(1) Victim re-direct examination
(PA = Prosecuting Attorney; DA = Defence Attorney; J = Judge; V = Victim;
D = Defendant; p = point; b = beat; pb = pointing beat; IFT = index ﬁnger
touching thumb.)
001
PA: Do you have any ulterior motive for going through this Ms Bowman?
002
(1.7)
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
546

003
V:
Yes.
004
(.6)
005
PA: What is that?
006
(.4)
007
DA: Objection yer honor (.6) motivation
[
008
V:
((gaze moves toward DA))
009
(2.3)
010
J: Overruled.
[
011
V:
((gaze returns to PA))
012
(1.7)
013
V: ((V moves from home position to gaze and point at D)) =
(p)
(pb)
(pb)
(pb+hold)
014
V:
= What he did to me was wro:::ng (1.3)
[((gaze and left hand pointing toward D at turn-initial position))
((short beats on did and was))
((post stroke hold on wro:::ng into the 1.3 pause))
((on did gaze moves to PA))
(p)
(pb pb pb)
015
I have a child
[((points to herself on I then downward bunched ﬁngers point
with index ﬁnger extended on child))
016
(0.8)
((point and gaze moves toward D during pause))
(p)
(pb)
(pb) (pb+hold)
017
((in-breath)) What he did to me was wro:::ng
((gaze shifts to PA on was, to jury on post-stroke hold))
018
(1.0)
((during pause slight head shift to the right toward jury))
(b)
019
n’ it’s not right (.)
[((gesture shifts to PA))
((gaze to PA on n’ it’s, shifts to jury on not right))
((ﬁrst head shift increment to right towards jury))
((IFT)) (b)
(b)
(b)
020
n’ I don’t want to live the rest of my life
[((gesture shifts to PA))
((gaze to PA, shifts to jury on the rest))
((second head shift increment to right))
021
((arm and ﬁnger shifts to point to D))
(p)(pb)(pb+hold)
022
in fear of that man
[((gaze at PA, then shifts to jury on post-stroke hold))
((third head shift increment to right))
023
(0.5)
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
547

(b)
(b)
024
n’ I don’t wanna be responsible for him doin it
[[((gaze to PA))
((jury)) (PA)
(b)
025
to somebody else.
026
DA: I object yer honor.
027
V:
[((return to home position+gaze+head direction to DA))
Embodied accusations
In rape trials – like other criminal trials – defence attorneys routinely raise questions
about the victim’s extra-legal motives for making the accusation, and the case under
scrutiny here represents a poignant instance. During cross-examination, the defence
questioned the victim at length about ulterior motives for fabricating the charge against
the defendant, some conscious, others unconscious: that she disliked men, that she was
hurt because the defendant would not let her spend the night, that she was mentally
disturbed, that she was looking for publicity, that she was upset about being “used”
sexually and being “misled” by the defendant’s true intentions. By ascribing ulterior
motives, the defence assembles an interpretive template for framing and assessing the
credibility of the victim’s account, an account based not on legally relevant criteria but
on malicious factors irrelevant to ultimate issue in the case.
By the same token, the prosecution and victim must convince the jury otherwise: that
the victim’s accusation consists solely of legally relevant facts. In line 1, the prosecuting
attorney begins her re-direct examination of the victim with a question about ulterior motives
“for going through with this”, and after the victim’s avowal (“Yes”) she poses the
further question: “What is that?” That the victim admits possessing ulterior motives seems,
on the face of it, a rather unorthodox response because the defence rather than prose-
cution typically ascribes such motives to impeach the victim’s credibility in rape trials.
Given the defence attorney’s vigorous imputation of ulterior motives in the prior stage
of questioning, however, more than a simple denial appears warranted in response.
After the objection sequence, we see the victim steer the logic of motive ascription
and avowal in a quite unanticipated yet favourable direction, elaborating her ‘ulterior’
motive with the fused relative in line 14: “What he did to me was wro:::ng.” And there
is more than a verbal component to the answer, for if we consider the victim’s actions in
line 13, notice that she begins with an embodied response well before the start of the
fused relative. Following the judge’s overrule on the objection, she turns from DA to
PA, moves out of home or rest position (Sacks and Schegloﬀ2002), and raises her left
arm/wrist and ﬁnger to point at the defendant: an elevation and extension of the arm in
a bent elbow position with the index ﬁnger extended and other ﬁngers tightly curled
under the thumb. As she switches on the deictic vector of the point, she also shifts pos-
tural alignment and projects gaze toward the defendant, creating him as the focus of joint
attention. As her utterance proceeds in line 14, the pointing gesture coincides with onset
of the verbal component (“What he”) – a delicately laced synchronization of verbal and
visual modalities so that both arrive simultaneously in a semantically coherent course of
action. Just as important, while the victim realigns gaze from the defendant to the pro-
secuting attorney on “did” she maintains the pointing gesture at the defendant – a
noticeably marked post-stroke hold (where the gesture is suspended in position for a
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
548

period of time after the gesture stroke) – not only over the entire verbal component, but
also into the 1.3 second utterance ﬁnal pause (in line 14, Figure 35.1).
But the victim does more than orchestrate a semantically coherent and temporally syn-
chronized course of gesture-speech action; her pointing gesture does more than indicate
the defendant’s bearing from a deictic centre. In fact, the pointing gesture involves quite a
lot more than just pointing – more than indicating the defendant’s location in space.
According to Kendon (2003), McNeill (2005) and Kita (2003), index ﬁnger pointing
refers to those actions whose primary or sole function is to indicate direction, and in lines
13–14 we indeed see how ostensive gestural deixis is directionally anchored, projecting a
vector from the ﬁnger to the defendant. As she switches on the spatial vector, we see
gesture, gaze and speech align perfectly in the production of her utterance (each arriving
simultaneously on the pronoun “he”), and that reﬂects our prior discussion of the joint
interplay between speech and gesture: that speakers adjust and readjust gesture–speech
modalities to achieve intricately interwoven structures of discursive action.
When we dissect this in more microscopic detail, however, notice that her pointing
gesture evolves into short beats on the stressed syllables “did” and “me”, and a series of
unaccented “shaking” beats on “wro:::ng”. As mentioned previously, beats refer to the
rhythmic function of gestures – how gestures visualize or (perhaps more accurately)
orchestrate aspects of discursive structure through horizontal and/or vertical movements.
According to Streeck (2008), they enact the musical and informational ﬂow of an
utterance, highlighting points of emphasis, parsing signiﬁcant segments into discretely
organized units of relevance. In this case, the victim resets the pointing gesture as a
multifunctional – double duty – narrative resource for not only switching on the deictic
vector but also mapping out signiﬁcant segments of her utterance, fusing the deictic on
the one hand with the pragmatic function on the other to create a hybrid gesture of
considerable complexity. When these two functions collide and fuse, they yield an
accusatory moral stance that ascribes blame and allocates responsibility for the sexual
assault. Put another way, gestural deixis mutates into accusatory beats. Indeed, upon
closer inspection, the pointing beat recalibrates into an accusatory gesture during vowel
lengthening (on “wro:::ng”) and further into the 1.3 second ensuing pause, where it not
only stands alone as a post-stroke hold but simultaneously displays an unmarked ﬁnger shake
(three micro beats while pointing at the defendant) – intensifying blame by foregrounding
the defendant as a joint focus of attention.
In a recent work, Goodwin (2003) has demonstrated how the ostensibly simple deictic
gesture of pointing derives its meaning from the broader stream of semiotic activities in
which it is embedded, and in line 14 (Figure 35.1) we can witness such meaning con-
struction in the victim’s narrative-in-progress. First, she maintains index ﬁnger extension
in a post-stroke hold toward the defendant while simultaneously withholding speech,
and second shifts participation structure via gaze realignment toward the prosecuting
attorney to map an accusatory moral stance onto the deictic vector of the point: a highly
aﬀective and emphatic stance toward the information imparted. That is, once the deictic
vector rotates into directional alignment she retools and redeploys it as a beat to hammer
out points of emphasis. Just as germane, pointing and shaking an accusatory ﬁnger at the
defendant while directing talk to a diﬀerent recipient packs an additional modal punch,
transforming her “ulterior” motives into an accusatory account. And that imagistic
meaning would be lost without detailed consideration of the embodied component.
Thus far we have seen how gestures and other bodily actions possess a type of
emergent ﬂexibility and multifunctionality that, in concert with speech, are speciﬁcally
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
549

tailored and adapted to the contingencies of direct examination: assembling accusations
and blame (and, as we will see, in a more or less “ulterior” strategy in legal terms).
Moreover, although the victim’s words convey very little stress, her utterance is still
laden with aﬀective evaluation – with intense modal meaning – in the temporal coor-
dination of bodily stance and speech, forms of meaning that would be lost to description
and analysis by focusing only on the latter. As we will see below, she is just getting
warmed up.
Gesture and the emergent organization of maternal identity
In line 14, the victim realigns gaze from the defendant to the prosecuting attorney on the
do-verb, and in line 15 (Figures 35.2 and 35.3), she continues this gaze pattern in the
ensuing comment: “I have a child”. On the ﬁrst person pronoun, Bowman points to
herself with the left hand but then immediately, in a ﬂuid improvisation, aborts the point
and produces a downward gesture consisting of several bunched ﬁnger beats (with the
ﬁngers facing down and palm inwards) that reach the stroke phase on “child”. In this
supple movement, she transforms personal reference deixis with the extended index
ﬁnger to a bunched three or four-ﬁnger display to make an emphatic point; her self-
reﬂexive ﬁnger point transforms into the bunched gesture on the downward motion, a
type of discontinuous gliding gesture that begins as a self point but one displaced and
merged immediately into a diﬀerent form that synchronizes with her production of the
noun phrase “child”. Put another way, she accelerates tempo of the self point and then
Figure 35.2 I
Figure 35.3 have a child
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
550

implements a cut-oﬀto reconﬁgure a new gesture that coordinates with the emphatic
ﬁnger points on “child”.
Mobilizing an ingenious demonstration of displaced rhythm to preserve the integrity
of talk–gesture synchronicity, she produces a parenthetical afterthought or aside – but not
an unimportant one. While the defence attributed an array of unseemly motives – that
she was a woman scorned or revengeful – the victim reframes ulterior motives as an issue
of moral authority, a discourse of maternal responsibility. She contextualizes gender
identity not as sexual relation (a woman picked up in a bar) but as a family relation,
where the downward gesture on child may be metaphoric in the sense that the child is
lower in age and smaller than herself. The defendant did not merely sexually assault a
woman but a mother with a child, and the bunched ﬁnger beats, by visualizing both
pragmatic and propositional structure in an emphatic display of bodily stance, intensify
the immorality of such a crime. Thus we see the role of gesture not only to coordinate
interaction, adjusting and readjusting its form and trajectory to keep pace with the
emergent contingencies of utterance construction, but also in concert with speech, to
contextualize maternal identity, activate epistemic stance, and build creative accusatory
accounts in legal performance. We see how identity and stance are not only realized
through grammatical resources but also contextually situated and multimodally emergent.
Repeating and recycling the accusation
Where is the victim’s ulterior motive in all this? What is becoming transparent at this
stage is that the victim’s avowal of ulterior motive represents less a rebuttal of the defence
attorney’s impeachment strategy than a symbolic vehicle for assembling a litany of accu-
sations against the defendant. Doubtless, the only thing “ulterior” is not the victim’s
motive but her deployment of motive as an interactional resource for attacking the
defendant’s moral character. Still, and with much greater precision, the victim and the
prosecuting attorney mobilize ulterior motive as an explicit metapragmatic resource for
shaping a sonorous recitation of moral condemnation against the defendant, steering the
topic toward his unscrupulous behaviour rather than the victim’s state of mind. Although
legal research often notes that rape victims in particular and witnesses in general are
powerless on the stand, less research has shown how witnesses compose a persuasive
voice in court, and the victim’s accusatory narrative here constitutes, mutatis mutandis, a
mirror image of defence strategy: a powerful form of multimodal resistance.
Figure 35.4 What he did to me was wro:::ng
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
551

In line 17 (Figure 35.4), the narrative develops further as the victim repeats and
recycles her accusation (“What he did to me was wro:::ng”), repeating not only verbal
but visual conduct as well, returning her pointing gesture to the defendant during the
pause in line 16 and gazing in his direction on “was”. Although the victim repeats the
fused relative, she alters gestural conﬁguration in terms of tempo and elevation: slower
tempo and steep upward/downward motions for more pronounced emphasis. That is to
say, the second recycled and repeated fused relative is accompanied by marked pointing
beats – heightened elevation on the upswing and increased acceleration on the down-
swing – though still incorporating the autonomous post-stroke gestural hold toward the
defendant during vowel lengthening (on “wro:::ng”) and after utterance completion. By
withholding speech on the post-stroke hold, the victim bestows a powerful sense of
modal intensity to her verbal conduct: a pronounced shift in the fused relative, now the
ﬁrst component in an emerging multimodal parallel structure.
Just as crucial, she not only shifts gaze to the prosecuting attorney after her initial gaze
at the defendant but also, while still maintaining a pointing gesture in his direction, rea-
ligns her gaze and postural orientation to the jury during the post-stroke hold (albeit
brieﬂy), adding an emergent dimension of subordinate participation into the unfolding
narration. In a supple display of multimodal dexterity, she intimates a high degree of
contempt toward the defendant – perhaps inviting the jury to agree with that assess-
ment – by pointing at him while simultaneously moving into a state of gaze with other
participants, participants responsible for prosecuting and evaluating his actions. To
“rearrange” (Goﬀman 1959), she directs a form of “uncivil” inattention toward the
defendant by discussing his blame relevant actions and immoral traits while directing that
talk to other co-present recipients.
The sequence progresses through a multimodal parallel structure consisting of the
contracted coordinating conjunction (explicitly marking the parallel structure in pro-
gress), general ascription concerning the defendant’s actions built as a contrast oﬀthe
prior blame component (“n’ it’s not right”) and elevated pointing beat to the prosecuting
attorney: a steeply marked elevation on the contracted conjunction and acceleration on
the downswing stroke “right” in line 19 (Figure 35.5).
From the pointing beat’s downswing position (at the bottom of the motion) in
Figure 35.5, she retracts her hand shape to execute an index ﬁnger touching thumb or
precision gesture (in which the tip of the thumb touches the tip of the index ﬁnger to
form, as Kendon (2004: 225) notes, a “ring” shape that “makes prominent some fact or
Figure 35.5 n’ it’s not right
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
552

idea”), directs this new gesture (still with the left hand) via a low vertical arc movement
to the jurors and aligns gaze to the jury box in the middle of the utterance (on “rest” in
line 20) to shape a new – and main – participation structure. Next, she redeploys the
precision gesture to map beats onto stressed syllables and, in the process, mobilizes
postural adjustments in the form of three distinct incremental shifts to the right (on lines
19, 20 and 22), a progression of short head shifts imposed on each intonation unit that
culminate in perfect visual alignment with the jury and that accentuate their institutional
relevance. Finally, the third verbal component in the emerging parallel structure repeats
the contracted coordinating conjunction to link the accusatory litany in Figure 35.6
(“n’I don’t want to live the rest of my life in fear of that man”).
Thus far, we have seen how the victim’s visual activity moves laterally/horizontally
from defendant to prosecutor to jury (inter turn participation), and up/down vertically
on the ﬁrst two pointing beat gestures (intra turn). At the same time, her verbal activity
consists of parallel blame imputations regarding the defendant’s behaviour coordinated
through the contracted conjunctions. The ﬁrst two parts of the litany refer to general
blame attributes (“wrong” and “not right”). The third and fourth segments, however,
shift to more speciﬁc, ﬁrst person mental attributes (“n’ I don’t want to live the rest of
my life in fear of that man” and “n’ I don’t want to be responsible for him doin it to
somebody else”) that repeat the verb of cognition, contracted negative and inﬁnitive.
Consider the relation between grammar, legal identity and the body as this unfolds.
The ﬁrst general attribution is in the past tense (“was wro:::ng”), in which gaze and
pointing beat are directed at the defendant, indicating past behaviour. The second into-
nation unit (“it’s”) is in the present tense and directed to the prosecuting attorney, who is
institutionally responsible for prosecuting the case in the here and now. On the other
hand, the jury, who would be responsible for evaluating the crime in the future delib-
eration, is the primary (not sole) recipient of the speciﬁc components in the parallel
structure (“I don’t want to live” and “I don’t want to be responsible”), each referring to
grammatically marked future projections. Speciﬁcally, the want-type (mental desire verb
“want” to the inﬁnitival complement) inﬁnitives encode future projections, and it is the
jury’s institutionally endowed obligation to evaluate these; that is to say, the jury is
institutionally responsible for the future outcome of the case. Just as crucial, the shift
from general moral evaluations (“not right”, “wrong”) to speciﬁc cognitive verbs
(“wanna”) corresponds metaphorically to gestural shape. The victim deploys pointing
beats for the former, but shifts to the gesture of precision or speciﬁcity in the latter, and
this alternation in gestural form activates not only a change in participant alignment, but
Figure 35.6 n’I don’t want to live the rest of my life
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
553

also a new relation to her utterance (from past and present to future projection): an embo-
died shift in footing (Goﬀman 1981a). In so doing, she contextualizes a delicate or vulnerable
identity (perhaps a delicate gesture for a delicate woman) and that her fate (and the fate
of other potential victims) will soon be in the jury’s hands. As Morris (1977: 58) observes:
the ring or precision gesture is used when the speaker wants to “express himself delicately
and with great exactness. This hand emphasizes the ﬁneness of the points he is stressing.”
As the reader will also notice in the video clip, ring gesture onset is prominently
marked – almost as if she is “winding up” for a delivery – to convey precisely this point.
Here we can see in vivid detail how grammar, gesture, and participation merge into a
multimodal constellation of institutional relevance. We see how stylistic features of visual
and verbal conduct are not only rhythmically integrated – how verbal and embodied
parallelism intersect in polyrhythmic modalities – but institutionally anchored as well.
When her gesture moves from the prosecutor to the jury, she shifts from a steeply ele-
vated vertical pointing motion to a horizontal index ﬁnger tip touching thumb gesture
movement with a very low arc trajectory en route. Once at its participation destination
the gesture is recalibrated and redeployed to beat out her main points of emphasis, still
using the precision gesture shape. In a strikingly nimble multimodal performance, both
gestural form and trajectory are signiﬁcantly altered to recontextualize the new partici-
pation structure and new activity being transacted: a diﬀerent participation structure in
play with a diﬀerent texture of legal relevance. In more theoretical terms, gesture shapes
the infrastructural context in which such poetic improvisation can take place.
Multimodal and multiparty forms of participation
At the end of the intonation unit (“in fear of that man” in line 22 and Figure 35.7), the
victim reactivates the deictic vector – retracting the precision gesture and restoring the
index ﬁnger extension – but not until gesture onset begins, early enough to co-occur
with its verbal complement, the noticeably stressed demonstrative “that man”. As this
occurs, she realigns her point back to the defendant while simultaneously adjusting her
gaze and postural orientation to both jury and prosecuting attorney (indeed, the stressed
demonstrative imparts a marked pragmatic sense in addition to reference). In so doing,
she maps an emphatic moral stance onto the deictic vector of the point, while main-
taining multimodal frames of participation encompassing multiple strands of relevance.
That is, she not only switches to the deictic vector to coincide with the demonstrative
but, once synchronized, resets it to beat out the rhythm of her accusation, engaging the
Figure 35.7 in fear of that man
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
554

defendant without disengaging from either the jury or the prosecuting attorney by
maintaining gaze and postural orientation. Following this, she, ﬁrst, adds the ﬁnal
element to the parallel structure by repeating the contracted coordinating conjunction,
cognitive verb, and inﬁnitive; and, second, maintains the pointing beat into the indeﬁnite
pronoun (“n’ I don’t wanna be responsible for him doin it to somebody else” in lines
24–25 and Figure 35.8) to complete the dense rhythmic structure: a gestural hybrid of
deixis, beat, and bodily stance.
More substantively, the victim reframes ulterior motives as an issue of moral order, of
moral authority. By downplaying the sexual and foregrounding a protective mother identity,
she demonstrates how she is responsible not only for protecting a child but for protecting
others against future crimes by this sexual predator, engaging the jury’s sense of responsibility
for the future well being of other vulnerable women in the process. It is her responsibility to
keep him from doing “it” again. Still more symbolically, this demonstrates how the cultural
voice of maternal authority emerges not only from denotational text but in the intricate
polyrhythmic texture of multimodal form itself; that is to say, the victim not only conveys
her sentiments to the jury and PA but also, in and through the accusatory beats, fosters the
impression of reprimanding an obstinate and impenitent child – the defendant. Just as ger-
mane to the above point, by pointing at the defendant while directing her gaze and postural
orientation to other participants she projects her legal identity as a rape victim: a victim
unable or too afraid to gaze at her assailant. In the process, we can see how, in Michael
Silverstein’s (1998: 226) words, “what was said maps onto what was done” or how “denota-
tional text maps onto interacting text”. The victim not only constructs forms of participation
but also enacts culture in the iconic form of multimodal performance.
Back to ulterior motives
If we consider the re-direct narrative in technical legal terms, the victim’s ulterior
motives neither resurrect her credibility nor broach her motivational state after a sharp
defence impeachment. In a furtive turn of events, she reinforces and repeats the criminal
charges against the defendant through an emotionally riveting spate of accusatory
accounts. Still more accurately, she goes beyond the charge of rape to portray the
defendant as a dangerous individual, shifting from the criminal act per se to criminal
character (“in fear of that man”) and moral identity (“wrong”, “not right” as an entire
course of conduct): an indirect attack on the defendant’s moral character. That the
defendant has not even taken the stand at this juncture in the case bestows a further
Figure 35.8 n’ I don’t want to be responsible…
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
555

measure of distinction to her narrative; since he has not yet taken the stand it is legally
improper to attack his character unless he opens himself up to impeachment (notice the
defence attorney’s objection in line 26). The points I wish to make are these. First, rather
than consider rape victims in the courtroom as passive recipients for defence imputations
of motive, for fabricating the assault charges (often with a psychoanalytic twist), we can
see how Bowman not only resists defence impeachment of motive but also assembles
rather ingenious – multimodal and social organizational – resources for directing her own
character attacks against the defendant. This is not to say that ulterior motives are absent
in her narrative. Rather, her multimodal stance, especially her deictic beats, bequeaths a
strong accusatory sense to the talk – meaning that would be lost to analytic description
without considering the role of the body in and as cultural-legal action. And, second,
rather than consider bodily conduct as some type of nonverbal leakage that reveals an
objective inner truth (often with a psychoanalytic twist) we can see how it functions as
a discursive resource in the constitution of legal realities and organization of direct
examination.
Conclusion
In this chapter I have demonstrated – indeed the participant has demonstrated – how a
dense constellation of multimodal resources – gaze, gesture and talk – is brought to bear
on the emergent and contingent social projects confronting the victim in direct exam-
ination, including accusations, identity and stance. As her narrative unfolds, we have seen
how accusatory accounts are diﬀerentially distributed to institutionally anchored
recipients in temporally synchronized gesture-speech units – how verbal and visual
laminations of participation, legal identity and epistemic stance are generated through
multimodal patterns and oﬀ-kilter rhythms. Such multimodal actions display how the
law is not only talked but embodied into being as well.
In the semiotic division of labour, each multimodal increment contextualizes distinct
accusatory activities and fragments legal recipiency into institutionally emergent forms of
relevant participation. Speech speciﬁes the moral grounds of the accusatory litany; pointing
gestures pick out the defendant’s vector in the deictic ﬁeld; rhythmic beats ground aﬀective
and epistemic stance by hammering out points of signiﬁcance; and gaze movements draw
multiple participants into the motivational account and keep shifting institutional
alignments in play simultaneously. More theoretically, bringing multimodal analysis into
the realm of forensic linguistics opens up a microcosmic direction for a more discriminating
exploration of how the victim can dramatize her story – construct her own voice sponta-
neously – in a rhythmically intricate, highly interactive and emotionally compelling narrative,
a narrative that is ﬂuidly improvised yet uncannily synchronized. That she manages to
foster such a persuasive impression reveals the value of multimodal analysis not only for
direct examination in rape trials but also for legal discourse more generally.
Note
1 Participation refers to the interactive and embodied positioning of speaker and recipient roles in the
micro social organization of discourse (Goodwin 2007: 53; Goodwin and Goodwin 2004). Stance
possesses an array of meanings and here I use it quite generally as the multimodal marking of the
speaker’s degree of certainty of or commitment to their statement (epistemic stance) and to
evaluation, attitude and aﬀect conveyed in propositional content.
GREGORY M. MATOESIAN
556

Further reading
Goodwin, C. (2003) ‘Pointing as situated practice’, in S. Kita (ed.) Pointing: Where Language, Culture,
and Cognition Meet, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 217–41.
Kendon, A. (2004) Gesture, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kita, S. (2003) ‘Pointing: A foundational building block of human communication’, in S. Kita (ed.)
Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1–8.
Matoesian, G. (2008) ‘You might win the battle but lose the war: Multimodal, interactive, and extra-
linguistic aspects of witness resistance’, Journal of English Linguistics, 36(3): 195–219.
Norris, S. (2004) Analyzing Multimodal Interaction, New York: Routledge.
Sacks, H. and Schegloﬀ, E. (2002) ‘Home position’, Gesture, 2: 133–46.
MULTIMODALITY AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
557

36
Terrorism and forensic linguistics
Linguistics and terrorism cases
Roger W. Shuy
Introduction
Of the ten priorities listed by the FBI on its website, the ﬁrst three say that it will
protect the US from terrorist attack, from foreign intelligence eﬀorts at espionage, and
from cyber-based, high technology crimes. The bureau’s remaining priorities include
combating public corruption, criminal organizations, white-collar crime and crimes of
violence, protecting citizens’ civil rights, supporting other crime-ﬁghting organizations
and upgrading the bureau’s current technology. Note that protecting against terrorist
attack is the top priority.
Successful investigations of terrorism throughout the world share the same criteria:
(1) An operation needs to have good reason to suspect that some kind of terrorist
activity is happening or likely to happen. Simply trolling for possible suspects is
not an acceptable procedure in any kind of law enforcement activity.
(2) Once there is good evidence to suspect terrorism, a plan for catching the suspects
is conceived, which often involves undercover work, including tape-recording
conversations that may lead to a conviction. This process can be tricky, because
often there are suspects who interact with others who have no intention of com-
mitting a terrorist act, so the operation needs to take special care in sorting out the
potentially guilty from the innocent.
(3) Next, the agent doing the tape-recording needs to elicit irrefutable evidence on
tape that the target(s) are actually guilty of planning or having carried out speciﬁc
acts of terrorism. This task is even trickier, because such evidence depends on the
skills of the undercover agent to both avoid creating a crime and putting words
into the targets’ mouths while eliciting inculpatory language that will stand up at trial.
(4) Finally, the prosecutor must assess the evidence carefully and with integrity, and
use it only when it satisﬁes the legal requirements for prosecution.
When law enforcement agencies follow these four criteria, they can produce eﬀective
and beneﬁcial results that keep a nation’s citizens safe from terrorist activities. But when
558

they fail to do so, the results can be disastrous, in terms of the ruined lives of innocent
people, depleted budget resources, misuse of personnel and the waste of huge amounts of
taxpayer’s money.
Without doubt, law enforcement agencies often follow the above criteria and bring
terrorists to justice, but there is reason to believe that sometimes there are serious
problems in the way federal law enforcement agencies go about their business. These
problems include failing to locate the right suspects in the ﬁrst place, failing to correctly
identify what terrorist activities were planned and who actually planned or committed
them and carrying out an ineﬀective intelligence analysis of the evidence actually
collected.
A recent month-long conference on Terrorism and Security Studies was held at the
George C. Marshall Center in Germany for government representatives and terrorism
experts from 40 countries. The major topics included deﬁning terrorism, the interna-
tional tools and laws that had been found useful in combating it, global ﬁnancing and the
use of diplomacy and cooperation (Airy 2009). Unfortunately, nothing was reported
about the linguistic issues discussed in this chapter.
Linguistic analysis of conversations in terrorism cases is essentially the same as that used
in any other case, bribery, drug dealing or solicitation to murder, in which audio
recordings constitute major evidence. This chapter highlights some of the problems that
law enforcement (including anti-terrorism units) have had with language as evidence,
and then illustrates these problems with a recent terrorism case in Toledo, Ohio.
Four problems
Problem 1: Finding the right suspects
A recent representative example is a 15-month undercover Homeland Security
surveillance project in Maryland between March 2005 and May 2006 (Washington Post,
17 February 2009). The Maryland targets were peace activists and death penalty oppo-
nents, who were suspected of being terrorists. Agents spent 288 hours investigating them.
Results? Nothing, even though the agency’s reports revealed that among the “threats to
public safety” they investigated was a poetry reading ceremony held on the anniversary
of the bombing of Nagasaki.
The ﬁrst problem with some terrorism investigations, then, is that government agen-
cies can be overly suspicious of the wrong people, apparently including some 40% of the
US population who oppose the death penalty and an even larger number who think the
Iraq war should be ended. It would also appear that undercover agents sometimes focus
their eﬀorts on uneducated, gullible, less than perceptive, preoccupied suspects, who are
likely to be easier to catch and convict. In many cases, they are newcomers to the
country, often with limited English and, as a result, less sensitive to the nuances of the
language used around them.
Problem 2: Determining who created the alleged crime
Sometimes an alleged crime scenario is created and encouraged by the undercover agents
themselves. When this has happened in recent years, juries have sometimes acquitted the
defendants, most of whom are Middle Eastern males, some already US citizens. For
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
559

example in the Dallas “Holy Land” case, the jurors at the ﬁrst trial (which in fact ended
in a mistrial), reported that they felt the undercover FBI agent had encouraged the
defendants to perform acts that they would otherwise have been unlikely to carry out;
in other words that the idea of committing the alleged crime was created by the
investigators and not the defendants (New York Sun, 16 July 2007).
A similar example was the “Liberty City” case in Miami, where the criminal con-
spiracy was also generated by the government’s own informant (Miami Herald, 16 May
2009), who created what he termed an “al-Qaeda oath” and then led the relatively
uneducated defendants in reading it aloud on tape. They were subsequently arrested and
charged with terrorism against the US. They counter-claimed that they read the oath
aloud only to endear themselves to the agent in order to eventually bilk him into giving
them money. Some jurors evidently believed, perhaps with considerable justiﬁcation, that
this was at least two steps away from any intent to plan or carry out terrorist activities.
Problem 3: Accurately determining the agendas of the targets
The FBI and Homeland Security express pride that no successful terrorist attacks have
taken place in the US since 9–11, but from these and other on-going US terrorist cases, a
pattern emerges that begs for linguistic analysis. Some of the accused may well be guilty
of planning or attempting terrorist acts, but others may only seem to be. Careful analysis
of the tape-recorded evidence can often demonstrate that they had very diﬀerent
agendas. By agendas here, I mean the topics that are uppermost in their minds.
Topic analysis should be carried out on all evidentiary conversations, to derive clues to
intentions and agendas. No science can get inside the minds of speakers, but the topics
they introduce, recycle and omit give the clearest available clues to their intentions (Shuy
1982, 1990a, 1993a, 1998b, 2001, 2005). Ignoring such data is clearly failing to carry out
an adequate intelligence analysis.
Problem 4: Lack of careful intelligence analysis
before suspects are indicted
In many terrorism cases, undercover agents covertly record hundreds of hours of con-
versations. Unfortunately, law enforcement agents and subsequent listeners, like jurors, are
tempted, even inclined, to assume guilt simply because the suspects were present during
the taping (Shuy 1993a). In analyses of such conversations, linguists can contribute by:
(1) using their skills in phonetics, morphology and syntax to correct the government’s
transcripts;
(2) using their discourse analysis, semantics and pragmatics skills to identify and keep
track of the speakers’ topics, themes, schemas and agendas;
(3) using their speech act skills to identify and accurately distinguish between various
crucial speakers who request, promise, agree, deny, etc.; and,
(4) using their presentational skills to put all this together in a form that jurors can
easily understand and remember—usually as charts and visual aids.
Such linguistic analyses are parallel to what law enforcement specialists call intelligence
analysis (Godfrey and Harris 1971: 30), the primary goal of which is ﬁrst to obtain
accurate records of what was said by whom; then to put it all together in context;
ROGER W. SHUY
560

identify and distinguish between such speech acts as agreements and denials; and deter-
mine when the targets have either not heard or not attended to what was said to them
(Harris 1976: 30–34). The latter is often clariﬁed in videotaped evidence, where it is clear
that a particular target was either not present or not within hearing range of inculpatory
statements made by others. The intelligence analyst should then formulate multiple
hypotheses, not just the hypothesis of guilt. If s/he does not do so, the prosecution
can easily go awry, as was evidenced in the famous case of U.S. v. John DeLorean (Shuy
1993a: 68–85).
Terrorist case example
All four of these prosecutorial problems were manifested in the 2008 Toledo, Ohio
terrorism case of US v. Mohammad Amawi, Marwan El-Hindi, and Wassim Masloum, all
convicted of terrorism in June 2008. The case provides examples of several diﬀerent
aspects of typical US terrorist prosecutions.
I spent seven months consulting with the attorneys for one of the defendants, Marwan
El-Hindi. Linguistic analysis clearly demonstrated that El-Hindi’s agenda was very dif-
ferent from that for which he was accused. It also showed that the undercover agent
created the evidence of El-Hindi’s alleged illegal intent and capitalized on El-Hindi’s
inability to listen carefully and interpret the agent’s ambiguity, indirectness and hints.
Finally, it showed that when the agent became discouraged by El-Hindi’s failure to
follow his encouragement to set up a terrorist training cell, he abandoned that scenario
and created a new one which involved El-Hindi downloading videotapes and internet
transmissions from the Middle East and emailing them to him. It was this act that led to
all three men being convicted of the terrorist activity of abetting the enemy.
Background
Although all three defendants were Muslims living in Toledo, they had not even met until
they were brought together brieﬂy by the agent. Amawi, 28, was a dual citizen of the US
and Jordan. El-Hindi, 44, was a naturalized US citizen from Jordan and Masloum, 26, an
immigrant from Lebanon, was a legal permanent US resident. Amawi worked in a travel
agency, El-Hindi was a self-employed businessman, and Masloum was a college student.
The FBI had recruited Darren Griﬃn, an ex-Army Special Forces member and a
former drug user with unspeciﬁed money problems, who had previously worked very
brieﬂy for the FBI as a federal drug agent on a three-year contract to try to discover
unspeciﬁed terrorist activities in the Toledo community. For this work, Griﬃn testiﬁed
at trial that he was paid some $350,000.
Claiming to have his own private security business, Griﬃn’s technique was to hang
around Toledo mosques, claiming he was a recent convert to Islam and pretending to be
disenchanted with US foreign policy. He grew a beard, wore Arab clothing and took on
the role of what he thought to be an Islamic extremist. He told various people at the
mosque that he hated the president, wanted to do violence to the US government and
to train Muslims for violent jihad. He made little or no progress and, ironically, several
American Muslims at the mosque actually reported him to the FBI.
Eventually, he met the three defendants, brought them together and tape-recorded
their conversations. They had no previous criminal records and their alleged conspiracy
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
561

was orchestrated and implemented by the agent himself. In February 2006, the defen-
dants were charged with conspiring to kill or injure people in the Middle East, including
US troops serving in Iraq and with providing the support and resources to do so. Amawi
was also charged with threatening President Bush, a charge based on his severe
verbal criticisms, and with distributing bomb-making information, by downloading and
emailing the very videotapes that Griﬃn had requested. El-Hindi was accused of sharing
information (the videotapes) about terrorist training activities, including plastic explosives,
rockets, and bombs (the videotapes were downloaded onto his home computer).
Masloum, who was present on only a couple of the tapes, was charged with requesting
the agent to train him to carry out violent jihad in the Middle East. He was very
overweight and wanted physical training as he was about to be drafted in the
Lebanese army.
Alleged motivations of the targets
In terrorism cases the agents try to determine motivation, develop scenarios in which
they can record criminal action or intent and use conversational strategies that will
encourage the targets to inculpate themselves. In this case, Griﬃn worked hard to show
that the defendants were primarily concerned with training that would lead to violent
jihad, but this was not easy.
Amawi, the Toledo travel agent and devout Muslim, had recently visited his native
Jordan, where he learned much about the views of friends and relatives about the Iraq
war. Clearly the brightest of the three, he was technologically competent enough to
access television programs and internet resources from the Middle East. The prosecution
claimed that Amawi’s motive was his desire to return to the Middle East and personally
engage in extremist jihad.
El-Hindi, also a devout Muslim, was a bumbling business entrepreneur, whose only
income at that time came from commission earned by recruiting medical students for
European medical schools. A father of ﬁve, he was involved in a bitter and complicated
divorce, probably an important reason for his lack of attention to what the agent was
saying (or hinting) to him. On tape, over and over again El-Hindi shows his deep con-
cerns about the educational problems of poor Muslims in the Middle East and of Muslim
children in US schools. Among other half-baked projects, he wanted to buy or rent a
property and open a religiously oriented school. At trial, Griﬃn called El-Hindi the
“money man” in the alleged conspiracy, although none of El-Hindi’s schemes to obtain
grants had ever got even to the proposal stage.
Masloum’s interest was simply to prepare for this future military service; the prosecution
claimed that he wanted military training in order to commit violent jihad.
The agent’s two scenarios
As is common in covert operations like this, the government had to create a believable
scenario in which a possible terrorist crime might be committed. After agent Griﬃn
began trolling for prospects at the mosque and was rebuﬀed by several members, he
turned his attention ﬁrst to Amawi, who was vocal against the Iraq war. In fact, most of
the 300 hours of taped conversations were with Amawi. After Griﬃn ran into El-Hindi
at the mosque, he was intrigued by his puﬃng about his business capabilities. Any
potential terrorist act would need to be ﬁnanced somehow and El-Hindi appeared to be
ROGER W. SHUY
562

a promising participant. Masloum was more an accidental afterthought, participating in
very few of the conversations.
Griﬃn’s ﬁrst scenario was to get El-Hindi to recruit other Muslims to form a terrorist
cell, although he never said this explicitly to El-Hindi. He talked about training people,
but was very vague about what kind of training he would provide and the ambiguous
word, “training” was key in the prosecution case.
Both El-Hindi and Masloum were overweight and out of shape and there is con-
siderable evidence from the taped conversations that whenever they agreed with Griﬃn’s
oﬀer of training, they were thinking of physical training—he was a former Special Ops
soldier who claimed to be an expert in physical ﬁtness. El-Hindi mentioned some names
of friends and colleagues as possible recruits for such training, but no matter how many
times Griﬃn reminded him, El-Hindi never got around to inviting anyone and the
alleged terrorist cell never developed.
After a year or so, it became clear that the initial scenario of starting a terrorist cell was
going nowhere, so Griﬃn and his handlers changed their scenario to what the prosecu-
tion referred to as “electronic jihad.” Griﬃn arranged for the three men to meet for the
ﬁrst time for dinner at El-Hindi’s home, to talk and to watch videotapes from the war in
Afghanistan. Since the targets knew that Griﬃn was a new convert to Islam, they spent a
large portion of the time talking about religious matters. The videotape of this meeting
shows clearly that El-Hindi, the host, cook and meal-server, spent a great deal of his time
in the kitchen, thus missing much of the ongoing conversations in the living room.
Like most immigrants, the defendants were anxious to hear news about “home,” so
they often watched Middle East television news programs and scoured the internet.
Much of the evidence used by the government at trial was collected when Griﬃn asked
the men to download speciﬁc programs and internet information for him. Some of it
included scenes that allegedly depicted military tactics used by US and foreign armies in
the Afghan and Iraqi war zones, evidence that the government said had provided Griﬃn
with his “training” materials. It was on the basis of such evidence that the prosecutor
claimed the suspects had participated in “electronic jihad.” The terrorist charge against
the cook, El-Hindi, came from the videos Griﬃn had him email to him.
Agent’s conversational strategies used to implement his two scenarios
Undercover agents are encouraged to follow a three-step process in their eﬀorts to elicit
and record evidence of criminal activity or intentions (Shuy 2006: 7–9):
1. Let the suspects talk freely, thereby self-generating their own evidence of guilt.
If this fails then:
2. Drop hints that the suspects might pick up on and expose their own culpability.
If this fails then:
3. Represent the illegality of the enterprise clearly and unambiguously. This is a
requirement of the FBI’s own guidelines for agents during undercover operations
(Heymann 1984).
Griﬃn’s undercover strategy never got beyond step 2 in his conversations with El-Hindi,
who talked freely on a multitude of topics (step 1), but none related to the subject of the
investigation. Over half of the topics El-Hindi introduced concerned his personal pro-
blems with his divorce, his attempt to remarry and the welfare, health and education of
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
563

his ﬁve young children (see also Grebler, this volume, for similar talk in another alleged
terrorism case). Less frequent topics were about his various eﬀorts at starting business
ventures; his desire to establish a school for Muslim children and to help poor Muslims in
the US and Middle East; his many complaints about people he thought had cheated him
in past business ventures; discourses on religion; and his concern that local Muslims
should be protected from home intrusions and harassment. In the tape-recorded
evidence, there is no indication of him recognizing or even being aware of Griﬃn’s
many hints of illegality. To El-Hindi, at least, Griﬃn never made a single clear and
unambiguous representation of the illegality of his enterprise.
Agent’s strategy in scenario one: using “training” ambiguously
As I mentioned earlier, the prosecution claimed that when Griﬃn talked about “training”
he conveyed the meaning of training for violent jihad. In the 13 taped conversations in
which El-Hindi was a participant, Griﬃn brought up “training” 122 times, but of these,
111 are vague, ambiguous or unspeciﬁc. The 11 other references were deﬁned as:
training in security protection; training neighborhood kids to shoot air riﬂes; handgun
training for home self-protection; and training for physical ﬁtness. He was never speciﬁc
or explicit to El-Hindi that his “training” meant training for violent jihad.
In these same 13 conversations, El-Hindi himself mentions “training” 42 times, only
ﬁve of which are contextually vague or ambiguous. If a target with less than competent
use of English could be clear in his meaning about training, it is curious that the agent
was not equally clear. El-Hindi’s 37 speciﬁc references to “training” were: training in the
Koran; training in physical ﬁtness for himself and others; training American Muslims for
self-protection; training in recreation; training horses; training for getting grants; and
training to be a certiﬁed Arabic/English translator. El-Hindi never talked about training
for extremist jihad. In fact, he argued against violent jihad several times.
It is important to remember that Griﬃn never once told El-Hindi explicitly that the
training program was to prepare him and others for extremist jihad. Instead, he took
advantage of his vague and unspeciﬁed mentions of “training” to allow later listeners to
the tapes to think that that was what he meant.
The English system of referencing requires a ﬁrst deﬁned reference to which later
vague or potentially ambiguous items refer back. Thus, unless pronouns such as “he”
or “it” have previously deﬁned references, their meaning remains unclear. Based on
El-Hindi’s responses to Griﬃn’s vague and ambiguous references to “training” and on his
own uses of the word “training,” it is clear that El-Hindi never understood Griﬃn’s
general hints.
In contrast, in a tape-recorded conversation with two other men who were not
indicted in this case, Griﬃn was very clear that his “training” was for handguns and other
weapons which would be used in violent jihad. If Griﬃn could be that clear to others
when El-Hindi was not present, it is curious that his grammatical referencing was never
clear and unambiguous to El-Hindi himself.
In Creating Language Crimes (Shuy 2005) I described eleven conversational strategies
commonly used by undercover agents. The most frequent of these strategies is to employ
ambiguity to make the taped conversation appear to be about something that, in fact, the
target does not comprehend. Griﬃn used this strategy very commonly in his conversa-
tions with El-Hindi. Since my role in this case was only to analyze the conversations
involving El-Hindi, I cannot vouch for the way agent Griﬃn used “training” to Amawi
ROGER W. SHUY
564

and Masloum in conversations when El-Hindi was not present. However, it is clear that
to El-Hindi he was always ambiguous, except for the few occasions when he related
training to benign topics. And, since there was no other reported contact between the
three defendants, there is no evidence that El-Hindi could have discovered Griﬃn’s
intended meaning of “training” from them.
The ambiguity strategy works well even on native English speakers, especially on those
who, like El-Hindi, tend to be so absorbed in their own agendas that they pay little
attention to what others are saying. Although the prosecution claimed that Griﬃn had
been clear and unambiguous about meaning training for terrorist purposes, his actual
strategy was to suggest at least six quite diﬀerent meanings: training Muslims in
techniques of personal security; physical ﬁtness training; training in life skills; training in
education and religion; training horses; and training to be a certiﬁed translator. There
follow examples of each.
Training for personal security
Griﬃn talked about security throughout these conversations, allegedly to indicate
that Muslims must be careful to avoid being caught training for extremist jihad. But
El-Hindi’s own very diﬀerent deﬁnition of “security” was evident from several descriptions
of him and other Muslim Americans being detained at airports and being attacked on the
streets. After El-Hindi described his own experience of being mugged, Griﬃn continues:
Griﬃn:
The biggest thing is security, you know.
El-Hindi:
That’s what I’m saying.
Griﬃn:
We have to be extra careful because … they’re after Muslims.
Although it would appear here that El-Hindi and Griﬃn are agreeing on a deﬁnition of
security, the overall context of their conversations shows that they had very diﬀerent
schemas. Even when Griﬃn bravely dips his toe in the water and tries to be a bit clearer
about his goal for weapons training, El-Hindi still doesn’t get it:
Griﬃn:
There’s deﬁnitely stuﬀto teach kids. You know, it’s
basic stuﬀ, as far as weapons training. Weapons training is basic.
El-Hindi:
I was in good relation with Ji’atan Academy and he
trained in …
The on-going topic here is the possibility that they could rent or buy the private school
building. The Ji’atan Academy teaches karate to children. El-Hindi appears to interpret
Griﬃn’s use of “weapons” as karate instruction.
Up to this point in their conversations, Griﬃn’s use of the words, “train” and “training”
without exempliﬁcation, continues to mean military-type training to him while El-Hindi
continues to consider it training for the purpose of self-protection. Next, Griﬃn adds
“VIP” to the equation:
Griﬃn:
I’m gonna train some other guys … so we’ll, and uh,
basically how we’re gonna do it, uh, I found out too is they
could be my VIP protection team.
El-Hindi:
This is something I want to get into too.
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
565

It ﬂatters El-Hindi to be considered a VIP, because he is vain enough to consider himself
one of the important businessmen who would participate in the physical training Griﬃn
would oﬀer.
Training for physical ﬁtness
Next, Griﬃn takes the meaning of “training” in another direction.
El-Hindi:
I lost about twenty pounds since I came back.
Griﬃn:
It’s like you’re gonna be in training too.
El-Hindi:
I am. I am. I have to. I have to.
El-Hindi is very aware that his middle-aged body is terribly out of shape, but Griﬃn
doesn’t miss the opportunity to sneak in “training.”
Training for life skills
Even when Griﬃn gets a bit bolder with his hints about “training,” El-Hindi’s responses
show that he still doesn’t get it. A few months earlier El-Hindi had ﬂown to Egypt
speciﬁcally to ﬁnd and bring home two sons of a friend, who had squandered their
college tuition money to ﬂy to Cairo. Their parents feared that the boys were going to
get involved politically, possibly even to join in jihad. Griﬃn disbelieved his reasons for
the trip and reported to his handlers that El-Hindi had gone to Egypt to organize a
jihadist cell.
Shortly after their return, the two young men met Griﬃn at an Arab convention held
in a Chicago hotel. Griﬃn talked with the two young men about weapons training and
pro-Arab topics, recording the conversation with a miniature microphone hidden in his
watch. El-Hindi was at the same convention, to promote his business of recruiting
medical students but was not a participant in this conversation. Later the same day,
Griﬃn talked to El-Hindi about the boys and they agreed that they were headstrong and
stupid, much in need of instruction about many things, including ways to protect
themselves. This was captured on tape as well:
El-Hindi:
Listen, before we do anything, brother, you give them like a small
thing and see if they hang onto it.
Griﬃn:
They can’t because we’re talkin’ security here. We’re talkin’ my live-
lihood and everything … I’m puttin’ together a training program and
I’ve already started training some of these brothers that are going, that,
that need it. And they gotta protect theirself. We have to stay in
communication though because this is serious, you know.
El-Hindi:
Help the needy. Help the needy.
The prosecution used this exchange to try to show that El-Hindi wanted the boys to
join the still unformed cell for training in violent jihad. In contrast, El-Hindi was
warning Griﬃn to take whatever life-skill training he might provide them slowly,
one step at a time. From what Griﬃn had previously said about training for security,
El-Hindi could easily understand this to mean that they were in need of self-protection
training.
ROGER W. SHUY
566

Training for education and religion
Throughout the 13 conversations, El-Hindi often spoke about ﬁnding a suitable location
to build a school for Muslim children to learn the Koran, to have suitable recreation, and
possibly also to serve as a Muslim mosque. Griﬃn volunteers to do the physical educa-
tion part, but he is impatient with El-Hindi’s slow pace in bringing it all about. El-Hindi
is not a careful listener, here or anywhere else in the tapes. On two separate occasions, a
month apart, Griﬃn raised the ante a bit by indicating that they could mask his training
by making it look like something else.
Griﬃn’s ﬁrst reference was on November 23, very near the end of his conversations
with El-Hindi:
El-Hindi (talking about the school): The ﬁrst ﬂoor make it like a prayer area,
mosque and—
Griﬃn:
And everything else training.
El-Hindi:
Oh yeah.
Griﬃn:
’Cause that’s how we could mask it.
El-Hindi:
You will fall in love with that place. Two ﬂoors.
Griﬃn:
You know, like you were sayin’ before, we’ll do the daycare and use
the rest of the money for, you know, the training and everything.
El-Hindi:
I got to get in shape quick.
It is diﬃcult to know what El-Hindi understood by Griﬃn’s “mask it,” but if Griﬃn had
wanted to be more explicit, he certainly could have used a word that might be
more clearly understood by a non-native English speaker, such as “disguise” or “hide,”
“conceal,” “cover up,” or even the more commonly used military word, “camouﬂage.”
El-Hindi’s lack of reaction to Griﬃn’s eﬀort to indicate illegality is shown by the fact
that he continues his on-going excitement about ﬁnding a building that will contain a
school with a recreational facility for Muslim children with a mosque attached. His “oh
yeah” in response to Griﬃn’s use of “training” is consistent with his desire to have a
school that trains children in the Koran, regular education curriculum, recreation, and
physical education.
Griﬃn’s second use of “mask” came almost a month later:
Griﬃn:
My training and everything, it’s in the millions of dollars. You know
who I work for, so I’m getting in shape and getting ready and
everything too.
El-Hindi:
I need to get in shape too. Are we gonna have something for kids and
adults or—
Griﬃn:
If we mask it with uh, you know, the training.
El-Hindi:
For the kids?
Griﬃn:
We can automatically do it for the adults too. We’ll cater it toward the
kids and then, you know, we can always bring the uh, the adults along.
Here Griﬃn recycles his use of “training” to indicate physical training and El-Hindi
immediately understands it that way, saying once again that he himself needs to get in
shape. Then Griﬃn repeats his “mask it,” with his proposed training program. El-Hindi
clearly doesn’t get Griﬃn’s meaning, asking if the training would be for the kids. It goes
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
567

without saying that weapons-training for children was not a reasonable idea. Griﬃn’s use
of “it” is vague, as usual.
Training horses
One of El-Hindi’s futile and unwise business ideas was to bid on a tender from an
Egyptian police department to build a camp where their oﬃcers could train. Part of the
tender was to supply horses, horse-trailers, trucks, and other items. El-Hindi subsequently
called several Michigan vehicle manufacturers about the price for trucks and various
breeders about the cost of horses.
El-Hindi: They will establish a whole program training for shooting, training for
horses … a whole camp. Training for everything, even for swimming …
It’s going to be a huge camp to train for horses, you know, horses,
camels, martial arts and weapons.
This, of course, was taken by the government’s intelligence analysts as El-Hindi’s
willingness to agree with Griﬃn’s weapons training ideas. Despite the fact that this was
an Egyptian police-training project, El-Hindi’s reference to it as a “camp” where the
police would practice shooting furthered the government’s highly doubtful claim that he
really wanted to set up a camp in Egypt for violent jihad.
Training to become a certiﬁed translator
Another of El-Hindi’s many never-completed business ideas was to become a certiﬁed
translator of English and Arabic. He saw an advertisement, liked the idea, and reported it
to Griﬃn:
El-Hindi: They are oﬀering six weeks training here … They want you to represent
them in the United States for unlimited access, uh, translation from
English to Arabic and from Arabic to English. They want to make con-
tracts for Arab people.
There are many more examples of the way “training” was used by both Griﬃn and
El-Hindi, but these are representative and typical.
(2) The agent’s conversational strategy of ﬁshing fails
I mentioned earlier that undercover agents follow three steps in their operations (let the
target talk himself into guilt, then drop hints of illegality, and ﬁnally, be speciﬁc about
the illegality).With El-Hindi, Griﬃn certainly dropped hints of illegality, but El-Hindi
gave no evidence of understanding and Griﬃn never reached the important step
(required by FBI Guidelines: Heymann 1984) of being explicit, clear, and unambiguous
about that illegality. The above discussion of his ambiguity strategy provides some
examples of Griﬃn’s hinting style and for the defense attorneys I produced a chart citing
47 such hints, which I referred to as “ﬁshing.” Notably, all of Griﬃn’s ﬁshing hints failed
to achieve his goal, largely because the two men had very diﬀerent schemas throughout
their conversations. The following are representative examples.
ROGER W. SHUY
568

Griﬃn wants El-Hindi to ﬁnd a location where he could “train.”
Griﬃn:
I’m actually looking for like a farm to buy because then you could
have goats, train, do everything there.
El-Hindi:
That’s what you need. Farming.
El-Hindi was always thinking about his own schema, ways to make money, in this case
by farming. Griﬃn tries to get El-Hindi to let him “train” the two young men he had
brought back to from Egypt.
Griﬃn:
They don’t have any training so what we gotta get across to them is
you just goin’ over there to commit suicide. That’s not jihad. So we
have to reel those guys in.
El-Hindi:
I told them, “listen, you have some money. You really wanna beneﬁt
the people here?” They said, “yes.” I said, “let’s slaughter some ani-
mals and give to the poor people. And then you are helping a lot of
people.” So he gave me money, probably a thousand. And I want to
slaughter a lot of, thanks be to God, amen, I wanna give to the poor
people. They get the reward. We are going on a mission of change.
Here El-Hindi interprets Griﬃn’s “jihad” in his own schema of feeding local poor
people, part of his “mission for change.” In any case, the agent used “jihad” in the
context of what the boys and not what he and El-Hindi might do.
On one of the occasions when they are watching videos from the Middle East, Griﬃn
ﬁshes again:
Griﬃn:
What else are they taking applications for? For actual ﬁghters?
El-Hindi:
No, no. I didn’t see that … The way I understand it, they don’t need
ﬁghters. All they need is some push from the outside to educate
people.
This passage shows that El-Hindi’s focus on the videotapes reﬂected his own education
schema, something very diﬀerent from Griﬃn’s schema about violent jihad.
El-Hindi stayed ﬁrmly on his own legal agendas
Analysis of conversations includes not only the linguistic analysis of the targets’ responses to
agents’ topics illustrated above (a defensive strategy), but also the benign and legal topics
generated by the targets themselves (an oﬀensive strategy). El-Hindi’s contributions were
notable in that he self-generated no inculpatory evidence and stayed ﬁrmly with his own
agendas of raising money for charitable work and building a school for local Arab children.
El-Hindi self-generated no inculpatory statements
In most undercover operations investigators hit the jackpot when the targets say some-
thing indicating their illegal intentions. In all of the tapes in this case, El-Hindi never
introduced a topic that could be interpreted as favoring violent jihad. The only other
way that El-Hindi could have implicated himself would have been through voluntary
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
569

statements about his own ideas and plans. Griﬃn tried to modify three of El-Hindi’s own
agendas toward this end:
1. setting up a corporation that would get grants to be used to support training,
2. using the school he wanted to buy or rent to house his training, and
3. watching videos and internet programs from the Middle East.
Throughout the tapes, Griﬃn pushed El-Hindi very hard to get busy on these plans (see
also Grebler, this volume, on this strategy). Although there are many instances of each,
space permits only a representative sample.
El-Hindi planned to set up an ofﬁcial non-proﬁt organization to get
grant money
As we have seen, Griﬃn considered El-Hindi the “money man” and kept trying to get
him to set up a corporation to provide resources for training programs. The prosecution
made much of this “organization,” attempting to make it look like a syndicate or cell
operation. So when El-Hindi reported that he had gone to a lawyer to set up a perfectly
legal non-proﬁt organization, Griﬃn was shocked:
El-Hindi:
Before I check on the grants, we have to establish the, uh, non-proﬁt
organization. I will call it in, God willing, and see what they, I will tell
the lawyer what exactly we need for the non-proﬁt organization that
we planning.
Griﬃn:
What lawyer?
El-Hindi:
There’s a lawyer, the one who does my corporation.
Griﬃn:
(changes the subject)
Two months passed before they talked about this again:
El-Hindi:
You have to submit all tax papers then. Before, it was only you submit
the federal ID number and that’s it.
Griﬃn:
You have to submit your taxes?
El-Hindi:
You have to submit the actual paper, the certiﬁcate and everything.
Despite Griﬃn’s attempts to divert the idea, El-Hindi’s plan is to apply for a legal non-proﬁt
organization to do legal charity work.
El-Hindi planned to set up a school and mosque
Another of El-Hindi’s recurring topics was to build a school for Muslim children which
Griﬃn kept trying to convert into a place where he could also conduct weapons train-
ing. El-Hindi, however, seemed oblivious. This was his agenda from the very beginning
of his conversations with Griﬃn:
El-Hindi (talking about a Maumee school that was closing and soon to be for sale):
I took Ameer with me to see if, if we can uh, close a deal on buying
the building and convert it into a mosque over there … We could get
ROGER W. SHUY
570

grants to teach the children how to swim, right? …
Griﬃn:
If we had a building, it’d be perfect because we could do it at night.
There’s no prying eyes and all that good stuﬀ, so we’ll see.
El-Hindi:
It’s a private building, I mean. They’re going to come and search?
Griﬃn:
No, no. That’s not it.
El-Hindi:
And we’re not gonna be doing something illegal anyway.
Griﬃn:
No, no. We can’t shoot or any of that other good stuﬀ.
El-Hindi:
Well, it’s just training.
Despite Griﬃn’s many eﬀorts to the contrary, El-Hindi said he believed what they are
planning was perfectly legal and Griﬃn’s notion of training would be physical educa-
tion. A month later, in their next recorded conversation, El-Hindi recycled the school
topic:
El-Hindi:
I would like to set up a salaﬁschool over here, for the kids, Koran
memorization and Hadith memorization. You can bring your kids to
it. It’s going to be one of the best in the United States. I wanna get a
school, God willing, we need a place.
El-Hindi’s stayed with his plan to build a school for children to learn the Koran
along with the regular school subjects. He remained deaf to whatever Griﬃn hinted
about using it for other purposes. One of the important contributions a linguist can
make in a case like this is to mark, organize, and keep track of the agendas of the
speakers.
El-Hindi agreed to the agent’s request to send him videos from the
Middle East
As noted earlier, the agent devised the “electronic jihad” scenario after it had become
obvious that El-Hindi was never going to bring together a group of men to form a ter-
rorist cell. Griﬃn videotaped the meeting; the quality was terrible but, along with the
much better audio, it was usually possible to tell who was present during the evening’s
conversation. Some allegedly damaging statements were made when El-Hindi was out of
earshot, but when he was present the conversation was mostly about Islamic religious
practices and his own marriage and divorce problems.
After dinner, they moved to an adjoining room where they watched videotapes from
the Middle East. It was here that the charges against El-Hindi were framed. At trial, the
jury saw the videos, including some that showed very violent scenes of tanks being
blown up and a US marine being killed at a checkpoint in Iraq. These might be con-
sidered news ﬁlms in some parts of the world, but for the jurors in this case, they were
gruesome reminders of enemies of the US.
The fact that it was Griﬃn who arranged this showing and who speciﬁcally asked the
men to locate examples of military scenes, did not seem to matter to the prosecution
or, in fact, to the jury. The men dutifully located such examples, played them, and
then as requested, downloaded them for Griﬃn. The act of downloading and then sending
the ﬁles to Griﬃn became the cornerstone of the charge that they had engaged in
“electronic jihad.” And this was the speciﬁc charge for which El-Hindi was convicted.
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
571

Evidence that the agent realizes his efforts are failing
The issue of intelligence analysis, noted earlier, plays an important role in determining
whether or not the data gathered is suﬃcient to indict the target. The direct evidence for
indictment usually comes either from the target’s own explicit, inculpatory statements or
from the target’s inculpatory responses to the agent’s hints or ﬁshing eﬀorts. Neither of
these gave the government much to work with in El-Hindi’s case. But the agent’s words
can also provide clues as to whether or not the undercover operation is working well. In
other unrelated cases on which I’ve worked in the past, such evidence appeared after the
agent completed the conversation, but let the recorder keep running as he returned to
his base. On more than one occasion, I’ve heard the agent vent his disappointment to his
fellow agents with words like, “I’m sorry but I just couldn’t get him to admit anything.”
The tapes in this case are not as dramatic, but there are still some strong clues to indicate
that Griﬃn felt his eﬀorts were not working with El-Hindi. I prepared a chart of these for
defense use when they cross-examined Griﬃn, including the following representative
sample that occurred during the last month of his substantive conversations with El-Hindi:
Griﬃn:
’Cause we really gotta get things going ’cause we can easily tie them
together.
Griﬃn:
But I mean like it’s like everything we have before, you know, we
always say something, you know, we’re gonna do it but we don’t follow
through. We got to stay focused. We have to move together.
Griﬃn:
Just whatever grant stuﬀyou got, if you say we gotta establish a organi-
zation, then ﬁne, let’s do it. We gotta start marching with that, you
know. So let’s do it, you know, ‘cause the time for talking is over. We,
we, I have to move forward, so I want you with me, you know, when
we do our projects.
Griﬃn:
We all have to play our part. We can’t sit and talk any more ‘cause that’s
what too many Muslim brothers are doing right now. They’re sitting and
talking about it but they’re not helping the nation at all.
After this recorded conversation, Griﬃn stopped pushing El-Hindi to get focused and
move forward setting up a training program. That tactic clearly hadn’t worked because
El-Hindi’s schema and agenda of helping the poor and establishing a school for Muslim
children continued to put him on a very diﬀerent wave-length. From that point on,
Griﬃn’s conversations with El-Hindi contained no more mentions of training and
no more ﬁshing. It was clear that his scenario of “electronic jihad” then became the
government’s only avenue to net El-Hindi as a terrorist.
What can we learn from the El-Hindi prosecution?
This story does not have a happy ending for the defendants. The jury was unmoved by
the defense’s eﬀort to point out the issues described here and they found El-Hindi guilty
of terrorism. We can speculate about the eﬀectiveness of the prosecution’s attack or the
ineﬀectiveness of El-Hindi’s defense, but there seems to be much more to it than this.
To this day, the US and much of the world remain in a state of fear, engendered ori-
ginally from the tragic events of 9–11, and fed daily by politicians who thrive on such
ROGER W. SHUY
572

fear. Some are convinced that terrorist activity surrounds them daily, and in many
countries, including the US, citizens of Middle Eastern descent remain the prime sus-
pects. Unfortunately for El-Hindi, he ﬁt that broad proﬁle. Reviewing this case, we now
ask whether the agent focused on the right suspects, whether the prosecutor examined
the targets’ agendas and whether an eﬀective intelligence analysis was made.
Did the government ﬁnd the right suspects?
Regardless of the outcome, this case illustrates many of the problems law enforce-
ment oﬃcers face when they charge suspects with terrorism. Rather than seeking out
situations where terrorism was happening or likely to happen, agent Griﬃn trolled
for possible suspects in a place where American Muslims congregated, failed for a
while and then focused on a suspect who seemed to ﬁt his proﬁle. From the lan-
guage in evidence, however, El-Hindi was not the right suspect, but that seemed not
to matter.
This case had three targets who were recorded conversing together only a few times,
but who were recorded individually many times. The lawyers with whom I worked
instructed me not to analyze the tapes in which Amari and Masloum appeared together
or separately without El-Hindi, so I couldn’t judge whether they produced genuinely
incriminating utterances (but from all appearances, Masloum was considerably less likely).
If Amawi was indeed guilty, there is a very good chance that his guilt contaminated the
case against El-Hindi, since it is not unusual for all indicted defendants to be found
guilty, even if only one of them was. When this happens, the problem lies at least
partially in the legal system’s own intelligence gathering, intelligence analysis, and trial
procedures. So it is not possible to say for sure that the government located any, some, or
all of the right suspects in this case, but, based on the undercover recordings, it is clear
that El-Hindi provided no evidence of being guilty of anything with which he was
charged. It is highly likely that the prosecution pursued only one hypothesis—that of
guilt. This would suggest that the prosecutor’s intelligence analysis was inadequate.
Did the government investigate the agendas of the speakers?
There is no evidence in the prosecutor’s trial presentation that he had any concern for
(or knowledge of) the conversational agendas of either El-Hindi or agent Griﬃn. To
discourse analysts this seems very strange, since conversational agendas and schemas are
the very foundation of what is being discussed.
In criminal court cases it is common for both the prosecution and the defense lawyers
to focus only on small pieces of talk (words and sentences) and pay little or no attention
to the signiﬁcance of the holistic information that could be provided if they would make
the eﬀort (or get linguistic help) to examine the speakers’ topics, agendas, schemas, and
the signiﬁcance of their responses. People do not commonly recognize the fact that
words and sentences extracted from their original conversational context are capable
thereby of having a diﬀerent meaning.
One ﬁrst step for prosecutions of any type, is to analyze the speakers’ agendas and
schemas, as revealed through the topics they introduce and recycle (Shuy 1993a, 2005).
Prosecutors and police make much of the notion of “motive,” but they usually look for
this motive outside of the language evidence. The language clues found within the
recorded conversations are fruitful evidence of motives, however, and this information is
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
573

readily available, if lawyers would only look for it. This is a crucial contribution that
linguists can provide.
Was a proper and effective intelligence analysis made?
There are four essential steps in the process of intelligence analysis (Harris 1976: 30):
(1) collecting data
(2) evaluating the data for usefulness
(3) analyzing the data for meaning
(4) reporting ﬁndings
Undercover agent Griﬃn was responsible for collecting the data. No doubt his handlers
reviewed his tapes throughout this two-year investigation and it is proper to give them
credit for adequately evaluating, analyzing and then deciding that their ﬁrst scenario, that of
trying to get El-Hindi to form a cell that Griﬃn could train for violent jihad, was a failure.
The replacement scenario, however, was another matter. The prosecution’s ﬁnal analysis
was that El-Hindi’s intent was to select videotapes and internet programs that would help
Griﬃn in his alleged, but non-existent, eﬀorts to train people to commit violence against
the US. A more careful evaluation of these conversations shows a distracted, naïve and
gullible El-Hindi meekly complying with Griﬃn’s request to forward these materials. It is
diﬃcult to see how this shows his overall illegal intent. Perhaps if this meeting had taken
place in Amawi’s or Masloum’s home, El-Hindi would be less likely to have been charged.
Accurate intelligence analysis would also have shown that throughout Griﬃn’s two sce-
narios, El-Hindi said nothing inculpatory about a violent jihad. In fact, El-Hindi’s own
words and actions evidenced that he was opposed to such actions.
There is every indication in the tapes that the prosecution’s intelligence analysis was
faulty. The alleged oﬀensive materials were found in El-Hindi’s home when he hosted a
dinner meeting that was orchestrated by the agent. Griﬃn also orchestrated El-Hindi’s
emailing the materials to his home computer. That’s all the prosecution could factually
claim about El-Hindi’s involvement and apparently that’s all they thought was needed.
Spoken language is more diﬃcult to process than written language, which may be one
reason that the government’s intelligence analysis erred. Speech goes by the listener very
quickly, making it necessary to review to it many times. The commonly used technique
is to produce a written transcript of the speech, but a transcript can’t reveal important
information such as head nodding, non-verbal communication signals or indeed, whe-
ther the listeners were even present or responding with language that evidences attention
to or understanding of the agent’s allegedly inculpatory hints.
Because of the speed of speech, people who participate in conversations are often less
able to determine all the inferences and nuances of what is being said than are later pri-
vileged listeners who can listen at their leisure and replay as many times as they want.
Jurors also assume that the defendants are guilty, not only because they were indicted and
brought to trial, but also because the evidence was recorded. However, later listeners are
also highly disadvantaged when they listen to a tape that had a speciﬁc meaningful con-
text at the time it was made, but which is much less clear in the courtroom. Add to this
the fact that the prosecution focuses on individual words and sentences rather than entire
contextual indicators of meaning and intent and the case against El-Hindi is made much
easier for jurors.
ROGER W. SHUY
574

Conclusions
Many people in western nations still fear that anyone with Arabic appearance and an
Arabic name is likely to be a terrorist, making prosecutions like El-Hindi’s appear to
be reasonable and necessary. In some cases, these fears are supported by irrefutable
evidence—but not always. The clear danger remains that this strong fear can lead law
enforcement oﬃcers to select the wrong suspects, to focus on the wrong person in a
group under investigation, to neglect analyzing the discourse context in which the
alleged criminality takes place, and to produce an inadequate intelligence analysis.
Such prosecutions can go astray by basing their claims of guilt on ambiguous repre-
sentations made by undercover agents and by failing to understand when the agent’s
eﬀorts to hint at or ﬁsh for inculpatory responses have actually netted nothing. And
sometimes, the prosecution distorts by omitting relevant facts like the target’s statements
of intention to act legally. The case against El-Hindi illustrated all of these weaknesses.
If the prosecutors had called on linguists to analyze these conversations before the case
went to trial, El-Hindi might never have been indicted. When the prosecutors leave it to
the defense alone to make use of linguistic analysis, there is always a very good possibility
that the judge will not permit the linguist to oﬀer such testimony at trial, which is exactly
what happened in this case. El-Hindi is now serving a prison sentence of 14 years.
Further reading
Shuy, R.W. (1990) ‘The analysis of tape recorded conversations,’ in P.P. Andrews and M.B. Peterson
(eds) Criminal Intelligence Analysis, Loomis, CA: Palmer Press, 117–48.
——(1993) Language Crimes: The Use and Abuse of Language Evidence in the Courtroom, Malden, MA and
Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1998) The Language of Confession, Interrogation, and Deception, Thousand Oaks, CA and London:
Sage Publishing.
——(2005) Creating Language Crimes, New York: Oxford University Press.
TERRORISM AND FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
575

37
Computational forensic linguistics
Searching for similarity in large
specialised corpora
David Woolls
Introduction
This chapter addresses the ways in which computers can be used to assist the work of
the forensic linguist. The emphasis is on computational document comparison and in
particular on the identiﬁcation of high levels of similarity between the whole or parts of
two documents, which the forensic linguist can use to decide questions of shared or
suspicious authorship. One of the central problems discussed is how to handle very large
quantities of data eﬃciently and reliably. The need for computer assistance has grown
rapidly in the twenty-ﬁrst century, with most companies and educational institutions
holding their data in electronic form and often making it openly available on the Inter-
net. There is both the need to monitor for misuse of such electronic material and for the
existence of prior work or duplicated material in databases. Another major area examined
is the need for ﬂexibility in any computer program which has the objective of identifying
similarity. Identifying consecutive sequences of words only ﬁnds unmodiﬁed copying
(cut and paste), whereas more sophisticated modiﬁcations involve insertion, deletion,
re-ordering or thesaural changes and all these require word-level searching. Arising from
this, the power of using simple lists of particular words or parts of words, rather than
undertaking full grammatical parsing, is explored and explained.
Computational forensic linguistics
Computational forensic linguistics, as the name implies, is a branch of computational
linguistics, a discipline which has its roots in the 1950s, when computers ﬁrst entered the
commercial and academic world. Computational linguistics embraces a wide range of
subjects, of which perhaps the best known are information retrieval, lexicography and
machine translation, but it also covers automated parsing, categorisation of texts and
summarisation. The discipline generally works with large corpora, which it uses to derive
576

statistics to assist in these tasks. The use of computers for collusion detection was reported
by Johnson (1997) closely followed by Woolls and Coulthard (1998). Woolls (2003)
explores the development and expansion of such tools, and Woolls (2006) addresses the
work along with wider aspects of plagiarism and its detection.
In the area of computational forensic linguistics discussed in this chapter, while the
number of documents can be extremely large, the comparison requirement is generally
between two documents and in particular between the sentences of two documents.
That is, it is not suﬃcient to report that two documents are similar to each other,
because the user often already knows or suspects this to be the case. What s/he needs to
know is where exactly in the document the similarities appear and how to evaluate them
as unremarkable or signiﬁcant. The preliminary and theoretical discussion in this chapter
is based on just ﬁve sentences. This is partly because the work undertaken is almost
always highly conﬁdential and so real examples are not readily available and, even if they
were, it would necessarily take up a lot of space to illustrate their workings. But working
with single sentences also highlights the complexity of language, and what has to be
taken into account in designing computer programs that will provide accurate and
comprehensible results for the human reader. The discussion then moves on to two case
studies to illustrate the computational linguistic principles.
Sentences
In order to compare any two items, there need to be elements that are potentially present
in both. As far as sentences are concerned, these elements are primarily words and punc-
tuation. The single, very famous sentence that I focus on is taken from the opening to
Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen. I use it to demonstrate the elements that can be used by
a computer program for the purposes of similarity searching. In doing so, it might at times
appear that I am stating the obvious but, as nothing is obvious to a computer program, it is
important to start at this very basic level. What will become evident is that the computa-
tional treatment of texts is a matter of deciding what best to include to approximate what
we as humans generally do intuitively when we read a text. Here is the sentence:
‘It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good
fortune, must be in want of a wife.’
Identiﬁcation of words
What can a computer program do with this sentence? A number of things. First, it can
divide it up into its component words by identifying items that have spaces on either side.
This, however, isolates some ‘words’ that look like non-words to a human reader, because
of the punctuation that is attached to them: for example <‘It> <acknowledged,> and
<wife.’> . We now see that there is a need to give the computer a list of punctuation
items plus an instruction to remove them from the front and back of the ‘words’ it has
found. However, it is usually not desirable to simply ignore the punctuation, because the
use of punctuation is a structural decision made by a writer and as such can be distinctive.
Indeed, some programs treat individual items of punctuation as ‘words’ in their own right.
And of course the punctuation placed around the word words in the preceding sentence,
was used to indicate that it was not being employed in its normal meaning, so perhaps
‘words’ in this case should be considered to be a separate wordform from words.
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
577

Once we have isolated the words they can be organised into alphabetical order. In
computer terms this would actually mean that, of the words in our illustrative sentence,
<It> would come ﬁrst in the list, because capital I and lower case i have diﬀerent
numerical values. So, if we want a true alphabetical list we need case-insensitive order-
ing, which means treating both <I> and <i> as the same letter, either by making all
words uppercase or all words lowercase.
Indexing
Another extremely useful thing we can use the computer for is to produce an index of
exactly where all these words occur. Primarily we can record for each word which
document or documents it occurs in. It is common to add details of the location of each
word within each document, so that any word and also the words close to it can readily
be recovered. This is similar to the index at the back of this book. This technique lies
behind the operation of web search engines. The results are located by ﬁnding all the
documents which contain the word or words of the search term and the search result
‘snippets’ are built from the words close to the search terms in the selected documents.
The present author’s method also records which sentence the words occur in, which is
clearly necessary to perform the sort of sentence comparison described later in the
chapter.
Measurements and patterns
We can do other things with our list of words – we can measure the lengths of the
words in characters and we can count the number of times each word occurs. For
example, the shortest word in our sentence is <a> with just one character and it
occurs four times. A computer can easily sort the words in any combination of
alphabetical, length and frequency order. Or again, we can get the computer to look
for patterns. In this sentence there is one obvious pattern – the sequence <of a>
appears twice – and one perhaps less obvious pattern <in x of a> also appears twice,
where the x represents the word possession in the ﬁrst case and want in the second.
Winter (1994) describes such a pattern as a matching contrast relation realised by repetition
by replacement, which indicates that possession and want are in an antonymic relationship
in this particular sentence.
There is another pattern which humans are able to observe, but which cannot be
directly identiﬁed by a computer without some knowledge of word classes. It is
possible to attempt to replicate the human observation of patterns in a computer
program. The primary pattern here is <a> followed by a noun – which is itself followed
by another short word or other more complex patterns. One frequent modiﬁcation to
the base pattern is the presence of one or more adjectives before the noun, and
another is an adverb preceding the adjectives. Humans learn this and other patterns
either from reading or from formal lessons in grammar. We cannot readily give
computers this knowledge but we can provide lists of common endings for all four
main word classes and indicate which patterns are equivalents. Examples of the
components of such lists are included in Table 37.1. A pattern rule for a noun phrase
might therefore be: a [adverb] [adjective] noun (where the square brackets indicate
optional inclusion).
DAVID WOOLLS
578

Classiﬁcation
A computer can only simulate learning at best, but it is possible to identify, for almost
any language, those whole words that perform functions and to identify those beginnings
and endings of words which act as markers of word classes. Using such lists, combined
with fundamental rules, computer programs have been written that can fully parse
sentences with a very high degree of accuracy (see for example the free CLAWS parser at
http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/claws/). In the programs written by the present author a simpler
approach is taken using an extended list of function words (commonly called a Stop List)
and treating all other words as content words, that is words whose meaning is being orga-
nised by the function words and which can frequently be classiﬁed by their endings,
using the word-endings list.
Computers can also learn the probability of the ordering of such words and parts of
words, to deduce what sort of word might ﬁll the gap, if the program cannot ﬁnd it
within the dictionary it is using. Given such lists of function words and word endings
computers can also split sentences or complete documents into their broad compositions.
The 450-strong function word list used by the author frequently accounts for over 50%
of a full text. Our illustrative 23-word sentence has 13 function words and 10 content
words, that is, 57% function words.
Comparing sentences
Now we have illustrated the complexity of what is going on in a single sentence and
how computers can be programmed to recognise this, we need to address how we go
about comparing two sentences. This requires the introduction of two concepts used
throughout the comparison methodology described below.
The ﬁrst concept is called fuzzy matching. If we want to identify similarity rather
than identity, we need to be able to specify that the two sentences under consideration
form some sort of match, even if not all their words are identical. This facility is present
in the Advanced Search features of web search engines, where the searcher can explicitly
include or exclude certain words from the search. This is called Boolean searching,
because Boolean logic always produces a true or false result for a condition; either a word
is there or it isn’t. This works well when the user knows, or thinks they know, what
words might be of assistance in obtaining better search results, but, when one is com-
paring large numbers of sentences, it is not possible to specify particular words for each of
them, so the comparison has to be performed in a fuzzy way. That is, as long as a certain
number or percentage of words are present in both sentences we will consider the pair to
be a potential match.
The second concept is that of a chunk. We can, of course, use all the words in a
sentence and ﬁnd out how many of them are present in both, but some sentences are
Table 37.1 Word ending lists for all four main lexical classes
Some Noun endings
-s, -es, -ure, -ry,-ance, -ment
Some Verb endings
-ed, -es, -s, -en, -ing, -ise, -ize
Some Adjective endings
-ish, -al,-ous, -ic, -ary,-ful
Some Adverb endings
-ly, -ward, -where
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
579

quite long and complex and other comparison cases include examples where there is a
long stream of words containing no punctuation or capitalisation. The classic case of very
long sentences is the Claims Section of a patent application. By law, each claim has to be
a single sentence. As claims are central to the future eﬀectiveness of a granted patent,
patent attorneys attempt to squeeze as much detail as possible into each claim, so a
‘sentence’ can often run to several lines. This is achieved by the use of the semi-colon,
which is not seen as a sentence boundary by patent law, nor indeed in linguistics by
many descriptions of what constitutes a sentence. This is not too diﬃcult to handle, of
course, as long as the users of the software program have no objection to breaking a
string of words before reaching a ‘normal’ sentence boundary, that is, when it encounters
a semi-colon.
Rather more problematic are those texts where there is an absence of both punctuation
and upper case letters, as this example illustrates:
this is a good song i like it i think that it has some potential for the radio the singer
is great i like the singer alot and the vocals are great too this is a hot song that can
actually make it somewhere but u would have to push this song 4real
(author’s data)
This is a review written online as an immediate response to music the writer has just
listened to, and it looks more like transcribed speech than normal written text. To
handle regular orthographical marking, extended sentences as well as the review example
above, we need a common system of demarcation that can be applied to both orthodox
and non-orthodox texts, so that comparison is possible at a similar level between
segments so demarcated. This is what is meant by a chunk. To handle this we have made
use of the work of linguists and psycholinguists.
A chunk might be a traditional clause or phrase, or it might be a stretch of a sentence
that has a minimum number of words and a recognisable lexical boundary marker. The
term has its roots in psycholinguistics. Miller (1956) reported that we could hold around
seven items in short term memory. Spoken ‘sentences’, connected sections of speech all
of which are required for the listener to make sense of what the speaker is referring to,
are frequently much longer than this in terms of words, of course. Because of the short
recall length, each of these smaller chunks must make sense in themselves so they can be
encapsulated and fed into the next chunk, and in this way we can make sense of an
extended spoken argument with no need for explicit punctuation. In speech we are, of
course, assisted by rhythm, intonation and frequently, though not always, visual clues.
Where we have just a transcript, or simply written data, we can use the words that identify
the conceptual boundaries to break up any stream of words into shorter segments.
From the linguistic perspective, we employ the work of Fries (1952) who was inter-
ested in describing the structure of English in order to provide non-native speakers with
a description and a highly organised sequence of exercises to teach how the language
worked. He had decided that teaching traditional formal grammar was not helpful to
the rapid acquisition of conversational language skills. He covertly recorded telephone
conversations and set himself the task of identifying what he called the minimum free
utterances that resulted in a response and then describing their components and extensions,
not in the terms of traditional grammar, but into what he called classes. The classes were
numbered based on their relative frequency of occurrence and their position in the
resultant utterances, which were not called sentences. Although it goes against the spirit
DAVID WOOLLS
580

of his exercise, Class 1 words loosely approximate to nouns, Class 2 to verbs, Class 3 to
adjectives and Class 4 to adverbs. As all the recordings were of conversations, which
don’t include punctuation, no boundary markers are included in his examples, other than
initial capitalisation of the utterances.
It will be seen that this corresponds with what we have with the music review
sentence above. The interest for computational sub-sentence analysis is that Fries also
identiﬁed a relatively small number of words, which clearly did something to introduce,
organise or link the free utterances. These he named function words as a consequence.
He further subdivided this list into their diﬀerent functions. The ones that interest us are
those that signal boundaries to the listener, since we can make yet another list of such
words and use them to segment the text. If we do that with the review sentence, we
get this:
1. this is a good song
2. i like it
3. i think that it has some potential for the radio
4. the singer is great
5. i like the singer alot and the vocals are great too
6. this is a hot song that can actually make it somewhere
7. but u would have to push this song 4real
Notice that there are seven chunks, the two longest of which contain eleven words, and
the boundary words are in initial position: this, I, the, but. The artist reading this
review will be in no doubt that the writer likes the song, and will be able to separate the
various comments quite readily by the signals of the boundary words. Chunks 5 and 6
both comprise more than one clause but can be argued to act as a single unit in this
stream of words. This illustrates both the utility of Fries’ function words and the three
concepts – positive evaluation, identiﬁcation of potential and a need to promote the
song – which can act as a memorable summary to fulﬁl Miller’s criterion.
Sentence similarity
Now we can illustrate how this helps us with comparison. Here is another review by the
same person, already broken into chunks.
1. i like the guitar
2. i think that this song is really good
3. i think that it has some potential
4. i think that it has alot of potential
5. but u have to really push this song
6. that may make this song get somewhere
We need to rearrange the chunks to show the matching as in Table 37.2. In a
commercial system, the order of the originals would be preserved and a system of
cross-referencing similar to that shown in the table would be used to identify which
chunks the system had recognised as matching. Identity of word is shown in regular
font, diﬀerences in italics, and underlining has been used to identify related
concepts.
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
581

This example shows the complexity involved in comparing a single stream of words.
1. The repetition in 2.3 and 2.4 shows the need for some decision about whether to
show matches once or twice. Chunk 2.3 matches the ﬁrst part of 1.3 exactly, so
might be considered to have priority over chunk 4, but this requires there being a
rule for the program to employ.
2. We need to consider the direction of comparison. From shorter to longer would give
2.3 a score of 100%, from longer to shorter 70% (7 out of 10 words matched in 1.3).
3. We need to consider whether we are going to include function words or not in
the measurement. If we decide not to, from shorter to longer would give 2.3 a
score of 100%, (think, has, potential) from longer to shorter 75% (3 out of 4 words
matched in 1.3).
4. If we include function words, we need a way of excluding the second the in 1.5
(the vocals), since this is not part of a match.
5. Matching on particular functions may be helpful. There is match of modal use in
1.6 and 2.6, with can in the former being replaced by may in the latter.
There are other layers of complexity. If we encounter this sentence: ‘A man who possesses a
fortune needs a wife.’ we need to decide whether this is similar to our original sentence. The new
sentence falls into two chunks and in Table 37.3 we can see that it is certainly not completely
diﬀerent, in terms of the words themselves at least, after the ﬁrst six words of the original.
We might have started from the premise that the relation between any two sentences
is going to be scalar. Identity means 100% similarity; completely diﬀerent means 0%
similarity. But when we consider actual sentences it is more complicated than simply
looking for the presence or absence of identical words. Table 37.4 takes the matched
components of Table 37.3, recording the running total of matches, from identical
upwards, in column 2 and calculates the similarity percentages at each stage. Column 3
Table 37.2 Similarity, difference and identity in two reviews
Chunk
Review 1
Chunk
Review 2
1.1
this is a good song
2.2
i think that this song is really good
1.2
i like it
1.3
i think that it has some potential for
the radio
2.3
2.4
i think that it has some potential
i think that it has alot of potential
1.4
the singer is great
1.5
i like the singer alot and the vocals are
great too
2.1
i like the guitar
1.6
this is a hot song that can actually make it
somewhere
2.6
that may make this song get somewhere
1.7
but u would have to push this song 4real
2.5
but u have to really push this song
Table 37.3 Comparison of original sentence with new sentence
Austen
that
a
man
in
possession
of
a
good
fortune
Exact match
A
man
a
fortune
Lemma match
who possesses
Austen
must
be
in want
of
a wife
Exact match
a
wife
Synonym match
needs
DAVID WOOLLS
582

calculates from the perspective of the new nine-word sentence, and column 4 from the
perspective of the Austen 23-word original. Columns 5 and 6 show the word counts and
percentage calculations from the perspective of the Austen sentence when only the ten
content words it contains are used for comparative purposes. As can be seen, there are
thirteen diﬀerent possible measurements for this sentence alone, ranging from just 17% if
we only include exact matches with all the words that Jane Austen used in her sentence,
to 100% if we measure from the perspective of the new sentence and include all partial
similarity and repeated matching.
Table 37.4 shows that variation in what might be classed as similar is the crux of the
issue for any measurement of similarity at sentence level. A decision mechanism needs to be
built into a computer program to allow it to perform reliable and consistent comparison.
The author uses the principles of
1. excluding around 450 function words from the initial comparison because their
structural function makes them a requirement in sentences, so co-occurrence of
the function words themselves is frequently not an indicator of similarity;
2. assuming that any sentence with more than 50% of the content words matched in
some way warrants being considered a candidate for similarity;
3. including the function words in the ﬁnal presentation, as shown in the review
example, Table 37.3 above, because the structural similarity is part of what makes
the sentences similar;
4. performing all comparisons from the shorter sentence to the longer.
We are still left with the linguistic fact that it is evident that the two sentences are far
from equivalent semantically, as the list below shows.
1. there is no evaluation of the truth of the bare statement,
2. a single man and a man are not necessarily equivalent, and certainly not here,
because a married man is clearly not in need of a wife,
3. there is no stated requirement for the fortune to be a good one
4. and the modality of must be is omitted.
Table 37.4 Measuring similarity
New
sentence
Austen
Austen
Content only
Total words in sentence
9
23
10
Match type (from
table 37.3)
Running
total of
words
matched
% match
% match
Running
total of
content
words
matched
% match
Exact repetition (a, man,
fortune, wife)
4
44%
17%
3
30%
Exact repetition including
all 3 instances of a
6
67%
26%
Lemma (possess*)
7
78%
30%
4
40%
Synonym (in want of/needs)
8
89%
35%
5
50%
Composite (who possess*)
9
100%
39%
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
583

So in this sense, they might be considered to be completely diﬀerent despite all the
words in common. But it is possible to get from the long version to the short one, and
with a little imagination from the short to the long, so the sentences might well be
considered similar. Whether it makes any sense to have a percentage attached to the
similarity is also questionable, as you will have seen by now.
Re-ordering
The above discussion has so far looked only at direct matching at the lexical level while
retaining the word order. The actual situation is more complex, since changing from
the active to the passive, at least in English, always changes the word order and intro-
duces at least one additional word, with the reverse obviously being true. Consider the
simple proposition ‘Dogs chase cats’. This is generally true. ‘Cats chase dogs’ may or
may not be true, but it certainly doesn’t mean the same thing, whereas ‘Cats are chased
by dogs’ does, even though there are more words and chase and chased are not
identical. Most sentences are not as short as this, of course, but most sentences are
composed of phrases and clauses which can be this short and so the combination eﬀect
of identity/diﬀerence and word order can result in quite a few problems for a com-
puter program. This is especially the case where are and by in the above example
appear on a function word list, so would not immediately be taken into account at the
comparison stage, leaving the diﬀerent word order as a puzzle for the program with no
functional assistance to resolve it.
As humans, we have a diﬀerent way of identifying these relationships, and attempts
have been made using neural networks to get computers to do the same, with some
success, particularly in the recognition of similarity of authorship. For this, computers are
given a base set of known texts and a set of rules for learning the patterns of individual
usage. Comparing the features of a text of unknown origin with the features extracted
allows the derivation of a degree of similarity. Usually the unknown text is believed to
be by one of two or three authors, so the author with the best match on features is
considered the most likely author.
Even without using such techniques, which are not possible where there is only one
pair of texts available, there is another feature of written language that is helpful to the
computational cause. The recognition of lexical similarity between what one is reading
and what one has read before is so surprising that we frequently go back and check, and
in the majority of cases are correct in our recognition and can identify a prior source for
that sentence. Quite how we as humans do that over time and with much other reading
in between is outside the scope of this chapter. But computers can be given a large
number of texts and the task of exhaustively comparing them, and simply highlighting
where similarity exists, for humans to subsequently make a decision about.
Document similarity
We have concentrated on sentence similarity partly because that is the central compo-
nent of the work described below and partly because complete documents are clearly
composed of sentences. But documents can be compared directly. Documents that share
a lot of sentences will also share a lot of words, and various measures are available to
allow the vocabulary similarity of two documents to be established, all of which are
intended to return higher scores for related documents. Such scoring methods sit behind
DAVID WOOLLS
584

most information retrieval methodologies where a set of documents needs to be identiﬁed
as a potential source for answers to queries.
In addition, when comparing documents on occurrence and word frequency, it
becomes apparent that words that are shared but occur infrequently, particularly only
once (also called hapax legomena), are prime indicators of a relationship between the two
documents, and especially so if the two documents are of similar lengths (see Johnson
1997, for example, on hapax legomena and plagiarism). This feature is the result of the
way we write. In a document like an essay even as long as 4,000 words, a word
frequency count normally shows that between 60% and 70% of the content vocabulary
items used occur only once and a further 15% occur only twice. And comparing the
word lists of two independently produced documents on the same subject will normally
show a great deal of diﬀerence in the words which occur only once or twice. These are
quite straightforward measures, but there are clearly more complex ways of achieving
such comparisons. The problems arise when only parts of documents are being used and,
in particular, single or short sets of sentences.
Paraphrase
Finally, we need to point out what is very diﬃcult for computers to handle, even with a
thesaurus. Here is another version of our sentence. ‘Everyone agrees on one thing about rich
bachelors. They really should get married.’ Now, this is not as beautiful or well constructed as
the original, but it might be considered to say much the same thing. It preserves some
element of the evaluation of the statement and the modality of the suggested answer to
the implied problem. However, it also has no words in common with the original and
uses two sentences rather than one. The complete absence of lexical matching and the
use of a very compact expression rich bachelor in place of eight words, a single man in
possession of a good fortune, which has the eﬀect of switching the eﬀective word order as
well, sets a very diﬃcult task for computational comparison. And of course, paraphrase is
encouraged by teachers and is often not considered to be plagiarism. The missing ele-
ment for a computer program, when compared to a human reader, is that the human
reader would undoubtedly recognise the dependence if they knew the original or had
the words in front of them. Any computer program based on word similarity would
completely miss the semantic match.
Case study 1 – UCAS
The Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (UCAS) handles admissions to
almost all the universities in the United Kingdom. Each applicant has to submit a
personal statement including their background and their motivation for studying their
chosen subject. During the monitoring process which UCAS routinely performed, it
became evident that some of the applicants’ personal statements were very similar,
and some were traced back to advice sites on the Internet. UCAS decided that they
needed a fully automated system that would check all incoming personal statements
against not only all others in the current year but also all those submitted in at least
the two previous years, as well as with material collected from known openly avail-
able websites.
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
585

The scale of the requirement was very large, with approaching 600,000 applications
each year, most of them received in a four-month period. Nearly 40,000 applications
were submitted on the 2009 ﬁnal deadline day alone. Comparing each document with
every other requires a very very large number of comparisons, for instance a mere ﬁve
documents requires ten comparisons and 100 need 4,950.
The UCAS requirements were extremely challenging. They requested that the computer
program be able to identify similarity at sentence level, because they believed that wholesale
use of internet material was rare, and that merging and modifying sentences from a number
of sites was more likely. In addition, they needed the results of each batch of 125 applica-
tions in under 10 minutes, so that their Veriﬁcation Unit could make decisions without
appreciably changing the target time for handling applications in the existing system.
Procedure
In any such task, it is important to identify the nature of the input data and the
requirements of the end user. The ﬁrst determines how the task can be done and the
second determines what has to happen to the results of any analysis. In this case, there
were several elements that inﬂuenced program design and implementation.
Data
First, all the data to be monitored had been submitted in electronic form over the pre-
vious three years and were held solely on UCAS’s computers and were available as plain
text. This removed three of the major diﬃculties that can impair computational forensic
linguistics: data conversion from written or typed to electronic form, data dispersed over
the Internet and data in a variety of electronic formats.
Secondly, all the data was of roughly the same length, with the majority of applicants
making use of all the available 4,000 characters. This meant that document comparison at
word level would show comparable word distribution patterns, allowing ﬂexibility in
deciding what should be indexed.
Thirdly, the data would be fed from an existing system, designed to process the full
applications in batches of around 125, so there was a natural rhythm to the ﬂow of data
which could be built into the system.
End user requirements
The requirement here was threefold.
1. the UCAS Veriﬁcation Unit needed a very simple but clear summary of the
applications received at any given time;
2. they needed to be able to see the nature of the similarities between the incoming
material and the matched personal statements in a single document; and
3. they needed this to keep up with the ﬂow from the existing system, so to be as
near to real-time as possible.
In all computational forensic linguistics, the presentation of the output needs to be built
into the program, as distinct from a manually prepared report which can be built from
spreadsheets, graphs and charts as well as a word processor.
DAVID WOOLLS
586

Analysis
We have mentioned in the Document comparison section that all English texts share the
property that around 50% of the words will be function words and 50% lexical. So, in an
average length sentence (20 words), this means that approximately ten words in each
sentence will be lexical. Secondly, as also mentioned already, texts of under 1,000 words
each share the property that most of the lexical items will only occur once (hapax lego-
mena) or twice (dis legomena). This is particularly the case where the 650 words in the
personal statement have to cover a number of diﬀerent aspects, leaving little room for
repetition, so the hapax words can be as much as 70% of the lexical vocabulary. And in
personal statements, we can expect that the words used will diﬀer from statement to
statement, as they should represent the writer’s personal opinions, assessment or descrip-
tion of the common topic, and all of these factors will determine the word choice, along
with the background vocabulary of the individuals concerned.
This is helpful because it allows eﬃcient indexing and comparison. Hapax words can
clearly occur in only one sentence each, so it becomes much simpler to identify whether
they occur in the same sentence in any two texts simply by recording the ﬁle and sentence
number for each such word and counting how many words are shared by sentences from
diﬀerent documents. Using hapax words is also useful because they provide a limit on the
size of any index system used. If indexing is by hapaxes, not only is the list shorter than if
all words are taken into account, but the number of documents recorded where those
words occur will be much lower, making the amount of checking for co-occurrence
when using such an index a much less complex and time-saving process.
Indexing
As has been noted above, a computer program can be designed to ﬁnd all the hapax
words in each document and build an index of which documents and which sentences
they occur in. Then it can read any document, identify the hapax words in each sentence
of that document and check whether that word exists in the index. With careful com-
parison techniques, it can then ﬁnd out how many of the words in the current sentence
are found in another sentence in the set of all the other documents. A highly optimised
version of this useful feature lies at the heart of the eventual solution.
Accuracy
Central to all computational forensic linguistics is the need for accurate reporting. This
might seem obvious, but there are unusual considerations in this particular area. All other
forensic linguistics is based on experts in the ﬁeld forming an opinion. By contrast, in
computational forensic linguistics, it is far more likely that a non-linguist will be asked to
form an opinion based on the linguistics output. This would be a subject specialist where
essays are being compared, or an administrator with specialised skills in human resource
management or similar in a commercial organisation. At UCAS, the veriﬁcation unit had
expertise in the detection of fraudulent applications, but none in linguistics. So the users
needed to be able to rely totally on the data they saw and be assured that it was com-
plete. Presenting data which doesn’t appear to be copying and proves not to be, known
as a false positive, both creates more work, as any report requires examination, and also
reduces conﬁdence in the eﬃcacy of the program. At the same time, the users need to be
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
587

conﬁdent that nothing has been missed by the program operation, known as a false
negatives. This is much more problematic. With the vast number of comparisons needed
for a UCAS size data set, this cannot be checked by hand, so it has to be founded on
logically demonstrable principles, which can then be veriﬁed by planting known cases in
the dataset and making sure that all such cases are discovered.
In standard plagiarism detection there is a need to ﬁnd the source(s) in order for a successful
case to be built. In UCAS’s case, it was only necessary to demonstrate that one or more exam-
ples of the incoming statement could be found in whole or in part in their existing
database or in a web source. But they did need to be able to see the matching and to make it
available to both the applicant and the university admissions tutors. To do this, a maximum
of three identiﬁed sources was set, with each source being shown in a diﬀerent colour, so all
users of the data could see the location and extent of the borrowing. Inexact matches, such
as variations in spelling or tense, were also highlighted, to show where attempts at dis-
guise had occurred. This presentation assists decision-making and evidence provision in a
single document. An example of a multiple sourced personal statement is available on the
website accompanying this handbook, available at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/.
Effectiveness
The program has been running for two years’ at the time of writing, and has identiﬁed
over 26,000 cases for the Veriﬁcation Unit to assess, which is a little under 3% of the
applications in each year. However, behind this apparent stability, the number of serious
cases requiring UCAS notiﬁcation of applicant and admissions tutors dropped by 26%
between January 2008 and January 2009.
Case study 2 – Online music reviews: Slicethepie
Comparisons are not always done between diﬀerent authors. The case studied here is
that of Slicethepie, a web-based ﬁnancing platform for the music industry. This is the
case that provided the two reviews analysed in Table 37.2 above. Slicethepie employs
site users, called scouts, to review and rate music tracks collected from unrecorded artists,
and pay the scouts a small sum of money for each review. The scouts have to listen to at
least one minute of each track without knowing either the name of the artist or the title
and then provide a review. After submitting their review, they learn both who and what
they have been listening to. Some scouts, to maximise their revenue, were discovered to
be writing a single review and then copying it into the submission box for other tracks as
soon as the track had ﬁnished, while others were using a template and making minor
modiﬁcations. As the purpose of the review was to provide genuine, useful feedback to
the artists, Slicethepie needed to intercept such practices at the earliest possible stage.
Analysis
As with all forensic casework, each computational case has to be analysed, in particular to ensure
that the correct data are being fed to the program. The company initially believed they
required a similar system to that of UCAS, but volumes of around 6,000 reviews per day would
quickly have generated a huge comparison task and analysis quickly revealed something else.
The true requirement was for comparing the incoming reviews from individual scouts
DAVID WOOLLS
588

with their own prior submissions, rather than with the submissions of other scouts, as they
didn’t see the reviews written by other scouts. This reduced the size of the task considerably,
but it also revealed the linguistic problem mentioned above, that many of the reviews were
lacking in punctuation, capitalisation and sometimes even spaces. The reviews could also vary
considerably in length; a minimum of 15 words was required, but there was no upper limit.
Procedure
As with all cut and paste methods, if the scouts were simply using that methodology a
straightforward comparison of the content of two of a single scout’s reviews would have
been suﬃcient. But the tendency to minor modiﬁcation and the omission or insertion of
segments meant that sentence-by-sentence comparison was still required, in order to
prevent false matching of musical terminology across sentences in reviews where no
copying was taking place. So the chunking principle described above was used. A small
number of boundary markers combined with commas and the normal sentence period
marker (where present) were used to subdivide complete reviews into such chunks. In
this case, no prior identiﬁcation of true sentence boundaries was used. This is another
important diﬀerence between this computational method and normal reading practice.
As already noted, the important factor here is that all comparisons should be on the same
basis, so that a punctuated version and an unpunctuated version of the same writing are
treated identically by the comparison program.
User requirement
In another change from UCAS, Slicethepie required two elements: ﬁrstly side-by-side pre-
sentation of the reviews, with a simple system identifying similarity and diﬀerence, and sec-
ondly, an ordering of the matched reviews according to the extent of similarity, so that they
could identify the main oﬀenders readily and deal with the others in order of severity. There is
an illustration of the presentational style on the website (available at: http://www.forensiclinguis
tics.net/).
Going live
The system as initially built greatly assisted the retrospective identiﬁcation of the scouts
using copying, but couldn’t prevent the duplicate reviews from getting into the database
and being seen by the artists. So the company requested a live system. The music is
delivered to the scout using the Adobe Flash player. While this is primarily aimed at
delivering pictures, video and music to web users, it has a programming language behind
it. By providing a modiﬁed version of the program in this language, it was possible to
monitor what the scouts were doing while they were logged into the Slicethepie site. In
this case, the base system described above was enhanced to include monitoring for
minimum and maximum review length in words, for appropriate musical content, for
attempts to circumvent length restrictions by internal repetition of chunks of text or
holding keys down and other possibilities that deeper analysis of the practices of the
scouts revealed.
In addition to enhanced detection, an immediate feedback system was devised that
gave appropriate commentary on the nature of the problem identiﬁed by the program.
The feedback was designed to allow multiple messages for each problem to be created by
COMPUTATIONAL FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
589

the Slicethepie administrators, so that users didn’t always see the same message. For
example, an overly short contribution might trigger a ‘Would you mind writing a little more
please?’ one time and ‘You have only written 12 words. The artist would beneﬁt from a
bit more feedback.’ the next time. An example of the feedback is also available on the
website accompanying this Handbook (available at: http://www.forensiclinguistics.net/).
Such a system requires that the underlying program only reports to scouts who are
abusing the system and produces comments that are appropriate to what has been found,
so great care needs to be taken in the construction of the logic behind the diagnostics
and response.
Effectiveness
The desired eﬀect of reducing the amount of unhelpful and repetitious material getting
into the database was achieved immediately, with a corresponding reduction in the
amount of administration time required to deal with the problem. An unanticipated side
eﬀect was that the Slicethepie team noted a considerable improvement in the quality of
the reviews getting through the submission process, presumably as there was an awareness
in all scouts that their work was being closely monitored.
Conclusion
We have shown that for both creators and users of computational forensic linguistic tools
it is necessary to have a very clear understanding of the limitations which inevitably
surround attempting to use a machine to provide the equivalent of a human reader’s
capabilities. The strengths are clearly the size of data and the speed of processing of the
texts, without mental fatigue and with consistent application of the rules. The weak-
nesses come from the complexity of the concept of similarity and the fact that any
computer program can only be an approximation of what human readers can recognise
and handle with ease. We believe that strong visual presentation allows the end users of
the output to recognise true similarity and gain insight into why the program has selected
and marked sentences as showing similarity when it is sometimes less obvious at ﬁrst
reading. We have also shown that active use of an appropriate response can have a
positive eﬀect on user behaviour, which was an unexpected consequence.
Further reading
Journal of Literary and Linguistic Computing (a general source of computational applications to literature
and linguistics).
Abney, S.P. (1994) Parsing by Chunks. Available online at: www.vinartus.net/spa/90e.pdf (accessed 31
March 2009) (an implementation of chunks for grammatical parsing).
Brazil, D. (1995) A Grammar of Speech, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sinclair, J. McH. and Mauranen, A. (2006) Linear Unit Grammar: Integrating Speech and Writing. Studies
in Corpus Linguistics 25, Amsterdam: John Benjamins (detailed illustrations of chunks being used in
grammars).
See also Computational Forensic Linguistics.ppt on the accompanying website (http://www.forensiclin
guistics.net/).
DAVID WOOLLS
590

38
The future for forensic linguists
in the courtroom
Cross-cultural communication
Peter R. A. Gray1
As its title suggests, this book is intended to function as a handbook of forensic
linguistics. I have been asked to provide a ﬁnal chapter, expressing the point of view of a
judge about some aspects of forensic linguistics. The two aspects I have chosen are related
to the lack of communication between those engaged in the practice of the law and
those in the ﬁeld of forensic linguistics. The ﬁrst is the fundamental ignorance on the
part of most lawyers that there even is another profession concerned with the study of
the language used in the functioning of the legal system. The second is the problems that
forensic linguists can encounter when asked to give evidence as experts in court.
To put my remarks in context, I think it advisable that I tell the reader something of
my experience. Between 1972 and 1984, I practised as a barrister in Melbourne. In my
early days, I was involved in a wide variety of cases, including minor criminal proceed-
ings before magistrates, claims for damages for personal injuries, and minor commercial
disputes. The mid-1970s were a time of great opportunities for those at the Victorian
Bar. My practice expanded quite quickly into one dealing principally with matters of
commercial law, equity and property. In 1978, I began to receive briefs in labour law
matters. This aspect of my work developed rapidly into a specialisation which required
me to travel all over Australia. In 1984, I had the very good fortune to be appointed as a
judge of the Federal Court of Australia, a position I still hold. Initially, my judicial work
was principally in the ﬁeld of labour law, although it has since expanded into areas of
public and commercial law.
The court of which I am a judge deals with almost no criminal law; the work is spread
across a range of aspects of federal law and is interesting and challenging. The criminal
cases that it does hear involve regulatory oﬀences with relatively small maximum penal-
ties, so that there have been no criminal trials involving juries. It is therefore a very long
time since I have been in a courtroom with a jury.
During the 1990s, I was also appointed as Aboriginal Land Commissioner, pursuant to
the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 (Cth). This Act operates only in
the Northern Territory of Australia and enables groups of Aboriginal people to seek from
the Commissioner ﬁndings that they were the traditional Aboriginal owners of speciﬁc
areas of Crown land, as a result of which the Commissioner would recommend that the
591

land concerned become Aboriginal land under the Act. As a result of the operation of
this Act, approximately half of the land in the Northern Territory is now Aboriginal; the
freehold titles, along with traditional entitlements of various kinds, are held by various
land trusts for the beneﬁt of Aboriginal people. The hearings conducted under this Act
were administrative investigations, rather than trials resembling court proceedings.
Hearings were conducted routinely on the land in question and travelled from site to
site by four-wheel drive vehicle or helicopter. It was very common for the Aboriginal
claimants to supplement their oral evidence of traditional attachments to land by
demonstration of those attachments through ceremonial performances, involving dancing
and singing, with appropriate designs painted on their bodies and the use of sacred
objects.
In the course of dealing with Aboriginal land claims, I had many dealings with
anthropologists and linguists, people whom I had not previously encountered. For each
claim, I was entitled to engage a consulting anthropologist. There were two such per-
sons, each of whom gave me diﬀerent and very valuable perspectives on a number of
issues. In addition, it was typical for the claimants to have the assistance of one or more
anthropologists or linguists in the preparation and presentation of their claims and their
reports were vital in providing a framework to enable me to understand the oral evi-
dence of the claimants themselves. In a number of claims, linguists functioned as
anthropologists. They had become associated with the claimants over a number of years
for the purpose of studying the claimants’ language or languages and, as language
and culture are inseparable, the linguists had become the leading experts on the kinship
systems of the claimant groups and their relationships with land tenure.
My involvement in Aboriginal land claims prompted an interest in cross-cultural
communication. I continue to be an active member of committees at the national and
state levels, aiming to educate judges, magistrates and tribunal members in Aboriginal
cultural awareness, to minimise the injustice that arises from misunderstandings in legal
proceedings. It was this interest in cross-cultural communication that led me to my ﬁrst
biennial conference of the International Association of Forensic Linguists (IAFL), held in
Sydney in 2003. I applied to become a member of the IAFL and, although I do not have
any qualiﬁcations in linguistics, I was permitted to join and have enjoyed attending
subsequent biennial conferences.
Legal profession ignorance of forensic linguists
In the late 1970s, I was briefed to act for a defendant in a defamation suit. My client was
the former wife of the plaintiﬀ. The divorce had been acrimonious. The plaintiﬀclaimed
that my client had been involved in the preparation of a letter in which defamatory
statements about him appeared. The letter was addressed to the plaintiﬀ’s sister, but to
the address at which the plaintiﬀlived and at which his sister did not live. It purported to
have been written by someone who had been a friend of the sister many years before,
but had married and gone to live in the United States. The letter had been posted from
the United States, but the plaintiﬀalleged that its posting had been contrived by the
defendants. My client denied any involvement in the preparation or posting of the letter.
One issue arose from the allegation that the letter had been typed on a typewriter owned
by my client. By a subterfuge, the plaintiﬀhad managed to obtain a sample of the
typeface of my client’s typewriter. This sample consisted of each letter of the alphabet
PETER R. A. GRAY
592

typed once in upper case and once in lower case. I had no diﬃculty obtaining the
services of a professional forensic document examiner. Forensic document examination
had existed as a professional discipline for many years and there were several eminent
textbooks on the subject. The expert was prepared to give evidence that such a sample
provided no proper basis for the conclusion that the letter was typed on the particular
typewriter as the font concerned was used by several European typewriter manufacturers.
He argued that a much larger sample was necessary to determine whether minor
imperfections in the imprint of particular letters were repeated consistently, so that they
could be demonstrated to be the result of imperfections in the faces of the particular
keys, rather than imperfections in the ribbon or the paper.
Another issue also intrigued me. The text of the letter included a considerable number
of expressions that I conceived to be idiomatic, speciﬁcally American-English idiom.
Having regard to the level of my client’s education, and to the fact that she had spent her
entire life in a particular locality on the eastern fringes of Melbourne, without ever
travelling overseas, I wondered whether she could have written a letter that appeared to
be so authentically American-English. At the same time, I was aware that exposure to
American television programmes, which constituted the bulk of programmes shown on
Australian television, was very likely to have educated a regular viewer in the American
vernacular. I wondered whether it would be possible to obtain the services of an expert
witness, who could conduct some sort of testing of my client’s facility with American-
English, and give evidence as to the improbability of her having written the letter.
Neither I, nor the solicitor who had briefed me in the case, knew of any such expert.
What I needed, of course, was a forensic linguist, with expertise in author identiﬁca-
tion. It is hardly surprising that I did not know that such a person existed in the late
1970s, because unlike forensic document examination, forensic linguistics had hardly
surfaced in Australia at that time (see Eades 1994b and 1995 on early work). Such
expertise in dialects of English as existed in Australia at that time was more likely to have
been focused on dialects spoken by Aboriginal people than on dialects spoken in other
English-speaking countries. No doubt I, like many other people at that time, would have
assumed that a linguist was a person with knowledge or command of several languages,
rather than someone who was interested in the structure and function of languages
in general.
As it turned out, the defamation case never came to trial. My account of the case is
included here only to illustrate my ignorance at that time, as well as the obviousness of
the need for expertise of a kind now relatively common among forensic linguists.
In associating with forensic linguists at conferences, and in reading the literature of
forensic linguistics, I have been struck by one overwhelming fact. There appears to be
virtually no communication between forensic linguists and lawyers. It is true that there
are eminent forensic linguists who have qualiﬁed as lawyers and practised law, before
deciding to specialise in forensic linguistics. For the most part, however, there is a
massive lack of cross-cultural communication. I have had many conversations with law-
yers in which I have revealed my interest in forensic linguistics, only to be asked what
forensic linguistics is. My response is that forensic linguists study the legal system and
legal processes for their language, rather than for their legal content. It appears that the
state of ignorance I possessed in the late 1970s persists in the vast majority of lawyers at
the present time. A couple of recent illustrations will suﬃce.
The National Judicial College of Australia is the primary body responsible for the
continuing education of judges. Each year, it conducts a course for recently appointed
THE FUTURE FOR FORENSIC LINGUISTS IN THE COURTROOM
593

judges as well as a number of courses about speciﬁc issues of interest to judges whatever
their length of experience. I was quite excited to receive notiﬁcation of a course devoted
to the language of the courtroom, but my excitement turned to dismay when I read that
every presenter on the course was a judge. There were sessions dealing with the com-
position of judges’ directions to juries in criminal trials, and of sentencing remarks.
I contacted the administration of the college, to suggest that it might be helpful to
involve forensic linguists in the preparation and presentation of such a course. The
response I received was that many judges had already been exposed to the expertise of
Sandra Hale in the introductory courses. My mistake had been to assume that the
administration of the college would have been aware that the interests of forensic
linguists include analysis of the language of such things as directions to juries in criminal
trials and sentencing remarks. The assumption underlying the college’s response appears
to be that forensic linguistics is about interpreters. There is no doubt that forensic lin-
guists are interested in courtroom communication from one language to another and
indeed this is a vital part of many court proceedings, particularly in a multicultural society
such as Australia. In her chapter in this volume, Sandra Hale does an excellent job of
drawing attention to the need for high quality interpretation from one language to
another, and to the disadvantages of seeing the task of interpreters as being to translate
mechanically and literally. However, a focus on interpretation is not the sole concern of
forensic linguists. I should have drawn the attention of the college to work done by
forensic linguists about directions to juries in criminal trials, as exempliﬁed in the chapter
by Peter Tiersma in this book (although such work has not yet been done in Australia).
My second experience of judicial ignorance is more recent. Ron Butters, the author of
a chapter in this book on the use of expert forensic linguists in trademark disputes,
sought my assistance in ascertaining whether there have been any cases in Australia
concerning trademarks, in which forensic linguists have given expert evidence about the
way in which particular expressions in trademarks are likely to be perceived. As I do not
claim to have any expertise in trademark litigation, I emailed those of my colleagues in
Sydney and Melbourne who constituted panels hearing such cases. None of them
was aware of any trademark cases in which forensic linguists have given evidence in
Australia.2 Several of the judges of whom I made enquiries drew my attention to a case
that turned out to be concerned with copyright and where the relevant expert gave
evidence about the translation of a particular expression from one language to another.
Once again, interpretation appears to have been regarded as the limit. The response from
one judge was interesting. He had not heard of a trademark case involving a forensic
linguist giving evidence and went on to volunteer the opinion that he hoped that this
would never happen, because it might lead to post-modernism.
What can be done to redress the lack of communication between lawyers and forensic
linguists? Lawyers have a greater obligation to be aware of developments that aﬀect the
legal system than does anyone else. One of the problems of ignorance is that it invariably
includes ignorance of ignorance: we do not know what it is that we do not know. Even
if lawyers have heard of forensic linguistics, the innate conservatism of lawyers remains a
problem. The response to the question, ‘how many judges does it take to change a light
bulb?’ is the puzzled and anxious repetition of the word ‘change?’ It is often said that the
genius of the common law is that it has changed over the centuries to adapt itself to
changes in society. Changes have been slow, however, and have often been forced on
lawyers by reforming legislation. The historical account of changes in English courtroom
practice between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries in Dawn Archer’s chapter in
PETER R. A. GRAY
594

this volume contains many examples of changes being imposed by Parliament. Even
when new opportunities emerge in the law, lawyers usually manage to change them into
something that looks very like the old and familiar. Consequently, I see little hope of
lawyers volunteering to be inﬂuenced by forensic linguists in Australia. Attributing to
lawyers the sole responsibility to overcome the communication gap is not likely to result
in the elimination of the gap.
On the other hand, forensic linguists are not ignorant of lawyers. The solution to the
communication failure might well involve forensic linguists reaching out towards lawyers
more than they do at present. Collaborative research between linguists and lawyers
in academic institutions would be valuable. Forensic linguists could submit papers for
publication in legal journals, instead of restricting them to journals circulating among
linguists. Similarly, the submission of papers for presentation to legal conferences would
be a way in which many lawyers could be introduced to the notion that there are people
who study a wide variety of aspects of language use in the legal system.
One area in which linguists have been valuable to the legal system has been the plain
English movement. To some extent, the use of plain English has been forced on lawyers
by legislation or government action, requiring that documents such as insurance policies
be written in ways that can be understood more readily by both those who sell their
services to the public and by their clients. We are also said to live in an era of plain
English in legislation, although there is material for any number of papers about the
obscurities of the language used in Australian legislation in recent years. There is no
reason why the plain English movement could not extend to courtroom language in
judges’ directions to juries or sentencing remarks. Judges would beneﬁt from the sorts of
analyses of courtroom discourse exempliﬁed by the chapters in the present volume by
Gregory Matoesian and Laura Felton Rosulek.
Forensic linguists as expert witnesses
Traditionally, there have been tensions involving the evidence of expert witnesses in
common law courts. On the one hand, lawyers, including judges, recognise that there is
a need to have expert evidence about subjects that are beyond the realm of general
knowledge. On the other hand, lawyers, including judges, distrust experts in ﬁelds other
than law. There is a deep-seated fear of being led to wrong conclusions by experts with
vested interests or pet theories. There is an inability, or unwillingness, to grasp unfamiliar
methods of reasoning. There is even an element of what I call God complex. Lawyers
spend so much of their time acting for clients who are totally dependent on their services
in the lawyers’ areas of specialisation that they become used to being authoritative. In the
course of legal practice, it is normal to acquire some familiarity with a wide range of
other specialist areas. I have known, for example, many lawyers who practised for many
years in claims for damages for personal injuries, and acquired enormous amounts of
medical knowledge. Similarly, lawyers who have practised in cases involving allegations
of defective construction work acquire considerable amounts of engineering and archi-
tectural knowledge. The list could be extended. A lawyer whose experience covers a
number of areas of legal practice will have some acquaintance with a variety of areas of
specialist knowledge. The combination of a belief in the lawyer’s own authority and the
possession of a little knowledge about a number of specialist areas can easily lead to the
view that the lawyer knows all that is necessary to be known about everything. Acting
THE FUTURE FOR FORENSIC LINGUISTS IN THE COURTROOM
595

under such a misapprehension, a lawyer can easily treat with contempt an expert giving
evidence unfavourable to the lawyer’s client.
The negative attitude towards experts has been reﬂected in the traditional rule that an
expert witness cannot give an opinion as to an ultimate question: only the judge or the jury
can determine the ultimate question. This rule has now been abolished by statute in
Australia (Section 80 of the Evidence Act 1995 (Cth)), removing one area of objection to
the evidence of expert witnesses. Legislation in the same or similar terms has been
adopted by some States of Australia and its adoption is being considered by others. The
distrust of experts is also reﬂected in the free rein that has been given traditionally to
opposing counsel to cross-examine expert witnesses. Obviously, a way to win a case is to
discredit the other side’s expert. In some areas, people with the necessary expert knowledge
have declined to undertake forensic work, because they dislike having to defend their
methods, and their professional reputations, against vigorous cross-examination in a public
process. As a consequence of the way in which anthropologists have been cross-examined
in native title cases in Australia, there are very able anthropologists who refuse to perform
investigations and provide reports in such cases.
Another cause of tension is that some expert disciplines are perceived to be more exact
than others. The opinions of an engineer, a physicist, a chemist or even a medical practitioner
are somehow perceived to have more weight than those of a sociologist, a psychologist
or an anthropologist. The negative attitude towards interpretive sciences probably
extends to linguists who give evidence about matters such as the capacity of a particular
person to have understood an interview process or to have given answers in the terms
alleged, or about the identiﬁcation of a person’s origins from analysis of the language he
or she uses.
One further area of tension has arisen in relation to the identiﬁcation of the expert
with the interests of the clients on whose behalf he or she gives evidence. Practising in
the ﬁeld of claims for damages for personal injuries, I learned very quickly that certain
forensic medical experts were always engaged to provide opinions on behalf of injured
plaintiﬀs, while others were always retained by defendants’ insurers. Not surprisingly,
there tended to be an observable gap between the evidence of representatives of the two
groups about the severity of a particular plaintiﬀ’s injuries, the likely future eﬀect of those
injuries, and their impact on the plaintiﬀ’s life and capacity. The lawyers, including the
judge, in a particular case would know whether a particular forensic medical expert had
the reputation of being a ‘plaintiﬀ’s doctor’ or a ‘defendant’s doctor’. To some extent,
this same concern about identiﬁcation with the client’s interests pervades attitudes
towards other forensic experts. Similarly, in defective construction cases, some experts
were believed to favour aggrieved building owners, while others were thought to be
giving evidence designed to minimise the damages their builder clients would have to pay.
The problem of identiﬁcation with the client’s interests has been a particularly severe
one in cases in my court concerning native title. Some judges have expressed distrust of
the evidence of anthropologists (and other experts, including linguists functioning as
anthropologists), given on behalf of Aboriginal people claiming to hold title to tracts of
land by reason of traditional Aboriginal laws and customs.3 There are many reasons for
the distrust. They may include the fact that the anthropologist concerned has spent many
years gathering the data on which his or her opinion is based and that this data-gathering
has been by means of interviews with the very people who have become the applicants
in native title cases. Inevitably, close and warm relationships develop. Anthropologists are
perceived to have lost their objectivity and to have become advocates for those whose
PETER R. A. GRAY
596

societies they have studied. Compounding this problem is an ethical principle, com-
monly accepted by anthropologists, that forbids them from using information divulged to
them against the interests of persons from whom they have acquired the information in
the course of their research. In other words, an anthropologist who has worked closely
with a group of people who become involved in a native title case will not agree to give
evidence on behalf of a party resisting the native title claim (usually a government or a
proposed developer of the land concerned). Thus, the only anthropologists who will give
evidence on behalf of parties opposing native title claims will be those who have done
no ﬁeld research among the people claiming native title. For this reason, they can only
provide opinions based on the available literature, and opinions about the validity of the
research methods and reasoning of the researcher anthropologists who give evidence for
those claiming native title. (Lawyers too have ethical principles that prevent them
from using information acquired in acting for a client against the interests of that client
in another case. So, it is a little surprising that the adoption of the equivalent ethical
principle by anthropologists should have attracted the criticism from lawyers that it
sometimes has.)
Thus, it has been possible to criticise some anthropologists for being too close to the
parties on whose behalf they are giving evidence and to criticise others for not being
close enough to those parties.4 On the other hand, there have been judges who have
recognised that the fact that an expert witness is not truly independent of the party
calling him or her to give evidence is not a disqualiﬁcation.5 One judge has also said that
evidence given by an anthropologist of his or her observations over a long period (i.e.
the gathering of data) may be direct evidence and not evidence of opinion.6 In a criminal
trial, it will be common for the prosecution’s forensic experts to be engaged wholly in
the preparation of evidence on behalf of the police or the relevant prosecutorial
authority. Their lack of independence should not disqualify them from giving evidence.
A further diﬃculty that seems to confront anthropologists as witnesses in native title
cases may arise simply because those who speak with authority about the cultures and
societies of particular groups of indigenous people do so because they themselves have
gathered the data on which their opinions are based. To many lawyers, including judges,
the concept of an expert witness is someone who is presented with certain facts and
invited to give a relevant opinion about the consequences of those facts. It is true that, in
many cases, experts will be called to give opinions on given sets of facts, without having
had any prior involvement in ascertaining what those facts are. Such cases seem to have
given rise to the expectation that the expert will always be independent of the facts on
which he or she comments. In fact, in many cases, the expert will have been a participant
in the process of gathering data. For instance, a medical practitioner who has treated an
injured plaintiﬀis not regarded as incapable of giving evidence of a diagnosis and a
prognosis for that person simply because he or she has gathered the information on
which his or her opinion is based from the history provided by the injured plaintiﬀand
his or her own observations of the injuries.
The forensic linguist who has read what I have written so far about expert witnesses is
likely to be dismayed. How can any witness overcome the judicial and legal distrust of
someone who operates in a ﬁeld of interpretive science, who gathers the data from the
subject directly and uses the data so gathered to form an opinion, and who may have
developed a relationship with the subject in the course of that process, causing him or
her to identify with the subject’s interests? Add to this the problem that lawyers may
perceive the forensic linguist’s ﬁeld as not being one involving a suﬃcient level of
THE FUTURE FOR FORENSIC LINGUISTS IN THE COURTROOM
597

expertise, but one that the lawyer could just as easily command. (I suspect that the
expressed fear of a forensic linguist giving evidence in a trademark case, because it might
lead to post-modernism, is a consequence of regarding all such cases as involving nothing
more than ordinary usage of language.)
The only answer I have, and it is in no way a complete answer, is thorough pro-
fessionalism. The forensic linguist’s qualiﬁcations, experience, research, methods and
reasoning will all come under scrutiny, and must withstand such scrutiny for the opinion
to be accepted. There is little doubt that acceptance has come to a much greater extent
in the United States and in England, than it has in Australia. Acceptance can be achieved
only by demonstrating that opinions given by forensic linguists are professional opinions,
acceptable, even if not actually accepted in the particular case. Guides such as that set out
in Fiona English’s chapter will no doubt be of great importance and assistance to any
forensic linguist who is starting out. Papers and textbooks of that kind are obviously very
important. They do have a double edge, however. As lawyers become more familiar
with the process, the well-prepared cross-examiner will consult the published literature
in order to undermine the methodology of the forensic linguist expert. The profession-
alism of the expert therefore requires that he or she be fully conversant with the
literature, and omit no step recommended in the literature unless well able to justify the
omission.
One of the great diﬃculties any expert has in expressing an opinion is quantiﬁcation.
As Malcolm Coulthard pointed out in his excellent address to the dinner at the 2007
biennial conference of the International Association of Forensic Linguists in Seattle,
expressions of likelihood in terms of statistical probabilities or percentages have their
diﬃculties. So also does the use of standard phrases. In the course of my judicial career,
I have declined to make ﬁndings in accordance with the evidence of two former police
forensic document examiners. In one case,7 the issue was whether certain minutes of a
trade union committee had been falsiﬁed. It was the practice of the president to sign the
minutes of each previous meeting, once they had been approved, as a true and correct
record of that meeting. The president was alleging that signatures purporting to be hers
on a number of sets of minutes were forgeries. The forensic document examiner
was called to give evidence that, on his comparison of the president’s admittedly genuine
signatures and the questioned signatures, he was satisﬁed that there was a ‘strong prob-
ability of common authorship’. In the other case,8 the question was whether one or
more persons had ﬁlled out multiple ballot papers in the course of a trade union election.
Another forensic document examiner gave evidence that crosses appearing in squares on
a number of ballot papers demonstrated a ‘strong probability of common authorship’.
It struck me as odd that the same phrase should be used by two diﬀerent experts, but
there were other reasons in both cases for me to disbelieve the evidence of the experts.
I do take the view, however, that the use of a standard phrase to encapsulate an assess-
ment could well lead to the devaluation of the impact of that phrase. This may not
matter in front of juries, but judges may come to achieve familiarity with the phrase and
to discount it accordingly.
All is not necessarily grim in the world of expert witnesses. Signiﬁcant steps have been
taken by my court to ameliorate the plight of experts, and to ensure that their evidence
is given more weight. In this respect, my court has been something of a pioneer, in
Australia, if not in the world.
In the ﬁrst place, the court has issued a practice direction, containing guidelines for
expert witnesses,9 designed to remind expert witnesses that they must approach the
PETER R. A. GRAY
598

giving of evidence on a truly independent basis and not on the basis that they are there
to serve the interests of the party who calls and pays them. The practice direction contains
the following admonitions:
1 General duty to the court
1.1 An expert witness has an overriding duty to assist the Court on matters relevant to
the expert’s area of expertise.
1.2 An expert witness is not an advocate for a party even when giving testimony that
is necessarily evaluative rather than inferential.
1.3 An expert witness’s paramount duty is to the Court and not to the person
retaining the expert.
The practice direction contains some helpful advice as to what should appear in an
expert report. This includes such things as: details of the expert’s qualiﬁcations and of the
literature or other material used in making the report; assumptions of fact made by the
expert; a summary of each opinion provided in the report; reasons for each opinion; a
statement of the questions or issues that the expert was asked to address; any qualiﬁcation
about incompleteness or inaccuracy of the conclusion; and any question or issue that falls
outside the expert’s area of expertise. In the report of an expert witness, ﬁled with the
court prior to the trial, it is usual for the expert to say that he or she has read the practice
direction and heeded it.
The other relevant changes are in the procedures for dealing with experts when each
side proposes to call an expert, one to refute the opinion of the other.10 Routinely, the
court will order that the two experts confer prior to the trial and produce for the court a
joint document, setting out the matters on which they are agreed, the matters on which
they are not agreed, and the reasons for their disagreement. The practice note referred to
above states that, at such a conference, ‘it would be improper for an expert to be given,
or to accept, instructions not to reach agreement’. At the trial, the expert witnesses are
not called in the course of each party’s case, to be examined in chief, cross-examined and
re-examined, as is usual current practice. Rather, the opposing expert witnesses are called
at the conclusion of all of the other evidence led by both parties. Having been duly
aﬃrmed or sworn, they are then required to debate directly between themselves the
matters on which they are not agreed, so that the judge and the lawyers can observe the
debate. Only when this debate has been exhausted will the lawyers be permitted to
question the witnesses. The judge will also ask any questions that he or she considers will
help to clarify the issues.
The process of dealing with the expert witnesses at a trial in this manner is known as
the ‘hot tub’. It has proved very successful. One judge has said:
In my experience, the Hot Tub procedure brings a number of beneﬁts which
include the following. First, the experts give evidence at a time when the critical
issues have been reﬁned and the area of real dispute narrowed to the bare mini-
mum. Secondly, the judge sees the opposing experts together and does not have to
compare a witness giving evidence now with the halfremembered [sic] evidence of
another expert given perhaps some weeks previously and based on assumptions
which may have been destroyed or substantially qualiﬁed in the meantime.
Thirdly, the physical removal of the witness from his [sic] party’s camp into the
proximity of a (usually) respected professional colleague tends to reduce the level of
THE FUTURE FOR FORENSIC LINGUISTS IN THE COURTROOM
599

partisanship. Fourthly, the procedure can save a lot of hearing time … [in one case]
the lay evidence took some four weeks but the expert evidence of two distinguished
economists was disposed of in a day … [in another case] the evidence of two
experts as to bank interchange payments took a day, and that of ﬁve economists
another day.
Peter Heerey, Recent Australian Developments,
CJQ 2004, 23(Oct), 386–95 at 391
The procedure has thus helped to ameliorate any tendency for expert witnesses to regard
themselves as hired guns for the parties calling them to give evidence. The very fact that
the opposing experts have to deal with each other has led to much more common
ground than was found in expert conﬂicts in trials of the old style. The fact that the
experts have been able to argue their points of view directly with each other in the
courtroom, without the interference of lawyers, promotes an atmosphere in which per-
sonal and professional standing can remain intact, so that experts are more inclined to be
prepared to give evidence. Concessions that are made are not seen to have been extrac-
ted by skilful or overbearing cross-examination, but to be made genuinely. The judge’s
task of deciding between the opinions of conﬂicting experts is made easier by an
understanding of the way in which conﬂict arises and by observing how that conﬂict is
expressed on both sides.
I cannot promise that the realm of expert evidence will ever become a paradise, either
for the expert witnesses, or for the lawyers. Whatever system is adopted, experts will
always need to be rigorous in their approach to giving opinions about matters in dispute
in court proceedings. All that can be said is that lawyers, including judges, are becoming
increasingly aware of the problems that face expert witnesses, and are beginning to take
steps that will minimise those problems.
Conclusion
I have attempted to present some aspects of what I see as a lack of cross-cultural
communication between lawyers and forensic linguists, particularly in Australia. Whilst
that lack of communication is very largely to be laid at the feet of lawyers, it seems to
me that forensic linguists can do more than lawyers are likely to do to open up dia-
logue between the two professions. I have endeavoured to suggest ways in which such
dialogue might be opened. It is my hope that, in the future, lawyers will allow
themselves to accept the beneﬁt that some understanding of the work of forensic lin-
guists can oﬀer to them. There is no doubt that the legal system would be improved if
the work of forensic linguists were to be heeded by lawyers to a greater extent than it
has been.
I also express the hope that courts will continue to devise procedures and methods that
will facilitate the giving of expert evidence, including the evidence of forensic linguists.
Recognition that we have much to learn from forensic linguists would be a good start,
but would not be a complete answer in individual cases, in which one side will always be
wishing to discredit the expert who gives evidence against that side’s case. By removing
at least some of the process from the responsibility of the lawyers, and transferring it to
the responsibility of the experts, I am encouraged to believe that the giving of expert
evidence will be facilitated. The hot tub may not be altogether enjoyable for experts, but
PETER R. A. GRAY
600

it is likely to be more so than vigorous cross-examination, as well as being beneﬁcial to
the interests of justice.
Notes
1 I am greatly indebted to Diana Eades for her helpful comments and suggestions. Responsibility for
any errors and omissions in this chapter remains with me.
2 Diana Eades has since drawn to my attention Mobil Oil Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks [1984]
VR 25, a judgment of King J of the Supreme Court of Victoria. The case concerned an attempt to
register the word ‘Mobil’ as a trademark, in respect of a class of goods including sporting articles,
games and playthings. There was controversy as to whether the word ‘mobile’ would be pro-
nounced as it would be by many speakers of American English, so as to sound like ‘Mobil’, and
would therefore be incapable of registration. Two linguists gave evidence: Professor Hammarström
of Monash University and David Blair of Macquarie University. The summary of the evidence
appears in the judgment at pp 32–33 of the report.
3 For example, Sackville J in Jango and Others v. Northern Territory and Others [2006] FCA 318 (2006)
152 FCR 150 at [304]-[342] available at www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/FCA/
2006/318.html?query=title(Jango) and Lindgren J in Harrington-Smith and Others on behalf of the
Wongatha People v. State of Western Australia and Others (No 2) [2003] FCA 893 (2003) 130 FCR 424
available
at
www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/FCA/2003/893.html?query=title
(Harrington-Smith).
4 For example, The Members of the Yorta Yorta Aboriginal Community v. The State of Victoria & Ors
[1998] FCA 1606 at [55] and [61] available at: www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/
FCA/1998/1606.html?query=title(Yorta%20Yorta).
5 For example, Selway J in Gumana and Others v. Northern Territory of Australia and Others [2005] FCA
50 (2005) 141 FCR 457 at [163] available at: www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/
FCA/2005/50.html?query=title(Gumana).
6 Selway J in Gumana and Others v. Northern Territory of Australia and Others [2005] FCA 50 (2005) 141
FCR 457 at [160].
7 Geneﬀv. Peterson & Ors (1986) 19 IR 40 at 58–60 available at: www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/
au/cases/cth/FCA/1986/432.html?query=title(Geneﬀ).
8 Re Carter; Re Federated Clerks Union of Australia, Victorian Branch (No 1) (1989) 32 IR 1 at 4–14
available
at:
www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/FCA/1989/192.html?query=title
(Carter). The expert in that case used a number of diﬀerent descriptions to indicate various levels of
certainty on his part. Only one of those descriptions was ‘a strong probability of common authorship’.
9 Guidelines for expert witnesses in proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia – Practice direction,
5 May 2008 available at: www.fedcourt.gov.au/how/prac_direction.html.
10 Order 34A Federal Court Rules available at: www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/Legislative
InstrumentCompilation1.nsf/0/E98CF094B28FA4CDCA25752800179995/$ﬁle/FederalCourtRules
V1.doc.
THE FUTURE FOR FORENSIC LINGUISTS IN THE COURTROOM
601

39
Concluding remarks
Future directions in forensic linguistics
Malcolm Coulthard and Alison Johnson
‘If we could ﬁrst know where we are and whither we are tending, we could better judge what to
do and how to do it.’
From Abraham Lincoln’s 16 June 1858,
‘House Divided’ Speech (Online at www.ushistory.org)
Introduction
As our discipline comes of age, with two whole decades of specialised research and
writing behind us, we have been able to bring together a comprehensive volume of
chapters written by both established and up-and-coming forensic linguists. Many of them
have suggested directions for future work and map out a rich and promising territory for
the next generation of researchers to explore.
In Section I, the Language of the Law and the Legal Process, we see two common
issues emerging. First, the complexity of legal language and the challenges this presents
for lay people involved in the legal process. This is treated in chapters by Bhatia, Stygall,
Drew and Walker, Tiersma and Aldridge and the theme also runs into Section II, where
authors consider how the expert linguist negotiates this comprehensibility gap when
acting as interpreter and assessor (Hale, Kredens and Morris and English).
The second issue is one of legal rights; how are these rights asked for, given, nego-
tiated and denied? Our authors present diﬀerent and sometimes conﬂicting accounts of
the current global picture. The chapters about Britain written by Stokoe and Edwards
and Rock present a very diﬀerent picture from the one painted by Ainsworth for the
United States. This suggests that the US has something to learn from the UK in terms of
access to and intervention by lawyers in the interrogation process. Both of these issues
have a linking theme – that of power – and there are, not surprisingly, many chapters
concerned with this topic. Felton Rosulek shows us the power of lawyers’ closing speeches
and Tkacˇuková the disadvantaged position of lay people when they represent themselves
in court. The relationship between power and advantage and disadvantage is seen starkly
602

in the chapters by Ainsworth, Eades, Ehrlich, Grebler, Greenlee, Shuy and Stygall and
this critical forensic linguistics focus is one which will certainly be taken forward into the
next two decades of research and writing. As Wodak (2007: 209) says the aim of critical
linguistics is to ‘demystify discourses by deciphering ideologies’ and a critical approach in
forensic linguistics means that we unpack the ways that power and dominance are done
in legal contexts and how disadvantage and control are produced. We know that ‘lan-
guage is not powerful on its own – it gains power by the use powerful people make of
it’ (see Bhatia, this volume), and we have seen how this is exploited in a number of the
chapters. It is only by scrutinising and exposing powerful ideologies in action (such as
those discussed by Shuy, this volume) that forensic linguists can make a diﬀerence in
terms of acting in the social world and eﬀecting change. CDA looks outside the text ‘to
get a sense of its social context’ as it sees that meanings in texts are created through
having ‘a broad perspective on the social order’ (Fairclough 2001: 129). Problems in legal
texts are social problems and a critical forensic linguistic approach enables us to provide
analyses that suggest change and make an impact in the socio-legal world.
Section II focuses on the linguist as an expert in legal processes and all of the authors
show us that a solid descriptive methodology is at the heart of this work, though many of
these methods are pioneering and emergent. Justice Gray, in his chapter in Section III,
speaks about some of the dangers for experts if they make their methods public – lawyers
will consult the literature and be more prepared for cross-examination – but he also
oﬀers a fascinating glimpse into his own courtroom and possibly a new way of treating
expert witnesses and their evidence: the ‘hot tub’. Greenlee sees the advantage of a
developing forensic literature as a resource for defence lawyers.
The ﬁnal section, entitled New Debates and New Directions is the most forward
looking. Here, we oﬀer only a brief glimpse of four new directions for forensic linguis-
tics: multimodal analysis (Matoesian), computational approaches (Woolls) and the future
role of experts in the courtroom from both the perspective of a linguist (Shuy) and from
a judge (Gray). And in this, the closing chapter, we continue that discussion, highlighting
some other important directions in which we think the discipline will develop during the
next decade and some of the issues it might pursue.
The written language of the law
Communication through written text is diﬃcult at the best of times (Coulthard 1994b)
and texts written by lawyers to communicate information unambiguously to lay readers
are in the main particularly problematic – typically much more emphasis has been placed
by the writer on unambiguousness than on communicativeness. In addition to the huge
array of statutes and laws that govern our behaviour, and texts like temporary restraining
orders, jury instructions, the UK police caution and the US Miranda warnings, forensic
linguists have usefully focused on tenancy agreements, house purchase contracts, insur-
ance proposals, credit card terms and product packet warnings, on the relatively long
texts we ﬁnd inside medicine packets and on very short texts such as road signs or
automated messages on websites. What is interesting for forensic linguists about all these
texts is that the lay readers who are their supposed target audience often have diﬃculty
understanding them fully (see Stygall, for example, in this volume). Of course, there are
occasions when obfuscation is deliberate, as Dumas (this volume), argues is the case with
some cigarette package warnings. Describing and suggesting solutions for the problematic
CONCLUDING REMARKS
603

nature of legal–lay communication is a theme running through many of the chapters and
this will continue to concern forensic linguists for the foreseeable future.
For example, Jury Instructions have been the focus of a signiﬁcant amount of research
over the years. Dumas (2000a) reports work extending back several years on commu-
nicative problems associated with the Tennessee pattern jury instructions and in particular
with the instruction for ‘reasonable doubt’, which at the time she wrote was in the form
of the ﬁxed written text reproduced below, which judges would read out to the jury.
Jury instructions in general are a good example of the diﬃculty of categorising legal
language as spoken or written. They are written texts intended to be read aloud, but, as
we can see clearly from a reading of this particular instruction, presented immediately
below, they are certainly not designed to sound like speech.
Reasonable doubt is that doubt engendered by an investigation of all the proof in
the case and an inability, after such investigation, to let the mind rest easily as to the
certainty of guilt. Reasonable doubt does not mean a captious, possible or ima-
ginary doubt. Absolute certainty of guilt is not demanded by the law to convict of
any criminal charge, but moral certainty is required, and this certainty is required as
to every proposition of proof requisite to constitute the oﬀense.
(Tennessee Pattern Jury Instructions – Criminal, 4th ed. 1995, 7:14)
We wonder how many times you, our reader, would need to reread this deﬁnition
before you thought you knew what the phrase ‘reasonable doubt’ signiﬁed and how little
you would have understood if you, like the Tennessee jurors, had only heard it read
aloud and only once. If, as a member of the jury, you had asked for clariﬁcation, the
judge would have merely read the text aloud for a second time. The laudable explana-
tion for this refusal to explain or gloss is that the judge thereby avoids the possibility of a
subsequent appeal against conviction on the grounds that s/he had misdirected the jury.
This solution does not, of course, avoid a subsequent appeal on the grounds that the jury
did not understand the judge’s instruction.
As Dumas points out, the three sentences of this instruction contain eleven clauses, two
of the sentences have subordinate clauses embedded within other subordinate clauses and all
three sentences contain complicated nominal groups and diﬃcult lexis. Dumas oﬀers a
suggested more comprehensible revision, but it is four times as long as the original. What we
see here is a deﬁnition which may be legally watertight, but which is communicatively ﬂawed
and worse, such semantic obscurity could cause a miscarriage of justice. Dumas, acting as
expert witness, did indeed argue in another case that there was serious doubt as to whether
the members of a jury which had sentenced a man to death, had actually understood the
meaning of ‘reasonable doubt’ ‘as the court intended’ (Dumas 2002: 246–47).
One of the key critical and reformist projects of the late twentieth and early twenty-
ﬁrst century has been the Plain Language movement and this campaign has at times
successfully ventured into the legal world, but this has usually been when initiated by
lawyers – in most professional ﬁelds, but particularly in medicine and law, it is extremely
diﬃcult to change anything from the outside. However Tiersma (this volume), a trained
linguist as well as a law professor, was fortunate enough to be invited to act, over a
period of six years, as ‘linguistic consultant’ to two committees made up of judges and
lawyers which were set up in 1997, following the perceived debacle of the ﬁrst O J
Simpson murder trial, in order to redraft the California Pattern Jury Instructions so that
they would ‘accurately state the law using language … understandable to jurors’ (Kelso
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
604

1996). The resulting, much more comprehensible, Instructions became eﬀective in 2006.
The California deﬁnition of ‘reasonable doubt’, which can usefully be compared with
the Tennessee instruction above, was rewritten as:
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is proof that leaves you with an abiding convic-
tion that the charge is true. The evidence need not eliminate all possible doubt
because everything in life is open to some possible or imaginary doubt.
(California Plain Language Rewrite, 2005)
One hopes that, following the lead of California, more States will decide not only to
redraft their instructions but also to involve linguists in the process. Even so, as linguists
we are fully aware of the communicative diﬀerences between spoken and written
language and we should still campaign for a move towards the adoption of a system
like that currently used in the English courts where the jury instructions are not lexi-
cally and grammatically dense written-to-be-read texts, but rather encoded in spoken
language which is composed in real time. In addition to the use of the lexis and
grammar of speech, an added help to the jury would be lexical simpliﬁcation, for
instance the use of ‘sure’ instead of ‘beyond reasonable doubt’. Heﬀer (2006) analysing
English criminal trials from the 1990s found that in 93 out of the 100 summings-up he
examined, the judges used ‘sure’ in the grammatical Complement slot, predicated of
‘the jury’ acting as grammatical Subject, as an ordinary language substitute for ‘rea-
sonable doubt’: ‘so that you are sure’; ‘make/making you sure’; ‘feel sure’; ‘must be
sure’. Of the remaining seven judges, ﬁve combined ‘sure’ with ‘reasonable doubt’ –
‘sure beyond (a/any/all) reasonable doubt’; the remaining two used ‘reasonable doubt’
with no gloss.
In addition, the inclusion of everyday examples, if possible framed in colloquial
language, as an integral part of instructing the jury, should be encouraged. For example,
Heﬀer (2002: 241) provides an extract where a judge is illustrating the concept of
‘handling goods knowing or believing them to be stolen’:
If for example you were standing in Marks and Spencers and you watched a sho-
plifter steal and then ten minutes later you took the goods from the shoplifter you
would receive them knowing that they were stolen. If on the other hand you were
not in Marks and Spencers when the shoplifter stole that elegant hat and you were
outside in The Crown and Robe and somebody came up to you and said ‘Look
what I have just nicked from Marks and Spencers’ you do not have direct knowledge
of it, but you have the belief based on what you have been told. So that is the
distinction.
The English Caution is another written-to-be-spoken legal text that has come in for a
great deal of scrutiny. When, in England and Wales in 1994, the law was changed in
order to place conditions on the right to silence, a new 60-word version was produced.
This was quickly found to be too wordy for police oﬃcers to remember and, in 1995, it
was reduced to the following 37 words:
You do not have to say anything. But it may harm your defence if you do not
mention when questioned something which you later rely on in court. Anything
you do say may be given in evidence.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
605

A government spokeswoman, Baroness Blatch, said in the House of Lords that she
believed this version would be both ‘easy for the police to remember and easy for
suspects to understand’. Her conﬁdence would appear to have been unfounded, and
several forensic linguists (Cotterill 2000; Russell 2000 and Rock 2007) have found major
problems with the second sentence, particularly, but not exclusively, with the words and
phrases presented in bold below.
But it may harm your defence if you do not mention when questioned something
which you later rely on in court.
Among the many linguistic problems are:
i) that ‘harm’ is usually used with animate objects and so the meaning of ‘harm your
defence’ is at best obscure;
ii) that the suspect cannot know how important something needs to be in order to
be classiﬁed as ‘something which you later rely on’ in a future defence;
iii) nor indeed, until there is a speciﬁc accusation, what defence may be needed;
iv) that ‘mention’ usually collocates with unimportant facts, certainly not facts one
might ‘rely on’;
v) that the phrase ‘when questioned’ is crucially ambiguous – does it mean ‘in
response to questions’ put by the interviewer or ‘during the whole period when
you are being questioned’;
vi) to put this problem more explicitly, is an omission during the interview of something
later relied on supposed to be the fault of the interviewing oﬃcer, who didn’t ask the
right questions or of the interviewee, who should have volunteered the information?
So far attempts to have the English and Welsh Caution redrafted have failed, despite
quite general dissatisfaction, unlike in the state of NSW in Australia, where Gibbons
(2001a) worked with the Police to improve their Caution.
In the absence of a change in wording, both police and suspects in the UK have to rely
on the individual police oﬃcer who is enjoined to ensure that the interviewee understands
the caution. The problem is, as Rock (2007) clearly illustrates, that some oﬃcers are very much
better at ensuring understanding than others. This therefore raises other questions for the
police to confront, hopefully through research undertaken jointly with linguists; for
instance, should it be left to the individual linguistically untrained police oﬃcer to assess a
given suspect’s understanding and to encode the necessary explanations as s/he thinks
best or should there be a standardised pre-formulated explanation of the caution to be
used with all suspects? And as Stokoe and Edwards (this volume) show, any amount of
conﬁrmation of understanding at the beginning of an interview does not guarantee that
the suspect will take up their rights or feel able to assert them in the interview.
The language of interaction in the legal process
Police interviews
Both the US Miranda Warnings and the UK police caution explicitly advise the suspect
of their right to remain silent. The Miranda warning is superﬁcially much more positive:
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
606

‘you have the right to remain silent’ as compared with the UK caution ‘you do not have
to say anything. But it may harm your defence … ’. However, Janet Ainsworth’s analysis
of the Miranda warning in her chapter in this volume demonstrates how successive
Supreme Court judgments have produced a situation in which it is very diﬃcult for the
suspect to actually claim his or her right to silence. This is an area where all the necessary
descriptive groundwork has been done to provide a solid basis for a campaign to restore
the constitutional right to silence; what is now needed is a pro-active stance.
As we noted above, the most recent UK police caution strongly recommends
suspects not to exercise their right to silence on the grounds that doing so might harm
their defence. However, detailed analysis of interviews by Haworth (2009 and this
volume) shows how diﬃcult it can be for the average interviewee to contribute
what s/he considers to be relevant information. Indeed she makes a strong case for
rethinking what is currently the main purpose of the interview – to provide evidence
for prosecution – on the grounds that not only is it unfair to the suspect in that he is
not allowed to provide defence evidence but it can also be prejudicial to the police
as well, in that they may proceed with a fatally ﬂawed prosecution case. If her pre-
liminary ﬁndings are conﬁrmed, they will provide the basis for joint police/linguist
research which could lead to changes in the nature and organisation of investigative
interviews.
At the same time, it will be necessary to consider the implications of the fact that,
despite the strength of the warning of the potential dangers of remaining silent embodied
in the Caution, there is little evidence in research so far of UK juries being explicitly
reminded of the inferences they can legitimately draw. Stokoe and Edwards’ chapter,
which looks at the so far unresearched area of lawyers’ turns in police interviews, invites
a re-consideration of existing procedures. Ainsworth, in her chapter on the non-invo-
cation of rights by suspects and the very small number who actually have lawyers present,
highlights the diﬃculties and injustices faced by defendants in the American system.
Stokoe and Edwards’ chapter shows us some of the beneﬁcial eﬀects of what lawyers can
do in their interventions, when present. Though they interact for relatively few turns in
interviews (and there are rules on when and how they can intervene), lawyer interven-
tions work positively to invoke suspects’ rights (i.e. the fact that they ‘do not have to say
anything’). Stokoe and Edwards show that one of the major beneﬁts of this is that the
lawyers’ interventions are tailored to a speciﬁc moment, meaning that suspects do not
have to answer that speciﬁc question. This moment-by-moment intervention means that
rights are dealt with in situ rather than left as generalised principles for the suspects
themselves to have to choose when to apply, as is the case with the general warning
issued at the start of interviews. (The danger of course, for the suspect, is that they may
never do.) Spontaneous interjections by lawyers are more much eﬀective than if the
unrepresented suspect has to wait and ask for advice later. Successful lawyer interventions
may also halt or deﬂect the trajectory of an oﬃcer’s questioning, although Stokoe and
Edwards also show that suspects often fail to heed their lawyer’s advice and answer
anyway. Lawyers who bypass suspects and deal directly with oﬃcers are most eﬀective,
though this has potential costs, both to the relationship with the client (in terms of pos-
sibly alienating and/or disenfranchising them) and with the interviewer (in terms of
being obstructive). There is much future work to be done investigating the eﬀects of the
presence and absence of a lawyer, and, given the generally beneﬁcial eﬀects for the
defendant, there should be more research into the circumstances in which and reasons
why lawyers are not requested (see Ainsworth, this volume and Rock 2007).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
607

On performing interview records
We mentioned above that in the UK it is normal not only to transcribe investigative
interviews, but also to perform them in court. Paradoxically, rather than play the original
recordings of the police interviews in court, the preference is to reconvert the transcribed
version into a performed dialogue, for which the police witness usually plays him/herself
and the prosecuting lawyer plays the accused. Even stranger things can occur. In a case
in Bermuda, involving text messages sent between a 14-year-old girl, Rhiana, and her
32-year-old lover, Selassie, ‘Police oﬃcer Peter Stableford and Crown counsel Larissa
Burgess played the roles of Selassie and Rhiana as they read the proliﬁc texts to the jury
yesterday’ (The Royal Gazette, August 15 2009, available at: www.royalgazette.com/siftology.
royalgazette/Article/article.jsp?articleId=7d987ab3003000f&sectionId=60
[accessed
15
August 2009]). And Coulthard and Johnson (2007) show how a similar technique was
used in the Harold Shipman trial in the UK where police oﬃcer and prosecuting counsel
‘played’ interviewing oﬃcer and Shipman, respectively.
What all playwrights and actors know only too well is that performance involves
interpretation; lawyers are either blissfully unaware of this or choose to exploit its sig-
niﬁcance. In addition, as Haworth (2009) demonstrates, performance can include both
accidental and deliberate misinterpretations and mistakes, all of which can be prejudicial
to the accused. Finally, Holt and Johnson, Felton Rosulek and Matoesian in their
chapters in this volume show how both lawyers and witnesses use the theatricality of
the courtroom and the pragmatic and multimodal resources of language, to powerfully
present their opinions and their testimonies. It is incumbent on the forensic linguistic
community to increase awareness of the non-neutrality of performance and work
towards a better solution. This is a critical forensic linguistic endeavour arising out of
close analysis of data.
Working with an interpreter
There has already been a great deal of valuable research into the problems of interpreted
interaction in courtrooms (Berk-Seligson 2002; Hale this volume), though outside the
courtroom there has been much less work (see Kredens and Morris this volume). The
major ﬁnding seems to be that problems derive mainly from the lack of suﬃciently well-
trained interpreters. These problems are compounded not infrequently by the lack of
training for police and legal professionals on how to work successfully with an interpreter
(see Gray this volume).
The problems of professionalising interpreting are only partly academic – poor remu-
neration works against attracting the best into the ﬁeld – but so far as they are academic,
forensic linguists need to involve themselves more actively in training both interpreters
and legal professionals, with the latter group being the more diﬃcult to gain access to.
Sandra Hale in NSW, Australia, contributes one lecture on court interpreting to a regular
course for trainee judges and the Aston Centre for Forensic Linguistics runs hands-on
courses teaching police oﬃcers how to work with an interpreter, but this is only a drop
in the ocean. In an ideal world all police and legal professionals who work in countries
with a large proportion of non-native speakers, should have a short course on working
with an interpreter as an integral part of their training.
Another research area which has just emerged is the nature and successfulness of
video-link-mediated interpreted interaction. Recently, in order to save time and money,
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
608

courts have introduced video links which enable prisoners to participate in committal
and bail hearings without leaving the prison to attend court. Even prisoners who need
the help of interpreters are now participating in such hearings and research is just
beginning into how satisfactory this process actually is and will if necessary, suggest
improvements or even its abandonment.
Finally, Aldridge (this volume) reports how earlier research into the diﬃculties experi-
enced by vulnerable witnesses in general and by children in particular brought about
changes in the ways in which evidence was elicited in court. Innovations included the provision
of screens for certain witnesses and allowing children’s evidence-in-chief to be video-
recorded in advance. However, Aldridge reports that sadly, in the main, the changes have
not substantially improved the situation and concludes that radical measures are needed:
It seems that the adversarial system cannot easily oﬀer justice for vulnerable wit-
nesses and we must now turn our attention to research the popular contention that
inquisitorial style criminal proceedings hold inherent advantages for vulnerable
witnesses.
(Aldridge, this volume: 313)
One theme that ties much of the above discussion together is the lack of communication
and genuine collaboration between institutions and researchers. Gray (this volume) talks
of the need for cross-professional communication between linguists and lawyers. What is
also needed is more general communication: between linguists and interpreters; lawyers
and judges; and police, prison and probation oﬃcers. Gray urges linguists to start the ball
rolling, so that is a major challenge for the next decade.
The linguist as expert witness
The role of the expert witness
The role and position of the expert witness is rarely simple. In countries with an inves-
tigative legal system, the expert is usually appointed by the court; in those operating an
adversarial system, experts are typically briefed and paid by one of the disputing parties.
Not unnaturally, experts in the latter system are likely to feel some kind of loyalty,
consciously or unconsciously to ‘their’ side, as Solan (this volume) eloquently points out.
At the time of writing, there is a move in the UK both to clarify the role of the expert
and to ensure the relevance and reliability of the evidence provided.
As far as clarifying their role goes, all UK experts must now acknowledge that their
‘overriding duty is to the court and not the party calling [them] to testify’. In addition,
experts contracted by the Crown Prosecution Service are obliged to append a Declaration
of Understanding similar to the following:
I am an expert in forensic linguistics. I conﬁrm that I have read the guidance
contained in the booklet known as Disclosure: Expert’s evidence and unused
material which details my role and documents my responsibilities, in relation to
revelation as an expert witness. I have followed the guidance and recognise the
continuing nature of my responsibilities of revelation. In accordance with my
duties of revelation, as documented in the guidance booklet, I conﬁrm that:
CONCLUDING REMARKS
609

a. I have complied with my duties to record, retain and reveal material in accordance
with the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996, as amended;
b. I have compiled an Index of all material. I will ensure that the Index is updated in
the event I am provided with or generate additional material;
c. in the event my opinion changes on any material issue, I will inform the investi-
gating oﬃcer, as soon as reasonably practicable and give reasons.
In 1997, with support from the Home Oﬃce, a small group of bona ﬁde members of the
profession – including Angela Gallop of Forensic Access – got together to discuss what to
do about the lack of regulation. The upshot was the establishment of the Council for
the Registration of Forensic Practitioners (CRFP) – an independent regulatory body
to promote public conﬁdence in forensic practice in the UK (www. forensic-access.co.uk/
forensic-access-publications/benchmark-newsletter/crfp.htm [acce- ssed 1 August 2009]).
CRFP accreditation was based on rigorous peer review of forensic practitioners and
the intention was that in the long term it would be diﬃcult for an unregistered
practitioner to continue to give evidence. Mainly through the eﬀorts of Tim Grant,
forensic linguistics was accepted as a CRFP discipline in 2008, but, at roughly the same
time, a government subsidy was withdrawn and, in early 2009, the Council was forced
to close.
Paradoxically, at almost the same time the UK Forensic Science Regulator proposed
that forensic providers, including expert witnesses, should be accredited to accepted
standards by a recognised independent body. So far there are no details, but yet another
change is afoot. As a rough generalisation, up to the time of writing in 2009, courts in
the UK have approved the expert witness, whereas courts in the States have approved
the method. In other words, in the UK an individual judge could approve an expert
who was felt to have useful expertise to oﬀer and the expert could within reason use
whatever method s/he considered appropriate, while in the States, no matter how dis-
tinguished the expert, s/he would have to demonstrate that the method used satisﬁed
ﬁrst the Frye and latterly the Daubert test (Tiersma and Solan 2002). The consequence
has been that whereas expertise in the areas of handwriting and voice analysis has long
been accepted in the UK, it was typically not accepted in the United States.
However, in 2009, the UK Law Commission proposed that there should be a new
statutory test for determining the admissibility of expert evidence in criminal pro-
ceedings, which is likely to be very similar to the Daubert test. Forensic linguists and
phoneticians are awaiting developments with interest and wondering which of their
methods will be approved without dispute, which will need to be modiﬁed and which
will be disallowed.
There has been interesting descriptive work on the expert witness in court. Heﬀer
(2005) has documented how experts are allowed longer turns, Maley (2000) and Maley
and Fahey (1991) have shown how the expert’s evidence can be (mis)used for their own
purposes by the courtroom lawyers and Shuy (2006) has produced a ‘nuts and bolts
guide’. What we have not yet seen is a personal account written by an inexperienced
academic about giving expert evidence in court. For an academic used to both present-
ing information in well-structured ways and to engaging in clariﬁcatory debate, the
courtroom might seem to hold few surprises. However, it does.
First of all the academic may take a while to realise that there is no point in engaging
in debate with the cross-examining lawyer as s/he is paid not to be convinced. Worse,
the responses should not even be directed to the questioner who is purportedly asking
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
610

questions on behalf of the court, but rather to the jury, or perhaps, at least in an English
court, it is even better to address their responses directly to the judge who will summarise
the evidence for the jury at the end of the trial. But what is most diﬃcult for the expert,
is the fact that what s/he considered to be a well organised, well argued written report
may be at worst mangled, at best presented less than successfully, through the typical
lawyer–witness elicitation process. The expert may very well feel disempowered.
Two interesting questions for future research are ﬁrstly, whether the growing avail-
ability of courts with PowerPoint facilities will change the nature of the expert/lawyer
power relationship, by returning control over content and sequencing to the expert; and
secondly, whether a competent lecturer with (audio)visual resources can indeed present
evidence more successfully than the traditional elicitation method allows, or whether the
lawyer with his case overview is still better placed to select and sequence items from the
expert’s report.
As we noted above, in the adversarial system, expert witnesses are contracted by pro-
secution or defence. A consequence of this is that, typically, they give their evidence as
part of the case for the side that contracted them and consequently, if there are experts
on both sides, their evidence may be heard several days apart, further complicating the
situation for the jury. To rectify this, some courts now ask the experts to produce a joint
report in advance of appearing, which speciﬁes where they agree and disagree, while
Judge Gray (this volume) reports, as a further modiﬁcation, a ‘hot tub’ system he has
introduced into his own court.
The opposing expert witnesses are called at the conclusion of all of the other evi-
dence led by both parties. Having been duly aﬃrmed or sworn, they are then
required to debate directly between themselves the matters on which they are not
agreed, so that the judge and the lawyers can observe the debate. Only when this
debate has been exhausted will the lawyers be permitted to question the witnesses.
The judge will also ask any questions that he or she considers will help to clarify
the issues.
(Gray, this volume: 599)
New forensic tools
The work on student collusion which began with Johnson (1997) and led to the devel-
opment of the plagiarism detection program Copycatch (Woolls and Coulthard 1998;
Woolls 2002) has now been signiﬁcantly developed to work on large collections of texts.
A more recent version of the Copycatch program is in regular use in universities world-
wide, particularly in the British Open University where batches of 3,000 essays on a
single topic are not uncommon. Copycatch was customised for UCAS (the Universities
and Colleges Admissions Service) to process applications for admission to UK uni-
versities. All applicants must submit a personal statement of up to 4,000 characters
(around 600 words) as part of their application, but there were growing suspicions that
some of the statements were not suﬃciently personal. In 2006–7, a study by Woolls of a
sample corpus of 50,000 such statements found that 234 of them related a dramatic
incident involving ‘burning a hole in pyjamas at age eight’. A further 175 contained a
statement which involved ‘an elderly or inﬁrm grandfather’ and 370 statements contained
a sentence which included ‘a fascination for how the human body works’. The hole in
CONCLUDING REMARKS
611

the pyjamas accident was found to originate in a model personal statement placed on an
Internet website devoted to advice to applicants.
Model Personal Statement
Ever since I accidentally burnt holes in my pyjamas after experimenting with a
chemistry set on my 8th Birthday, I have always had a passion for science. Fol-
lowing several hospital visits during my teenage years to explore my interest, the
idea of a career that would exploit my humanity and problem-solving abilities
always made medicine a natural choice.
(UCAS 7/03/07 www.ucas.ac.uk/website/news/media_releases/2007/
[accessed 1 July 2009])
Below is an extract from one of the suspect applications with the borrowed items in
bold.
Ever since I burnt holes in my dress after experimenting with my brother’s
chemistry set when I was 10, I have always been passionate about the sci-
ences. Following several visits to the local hospital during my teenage years
as a result of minor accidents, the idea of a career that would help people
always made physiotherapy a natural choice.
A version of Copycatch is now used to compare all the 500,000 personal statements
submitted annually both with each other and with a growing database of statements
from previous years. As one might hope, knowledge of the existence of the program
seems to have reduced signiﬁcantly the incidence of the plagiarism it was designed to
detect. Here we can see how a program, which was a gleam in the eye in 1995,
became, in little over a decade, a highly reliable tool. We expect the next decade to see
some of the tools currently under development have a similar impact. We will mention
only two.
Firstly, there is still a need for an internet-searching equivalent to the Copycatch suite of
programs. Most universities worldwide use Turnitin to detect internet plagiarism, but it
works with chunks of language which are too large and, given the way more sophisti-
cated plagiarists adapt the texts they have borrowed, only a Copycatch type of program
will be adequate, particularly if one wants to ﬁnd chunks of as little as seven or eight
running words, which Coulthard (2004) suggests can be indicative of borrowing (see also
Coulthard, Johnson, Kredens and Woolls, this volume).
Secondly there is a growing interest in trying to determine the age, gender and ﬁrst
language of authors – the forensic applications for such programs obviously range from
the investigative use by police and security services in order to narrow the range of sus-
pects to manageable proportions, to the conﬁrmatory in authorship attribution cases – it
is easy to think of past cases where candidate authors diﬀered in terms of age, gender
and/or ﬁrst language and where a reliable program would have saved many hours of
work. Unsurprisingly, most of the development work is being done on texts written in
English, but early results are promising, (Koppel et al. 2009; Grant et al. 2009), and once
these methodologies have been reﬁned, there is no reason why they should not also be
adapted for use with other languages.
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
612

One recent development – the creation of reference corpora – will help to make some
approaches to authorship attribution more acceptable to a Daubert test. Whereas forensic
phoneticians have long had population statistics for the distribution of certain features like,
for instance, pitch of voice and certain speech defects, which could allow them to say
that for example a particular suspect voice had a particularly high average pitch that was
only found in one male in a hundred in the general population, until recently, forensic
linguists have had no such data, with the exception of McMenamin (2002) who reported a
collection of some 700 envelopes with California addresses. On the basis of this collection,
he could observe in one reported case that two particular features that co-occurred in the
suspect addresses were co-selected on only 1% of the envelopes in his reference corpus.
Now signiﬁcant corpora of appellant decisions (see Finegan, this volume), suicide
notes, police statements and particularly of text messages, are being compiled (see Tagg
2009 and Grant this volume). What this means is that whereas, for instance, analysis in
early text messaging cases had to rely on simply comparing past messages sent by the
candidate authors with the suspect messages, it is now possible to refer to population
statistics for crucial features and to begin to move towards calculating error rates. And
Finegan challenges new researchers and students to compile corpora from readily avail-
able material from Lexis-Nexis or Westlaw and through websites such as the US
Supreme Court (www.supremecourtus.gov/) and through the Oyez Project (www.oyez.
org) for oral arguments before the US Supreme Court (which have been made since
1955 and are available, going back several decades). These are amazing and unexplored
resources for forensic linguists researching legal register.
Asylum seekers
As Eades (this volume) describes, many governments use language analysis as an aid in
the determination of the origin and therefore the genuineness of asylum seekers.
Concerned forensic linguists in several countries at the turn of the century tried to alert
governments to problems in the methodology and to the unreliability of some of the
companies involved. In 2004, nineteen linguists and phoneticians produced a set of
‘Guidelines for the Use of Language Analysis in Relation to Questions of National
Origin
in
Refugee
Cases’
(www.lagb.org.uk/language-origin-refugees.pdf).
The
guidelines were endorsed by a dozen professional organisations including the IAFL and
the IAFPA. However, problems continue. Some companies are not following the
guidelines and Fraser, looking from a purely phonetic standpoint, suggests that what is
needed is
(a) a proper research programme which would investigate people’s actual abilities in
recognising, discriminating and identifying accents under various sociolinguistic
conditions; (b) collaboration between LADO [Language Analysis for Determining
Origin] agencies and linguists to develop analysis and testing procedures; and (c) a
system of accreditation by an independent, international authority for the agencies
that carry out LADO.
(Fraser 2009: 113)
Obviously such a programme could easily be expanded to include linguistic issues as
well and innovative work reported above on detecting ﬁrst languages would be very
relevant.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
613

Concluding observations
As a profession we are working towards a utopian future where anyone who is arrested
both understands and is able to claim their rights; where anyone who needs the help of
an interpreter is able to have one and where the prejudicial eﬀect of interpreting on the
legal process is reduced to an absolute minimum; where all legally signiﬁcant interactions
are audio- or video-recorded; and where all expert opinions, whether on the origin of an
asylum speaker, the authorship of a disputed text, the comprehensibility of a text or the
confusability or two trademarks, are reliable and reproducible. This Handbook is a guide
to progress so far; we hope to be able to report signiﬁcant improvements by the time of
the second edition but in the meantime, there is a lot of corpus linguistic, computational
and inter-cultural work to be done.
COULTHARD AND JOHNSON
614

References
15 U.S.C. §§ 1331 et seq., [1970] Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, (1970).
34 Fed. Reg. § 7919 [1969], An Amendment of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, 15
U.S.C. §§1331 et seq. (1965).
Abbott, H.P. (2008) The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Adams, K. and Winter, A. (1997) ‘Gang graﬃti as a discourse genre’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 1(3): 337–60.
Adams, M. (2005) ‘Lexical property rights: trademarks and American dictionaries’, Verbatim: The Lan-
guage Quarterly, 30: 1–8.
Adams, M. and Westerhaus, J. (2005) ‘Surnames and American trademark law’, Names: A Journal of
Onomastics, 53: 259–73. Available online at: www.adobe.com/products/ﬂashplayer/ (accessed 8 June
2009).
Agrimonti, L. (1995) ‘Note: the limitations of Daubert and its misapplication to quasi-scientiﬁc experts:
a two year case review of Daubert v. Merrell-Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 113 S. Ct. 2786 (1993)’,
Washburn Law Journal, 35: 134–56.
Ahmad, M.I. (2007) ‘Interpreting communities: lawyering across language diﬀerence’, UCLA Law
Review, 54(5): 999–1086.
Ainsworth, J. (1993): ‘In a diﬀerent register: the pragmatics of powerlessness in. police interrogation’,
The Yale Law Journal, 103(2): 259–322.
——(2006) ‘Linguistics as a knowledge domain in the law’, Drake Law Review, 54: 651–69.
——(2008) ‘“You have the right to remain silent … ” but only if you ask for it just so: the role of
linguistic ideology in American police interrogation law’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
The Law, 15: 1–21.
Airy, J.T. (2009) ‘Valuable lessons learned at an international counterterrorism forum’, The FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin, August (1–9).
Aitken, C. (1995) Statistics and the Evaluation of Evidence for Forensic Scientists, Chichester: John Wiley.
Aitken, J.K. and Butter, P. (2004) Piesse – The Elements of Drafting, 10th edn, Sydney: Lawbook Co.
Aldridge, M. and Luchjenbroers, J. (2007) ‘Linguistic manipulations in legal discourse: framing questions
and “smuggling” information’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 85–107.
——(2008) ‘Vulnerable witnesses and problems of portrayal: a consideration of videotaped interviews in
child rape case’, Journal of English Linguistics, 36(3): 266–84.
Aldridge, M. and Williams, C. (2006) ‘A survey of police oﬃcers’ attitudes of interviewing with special
measures’, unpublished ms.
Aldridge, M. and Wood, J. (1997) ‘Talking about feelings: young children’s ability to express emotions’,
Child Abuse and Neglect, 21: 1221–33.
Aldridge, M., Timmins, K. and Wood, J. (1997) ‘Children’s understanding of legal terminology: judges
get money at pet shows, don’t they?’, Child Abuse Review, 6: 141–46.
615

Allen, L.E. (1957) ‘Symbolic logic: a razor-edged tool for drafting and interpreting legal documents’,
Yale Law Journal, 66(6): 833–879.
Allimant, A. and Anne, S. (2008) ‘No room … homelessness and the experiences of women of non-
English speaking backgrounds’, paper presented at 5th National Homelessness Conference, Adelaide,
Australia.
Altman, R. (2008) A Theory of Narrative, New York: Columbia University Press.
American National Standards Institute (1978) American national standard guide for classifying and labeling
epoxy products according to their hazardous potentialities, New York: ANSI.
Amsterdam, A.G. and Bruner, J. (2002) Minding the Law, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, P. (2007) Technical Communication: A Reader-Centered Approach, 6th edn, Boston, MA:
Thomson/Wadsworth.
Andrews, M., Squire, C. and Tamboukou, M. (eds) (2008) Doing Narrative Research, Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Angélil-Carter, S (2002) Stolen Language? Plagiarism in Writing, London: Longman.
Angermeyer, P.S. (2005) ‘Who is “you”? Polite forms of address and ambiguous participant roles in
court interpreting’, Target, 17: 203–26.
Apitz, G. and Lin, J. (2007) ‘Interfaces to support the scholarly exploration of text collections’, in Pro-
ceedings of the CHI 2007 Workshop for Exploratory Search and HCI, San Jose, CA. Available online at:
www.umiacs.umd.edu/~digidock/publications.html.
Archer, D. (2002) ‘“Can innocent people be guilty?” A sociopragmatic analysis of examination tran-
scripts from the Salem witchcraft trials’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 3(1): 1–30.
——(2005) Questions and Answers in the English Courtroom (1640–1760), Amsterdam and Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
——(2006a) ‘(Re)initiating strategies: judges and defendants in Early Modern English courtrooms’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 181–211.
——(2006b) ‘Tracing the development of advocacy in two nineteenth-century English trials’, in M.
Dossena and I. Taavitsainen (eds) Diachronic Perspectives on Domain-Speciﬁc English, Bern: Peter Lang,
43–67.
——(forthcoming) ‘Tracing the crime narratives within the Palmer trial (1856): from the lawyer’s
opening speeches to the judge’s summing up’, in C. Heﬀer, F. Rock and J. Conley (eds) Textual
Travels in Legal-Lay Interaction, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aronsson, K. (1991) ‘Social interaction and the recycling of legal evidence’, in N. Coupland, H. Giles
and J. Wiemann (eds) Miscommunication and Problematic Talk, Newbury Park and London: Sage.
Atkinson, J. and Drew, P. (1979) Order in Court: The Organisation of Verbal Interaction in Judicial Settings,
London: Macmillan.
Auburn, T., Drake, S. and Willig, C. (1995) ‘“You punched him, didn’t you?”: versions of violence in
accusatory interviews’, Discourse & Society, 6(3): 353–86.
Auburn, T., Lea, S. and Drake, S. (1999) ‘“It’s your opportunity to be truthful”: disbelief, mundane
reasoning and the investigation of crime’, in C. Willig (ed.) Applied Discourse Analysis: Social and
Psychological Interventions, Buckingham: Open University Press, 44–65.
Auer, P. and Wei, L. (2007) ‘Introduction: multilingualism as a problem? Monolingualism as a pro-
blem?’, in P. Auer and L. Wei (eds) Handbook of Multilingualism and Multilingual Communication,
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1–14.
Austin, A.D. (1984) Complex Litigation Confronts the Jury System: A Case Study, Frederick, MD:
University Publications of America.
Austin, J.L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Australian Evidence Act 1995. Available online at: www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCo
mpilation1.nsf/0/0A3CF7EBACDD51B0CA25719A00060BE6/$ﬁle/EvidenceAct1995_WD02.pdf
(accessed 10 January 2008).
Axelrod, A. (2007) Getting Your Way Every Day, New York: American Management Association
(AMACON).
Baayen, R.H. (2001) Word Frequency Distributions, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
REFERENCES
616

Bachman, L. (2000) ‘Modern language testing at the turn of the century: assuring that what we count
counts’, Language Testing, 17: 1–42.
Bachman, L. and Palmer, A. (1996) Language Testing in Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. (1992) ‘Working memory’, Science, 255(5044): 556–59.
Bailey, R. (1984) ‘Dictionaries and proprietary names: the air-shuttle case’, Dictionaries, 53–65.
Baken, R.J. and Orlikoﬀ, R.F. (2000) Clinical Measurement of Speech and Voice, San Diego, CA: Singular.
Baker, J.H. (1990) An Introduction to English Legal History, 3rd edn, London: Butterworths.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) ‘Discourse in the novel’, in M. Holquist (ed.) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays
by M. M. Bakhtin, Austin: University of Texas Press, 259–422.
Baldwin, J. (1993) ‘Police interview techniques: establishing truth or proof?’, British Journal of Criminol-
ogy, 33: 325–52.
Baldwin, J. and French, P. (1990) Forensic Phonetics, London: Pinter.
Baltisberger, E. and Favaro, S. (2007) ‘When informants don’t want to inform: how to get relevant data
in the particular context of linguistic analyses for the determination of origin (LADO)’, in M.T.
Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the 2nd European IAFL Conference on Forensic
Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 85–90.
Bamberg, M. (2004) ‘Considering counter narratives’, in M. Bamberg and M. Andrews (eds) Considering
Counter Narratives: Narrating, Resisting, Making Sense, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 351–71.
Barnes, R. (2007) ‘Chief Justice counsels humility: Roberts says lawyers must put themselves in Judges’
shoes’, The Washington Post, February 6, A15.
Barnhart, C.L. (ed.) (1947) American College Dictionary, New York: Random House.
Baron, D. (1989) ‘Word law’, Verbatim, 16: 1–4.
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. (2000) ‘Literacy practices’, in D. Barton, M. Hamilton and R. Ivanicˇ (eds)
Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context, London: Routledge, 7–15.
Barton, D., Hamilton, M. and Ivanicˇ, R. (2000) ‘Introduction: exploring situated literacies’, in D.
Barton, M. Hamilton and R. Ivanicˇ (eds) Situated Literacies: Reading and Writing in Context, London:
Routledge, 1–6.
Bauman, R. (2004) A World Of Others’ Words: Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Intertextuality, Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. (1990) ‘Poetics and performance as critical perspectives on language and
social life’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 19: 59–88.
BBC News (2003) ‘McDonald’s Anger over McJob Entry’, 9 November, BBC News Online, accessed
23 March 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/3255883.stm.
——(2007) ‘McDonald’s Seeks “McJob” Rewrite’, BBC News Online, 20 March 2007, accessed 23
March 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/6469707.stm.
Beach, W.A. (1985) ‘Temporal density in courtroom interaction: constraints on the recovery of past
events in legal discourse’, Communication Monographs, 52: 1–18.
Beattie, J.M. (1986) Crime and the Courts in England 1660–1800, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——(1991) ‘Scales of justice: defence counsel and the English criminal trial in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries’, Law and History Review, 9(2): 221–67.
Beaupré, M. (1986) Interpreting Bilingual Legislation, Toronto: Carswell.
Bedell, G. (2000) 3 Steps to Yes, New York: Crown Business.
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language in Society, 13: 145–204.
Bell, B. and Loftus, A. (1985) ‘Vivid persuasion in the courtroom’, Journal of Personality Assessment, 49:
659–64.
Bennell, C. and Canter, D. (2002) ‘Linking commercial burglaries by modus operandi: tests using
regression and ROC analysis’, Science and Justice, 42: 153–64.
Bennett, W.L. and Feldman, M.S. (1981) Reconstructing Reality in the Courtroom, London: Tavistock
Publications.
Benneworth, K. (2006) ‘Repertoires of paedophilia: conﬂicting descriptions of adult–child sexual rela-
tionships in the investigative interview’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2):
190–211.
REFERENCES
617

——(2007) ‘“Just good friends”: managing the clash of discourses in police interviews with paedophiles’,
in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language of Sexual Crime, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 42–62.
——(2009) ‘Police interviews with suspected paedophiles: a discourse analysis’, Discourse and Society, 20
(5): 555–569.
Beres, L. and Griﬃth, T. (2004) ‘Gangs, schools and stereotypes’, Loyola Los Angeles Law Review, 37:
935–78.
Beretta, A., Campbell, C., Carr, T.H., Huang, J., Schmitt, L.M., Christianson, K. and Cao, Y. (2003)
‘An Er-Fmri investigation of morphological inﬂection in German reveals that the brain makes a dis-
tinction between regular and irregular forms’, Brain and Language, 85: 67–92.
Berger, M.A. and Solan, L.M. (2008) ‘The uneasy relationship between science and law: an essay and
introduction’, Brooklyn Law Review, 73: 847–54.
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction of Reality, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Berk-Seligson, S. (1990/2002) The Bilingual Courtroom: Court Interpreters in the Judicial Process, Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
——(1999) ‘The impact of court interpreting on the coerciveness of leading questions’, Forensic Lin-
guistics, 6(1): 30–56.
——(2000) ‘Interpreting for the police: issues in pre-trial phases of the judicial process’, Forensic Lin-
guistics, 7(2): 212–37.
——(2002) ‘The Miranda warnings and linguistic coercion: the role of footing in the interrogation of a
limited-English speaking murder suspect’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 127–46.
——(2008) ‘Judicial systems in contact. Access to justice and the right to interpreting/translating ser-
vices among the Quichua of Ecuador’, Interpreting, 10: 9–33.
Bhatia, V.K. (1982) An Investigation into Formal and Functional Characteristics of Qualiﬁcations in Legislative
Writing and its Application to English for Academic Legal Purposes, PhD thesis, University of Aston in
Birmingham.
——(1983) ‘Simpliﬁcation v. easiﬁcation: the case of legal texts’, Applied Linguistics, 4(1): 42–54.
——(1987a) ‘Language of the law’, Language Teaching, 20(3): 227–34.
——(1987b) ‘Textual-mapping in British legislative writing’, World Englishes, 6(1): 1–10.
——(1993) Analysing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings, London: Longman.
——(1994) ‘Cognitive structuring in legislative provisions’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law,
London: Longman, 136–55.
——(1997) ‘Translating legal genres’, in A. Trosborg (ed.) Text Typology and Translation, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 203–16.
——(2004) Worlds of Written Discourse: A genre-based view, London and New York: Continuum.
——(2005) ‘Speciﬁcity and generality in legislative expression: two sides of the coin’, in Bhatia, V.K.,
Engberg, J., Gotti, M. and Heller, D. (eds) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang, 337–356.
Bhatia, V.K. and Candlin, C.N. (2004) ‘Analysing arbitration laws across legal systems’, Hermes, 32: 13–43.
Bhatia, V.K., Candlin, C.N. and Engberg, J. (eds) (2008) Legal Discourse across Cultures and Systems,
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Bhatia, V.K., Engberg, J., Gotti, M. and Heller, D. (2005) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang.
Biber, D. (1988) Variation across Speech and Writing, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. and Finegan, E. (1988) ‘Adverbial stance types in English’, Discourse Processes, 11: 1–34.
——(1989) ‘Styles of stance in English: lexical and grammatical marking of evidentiality and aﬀect’,
Text, 9: 93–124.
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S. and Finegan, E. (1999) ‘Stance adverbials’, in Longman
Grammar of Spoken and Written English, Harlow: Longman, 853–75.
Bittner, E. (1967) ‘The police on skid row: a study of peace keeping’, American Sociological Review, 32:
699–715.
Blatchford, H. and Foulkes, P. (2006) ‘Identiﬁcation of voices in shouting’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 13: 241–54.
Bloch, B. (1948) ‘A set of postulates for phonemic analysis’, Language, 24(1): 3–46.
REFERENCES
618

Blommaert, J. (2001) ‘Investigating narrative inequality: African asylum seekers’ stories in Belgium’,
Discourse & Society, 12(4): 413–49.
——(2005) Discourse, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bogen, D. and Lynch, M. (1989) ‘Taking account of the hostile native: plausible deniability and the
production of conventional history in the IranContra Hearings’, Social Problems, 36: 197–224.
Bogoch, B. (1999) ‘Courtroom discourse and the gendered construction of professional identity’, Law
and Society Inquiry, 24(2): 329–75.
Braun, A. (1996) ‘Age estimation by diﬀerent listener groups’, Forensic Linguistics, 3: 65–73.
Braun, A. and Wagner, A. (2002) ‘Is voice quality language-dependent?’, in A. Braun and H.R.
Masthoﬀ(eds) Phonetics and its Applications: Festschrift for Jens-Peter Köster on the Occasion of his 60th
Birthday, Stuttgart: Steiner.
Brazil, D. (1993) ‘Telling tales’, in M. Coulthard (ed.) Advances in Spoken Discourse Analysis, London:
Routledge, 154–69.
Brennan, F. (2003) Tampering with Asylum, Brisbane: University of Queensland Press.
Brennan, M. (1994) ‘Cross-examining children in criminal courts: child welfare under attack’, in J.
Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 199–216.
Brennan, M. and Brennan, R.E. (1988) Strange Language – Child Victims under Cross-Examination, Wagga
Wagga, NSW: Charles Sturt University.
Brereton, D. (1997) ‘How diﬀerent are rape trials? A comparison of the cross-examination of complai-
nants in rape and assault trials’, British Journal of Criminology, 37(2): 242–261.
Brière, E. (1978) ‘Limited English speakers and the Miranda rights’, TESOL Quarterly, 12(3): 235–45.
Briggs, C. (ed.) (1996) Disorderly Discourse: Narrative, Conﬂict and Inequality, New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
——(1997) ‘Notes on a “confession”: on the construction of gender, sexuality and violence in an
infanticide case’, Pragmatics, 7(4): 519–46.
Broeders, A.P.A. (1999) ‘Some observations on the use of probability scales in forensic identiﬁcation’,
Forensic Linguistics: International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 6, ii: 228–41.
——(2001) ‘Forensic speech and audio analysis, forensic linguistics 1998 to 2001: a review’, 13th
INTERPOL Forensic Science Symposium, 16–19 October 2001, Lyon, France. Available online at:
www.interpol.int/Public/Forensic/IFSS/meeting13/Reviews/ForensicLinguistics.pdf.
Bromby, M.C. (2002) The Role and Responsibilities of the Expert Witness within the UK Judicial System,
dissertation presented for the Diploma in Forensic Medical Science. Available online at: www.caledoni
an.ac.uk/lss/global/contactmaps/staﬀ/bromby/DipFMSDissertation.pdf. (accessed 9 January 2008).
Brooks, P. (1996) ‘The law as narrative and rhetoric’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories:
Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 14–22.
——(2000) Troubling Confessions: Speaking Guilt in Law and Literature, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Brooks, P. and Gewirtz, P. (eds) (1996) Law’s Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Brouwer, J. (2007) ‘Kennedy cousin will stay in jail’, Sunday Mirror, 28 October 2007, p. 28.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bruner, J. (1978) ‘The role of dialogue in language’, in A. Sinclair, R. Jarvella and W.J.M. Levelt (eds)
The Child’s Conception of Language, New York: Springer-Verlag, 241–56.
——(1986) Actual Minds, Possible Worlds, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1990) Acts of Meaning, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1996) The Culture of Education, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(2004) ‘Life as narrative’, Social Research, 71(3) 691–710. (Originally published in Social Research 54
(1), Spring 1987).
Bucholtz, M. (2006) ‘Word up: social meanings of slang in California youth culture’, in J. Goodman
and L. Monaghan (eds) Interpersonal Communication: An Ethnographic Approach, London: Blackwell,
243–67.
REFERENCES
619

Bucke, T., Street, R. and Brown, D. (2000) ‘The right of silence: the impact of the Criminal Justice
and Public Order Act 1994’, Home Oﬃce Research Study 199, London: Home Oﬃce.
Bülow-Møller, A.M. (1991) ‘Trial evidence: overt and covert communication in court’, International
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(1): 38–60.
Burchﬁeld, R. (1992) Unlocking the English Language, New York: Hill and Wang.
Burns, B. (2001) A Theory of the Trial, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Burns, S. (2001) ‘“Think your blackest thoughts and darken them”: judicial mediation of large money
damage disputes’, Human Studies, 24(3): 227–49.
Burrell, S. (1990) ‘Gang evidence: issues for criminal defence’, Santa Clara Law Review, 30: 739–84.
Bursik, R. and Grasmick, H. (2006) ‘Deﬁning and researching gangs’, in Egley, A., Maxson, C.L.,
Miller, J. and Klein, M.W. (eds) The Modern Gang Reader, 3rd edn, Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury Publ.
Co., 2–13.
Burton, M., Evans, R. and Saunders, A. (2007) ‘Vulnerable and intimidated witnesses and the adver-
sarial process in England and Wales’, International Journal of Evidence and Proof, 11(1): 1–23.
Butters, R. (2007a) ‘Changing linguistic issues in US trademark litigation’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova
and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language
and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 29–42.
——(2007b) ‘Sociolinguistic variation and the law’, in R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds) Sociolinguistic Var-
iation: Theories, Methods and Applications, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 318–37.
——(2008a) ‘A linguistic look at trademark dilution’, Santa Clara Computer and High Technology Law
Journal, 24: 507–19.
——(2008b) ‘Review of Shuy (2006)’, Language in Society, 37(2): 300–4.
——(2008c) ‘Trademarks and other proprietary terms’, in J. Gibbons and M. Turell (eds) Dimensions of
Forensic Linguistics, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 231–47.
Butters, R. and Westerhaus, J. (2004) ‘Linguistic change in words one owns: how trademarks become
“generic”’, in A. Curzan and K. Emmons (eds) Studies in the History of the English Language II, Berlin/
New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 111–23.
Buttny, R. and Cohen, J.R. (2007) ‘Drawing on the words of others at public hearings: Zoning, Wal-
Mart, and the threat to the aquifer’, Language in Society, 36: 735–56.
Bygate, M., Skehan, P. and Swain, M. (2001) Research Pedagogic Tasks: Second Language Learning,
Teaching and Testing, London: Longman.
Byrd, D. (1994) ‘Relation of sex and dialect to reduction’, Speech Communication, 15: 39–54.
Cahill, D., Grebler, G., Baker, A. and Tully, B. (1988) Vulnerable Testimony: Police Interviewing of Men-
tally Handicapped and Mentally Disordered People in Connection with Serious Crime, unpublished mono-
graph, London: Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults.
Cairns, D.J.A. (1998) Advocacy and the Making of the Adversarial Criminal Trial 1800–1865, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Caldas-Coulthard, C.R. and Coulthard, M. (1996) Texts and Practices. Readings in Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge.
Caldwell, H. and Fisher-Ogden, D. (2004) ‘Stalking the jets and the sharks: exploring the con-
stitutionality of the gang death penalty enhancer’, George Mason Law Review, 12: 601–50.
Caldwell, R. (1982) ‘Specialist informant interviews’, reported in Bhatia, 1982.
Cambier-Langeveld, T. (2007a) ‘Current methods in forensic speaker identiﬁcation: results of a colla-
borative exercise’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14: 223–43.
——(2007b) ‘Hot issues in the ﬁeld of “language analysis”’, paper presented at the IAFPA 16th annual
conference of the International Association of Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, 2007. Available
online at: www.iafpa.net/confprog07.htm (accessed 26 November 2008).
Cameron, D. (2001) Working with Spoken Discourse, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980) ‘Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language
teaching and testing’, Applied Linguistics, 1: 1–47.
Cao, D. (2007a) Translating Law, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2007b) ‘Inter-lingual uncertainty in bilingual and multilingual law’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39: 69–83.
REFERENCES
620

Carr-Hill, R., Passingham, S., Wolf, A. and Kent, N. (1996) Lost Opportunities: The Language Skills of
Linguistic Minorities in England and Wales, London: The Basic Skills Agency.
Cashion, J.L. (1985) ‘Politeness in courtroom language’, conference paper available as Eric Document
Reproduction Service, No. ED 254 882.
Cassell, J. and McNeill, D. (1991) ‘Gesture and the poetics of prose’, Poetics Today, 12(3): 375–404.
Cassell, P.G. (1996a) ‘Miranda’s social cost: an empirical reassessment’, Northwestern University Law
Review, 90: 387–499.
——(1996b) ‘All beneﬁts, no costs: the grand illusion of Miranda’s defenders’, Northwestern Law Review,
90: 1084–1124.
——(2001) ‘Miranda’s social cost: An empirical reassessment’, Northwestern University Law Review, 90: 387–499.
Cassell, P.G. and Hayman, B.S. (1996) ‘Police interrogation in the 1990’s: an empirical study of the
eﬀects of Miranda’, UCLA Law Review, 43: 839–931.
Cederborg, A. (2002) ‘The discourse of police interviews: the case of sexually abused children’, in H.
Giles (ed.) Law Enforcement, Communication and Community, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
de Certeau, M. (1986) Heterologies: Discourse on the Other, trans. B. Massumi, Minneapolis, MN: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press.
Chafe, W.L. (1985) ‘Linguistic diﬀerences produced by diﬀerences between speaking and writing’, in
D.R. Olson, N. Torrance and A. Hildyard (eds) Literacy, Language and Learning: The Nature and
Consequences of Reading and Writing, London: Cambridge University Press, 105–23.
Chambers, J.K. (2008) ‘Curriculum Vitae’. Available online at: www.chass.utoronto.ca/~chambers/
(accessed December 2008).
Chambers, J.K., Trudgill, P. and Schilling-Estes, N. (eds) (2002) The Handbook of Language Variation and
Change, Oxford: Blackwell.
Chang, Y. (2004) ‘Courtroom questioning as a culturally situated persuasive genre of talk’, Discourse and
Society, 15(6): 705–22.
Channell, J. (1994) Vague Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Charrow, R. and Charrow, V. (1979) ‘Making legal language understandable: a psycholinguistic study
of jury instructions’, Columbia Law Review, 79: 1306–74.
Chaski, C. (2001) ‘Empirical evaluations of language-based author identiﬁcation techniques’, Interna-
tional Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(1): 1–65.
——(2005) ‘Who’s at the keyboard? Authorship attribution in digital evidence investigations’, Interna-
tional Journal of Digital Evidence, 4: 1–13.
Chatman, S. (1978) Story and Discourse, London: Cornell University Press.
Cheng, E.K. and Yoon, A.H. (2005) ‘Does Frye or Daubert matter? A study of scientiﬁc admissibility
standards’, Virginia Law Review, 91: 471–512.
Cheshire, J. (2002) ‘Sex and gender in variationist research’, in J.K. Chambers, P. Trudgill and N.
Schilling-Estes (eds) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change, Oxford: Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. (1985) The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Christensen, T.P. (2008) ‘Judges’ deviations from norm-based direct speech in court’, Interpreting, 10:
99–127.
Cicourel, A.V. (1968) The Social Organization of Juvenile Justice, New York: Wiley.
Clankie, S. (2002) ‘Theory of genericization on brand name change’, Studies in Onomastics, 6, Lewiston,
New York: Edwin Mellen.
Clarke, C. and Milne, R. (2001) National Evaluation of the PEACE Investigative Interviewing Course,
London: Home Oﬃce.
Clayman, S. and Heritage, J. (2002) The News Interview: Journalists and Public Figures on the Air, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cliﬀ, N. (1959) ‘Adverbs as multipliers’, Psychological Review, 66(1): 27–44.
Clift, R. and Holt, E. (2007) ‘Introduction’, in E. Holt and R. Clift (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported Speech
in Interaction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–15.
Clopper, C.G. and Pisoni, D.B. (2004) ‘Some acoustic cues for the perceptual categorization of
American English regional dialects’, Journal of Phonetics, 32: 111–40.
REFERENCES
621

——(2006) ‘Eﬀects of region of origin and geographic mobility on perceptual dialect categorization’,
Language Variation and Change, 18: 193–221.
Cloud, M., Shepherd, G.B., Barkoﬀ, A.N., Shur, J.V., Chi, U. and Rev, L. (2002) ‘Words without
meaning: the constitution, confessions, and mentally retarded suspects’, University of Chicago Law
Review, 69: 495–624.
Coates, L. and Wade, A. (2004) ‘Telling it like it isn’t: obscuring perpetrator responsibility for violent
crime’, Discourse and Society, 5: 189–206.
Coates, L., Bavelas, J. and Gibson, J. (1994) ‘Anomalous language in sexual assault trial judgements’,
Discourse and Society, 5: 189–206.
Cody, M.J. and McLaughlin, M.L. (1988) ‘Accounts on trial: oral arguments in traﬃc court’, in C.
Antaki (ed.) Analysing Everyday Explanation: A Casebook of Methods, London: Sage, 113–26.
Cohen, L. (1977) The Probable and the Provable, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Coldrey, J. (1987) ‘Aboriginals and the criminal courts’, in K.M. Hazlehurst (ed.) Ivory Scales: Black
Australia and the Law, Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Cole, S.A. (2004) ‘Grandfathering evidence: ﬁngerprint admissibility rulings from Jennings to Llera
Plaza and back again’, American Criminal Law Review, 41: 1189–1276.
Coleman, R.O. (1976) ‘A comparison of the contributions of two voice quality characteristics to the
perception of maleness and femaleness in the voice’, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 19: 168–80.
Collins, D. (2001) Reanimated Voices: Speech Reporting in a Historical Pragmatic Perspective, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
——(2007) ‘Speech reporting and the suppression of orality in seventeenth-century Russian trial dos-
siers’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 1: 175–99.
Comack, E. (1999) ‘Theoretical excursions’, in E. Comack (ed.) Locating Law: Race/Class/Gender Con-
nections, Halifax, Nova Scotia: Fernwood Publishing, 19–68.
Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Civil, of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, Cali-
fornia (1956) California Jury Instructions: Civil, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co.
——(2004) California Jury Instructions: Civil, St. Paul, MN: West Group.
Committee on Standard Jury Instructions, Criminal, of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County,
California (2003) California Jury Instructions: Criminal, St. Paul, MN: West Group.
Conger, J. (1998) Winning ‘Em Over, New York: Simon & Shuster.
Conley, J.M. (2006) ‘Comment – power is as power does’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 467–75.
Conley, J.M. and O’Barr, W.M. (1990) Rules versus Relationships: The Ethnography of Legal Discourse,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(1998/2005) Just Words: Law, Language and Power, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Conquergood, D. (1994) ‘Homeboys and hoods: gang communication and cultural space’, in L. Frey (ed.)
Group Communication in Context: Studies of Natural Groups, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 23–55.
Coode, G. (1845) On Legislative Expression, or, the Language of the Written Law, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Cooke, M. (2009) ‘Interpreter ethics versus customary law: quality and compromise in aboriginal lan-
guages interpreting’, in S. Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Critical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting: A Shared
Responsibility, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 85–98.
Corcoran, C. (2004) ‘A critical examination of the use of language analysis interviews in asylum pro-
ceedings: a case study of a West African seeking asylum in the Netherlands’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 200–21.
Corley, M. and Steward, O.W. (2008) ‘Hesitation dysﬂuencies in spontaneous speech: the meaning of
um’, Language and Linguistics Compass, 2: 589–602.
Correia, R.D.C. (2003) ‘Translation of EU legal texts’, in A. Tosi (ed.) Crossing Barriers and Bridging Cultures:
The Challenges of Multilingual Translation for the European Union, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 21–37.
Cotter, C. and Walking Turtle, E. (2001) USA Phrasebook: Understanding Americans and Their Culture,
2nd edn, Victoria, Australia: Lonely Planet.
Cotterill, J. (2000) ‘Reading the rights: a cautionary tale of comprehension and comprehensibility’,
Forensic Linguistics, 7: 4–25.
REFERENCES
622

——(2001) ‘Domestic discord, rocky relationships: semantic prosodies in representation of marital vio-
lence in the O.J. Simpson trial’, Discourse & Society, 12(3): 291–312.
——(2002) ‘Intertextuality in the trials of O.J. Simpson’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process,
Hampshire/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the OJ Simpson Trial, Basingstoke and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2004) ‘Collocation, connotation, and courtroom semantics: lawyers’ control of witness testimony
through lexical negation’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 513–37.
Coulthard, M. (1994a) ‘On the use of corpora in the analysis of forensic texts’, Forensic Linguistics, 1(1): 27–43.
——(1994b) ‘Evaluating texts’, in R.M. Coulthard (ed), Advances in Written Text Analysis, London:
Routledge, 1–11.
——(1996) ‘The oﬃcial version: audience manipulation in police records of interviews with suspects’,
in C.R. Caldas-Coulthard and M. Coulthard (eds) Texts and Practices: Readings in Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge, 166–78.
——(2002) ‘Whose voice is it? Invented and concealed dialogue in written records of verbal evidence
produced by the police’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, New York and Basingstoke:
Palgrave, 19–34:
——(2004) ‘Author identiﬁcation, idiolect and linguistic uniqueness’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 431–47.
——(2005) ‘The linguist as expert witness’, Linguistics and the Human Sciences, 1(1) 39–58.
——(2007) ‘In my opinion’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European
IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 43–56.
Coulthard, M. and Johnson, A. (2007) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence,
London/New York: Routledge.
Coulthard, M. and Montgomery, M. (1981) Studies in Discourse Analysis, London: Routledge.
Coupland, N., Giles, H. and Wiemann, J.M. (1991) ‘Miscommunication’ and Problematic Talk, Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Cover, R.M. (1986) ‘Violence and the word’, Yale Law Journal, 95: 1601–29.
Cowan, A.L. (2007) ‘Skakel loses in eﬀort to gain a new trial’, The New York Times, 26 October 2007, p. B4.
Creech, R. (2005) Law and Language in the European Community: The Paradox of a Babel ‘United in
Diversity’, Groningen: Europa Law Publishing.
——(2007) ‘Missing the mark: assessing trademarks for distinctiveness and descriptiveness in Europe’s
multilingual environment’, in K. Kredens and S. Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the Law:
International Outlooks, Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 371–78.
Crystal, D. (1995) ‘Review of Forensic Stylistics’, Language, 71(2): 381–84.
——(2008) Txtng: The Gr8 Db8, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crystal, D. and Davy, D. (1969) Investigating English Style, London: Longman.
Culpeper, J. and Kytö, M. (2000) ‘Gender voices in the spoken interaction of the past: a pilot study
based on Early Modern English trial proceedings’, in D. Kastovsky and A. Mettinger (eds) The History
of English in a Social Context, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 53–89.
Curiel, J. (25 March 2008) ‘S.F. gives ex-gang members way to get oﬀlist’, San Francisco Chronicle.
Curl, T. and Drew, P. (2008) ‘Contingency and action: a comparison of two forms of requesting’,
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 41: 1–25.
Cutler, A. (1982) ‘Guest editorial: the reliability of speech error data’, in A. Cutler (ed.) Slips of the
Tongue and Language Production, The Hague: Mouton, 7–28.
Cutler, C. (1999) ‘Yorkville crossing: white teens, hiphop, and African American English’, Journal of
Sociolinguistics, 3: 428–42.
Daley, K. and Daley-Caravella, L. (2004) Talk Your Way to the Top, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dancey, C.P. and Reidy, J. (1999) Statistics without Maths for Psychologists, London: Prentice Hall.
Dando, C., Wilcock, R. and Milne, R. (2008) ‘The cognitive interview: inexperienced police oﬃcers’
perceptions of their witness/victim interviewing practices’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 13: 59–70.
Danet, B. (1980a) ‘“Baby” or “fetus”: language and the construction of reality in a manslaughter trial’,
Semiotica, 32: 187–219.
REFERENCES
623

——(1980b) ‘Language in the legal process’, Law and Society Review, 14(3): 445–564.
Danet, B. and Bogoch, B. (1980) ‘Fixed ﬁght or free for all? An empirical study of combativeness in the
adversary system of justice’, British Journal of Law and Society, 7: 36–60.
——(1994) ‘Orality, literacy, and performativity in Anglo-Saxon wills’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and
the Law, London: Longman, 100–35.
Danet, B. and Kermish, N.C. (1978) ‘Courtroom questioning: a sociolinguistic perspective’, in L.N.
Massery (ed.) Psychology and Persuasion in Advocacy, Washington, DC: Association of Trial Lawyers of
America, National College of Advocacy, 413–41.
Danet, B., Hoﬀman, K.B., Kermish, N.C., Rafn, H.J. and Stayman, D (1980) ‘An ethnography of
questioning in the courtroom’, in R.W. Shuy and A. Shnukal (eds) Language Use and the Uses of
Language, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press: 222–34.
Darby, J.K. (ed.) (1981) Speech Evaluation in Psychiatry, New York: Grune and Statton.
Darley, J.M. and Gross, P.H. (1983) ‘A hypothesis-conﬁrming bias in labeling eﬀects’, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 44: 20–33.
Davies, G. and Westcott, H. (1999) ‘Interviewing child witnesses under the memorandum of good
practice: a research review’, Police Research Series Paper, 115.
Davies, G., Wilson, C., Mitchell, R. and Milsom, J. (1995) Videotaping Children’s Evidence: An Evalua-
tion, London: Home Oﬃce.
Dawid, A.P. (2002) ‘Bayes’s theorem and weighing evidence by juries’, in R. Swinburne (ed) Bayes’s
Theorem, Proc. Brit. Acad. 113, 71–90.
Deak, M. (2009) ‘Despite contention over lack of translation, court upholds Plainﬁeld man’s conviction’.
Available online at: www.mycentraljersey.com/article/20090701/NEWS/907010365 (accessed 9 July
2009).
Delbridge, A. (ed.) (1981) The Macquarie Dictionary, Sydney: Macquarie Library Pty, Ltd.
Dershowitz, A.M. (1996) ‘Life is not a dramatic narrative’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s
Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 99–105.
Dick, R.C. (1985) Legal Drafting, Toronto: Carswell.
Diehl, R.L., Lindblom, B., Hoemeke, K.A. and Fahey, R.P. (1996) ‘On explaining certain male–female
diﬀerences in the phonetic realization of vowel categories’, Journal of Phonetics, 24: 187–208.
Diez, I.G. (2005) ‘The transformation of asylum seekers’ narratives through the asylum procedure’,
paper presented at the International Association of Forensic Linguists 7th Biennial Conference on Forensic
Linguistics/Language and Law, CardiﬀUniversity, UK, July 2005.
van Dijk, T. (ed.) (1985) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 4, London: Academic Press.
——(1991) Racism and the Press, London: Routledge.
——(1997) Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary Introduction, London: Sage Publications, Inc.
——(2008) Discourse and Context: A Sociocognitive Approach, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dinwoodie, G.B. (2008) ‘What linguistics can do for trademark law’, in L. Bently, J. Davis and J.
Ginsburg (eds) Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary Critique, Cambridge Intellectual Property
and Information Law, 10, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 140–58.
Dobash, R.E. and Dobash, R.P. (1992) Women, Violence and Social Change, London: Routledge.
Docuyanan, F. (2000) ‘Governing graﬃti in contested urban spaces’, Political and Legal Anthropology
Review, 23: 103–21.
Donahoe, J.J. (1998) ‘Did Miranda diminish police eﬀectiveness?’, Stanford Law Review, 50: 1147–80.
Doty, K.L. (2007) ‘Telling tales: the role of scribes in constructing the discourse of the Salem witchcraft
trials’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 8(1): 25–41.
Doty, K.L. and Hiltunen, R. (2002) ‘“I will tell, I will tell”: confessional patterns in the Salem witch-
craft trials, 1692’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 3(2): 299–335.
——(2009) ‘Formulaic discourse and speech acts in the witchcraft trial records of Salem, 1692’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 4(1): 458–69.
Doughty, C.J. and Long, M.H. (eds) (2003) The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition, Oxford: Blackwell.
Drew, P. (1985) ‘Analysing the use of language in courtroom interaction’, in T.A. van Dijk (ed.)
Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 3, London: Academic Press, 133–47.
REFERENCES
624

——(1990) ‘Strategies in the contest between lawyer and witness in cross-examination’, in J.N. Levi
and A.G. Walker (eds) Language in the Judicial Process, New York: Plenum Press, 39–64.
——(1992) ‘Contested evidence in courtroom cross-examination: the case of a trial for rape’, in P.
Drew and J.C. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 470–520.
——(1997) ‘“Open” class repair initiators in response to sequential sources of trouble in conversation’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 28: 69–101.
——(1998) ‘Metropolitan police service emergency and non-emergency telephone call handling: a
study of the handling of enquiries and incident reports made over the telephone by members of the
public to MPS operator centres, control rooms and the new Scotland Yard information room’, Report
to the Metropolitan Police Service, London.
——(2003) ‘Comparative analysis of talk-in-interaction in diﬀerent institutional settings: a sketch’, in P.
J. Glenn, C.D. leBaron, J. Mandelbaum and R. Hopper (eds.) Studies on Language in Social Interaction,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 293–308.
——(2004) ‘Conversation analysis’, in K. Fitch and R. Sanders (eds) Handbook of Language and Social
Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 71–102.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992a) ‘Analyzing talk at work: an introduction’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage
(eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 3–65.
——(eds) (1992b) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press.
Drew, P. and Sorjonen, M.J. (1997) ‘Institutional discourse’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Discourse Analysis: A
Multidisciplinary Introduction, London: Sage, 92–118.
Drizin, S.A. and Colgan, B.A. (2004) ‘Tales from the juvenile confession front: a guide to how standard
police interrogation tactics can produce coerced and false confessions from juvenile suspects’, in G.D.
Lassiter (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Drizin, S.A. and Leo, R.A. (2004) ‘The problem of false confession in the post-DNA world’, North
Carolina Law Review, 82: 891–1007. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1134094.
Dror, I.E., Charlton, D. and Péron, E. (2005) ‘Contextual information renders experts vulnerable to
making erroneous identiﬁcations’, Forensic Science International, 156: 74–78.
Dumas, B.K. (1990) ‘An analysis of the adequacy of federally mandated cigarette package warnings’ in J.
N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds) Language in the Judicial Process, NY: Plenum Press Corp., 309–52.
——(1992) ‘An analysis of the adequacy of cigarette package warnings: an analysis of the adequacy of
federally mandated cigarette package warnings’, Tennessee Law Review, 59: 261–304.
——(2000a) ‘US pattern jury instructions: problems and proposals’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 49–71.
——(2000b) ‘Warning labels and industry safety information standards: the case of Loctite RC/609’, in
J. Peyton and P. Griﬃn (eds) Language in Action: New Studies of Language in Society, Cresskill, New
Jersey: Hampton Press, 302–17.
——(2002) ‘Reasonable doubt about reasonable doubt: assessing jury instruction adequacy in a capital
case’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 246–59.
Dunstan, R. (1980) ‘Contexts for coercion: analyzing properties of courtroom “questions”’, British
Journal of Law and Society, 7: 61–77.
Durant, A. (2008) ‘“How can I tell the trade mark on a piece of gingerbread from all the other marks
on it?”, naming and meaning in verbal trade mark signs’, in L. Bently, J. Davis and J. Ginsburg (eds)
Trade Marks and Brands: An Interdisciplinary Critique, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 107–39.
van Dyke, J. (2007) ‘Interference eﬀects from grammatically unavailable constituents during sentence
processing’, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33(2): 407–30.
van Dyke, J. and McElree, B. (2006) ‘Retrieval interference in sentence comprehension’, Journal of
Memory and Language, 55(2): 157–66.
Eades, D. (1992) Aboriginal English and the Law: Communicating with Aboriginal English Speaking Clients: A
Handbook for Legal Practitioners, Brisbane: Queensland Law Society.
——(1994a) ‘A case of communicative clash: aboriginal English and the legal system’, in J. Gibbons
(ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 234–64.
——(1994b) ‘Forensic linguistics in Australia: an overview’, Forensic Linguistics, 1(2): 113–32.
REFERENCES
625

——(1995) ‘Aboriginal English on trial: the case for Stuart and Condren’, in D. Eades (ed.) Language in
Evidence: Linguistic and Legal Perspectives in Multicultural Australia, Sydney: University of New South
Wales Press, 147–74.
——(1996) ‘Verbatim courtroom transcripts and discourse analysis’, in H. Kniﬀka, S. Blackwell and M.
Coulthard (eds) Recent Developments in Forensic Linguistics, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang GmbH,
241–54.
——(2000) ‘“I don’t think it’s an answer to the question”: Silencing aboriginal witnesses in court’,
Language in Society, 29: 161–95.
——(2002) ‘“Evidence given in unequivocal terms”: gaining consent of aboriginal kids in court’, in J.
Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 162–79.
——(2003a) ‘Participation of second language and second dialect speakers in the legal system’, Annual
Review of Applied Linguistics, 23: 113–33.
——(2003b) ‘The politics of misunderstanding in the legal process: aboriginal English in Queensland’,
in J. House, G. Kasper and S. Ross (eds) Misunderstanding in Spoken Discourse, London: Longman,
199–226.
——(2004) ‘Understanding Aboriginal English in the legal system: a critical sociolinguistics approach’,
Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 491–512.
——(2005) ‘Applied linguistics and language analysis in asylum seeker cases’, Applied Linguistics, 26(4):
503–26.
——(2006) ‘Lexical struggle in court: aboriginal Australians versus the State’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 10
(2): 153–80.
——(2008a) ‘From expertise to advocacy: forensic linguistics and advocacy in asylum seeker cases’, in F.
Olsen, A. Lorz and D. Stein (eds) Law and Language: Theory and Society, Düsseldorf: Düsseldorf Uni-
versity Press, 87–118.
——(2008b) Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control, Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
——(2009) ‘Testing the claims of asylum seekers: the role of language analysis’, Language Assessment
Quarterly, 6(1): 30–40.
Eades, D. and Arends, J. (2004) ‘Using language analysis in the determination of national origin of
asylum seekers: an introduction’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 179–99.
Eades, D., Fraser, H., Siegel, J., McNamara, T. and Baker, B. (2003) ‘Linguistic identiﬁcation in the
determination of nationality: a preliminary report’, Language Policy, 2(2): 179–99.
Eakin, J.P. (2008) Living Autobiographically: How we Create Identity in Narrative, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Eberhardt, J.L., Goﬀ, P.A., Purdie, V.J. and Davies, P. (2004) ‘Seeing black: race, crime, and visual
processing’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87: 876–93.
Eckert, P. (1997) ‘Why ethnography?’, in U.B. Kotsinas, A.-B. Stenström and A.-M. Karlsson (eds)
Ungdomsspråk i Norden, Stockholm: MINS 43, 52–62.
Eclavea, R. (1982) ‘Annotation: admissibility of testimony concerning extrajudicial statements made to,
or in presence of, witness through an interpreter’, American Law Reports 4th series, 12: 1016.
Edelman, G. (2009) ‘Improving provision for children with speech, language and communication dif-
ﬁculties: the role of the voluntary sector’, Current Paediatrics, 14(3): 223–28.
Edwards, D. (1997) Discourse and Cognition, London: Sage.
——(2006) ‘Facts, norms and dispositions: practical uses of the modal would in police interrogations’,
Discourse Studies, 8(4): 475–501.
——(2008) ‘Intentionality and mens rea in police interrogations: the production of actions as crimes’,
Intercultural Pragmatics, 5(2): 177–99.
Edwards, L.H. (2006) Legal Writing: Process, Analysis, and Organization, 4th edn, New York: Aspen.
Edwards, V. (2004) Multilingualism in the English-speaking World, Oxford: Blackwell.
Egelko, R. (2008) ‘Court limits defendant’s right to seek mercy’, The San Francisco Chronicle, 25 July
2008. Available online at: www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article/comments/view?f=/c/a/2008/07/25/
BA5511V00L.DTL (accessed 6 August 2009).
Eggins, S. (1994) An Introduction to Systemic Functional Linguistics, London: Pinter Publishers Ltd.
REFERENCES
626

Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual Consent, London and New York: Routledge.
——(2002) ‘(Re)contextualizing complainant’s accounts of sexual assault’, The International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 9(2): 193–212.
——(2003) ‘Coercing gender: language in sexual assault adjudication processes’, in J. Holmes and M.
Meyerhoﬀ(eds) The Handbook of Language and Gender, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 645–70.
——(2006) ‘Constraining the boundaries of gendered identities: trial discourse and judicial decision-
making’, in J. Baxter (ed.) Speaking Out: The Female Voice in Public Contexts, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 139–58.
——(2007) ‘Legal discourse and the cultural intelligibility of gendered meanings’, Journal of Socio-
linguistics, 11(4): 452–77.
Eichhorn, L. (1989) ‘Social science ﬁndings and the jury’s ability to disregard evidence under the federal
rules of evidence’, Law & Contemporary Problems, 42: 341–53.
Ellis, R. (2003) Task-based Language Learning and Teaching, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. and Barkhuizen, G. (2005) Analysing Learner Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, S. (1994) ‘The Yorkshire ripper enquiry: part I’, Forensic Linguistics, 1: 197–206.
Ellison, L. (2001) The Adversarial Process and the Vulnerable Witness, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elwork, A., Sales, B. and Alﬁni, J. (1977) ‘Juridic decisions: in ignorance of law or in the light of it?’,
Law and Human Behavior, 1: 123–41.
——(1982) Making Jury Instructions Understandable, Charlottesville, VA: Michie.
Engberg, J. and Heller, D. (2008) ‘Vagueness and indeterminacy in law’, in V.K. Bhatia, C.N. Candlin
and J. Engberg (eds) Legal Discourse across Cultures and Systems, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University
Press.
Engel, S. (2000) Context is Everything: The Nature of Memory, New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
Ervin Tripp, S. (1970) ‘Discourse agreement: how children answer questions’, in J. Hayes (ed.) Cognition
and the Development of Language, New York: Wiley, 79–109.
Esbensen, F.L., Winfree, T., He, N. and Taylor, T.J. (2001) ‘Youth gangs and deﬁnitional issues: when
is a gang a gang and why does it matter?’, Crime & Delinquency, 47: 105–30.
Espiritu, N. (2005) ‘(E)racing youth: the racialized construction of California’s Proposition 21 and the
development of alternative contestations’, Cleveland State Law Review, 52: 189–208.
Estrich, S. (1987) Real Rape, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
European Commission (2003) ‘Joint practical guide of the European Parliament, the Council and the
Commission for persons involved in the drafting of legislation within the community institutions’.
Evans, M., McIntosh, W., Lin, J. and Cates, C. (2007) ‘Recounting the courts: applying automated
content analysis to enhance empirical legal research’, Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 4(4):1007–39.
Faerk, C. and Kasper, G. (1987) ‘Perspectives on language transfer’, Applied Linguistics, 8(2): 111–36.
Faigman, D., Kaye, D., Saks, M. and Cheng, E. (2007) Modern Scientiﬁc Evidence: The Law and Science of
Expert Testimony, Minneapolis: West Pub. Co.
Fairclough, N. (1989) Language and Power, London: Longman.
——(1995) Media Discourse, London: Arnold.
——(2001) ‘Critical discourse analysis as a method in social scientiﬁc research’, in R. Wodak and M.
Meyer (eds) Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis, London: Sage, 212–28.
FCA (Federal Court of Australia) (2003) Applicant WAFV of 2002 v. Refugee Review Tribunal [2003]
(17 January 2003). Available online at: www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/FCA/2003/16.html (accessed
26 November 2008).
Feldman, A.D. (2004) ‘High court study: a divided court in more ways than one: the supreme court of
Delaware and its distinctive model for judicial eﬃcacy, 1997–2003’, Albany Law Review, 67: 849–92.
Felton Rosulek, L. (2008) ‘Manipulative silence and social representation in the closing arguments of a
child sexual abuse case’, Text & Talk, 28(4): 529–50.
——(2009a) ‘First person plural pronouns as persuasive devices in the closing arguments of criminal
trials’, poster at the American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL) Conference.
——(2009b) The Sociolinguistic Construction of Reality in the Closing Arguments of Criminal Trials, unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL.
REFERENCES
627

——(forthcoming a) ‘The sociolinguistic creation of opposing representations of defendants and vic-
tims’, International Journal of Speech, Language, and Law.
——(forthcoming b) ‘Legitimation and the heteroglossic nature of closing arguments’, GURT 2008: Proceed-
ings of the Georgetown University Roundtable in Linguistics, Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Filipovic, L. (2007) ‘Language as a witness: insights from cognitive linguistics’, International Journal of
Speech, Language and the Law, 14: 245–67.
Findley, K.A. and Scott, M.S. (2006) ‘The multiple dimensions of tunnel vision in criminal cases’,
Wisconsin Law Review, 2: 291–397.
Fischoﬀ, S. (2005) ‘Gangsta’ rap and a murder in Bakersﬁeld’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29:
795–805.
Fisher, R.P. and Geiselman, R.E. (1992) Memory-Enhancing Techniques for Investigative Interviewing: The
Cognitive Interview, Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Fisher, R.P., Geiselman, R.E. and Amador, M. (1989) ‘Field test of the cognitive interview: enhancing
the recollection of actual victims and witnesses of crime’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 74: 722–27.
Fisiak, J. (ed.) (1996) Collins English–Polish Dictionary, Warsaw: Polska Oﬁcyna Wydawnicza.
Fitch, W.T. and Giedd, J. (1999) ‘Morphology and development of the human vocal tract: a study
using magnetic resonance imaging’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 106: 1511–22.
Fletcher, P. and Ingram, R. (1995) ‘Grammatical impairment’, in P. Fletcher and B. MacWhinney (eds)
The Handbook of Child Language, Oxford: Blackwell, 603–22.
Flückiger, A. (2008) ‘The ambiguous principle of clarity of the law’, in A. Wagner and S. Cacciaguidi-
Fahy (eds) Obscurity and Clarity in the Law: Prospects and Challenges, Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 9–24.
Fodor, J. and Garrett, M. (1967) ‘Some syntactic determinants of sentential complexity’, Perceptions and
Psychophysics, 2(7): 289–96.
Foley, T. (2006) ‘Lawyers and legal interpreters: diﬀerent clients, diﬀerent culture’, Interpreting, 8(1): 97–104.
Foulkes, P. and Docherty, G. (2006) ‘The social life of phonetics and phonology’, Journal of Phonetics,
34: 409–38.
Fourakis, M. and Port, R. (1986) ‘Stop epenthesis in English’, Journal of Phonetics, 14: 197–221.
Fowler, R. (1985) ‘Power’, in T. van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol 4, London: Aca-
demic Press, 61–82.
Foyle, R. (2002) ‘Legislative language in the EU: the crucible’, International Journal for the Semiotics of
Law, 15: 361–74.
Framer, I. (2001) ‘Interpreters and their impact on the criminal justice system: the Alejandro Ramírez
Case’, Proteus, IX(1–2, 1–6). Available online at: http://languageaccess.us/uploads/Interpreters%
20and%20Their%20Impact%20PDF.pdf (accessed 5 August 2009).
Francis, G. (1994) ‘Labelling discourse: an aspect of nominal-group lexical cohesion’, in Coulthard, R.
M. (ed.) Advances in Written Text Analysis, London: Routledge, 83–101.
Francis, W.N. and Kucˇera, H. (1982) Frequency Analysis of English Usage: Lexicon and Grammar, Boston:
Houghton Miﬄin.
Fraser, B. (1975) ‘Warning and threatening’, Centrum, 3: 169–80.
——(1980) ‘Conversational mitigation’, Journal of Pragmatics, 4: 341–50.
——(1998) ‘Threatening revisited’, Forensic Linguistics: International Journal of Speech, Language and Law, 5(2):
159–73.
Fraser, B. and Freedgood, L. (1999) ‘Interpreter alterations to pragmatic features in trial testimony’,
paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Association for Applied Linguistics (21,
Stanford, CT, 6–9 March, 1999).
Fraser, H. (2003) ‘Issues in transcription: factors aﬀecting the reliability of transcripts as evidence in legal
cases’, Forensic Linguistics, 10(2): 203–26.
——(2009) ‘The role of “educated native speakers” in providing language analysis for the determination
of the origin of asylum seekers’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 16(1): 113–38.
French, P. and Harrison, P. (2006) ‘Investigative and evidential applications of forensic speech science’,
in A. Heaton-Armstrong, E. Shepherd, G. Gudjonsson and D. Wolchover (eds) Witness Testimony,
Psychological, Investigative and Evidential Perspectives, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
REFERENCES
628

——(2007) ‘Position statement concerning use of impressionistic likelihood terms in forensic speaker
comparison cases’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(1): 137–44.
French, P., Harrison, P. and Windsor Lewis, J. (2006) ‘R v. John Samuel Humble: the Yorkshire ripper
hoaxer trial’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13: 255–73.
Friedman, L.M. (1993) ‘How I write’, 4 SCRIBES Journal of Legal Writing, 3: 5.
Fries, C.C. (1952) The Structure of English, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company Inc.
Frontline, (2006) ‘The Enemy Within’, item on Public Broadcasting Station PBS, July 24, 2006
Fuhrman, M. (1998) Murder in Greenwich: Who Killed Martha Moxley? New York: HarperCollins Pub-
lishers.
Fuller, J. (1993) ‘Hearing between the lines: style switching in a courtroom setting’, Pragmatics, 3: 29–43.
de Fruyt, F., Bockstaele, M., Taris, R. and van Hiel, A. (2006) ‘Police interview competencies: assess-
ment and associated traits’, European Journal of Personality, 20(7): 567–84.
Galasin´ski, D. (2000) The Language of Deception: A Discourse Analytical Study, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Galatolo, R. (2007) ‘Active voicing in court’, in E. Holt and R. Clift (eds) Reporting Talk: Reported
Speech in Interaction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 195–220.
Galatolo, R. and Mizzau, M. (2005) ‘Quoting dialogues and the construction of the narrative point of
view in legal testimony: the role of prosody and gesture’, Studies in Communication Science, Special
Issue ‘Argumentation in Dialogic Interaction’, June 2005: 217–31.
Galindo, L. (1993) ‘The language of gangs, drugs and prison life among Chicanas’, Latino Studies Journal,
4: 23–43.
Garcia, A. (1998) ‘Is Miranda dead, was it overruled, or is it irrelevant?’, St. Thomas Law Review, 10: 461–98.
Gardner, H. (2004) Changing Minds, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Garﬁnkel, H. and Sacks, H. (1970) ‘On formal structures of practical actions’, in J.C. McKinney and E.
A. Tiryakian (eds) Theoretical Sociology, New York: Appleton Century Crofts, 338–66.
Garner, B. (1995) A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage, 2nd edn, Oxford and New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
——(1999a) The Winning Brief, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(ed.) (1999b) Black’s Law Dictionary, 7th edn, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co.
——(2003) Garner’s Modern American Usage, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
——(ed.) (2004a) Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th edn, Eagan, MN: West Publishers.
——(2004b) The Winning Brief, 2nd edn., Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Gates, H.L. (1995) ‘Thirteen ways of looking at a black man’, New Yorker, 23 October 1995.
Gawande, A. (2009) ‘The cost conundrum’, The New Yorker, Annals of Medicine section, 1 June 2009,
36–44.
Geiselman, R.E., Fisher, R.P., MacKinnon, D.P. and Holland, H.L. (1986) ‘Enhancement of eye-
witness memory with the cognitive interview’, American Journal of Psychology, 99: 385–401.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006) ‘Thinking big with small stories in narrative and identity analysis’, Narrative
Inquiry, 16(1): 122–30.
Gergen, K. (1999) An Invitation to Social Construction, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Gernsbacher, M. and Givón, T. (eds) (1995) Coherence in Spontaneous Text, Philadelphia, PA and
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gewirtz, P. (1996a) ‘Victims and voyeurs: two narrative problems at the criminal trial’, in P. Brooks and
P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories: Narrative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 135–61.
——(1996b) ‘Narrative and rhetoric in the law’, in P. Brooks and P. Gewirtz (eds) Law’s Stories: Nar-
rative and Rhetoric in the Law, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2–13.
Gfroerer, S. (2006) ‘Sprechererkennung und Tonträgerauswertung’, in G. Widmaier (ed.) Münchener
Anwaltshandbuch Strafverteidigung, München: Beck, 2505–26.
Ghai, Y. (1997) Hong Kong’s New Constitutional Order: The Resumption of Chinese Sovereignty and the Basic
Law, Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
REFERENCES
629

Giambruno, C. (2008) ‘The role of the interpreter in the governance of sixteenth- and seventeenth-
century Spanish colonies in the “New World”’, in C. Valero Garcés and A. Martin (eds) Crossing
Borders in Community Interpreting: Deﬁnitions and Dilemmas, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Giannelli, P.C. (2003) ‘Admissibility of scientiﬁc evidence’, Oklahoma City University Law Review, 28: 1–15.
——(2007) ‘Wrongful convictions and forensic science: the need to regulate crime labs’, North Carolina
Law Review, 86: 163–235.
Gibbons, J. (ed.) (1994) Language and the Law, London: Longman.
——(1995) ‘What got lost? The place of electronic recording and interpreters in police interviews’, in
D. Eades (ed.) Language in Evidence: Linguistic and Legal Perspectives in Multicultural Australia, Sydney:
University of New South Wales Press, 175–86.
——(2001a) ‘Revising the language of New South Wales police procedures: applied linguistics in
action’, Applied Linguistics, 22(4): 439–69.
——(2001b) ‘Legal transformations in Spanish: an “audiencia” in Chile’, Forensic Linguistics, 8(1): 24–43.
——(2003) Forensic Linguistics: An Introduction to Language in the Justice System, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gibson, W. (1961) ‘Literary minds and judicial style’, New York University Law Review, 36: 915–30.
Giles, H. and Powesland, P.F. (1975a) ‘A social psychological model of speech diversity’, in H. Giles
and P. Powesland (eds) Speech Style and Social Evaluation, New York: Harcourt, Brace, 154–70.
——(1975b) Speech Style and Social Evaluation, London: Academic Press.
Gilmore, G. (1974) The Death of Contract, Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press.
Gilvelber, D. (1997) ‘Meaningless acquittals, meaningful convictions: do we reliably acquit the inno-
cent?’, Rutgers Law Review, 49: 1317–96.
Gitomer, J. (2007) Little Green Book of Getting Your Way, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times Press.
Godfrey, D and Harris, D. (1971) Basic Elements of Intelligence, Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Oﬃce.
Goﬀman, E. (1959) Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, New York: Doubleday.
——(1981a) Forms of Talk, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
——(1981b) ‘Footing’, in Forms of Talk, Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 124–57.
——(1986) Frame Analysis, Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003) Hearing Gesture, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gomez, P. (2004) ‘It is not so simply because an expert says it is so: the reliability of gang expert tes-
timony regarding membership in criminal street gangs: pushing the limits of Texas Rule of Evidence
702’, St. Mary’s Law Review, 34: 581–622.
Goodman, G. (1984) ‘The child witness: an introduction’, Journal of Social Issues, 40(2): 1–7.
Goodman, G. and Melinder, A. (2007) ‘Child witness research and forensic interviews with young
children: a review’, Legal and Criminal Psychology, 12: 1–19.
Goodrich, P. (1987) Legal Discourse: Studies in Linguistics, Rhetoric and Legal Analysis, Basingstoke: Macmillan.
——(1990) Languages of Law: From Logics of Memory to Nomadic Masks, London: Weidenfeld and
Nicholson.
Goodwin, C. (1981) Conversational Organization, New York: Academic Press.
——(1994) ‘Professional vision’, American Anthropologist, 96(3): 606–33. Available online at: www.
sscnet.ucla.edu/clic/cgoodwin/94prof_vis.pdf (accessed 6 August 2009).
——(2000) ‘Practices of seeing: visual analysis: an ethnomethodological approach’, in T. van Leeuwen
and C. Jewitt (eds) Handbook of Visual Analysis, London: Sage Publications. Available online at: www.
sscnet.ucla.edu/clic/cgoodwin/publish.htm (accessed 6 August 2009).
——(2003) ‘Pointing as situated practice’, in S. Kita (ed.) Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cogni-
tion Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 217–41.
——(2007) ‘Participation, stance, and aﬀect in the organization of activities’, Discourse and Society, 18(1): 53–73.
Goodwin, C. and Goodwin, M. (2004) ‘Participation’, in A. Duranti (ed.) A Companion to Linguistic
Anthropology, Oxford: Blackwell, 222–44.
Gordon-Smith, D. (1989) ‘The drafting process in the European Community’, Statute Law Review, 10:
56–68.
REFERENCES
630

Gorman, T.P., White, J., Brooks, G. and English, F. (1990) Language for Learning, London: Department
for Education and Science.
Gotti, M. (2005) ‘Vagueness in the model law on international commercial arbitration’, in V.K. Bhatia,
J. Engberg, M. Gotti and D. Heller (eds) Vagueness in Normative Texts, Bern: Peter Lang, 227–53.
Government of Hong Kong, (1984) Sino-British Joint Declaration 1984.
——(1990) The Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China.
Government of Hong Kong, Court of Final Appeal, (1999) ‘Chan Kam Nga’, Hong Kong Law Report
Digest 1 at 310, HKSAR.
Graham, T. (2007) ‘Neulander appeals come to an end’, Philadelphia Inquirer, 18 April 2007, p. B01.
Grant, T. (2005) Authorship Attribution in a Forensic Context, unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham.
——(2007) ‘Quantifying evidence for forensic authorship analysis’, International Journal of Speech, Lan-
guage and the Law, 14(1): 1–25.
Grant, T. and Baker, K. (2001) ‘Identifying reliable, valid markers of authorship: a response to Chaski’,
Forensic Linguistics, 8(1): 66–79.
Grant, T., Smith, D. J., Kredens, K. and Spencer, S. (2009) ‘Identifying an author’s native language’,
unpublished research report produced for Qinetiq (Intelligence and Digital Security Division).
Greatbatch, D. (1986) ‘Aspects of topical organization in news interviews: the use of agenda-shifting
procedures by interviewees’, Media, Culture and Society, 8: 441–55.
——(1988) ‘A turn-taking system for British news interviews’, Language in Society, 17: 401–30.
Grebler, G. (2005a) ‘“And then what did she say?” Making confession statements believable and com-
pelling (even when they are false)’, paper presented at the International Association of Forensic Linguists
7th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and Law, CardiﬀUniversity, UK, July 2005.
——(2005b) ‘Language issues in (false) confession evidence’, paper presented at International Linguistic
Association 50th Anniversary Conference on Language and Law, New York City, April 2005.
Greene, J. and Pranis, K. (2007) GangWars: The Failure of Enforcement Tactics and the Need for Eﬀective
Public Safety Strategies, Washington, DC: Justice Policy Institute.
Greene, S. (2009) ‘A sign of apathy for deaf’, The Denver Post, 7 July 2009. Available online at: www.
denverpost.com/news/ci_12818667 (accessed 13 July 2009).
Greenﬁeld, S. (2008) ID: The Quest for Identity in the 21st Century, London: Sceptre.
Greisbach, R. (1999) ‘Estimation of speaker height from formant frequencies’, Forensic Linguistics, 6: 265–77.
Grice, H.P. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics 3:
Speech Acts, New York: Academic Press, 41–58.
Griﬃths, A. and Milne, R. (2005) ‘Will it all end in tiers: police interviews with suspects in Britain’, in
T. Williamson (ed.) Investigative Interviewing: Rights, Research, Regulation, Willan: Devon, 167–89.
Grimes, B. (1992) Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 12th edn, Dallas, TX: Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Grisso, T. (1980) ‘Juveniles’ capacity to waive Miranda rights: an empirical analysis’, California Law
Review, 68: 1134–66.
Groopman, J. (2007) How Doctors Think, New York: Houghton Miﬄin.
Groscup, J. and Penrod, S. (2003) ‘Battle of the standards for experts in criminal cases: police vs. psy-
chologists’, Seton Hall Law Review, 33: 1141–65.
Gross, S.R., Jacoby, K., Matheson, D.J., Montgomery, N. and Patil, S. (2005) ‘Exonerations in the
United States, 1989 through 2003’, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 95(2). Available online at:
www.ssrn.com/abstract=753084 (accessed 6 August 2009).
Gruber, K. (2007) A Linguistic and Ethnographic Analysis of Apology Narratives Performed in the Context of
Federal Sentencing Hearings, unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Chicago.
Gubrium, J. and Holstein, J. (2009) Analyzing Narrative Reality, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Gudjonsson, G. (1992) The Psychology of Interrogations, Confessions and Testimony, Chichester: John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.
Gumperz, J. (1982) Discourse Strategies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J., Aulakh, G. and Kaltman, H. (1982) ‘Thematic structure and progression in discourse’, in J.
Gumperz (ed.) Language and Social Identity, New York: Cambridge University Press, 22–56.
REFERENCES
631

Gunnarsson, B.-L (1984) ‘Functional comprehensibility of legislative texts: Experiments with a Swedish
Act of Parliament’, Text 4(1–3): 71–105.
Gusﬁeld, J. (1980) Illusions of Authority, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Gustafsson, M. (1975) Some Syntactic Properties of English Law Language, Publication No. 4, Department of
English, Turku: University of Turku.
——(1984), ‘The syntactic features of binomial expressions in legal English’, Text, 4(1/3): 123–41.
Haack, S. (2008) ‘What’s wrong with litigation-driven science? An essay in legal epistemology’, Seton
Hall Law Review, 38: 1053–83.
Hager, J. (1959) ‘Let’s simplify legal language’, Rocky Mountain Law Review, 32: 74–86.
Hale, S. (1996) ‘Pragmatic considerations in court interpreting’, Australian Review of Applied Linguistics,
19: 61–72.
——(1999) ‘Interpreters’ treatment of discourse markers in courtroom questions’, Forensic Linguistics, 6
(1): 57–82.
——(2001) ‘How are courtroom questions interpreted? An analysis of Spanish interpreters’ practices’, in
I. Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges. Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St. Jerome.
——(2003). ‘“Excuse me, the interpreter wants to speak” – Interpreter interruptions in the courtroom:
why do interpreters interrupt and what are the consequences?’, Proceedings of the Third Critical Link
Conference, Montreal, May 2001. Available online at: www.criticallink.org/proceedings/5.pdf (acces-
sed 6 August 2009).
——(2004) The Discourse of Court Interpreting: Discourse Practices of the Law, the Witness and the Interpreter,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
——(2007) Community Interpreting, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hale, S. and Campbell, S. (2002) ‘The interaction between text diﬃculty and translation accuracy’,
Babel, 48: 14–33.
Hale, S. and Gibbons, J. (1999) ‘Varying realities: patterned changes in the interpreter’s representation
of courtroom and external realities’, Applied Linguistics, 20(2): 203–20.
Halliday, M.A K. (1973) Language in a Social Perspective: Explorations in the Functions of Language, London:
Edward Arnold.
——(1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning, London: Edward
Arnold.
——(1989) Spoken and Written Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 2nd edn, London: Edward Arnold.
Hamlyn, B., Phelps, A., Turtel, J. and Sattar, G. (2004) ‘Are special measures working? Evidence from
surveys of vulnerable and intimidated witnesses’, Home Oﬃce Research Study, No. 283, London:
HMSO.
Hammersley, M. (2006) ‘Ethnography: problems and prospects’, Ethnography and Education, 1(1): 3–14.
Hanks, P. (1971) Hamlyn Encyclopedic World Dictionary, Feltham: Hamlyn.
Hansen, M. (2002) ‘Dr. Cop on the stand: judges accept police oﬃcers as experts too quickly, critics
say’, American Bar Association Journal, 31–4.
Hardcastle, R.A. (1997) ‘Cusum; a credible method for the determination of authorship?’, Science and
Justice, 37(2), 129–38.
Harris, D. (1976) Basic Elements of Intelligence, Washington, DC: US Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration.
Harris, S. (1984) ‘Questions as a mode of control in magistrates’ courts’, International Journal of the
Sociology of Language, 49: 5–28.
——(2001) ‘Fragmented narratives and multiple tellers: witness and defendant accounts in trials’, Dis-
course Studies, 3(1): 53–74.
——(2003) ‘Politeness and power: making and responding to “requests” in institutional settings’, Text,
23(1): 27–52.
——(2005) ‘Telling stories and giving evidence: the hybridisation of narrative and non-narrative modes
of discourse in a sexual assault trial’, in J. Thornborrow and J. Coates (eds) The Sociolinguistics of
Narrative, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 215–37.
REFERENCES
632

Harvey, M. (2000) ‘A beginner’s course in legal translation: the case of culture-bound terms’, ASTTI/
ETII: 357–69.
——(2002) ‘What’s so special about legal translation?’, Meta, 47(2): 177–85.
Hastie, R. (1993) ‘Algebraic models of juror decision processes’, in R. Hastie (ed.) Inside the Juror,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 84–115.
Hastie, R. and Pennington, N. (1996) ‘The O.J. Simpson stories: behavioral scientists’ reﬂections on
“The People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson”’, University of Colorado Law
Review, 67: 957–76.
Hastie, R., Penrod, S. and Pennington, N. (1983) Inside the Jury, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
ten Have, P. (2007) Doing Conversation Analysis (2nd edn), London: Sage.
Haworth, K. (2006) ‘The dynamics of power and resistance in police interview discourse’, Discourse &
Society, 17(6): 739–59.
——(2009) ‘Police interview discourse and its role(s) in the judicial process’, unpublished thesis, Uni-
versity of Nottingham.
Heaps, C. and Henley, T. (1999) ‘Language matters: wording considerations in hazard perception and
warning comprehension’, Journal of Psychology, 133: 341–42.
Heath, C. (1986) Body Movement and Speech in Medical Interaction, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Heﬀer, C. (2002) ‘“If you were standing in Marks and Spencers”: narrativisation and comprehension in
the English summing-up’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave, 228–45.
——(2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided Analysis of Legal–Lay Discourse, Basingstoke/New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2006) ‘Beyond “reasonable doubt”: The criminal standard of proof instruction as communicative
act’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2): 159–188.
——(2007) ‘Judgement in court: evaluating participants in courtroom discourse’, in K. Kredens and S.
Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the Law: International Outlooks, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang,
145–79.
——(2008a) ‘Report of Dr. Christopher Heﬀer dated 28 August 2008. re Bambino Mio Limited,
Claimant and Cazitex N.V., Defendant’, unpublished manuscript.
——(2008b) ‘The language and communication of jury instruction’, in J. Gibbons and M.T. Turell
(eds) Dimensions of Forensic Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 47–65.
——(2010) Forensic Discourse, London and New York: Continuum.
Heinemann, T. (2006) ‘“Will you or can’t you?” Displaying entitlement in interrogative requests’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 38: 1081–1104.
Henning, T. (1999) ‘Judicial summation: the trial judge’s version of the facts or the chimera of neu-
trality’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 12: 171–213.
Heritage, J. (1984) ‘A change-of-state token and aspects of its sequential placement’, in J.M. Atkinson
and J. Heritage (eds) Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 299–346.
——(1985) ‘Analysing news interviews: aspects of the production of talk for an overhearing audience’,
in T.A. van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Vol. 3, London: Academic Press, 95–119.
——(2002) ‘Ad hoc inquiries: two preferences in the design of routine questions in an open con-
text’, in D.W. Maynard, H. Houtkoop-Steenstra, N.C. Schaeﬀer and J. van der Zouwen (eds)
Standardization and Tacit Knowledge: Interaction and Practice in the Survey Interview, Chichester: Wiley,
313–34.
——(2003) ‘Designing questions and setting agendas in the news interview’, in P. Glenn, C.D.
LeBaron, J. Mandelbaum (eds) Studies in Language and Social Interaction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates Inc, 151–77.
Heritage, J. and Clayman, S. (2010) Talk in Action: Interactions, Identities, and Institutions, New York:
Blackwell.
Heritage, J. and Sorjonen, M. (1994) ‘Constituting and maintaining activities across sequences: And-
prefacing as a feature of question design’, Language in Society, 23: 1–29.
REFERENCES
633

Heritage, J. and Watson, D. (1977) ‘Recent developments in the sociology of language in Britain’,
Sociolinguistics Newsletter, 8: 2–6.
——(1980) ‘Aspects of the properties of formulations in natural conversations: Some instances analysed’,
Semiotica 30–33/4: 245–62.
Heritage, J. and Watson, R. (1979) ‘Formulations as conversational objects’, in G. Psathas (ed.) Everyday
Language: Studies in Ethnomethodology, New York: Irvington Press, 123–62.
Hertog, E., Corsellis, A., Rasmussen, K.W., van den Bosch, Y., van der Vlis, E. and Keijzer-Lambooy,
H. (2007) ‘From Aequitas to Aequalitas: Establishing standards in legal interpreting and translation in
the European Union’, in C. Wadensjö, B. Englund Dimitrova and A.L. Nilsson (eds) The Critical
Link 4, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 151–66.
Hewitt, B. (2003) ‘A plea for mercy: as his family ﬁghts to free him, convicted murderer Michael
Skakel ﬁnally speaks’, People Weekly, 59.18, 12 May 2003.
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: A Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heymann, P. (1984) Testimony before the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the
House Committee on the Judiciary 96th Congress, March 4, 36–39.
Hibbitts, B. (1995) ‘Making motions: the embodiment of law in gesture’, The Journal of Contemporary
Legal Issues, 6: 51–82.
Hickey, L. (1993) ‘Presupposition under cross-examination’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 6
(16): 89–109.
Hill, C.A. and King, C. (2004) ‘How do German contracts do as much with fewer words?’ Chicago-
Kent Law Review, 79: 889–926.
Hill, M. (2003) ‘Identifying the source of critical details in confessions’, Forensic Linguistics, 10(1): 23–61.
Hillenbrand, J., Getty, L.A., Clark, M.J. and Wheeler, K. (1995) ‘Acoustic characteristics of American
English vowels’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97: 3099–3111.
Hiltunen, R. (1984) ‘The type and structure of clausal embedding in legal English’, Studies of Legal
Discourse, 4(1/3): 107–21.
——(1996) ‘“Tell me, be you a witch?”: questions in the Salem witchcraft trials of 1692’, International
Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 9(25): 17–37.
——(2004) ‘Salem 1692: a case of courtroom discourse in a historical perspective’, in R. Hiltunen and
S. Watanabe (eds) Approaches to Style and Discourse in English, Osaka: Osaka University Press, 3–21.
Hirsch, S. (1998) Pronouncing and Persevering: Gender and the Discourses of Disputing in an African Islamic
Court, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hobbs, P. (2003a) ‘“Is that what we’re here about?” A lawyer’s use of impression management in a
closing argument at trial’, Discourse and Society, 14(3): 273–90.
——(2003b) ‘“You must say it for him”: reformulating a witness’ testimony on cross-examination at
trial’, Text, 23(4): 477–511.
——(2008) ‘It’s not what you say, but how you say it: the role of personality and identity in trial suc-
cess’, Critical Discourse Studies, 5(3): 231–48.
Hoey, M. (2005) Lexical Priming. A New Theory of Words and Language, London: Routledge.
Hollien, H. (1990) The Acoustics of Crime, New York: Plenum.
——(2002) Forensic Voice Identiﬁcation, London: Academic Press.
Holmberg, U. (2004) ‘Crime victims’ experiences of police interviews and their inclination to provide
or omit information’, International Journal of Police Science and Management, 6: 155–70.
Holmberg, U. and Christianson, S.A. (2002) ‘Murderers’ and sexual oﬀenders’ experiences of police
interviews and their inclination to admit or deny crimes’, Behavioural Sciences and the Law, 20(1–2):
31–45.
Holmes, D.I. (1998) ‘The evolution of stylometry in the humanities’, Literary and Linguistic Computing,
13(3): 111–17.
Holt, E. (2009) ‘Reported speech’, in S. D’Hondt, J.O. Östman and J. Verschueren (eds) The Pragmatics
of Interaction: Handbook of Pragmatics Highlights 4, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 190–205.
Holt, E and Clift, R. (eds) (2007) Reporting Talk: Reported Speech in Interaction (Studies in Interactional
Sociolinguistics 24). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
REFERENCES
634

Holt, E.J. and Johnson, A.J. (2006) ‘Formulating the facts: Questions and repeats in police/suspect
interviews’, Paper at International Conference on Conversation Analysis, Helsinki, May 2006.
Home Oﬃce (1989) Pigot Committee: Report of the Advisory Group on Video Evidence, London: HMSO.
——(1992) Circular 22, HMSO: London.
——(1998) Speaking up for Justice: Report of the Interdepartmental Working Group on the Treatment of Vul-
nerable or Intimidated Witnesses in the Criminal Justice System, London: HMSO.
——(2002/2007) Achieving the Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance for Vulnerable and Intimi-
dated Witnesses, including Children, London: Home Oﬃce.
——(2007) Achieving the Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Wit-
nesses, and Using Special Measures, London: Home Oﬃce.
——(2008) PACE Code C: Code of Practice for the Detention, Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police
Oﬃcers, London: HMSO.
Home Oﬃce and the Department of Health (1992) Memorandum of Good Practice on Video-recorded
Interviews with Child Witnesses for Criminal Proceedings, London: HMSO.
Home Oﬃce, Crown Prosecution Service and Department for Constitutional Aﬀairs (2005) Code of
Practice for Victims of Crime, London: Oﬃce for Criminal Justice Reform.
Hostettler, J. (2006) Fighting for Justice: The History and Origins of Adversary Trial, Hook: Waterside Press.
Hotta, S. (2007a) ‘A linguistic exploration of trademark dilution’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J.
Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and the
Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 179–86.
——(2007b) ‘Morphosyntactic structure of Japanese trademarks and their distinctiveness: a new model
for linguistic analysis of trademarks’, in K. Kredens and S. Gozdz-Roszkowski (eds) Language and the
Law: International Outlooks, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang, 379–92.
Hotta, S. and Fujita, M. (2007) ‘The psycholinguistic foundation of trademarks: an experimental study’,
in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds) Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on
Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 173–78.
House, J. (1977) A Model of Translation Quality Assessment, Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
van der Houwen, F. (2005) Negotiating Disputes and Achieving Judgments on Judge Judy, unpublished PhD
dissertation, University of Southern California.
Howald, B.S. (2009) ‘Authorship attribution under the rules of evidence: empirical approaches in the
layperson legal system’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 15: 219–47.
Howard, R.M. (1995) ‘Plagiarisms, authorships, and the academic death penalty’, College English, 57,
788–805.
——(1999) ‘The new abolitionism comes to plagiarism’, in L. Buranen and A.M. Roy (eds). Perspectives
on Plagiarism and Intellectual Property in a Postmodern World, Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 87–95.
Huckin, T. (2002) ‘Textual silence and the discourse of homelessness’, Discourse and Society, 13: 347–72.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G.K. (2002) The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hudson, T., de Jong, G., McDougall, K., Harrison, P. and Nolan, F. (2007) ‘F0 statistics for 100 young
male speakers of standard southern British English’, Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, Saarbrücken, Germany, 1809–12. Available online at: www.icphs2007.de/con-
ference/papers/1570/1570.pdf.
Hunston, S. and Sinclair, J. (2000) ‘A local grammar of evaluation’, in S. Hunston and G. Thompson
(eds) Evaluation in Text: Authorial Stance and the Construction of Discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hunt, J. and Borgida, E. (2001) ‘“Is that what I said?”: witnesses’ responses to interviewer modiﬁca-
tions’, Law and Human Behaviour, 25: 583–603.
Hunt, M. (1996) ‘The sociolinguistics of tagging and Chicano gang graﬃti’, unpublished PhD dis-
sertation, U. Southern California.
Huntington, R. (1991) ‘European unity and the tower of Babel’, Boston University International Law
Journal, 9: 321–46.
Hutchby, I. and Wooﬃtt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis, Oxford: Polity Press.
REFERENCES
635

Hymes, D. (1977) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach, London: Tavistock Publica-
tions.
——(1981) “In Vain I Tried to Tell You”: Essays in Native American Ethnopoetics, Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Ibrahim, A. (1999) ‘Becoming black: rap and hip-hop, race, gender, identity and the politics of ESL
learning’, TESOL Quarterly, 33: 349–69.
Ibrahim, R. (2008) ‘Performance in L1 and L2 observed in an Arabic–Hebrew bilingual aphasic following brain
tumor: A case constitutes double dissociation’, Psychology Research and Behaviour Management, 1: 11–9.
Ibrahim, Z. (2007) ‘The interpreter as advocate. Malaysian court interpreting as a case in point’, in C.
Wadensjö, B. Englund Dimitrova and A.L. Nilsson (eds) The Critical Link 4. Professionalisation of
Interpreting in the Community, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Ikane, J. (2007) ‘Problems in communicating the suspect’s rights in interpreted police interviews’,
Applied Linguistics, 28(1): 87–112.
Inbau, F.E., Reid, J.E. and Buckley, J.P. (1986) Criminal Interrogation and Confessions, Baltimore, MN:
Williams and Wilkins.
Istratescu, C. (2007) Fighting Gang Allegations: A Conceptual and Methodological Approach, CPDA:
Advanced Trial Skills Institute.
Jackson, A. (2004) Prosecuting Gang Cases: What Local Prosecutors Need to Know, Los Angeles, CA:
American Prosecutors Research Institute.
Jackson, B.S. (1988) Law, Fact and Narrative Coherence, Liverpool: Deborah Charles Publications.
——(1995) Making Sense in Law, Liverpool: Deborah Charles Publications.
Jacquemet, M. (1996) Credibility in Court: Communicative Practices in the Camorra Trials, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Janney, R.W. (2002) ‘Cotext as context: vague answers in court’, Language and Communication, 22: 457–75.
Javan, S. (2009) Little Bodies don’t mean Little Minds: An Investigation into Children’s Facilitation of Audience
Design when Constructing Referring Expressions in the Context of an Investigative Police Interview. Unpub-
lished dissertation.
Jaworski, A. and Galasin´ski, D. (2004) ‘Vocative address forms and ideological legitimization in political
debates’, Discourse Studies, 2: 35–53.
Jeﬀerson, G. (1989) ‘Preliminary notes on a possible metric which provides for a “standard maximum”
silence of approximately one second in conversation’, in D. Roger and P. Bull (eds) Conversation: An
Interdisciplinary Perspective, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 166–96.
——(2004) ‘Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction’, in G. Lerner (ed.) Conversation Ana-
lysis: Studies from the First Generation, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 13–31.
Jessen, M. (2007a) ‘Forensic reference data on articulation rate in German’, Science and Justice, 47: 50–67.
——(2007b) ‘Speaker Classiﬁcation in forensic phonetics and acoustics’, in C. Müller (ed.) Speaker clas-
siﬁcation I: Fundamentals, Features, and Methods, Berlin: Springer.
——(2008a) ‘Forensic phonetics’, Language and Linguistics Compass 2: 671–711.
——(2008b) ‘Continuous v. categorical variations between speakers’, paper presented at the 17th
Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics, Lausanne.
Jessen, M., Köster, O. and Gfroerer, S. (2005) ‘Inﬂuence of vocal eﬀort on average and variability of
fundamental frequency’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 12: 174–213.
Johnson, A. (1997) ‘Textual kidnapping: a case of plagiarism among three student texts’, International
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 4(ii): 210–25.
——(2002) ‘So … ? pragmatic implications of so-prefaced questions in formal police interviews’, in J.
Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Process, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 91–110.
——(2006) ‘Police questioning’, in K. Brown (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, Vol. 9,
Oxford: Elsevier, 661–72.
——(2008a) ‘Changing stories: Achieving a change of state in suspect and witness knowledge through
evaluation in police interviews with suspects and witnesses’, Functions of Language, 15(1): 84–114.
——(2008b) ‘“From where we’re sat … ”: negotiating narrative transformation through interaction in
police interviews with suspects’, Text & Talk, 28(3): 327–49.
REFERENCES
636

——(2008c) ‘From interview to courtroom – the evidential narrative as courtroom object’, paper pre-
sented at Georgetown University Roundtable, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Johnson, K. (2006) ‘Speaker normalization in speech perception’, in D.B. Pisoni and R.E. Remez (eds)
The Handbook of Speech Perception, Oxford: Blackwell.
Johnstone, B. (1996) The Linguistic Individual, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2000) Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2002) Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(2009) ‘Stance, style, and the linguistic individual’, in A. Jaﬀe (ed.) Sociolinguistic Perspectives on
Stance, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jones, S. and LeBaron, C. (2002) ‘Research on the relationship between verbal and nonverbal com-
munication: emerging integrations’, Journal of Communication, 52(3): 499–521.
Jönsson, L. and Linell, P. (1991) ‘Story generations: from dialogical interviews to written reports in
police interrogations’, Text, 11(3): 419–40.
Jucker, A.H. and I. Taavitsainen (2000) ‘Diachronic speech act analysis: insults from ﬂyting to ﬂaming’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 1(1): 67–95.
Judicial Council of California (2003) Civil Jury Instructions, Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.
——(2006) Criminal Jury Instruction, Newark, NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.
Kadric, M. (2000) ‘Interpreting in the Austrian courtroom’, in R. Roberts, S. Carr, D. Abraham and A. Dufour
(eds) The Critical Link 2: Interpreters in the Community, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Kaldor, S. and Malcolm, I. (1991) ‘Aboriginal English – an overview’, in S. Romaine (ed.) Language in
Australia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 67–83.
Kamisar, Y. (2007) ‘On the fortieth anniversary of the Miranda case: why we needed it, how we got it –
and what happened to it’, Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 5, 163–203.
Kandel, E. (1998) ‘A new intellectual framework for psychology’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 155:
457–69.
——(2006) In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind, New York: W. W. Norton.
Kandel, R.F. (2002) ‘Why evidence scholars should study conversation’, International Commentary on
Evidence, 1(2): article no. 7. Available online at: www.bepress.com/ice/vol1/iss2/art7.
Kaplan, J.P., Green, G.M., Cunningham, C.D. and Levi, J.N. (1995) ‘Bringing linguistics into judicial
decision making: semantic analysis submitted to the US Supreme Court’, Forensic Linguistics: Interna-
tional Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 2(1): 81–98.
Karton, J. (2008) ‘Lost in translation: international criminal tribunals and the legal implications of
interpreted testimony’, Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 41(1): 1–54. Available online at: www.
translationsdecoder.com/lostintranslationvanderbiltschooloﬂaw.htm (accessed 12 July 2009).
Kassin, S. (2002) ‘False confessions and the jogger case’, The New York Times OP-ED, 1 November
2002, p. A31.
——(2005) ‘On the psychology of confessions: does innocence put innocents at risk?’, American Psy-
chologist, 60: 215–28.
Kassin, S. and Gudjonsson, G.H. (2004) ‘The psychology of confession evidence: a review of the lit-
erature and issues’, Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5(2), 33–67. Available online at: www.
williams.edu/Psychology/Faculty/Kassin/research/confessions.htm.
Kassin, S., Leo, R.A., Meissner, C.A., Richman, K.D., Colwell, L.H., Leach, A. and La Fon, D. (2007)
‘Police interviewing and interrogation: a self-report survey of police practices and beliefs’, Law and
Human Behaviour, 31(4): 381–400.
Kassin, S. and Sukel, H. (1997) ‘Coerced confessions and the jury: an experimental test of the “harmless
error” rule’, Law and Human Behavior, 21: 27–47.
Katz, E. and Lazarsfeld, P. (1955) Personal Inﬂuence, Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Katz, J. (2009) ‘When cops speak Spanglish to a non-English speaker’, Simple Justice Blog. Available
online at: www.katzjustice.com/underdog/permalink/LanguageIssues.html (accessed 1 May 2009).
Keane, A. (1996) The Modern Law of Evidence, 4th edn, London: Butterworths.
Kearns, J. (2006) ‘Lodi Muslims: under the “eye of suspicion”’, Public Broadcasting Station PBS, 24
July 2006.
REFERENCES
637

Keen, L. (2009) ‘Judge is horriﬁed by quality of video evidence’, South Wales Echo, 30 January 2009.
Available online at: www.walesonline.co.uk/news/cardiﬀ-news/2009/01/30/ (accessed 16 June
2009).
Kelso, J.C. (1996) ‘Final report of the blue ribbon commission on jury system improvement’, Hastings
L.J., 47: 1433.
Kendon, A. (2003) Gesture, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kendon, A. and Versante, L. (2003) ‘Pointing by hand in “Neopolitan”’, in S. Kita (ed.) Pointing: Where
Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 109–37.
Kennedy, L. (1961) 10 Rillington Place, London: Victor Gollancz.
Kerr-Thompson, J. (2002) ‘“Powerful/powerless” language in court: a critical re-evaluation of the
Duke Language and Law Programme’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 9(2): 153–67.
Kidwell, M. (2006) ‘“Calm down!”: the role of gaze in the interactional management of hysteria by the
police’, Discourse Studies, 8(6): 771–96.
King, M. (1997) A Better World for Children? Explorations in Morality and Authority, London: Routledge.
Kintsch, W. (1995) ‘How readers construct situation models for stories: the role of syntactic cues and
causal inferences’, in M. Gernsbacher and T. Givón (eds) Coherence in Spontaneous Text, Amsterdam
and Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 139–60.
Kirsch, I., Jungeblut, A., Jenkins, L. and Kolstad, A. (2002) Adult Literacy in America, 3rd edn,
Washington DC: US Department of Education. Available online at: http://nces.ed.gov/pubs93/
93275.pdf (accessed 10 December 2008).
Kita, S. (2003) ‘Pointing: a foundational building block of human communication’, in S. Kita (ed.)
Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1–8.
Klein, M. (1996) ‘Framing the juvenile justice problem: the reality behind the problem’, Pepperdine Law
Review, 23: 860–67.
——(1997) ‘What are street gangs when they get to court?’, Valparaiso University Law Review, 31: 515–21.
Klein, S.R. (2001) ‘Identifying and (re)formulating prophylactic rules, safe harbors, and incidental rights
in constitutional criminal procedure’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 1030–80.
Kniﬀka, H. (2007) Working in Language and Law: A German Perspective, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koegel, T. (2007) The Exceptional Presenter, Austin, TX: Greenleaf Book Group Press.
Kolb, W. and Pöchhacker, F. (2008) ‘Stories retold: interpreting in asylum appeal hearings’, in D.
Russell and S. Hale (eds) Interpreting in Legal Settings, Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Komter, M.L. (1998) Dilemmas in the Court Room. A Study of Trials of Violent Crime in the Netherlands,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
——(2002) ‘The suspect’s own words: the treatment of written statements in Dutch courtrooms’, For-
ensic Linguistics, 9(2): 168–92.
——(2003) ‘The interactional dynamics of eliciting a confession in a Dutch police interrogation’,
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 36(4): 433–70.
——(2005) ‘Understanding problems in an interpreter-mediated police interrogation’, in S. Burns (ed.)
Ethnographies of Law and Social Control: Sociology of Crime, Law & Deviance, Vol. 6, Amsterdam: Else-
vier, 203–24.
——(2006) ‘From talk to text: the interactional construction of a police record’, Research on Language
and Social Interaction, 39(3): 201–28.
Koppel, M., Schler, J., and Argamon, S. (2009). ‘Computational methods in authorship attribution’,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1), 9–26.
Koskoﬀ, T.I. (1983) ‘The language of persuasion’, in The Litigation Manual: A Primer for Trial Lawyers,
Chicago: Section of Litigation, American Bar Association, 110–111.
Köster, O. and Köster, J-P. (2004) ‘The auditory-perceptual evaluation of voice quality in forensic
speaker recognition’, The Phonetician, 89: 9–37.
Kotadia, M. (2004) ‘MikeRoweSoft settles for an Xbox’, c|netNews.Com, January 26. Available online
at: http://news.com.com/2100–1014_3–5147374.html (accessed 20 December 2008).
Koven, M. (2002) ‘An analysis of speaker role inhabitance in narratives of personal experience’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 34: 167–217.
REFERENCES
638

Kozin, A.V. (2008) ‘Unsettled facts: on the transformational dynamism of evidence in legal discourse’,
Text & Talk, 28(2): 219–38.
Kredens, K. (2002) ‘Idiolect in authorship attribution’, in P. Stalmaszczyk (ed.), Folia Linguistica Anglica
4, Lodz: Lodz University Press.
——(2003) ‘Towards a corpus-based methodology of forensic authorship attribution: a comparative
study of two idiolects’, in B. Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk (ed.) PALC’01: Practical Applications in
Language Corpora, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang.
Kremer-Sadlik, T. (2004) ‘How children with autism and Asperger Syndrome respond to questions: a
“naturalistic” theory of mind task’, Discourse Studies, 6(2): 185–206.
Kress, G. (ed.) (1976) Halliday: System and Function in Language, London: Oxford University Press.
Krouglov, A. (1999) ‘Police interpreting: Politeness and sociocultural context’, The Translator, 5: 285–302.
Kryk-Kastovsky, B. (2000) ‘Representations of orality in Early Modern English trial records’, Journal of
Historical Pragmatics, 1(2): 201–30.
——(2006) ‘Impoliteness in Early Modern English courtroom discourse’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics,
7(2): 213–44.
——(2009) ‘Speech acts in Early Modern English court trials’, Journal of Pragmatics, 41(3): 440–57.
Künzel, H.J. (1987) Sprechererkennung: Grundzüge forensischer Sprachverarbeitung, Heidelberg: Kriminalistik Verlag.
——(1989) ‘How well does average fundamental frequency correlate with speaker height and weight?’,
Phonetica, 46: 117–25.
——(1995) ‘Field procedures in forensic speaker recognition’, in J. Windsor Lewis (ed.) Studies in
General and English Phonetics. Essays in Honour of Professor J. D. O’Connor, London: Routledge.
——(2001) ‘Beware of the “telephone eﬀect”: The inﬂuence of telephone transmission on the mea-
surement of formant frequencies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8(1) 80–99.
——(2004) ‘Tasks in forensic speech and audio analysis: a tutorial’, The Phonetician, 90: 9–22.
Kurzon, D. (1997) ‘Legal languages: varieties, genres, registers and discourses’, International Journal of
Applied Linguistics, 7(2): 119–39.
——(1998a) ‘Language of the law and legal language’, in L. Christer and M. Nordman (eds) Special
Language: From Humans Thinking to Thinking Machines, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 283–90.
——(1998b) Discourse of Silence, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin, Y., Boyle, B., Hsu, Y. and Dunleavy, E. (2007) Literacy in Everyday
Life: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy, Washington, DC: US Department
of Education. Available online at: http://nces.ed.gov/Pubs2007/2007480.pdf (accessed 11 December
2008).
Kwarcin´ski, W. (2006) ‘A diachronic speech act analysis of sworn testimonies in Polish criminal trials’,
Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 293–314.
Kytö, M. and Culpeper, J. (2006) A Corpus of English Dialogues 1560–1760, Oxford Text Archive.
Available online at: http://ota.ahds.ac.uk/ (accessed 24 August 2009).
Labov, W. (1966a) ‘The linguistic variable as a structural unit’, Washington Linguistics Review, 3: 4–22.
——(1966b) The Social Stratiﬁcation of English in New York City, Washington, DC: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
——(1972) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English Vernacular, Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
——(1994) Principles of Linguistic Change, vol. 1: Internal Factors, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1996) ‘When intuitions fail’, in L. McNair, K. Singer, L. Dolbrin and M. Aucon (eds) Papers from
the Parasession on Theory and Data in Linguistics, Chicago Linguistic Society, 32: 77–106.
——(1997) ‘Some further steps in narrative analysis’, Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4): 395–415.
——(2002) ‘Driving forces in linguistic change’, International Conference on Korean Linguistics, Seoul National
University, 2 August 2002. Available online at: www.ling.upenn.edu/~wlabov/Papers/DLFC.htm.
——(2004) ‘Quantitative reasoning in linguistics’, in Ulrich Ammon, Norbert Dittmar, Klaus J. Mat-
theier, and Peter Trudgill (eds) Sociolinguistics/Soziolinguistik: An international handbook of the science of
language and society/Ein internationales Handbuch zur Wissenschaft von Sprache und Gesellschaft, Vol 1. 2nd
edition, New York and Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 6–22.
REFERENCES
639

Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis: oral versions of personal experience’, in J. Helms
(ed.) Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts: Proceedings of the 1996 Annual Spring Meeting of the American
Ethnological Society, Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 12–44.
Lakoﬀ, G. (1988) ‘Cognitive semantics’, in U. Eco (ed.) Meaning and Mental Representation, Bloo-
mington: Indiana University Press.
Lakoﬀ, R.T. (1996) ‘True confessions? pragmatic competence and criminal confession’, in Gerhardt, J.,
Guo, J., Kyratzis, A. and Slobin D.I. (eds) Social Interaction. Social Context, and Language: Essays in
Honor of Susan Ervin-Tripp, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lally, C. (2009) ‘Interpreters for gardaí are not vetted abroad’, Irish Times, 30 April 2009. Available
online at: www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/ireland/2009/0430/1224245683458_pf.html (accessed 12
July 2009).
Landau, S. (2001) Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Landsman, S. (1984) The Adversary System: A Description and Defense, Washington, DC: American
Enterprise Institute.
——(1990) ‘The rise of the contentious spirit: adversary procedure in eighteenth century England’,
Cornell Law Review, 50: 498–609.
Langbein, J.H. (1978) ‘The criminal trial before the lawyers’, University of Chicago Law Review, 45: 263–316.
——(1999) ‘The prosecutorial origins of defence counsel in the eighteenth century: the appearance of
solicitors’, Cambridge Law Journal, 58(2): 314–65.
——(2003) The Origins of the Adversary Criminal Trial, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lantigua, J. (2002) ‘Unraveling the mystery of Petrona’, Palm Beach Post, 24 November 2002. Available
online at: www.racematters.org/petronatomas.htm (accessed 9 July 2009).
Larkin, W. and Burns, D. (1977) ‘Sentence comprehension and memory for embedded structure’,
Memory and Cognition, 5(1): 17–22.
Lassiter, G.D. (ed.) (2004) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Lassiter, G.D. and Geers, A.L. (2004) ‘Bias and accuracy in the evaluation of confession evidence’,
in G.D. Lassiter (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/Plenum, 197–
265.
Lassiter, G.D., Ratcliﬀ, J., Ware, J., Lezlee, J. and Irvin, C.R. (2006) ‘Videotaped confessions: panacea or
pandora’s box?’, Law & Policy, 28(2): 192–210. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=889148.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Laver, J. (1980) The Phonetic Description of Voice Quality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Law Commission (2009) The Admissibility of Expert Evidence in Criminal Proceedings in England and Wales.
Consultation Paper 190. Available online at: www.lawcom.gov.uk/docs/cp190.pdf.
LeBaron, C.D. and Streeck, J. (1997) ‘Built space and the interactional framing of experience during a
murder interrogation’, Human Studies, 20: 1–25.
Lee, D. (1987) ‘The semantics of just’, Journal of Pragmatics, 11: 377–98.
Lee, J. (2008) ‘City room; female smokers, and a P.R. coup’, The New York Times, 11 October 2008 (A16).
——(2009a) ‘Interpreting inexplicit language during courtroom examination’, Applied Linguistics, 30:
93–114.
——(2009b) ‘Conﬂicting views on court interpreting examined through surveys of legal professionals
and court interpreters’, Interpreting, 11(1): 35–56.
Lees, S. (1996) Carnal Knowledge: Rape on Trial, London: H. Hamilton.
de Leeuw, E. (2007) ‘Hesitation markers in English, German, and Dutch’, Journal of Germanic Linguistics,
19: 85–114.
van Leeuwen, T. (2002) ‘The representation of social actors’, in M. Toolan (ed.) Critical Discourse
Analysis, London: Routledge, 302–39.
——(2007) ‘Legitimation in discourse and communication’, Discourse and Communication, 1(1): 91–112.
Lehiste, I. and Meltzer, D. (1973) ‘Vowel and speaker identiﬁcation in natural and synthetic speech’,
Language and Speech, 16: 356–64.
REFERENCES
640

Lehto, M.R. and Miller, J.M. (1986) Warnings, Vol. 1: Fundamental, Design, and Evaluation Methodologies,
Ann Arbor, MI: Fuller.
Lempert, L. (1996) ‘Women’s strategies for survival: developing agency in abusive relationships’, Journal
of Family Violence, 11: 269–89.
Lentine, G. and Shuy, R. (1990) ‘Mc-: meaning in the marketplace’, American Speech, 65: 349–66.
Leo, R.A. (1998) ‘Miranda and the problem of false confessions’, in R. A. Leo and G. C. Thomas (eds)
The Miranda Debate: Law, Justice and Policing, Boston: Northeastern University Press, 271–82.
——(2001) ‘Questioning the relevance of Miranda in the twenty-ﬁrst century’, The Michigan Law
Review, 99(5): 1000–1029.
——(2009) ‘False confessions: causes, consequences and implications’, The Journal of the American Acad-
emy of Psychiatry and the Law, University of San Francisco Law Research Paper No. 2009–11. Avail-
able online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1328623.
Leo, R.A. and Davis, D. (2009) ‘From false confession to wrongful conviction: seven psychological
processes’, Journal of Psychiatry and Law. Available online at: www.ssrn.com/abstract=1328622.
Leo, R.A., Drizin, S.A., Neufeld, P.J., Hall, B.R. and Vatner, A. (2006) ‘Bringing reliability back in:
false confessions and legal safeguards in the twenty-ﬁrst century’, Wisconsin Law Review, 2006(2): 479–
538 University of San Francisco Law Research Paper No. 2009–04. Available online at: www.ssrn.
com/abstract=1134948.
Leo, R.A. and Liu, B.L. (2009) ‘What do potential jurors know about police interrogation techniques
and false confessions?’, Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 27(3): 381–99. Available online at: www.ssrn.
com/abstract=1404078.
Leo, R.A. and Ofshe, R.J. (1998) ‘The consequences of false confessions: deprivations of liberty and
miscarriages of justice in the age of psychological interrogation’, Journal of Criminal Law and Crimin-
ology, 88(2): 429–96.
Leo, R.A. and Richman, K.D. (2008) ‘Mandate the electronic recording of police interrogations’, Crime
and Public Policy, 6(4): 791–98. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1141335.
Leo, R.A. and White, W.S. (1999) ‘Adapting to Miranda: modern interrogators’ strategies for dealing
with the obstacles posed by Miranda’, Minnesota Law Review, 84: 397–472.
Lerm, H. (1997) ‘Language manipulation in court cross-examination: “how powerful is the sword”’, in
K. Müller and S. Newman (eds) Language in Court, Port Elizabeth: Vista University.
Lerner, G.H. (1991) ‘On the syntax of sentences-in-progress’, Language in Society, 20: 441–58.
Levi, J (1993) ‘Evaluating jury comprehension of the Illinois capital sentencing instructions’, American
Speech, 68, i: 20–49
Levinson, S. (1992) ‘Activity types and language’, in P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Inter-
action in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 66–100.
Levy, L.W. (1999) The Palladium of Justice: Origins of Trial by Jury, Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
Lieberman, J. and Sales, B. (1997) ‘What social science teaches us about the jury instruction process’,
Psychology, Public Policy and Law, 3(4): 589–644.
——(1999) ‘The eﬀectiveness of jury instructions’, in W.F. Abbott and J. Batt (eds) A Handbook of Jury
Research, Philadelphia, PA: American Law Institute, 18–73.
Lin, J.W. (2006) ‘Time in a language without tense: the case of Chinese’, Journal of Semantics, 23: 1–53.
Linde, C. (1993) Life Stories: The Creation of Coherence, New York: Oxford University Press.
Lindsey, J.M. (1990) ‘The legal writing malady: causes and cures’, New York Law Journal, 12
December 1990.
Lindström, A. (2005) ‘Language as social action: a study of how senior citizens request assistance with
practical tasks in the Swedish home help service’, in A. Hakulinen and M. Selting (eds) Syntax and
Lexis in Conversation, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 209–33.
Linell, P. (1998) ‘Discourse across boundaries: on recontextualisation and the blending of voices in
professional discourse’, Text, 18: 143–57.
Linell, P. and Jönsson, L. (1991) ‘Suspect stories: perspective-setting in an asymmetrical situation’, in
Marková, I. and Foppa, K. (eds) Asymmetries in Dialogue, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf,
75–100.
REFERENCES
641

Linell, P. and Luckmann, T. (1991) ‘Asymmetries in dialogue: some conceptual preliminaries’, in
Marková, I. and Foppa, K. (eds) Asymmetries in Dialogue, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf,
1–20.
Linell, P., Alemyr, L. and Jönsson, L. (1993) ‘Admission of guilt as a communicative project in judicial
settings’ Journal of Pragmatics, 19: 153–76.
Linville, S.E. (2001) Vocal Aging, San Diego, CA: Singular.
Loftus, E. (1979) Eyewitness Testimony, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
——(1992) Witness for the Defence, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
——(1996) Eyewitness Testimony: With a New Preface, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Long, L.N. and Christensen, W.F. (2008) ‘Clearly, using intensiﬁers is very bad – or is it?’, Idaho Law
Review, 45:171–89.
López, J. (2002) Gangs: Casualties in an Undeclared War, Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Pub. Co.
Lord, C. (2002) ‘Are subordinate clauses more diﬃcult?’, in J. Bybee and M. Noonan (eds) Complex
Sentences in Grammar and Discourse: Essays in Honor of Sandra A. Thompson, Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia, PA: John Benjamins, 223–34.
Louw, B. (1993) ‘Irony in the text or insincerity in the writer? The diagnostic potential of semantic
prosodies’, in M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds) Text and Technology, Amsterdam:
Benjamins, 157–76.
Luchjenbroers, J. (1997) ‘“In your own words … ” Questions and answers in a supreme court trial’,
Journal of Pragmatics, 27: 477–503.
Luchjenbroers, J. and Aldridge, M. (2007) ‘Conceptual manipulation with metaphors and frames:
dealing with rape victims in legal discourse’, Text & Talk, 27(3): 339–59.
Lucy, D. (2005) Introduction to Statistics for Forensic Scientists, London: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. (2004) Law as a Social System, trans. Klaus Ziegert, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lundeberg, M. (1987) ‘Metacognitive aspects of reading comprehension: studying understanding in
legal case analysis’, Reading Research Quarterly, 22(4): 407–32.
Lundquist, L. (1995) ‘Indeﬁnite noun phrases in legal texts: use, function and construction of mental
spaces’, Journal of Pragmatics, 23(1): 7–29.
Luntz, F. (2007) Words That Work: It’s Not What You Say – It’s What People Hear, New York: Hyperion.
da Luz, C.M. and Weckerly, P.C. (1993) ‘The Texas “condom-rape” case: caution construed as con-
sent’, UCLA Women’s Law Journal, 3: 95–104.
Lynch, M. (2007) ‘Law courts as perspicuous sites for ethnomethodological investigations’, in S. Hester and
D. Francis (eds) Orders of Ordinary Action: Respecifying Sociological Knowledge, Aldershot: Ashgate, 107–19.
Lyons, J. (1977) Semantics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDavid, R. (1977) ‘Evidence’, in D. Shore and C. Hines (eds) Papers in Language Variation: SAMLA-
ADS Collection, Alabama: University of Alabama Press, 125–32.
McDonald, D. (1986) The Language of Argument, New York: Harper & Rowe Publishers, Inc.
McDougall, K. (2006) ‘Dynamic features of speech and the characterization of speakers: towards a new
approach using formant frequencies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13: 89–126.
McGreevy, P. and Banks, S. (2006) ‘On paper, leaving a gang is diﬃcult; L.A. uses injunctions to ﬁght
thugs, but those who go straight ﬁnd it’s hard to get oﬀthe list’, Los Angeles Times, 23 March 2006.
Mackay, J. 1997 Little Boss: A Life of Andrew Carnegie, Edinburgh, Mainstream.
MacLachlan, G. and Reid, I. (1994) Framing and Interpretation, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
The McLibel Trial: Court Transcripts, 1 June 2006. Available online at: www.mcspotlight.org/case/trial/
transcripts/index.html.
McMenamin, G.R. (1993) Forensic Stylistics, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
——(2001) ‘Style markers in authorship studies’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 8: 93–97.
——(2002) Forensic Linguistics – Advances in Forensic Stylistics, Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.
——(2004) ‘Disputed authorship in U.S. law’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(1):
73–82.
McNamara, T. (2000) Language Testing, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNeill, D. (1992) Hand and Mind, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
REFERENCES
642

——(2005) Gesture and Thought, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Macro International (16 March 2007) Design and Testing of Eﬀective Truth in Lending Disclosures, sub-
mitted to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC. Available online
at: www.federalreserve.gov/dcca/regulationz/20070523/execsummary.pdf (accessed 5 January 2009).
——(15 December 2008) Design and Testing of Eﬀective Truth in Lending Disclosures: Qualitative Study,
submitted to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC. Available online
at: www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20081218a7.pdf (accessed 5 January 2009).
Madden, H. (2007) ‘Zooting up/brighten prom night with ﬂash, dash – and panache’, San Francisco
Chronicle, 29 April 2007.
Madsen, D. (1997) ‘Towards a description of communication in the legal universe: translation of legal
texts and the Skopos theory’, Fachsprache – International Journal of LSP, 19(3): 17–27.
Mahoney, P. (2004) ‘Houses built on sand: police expert testimony in California gang prosecutions: did
Gardeley go too far?’, Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly, 31: 385–410.
Maira, S. (2007) ‘Deporting radicals, deporting La Migra: the Hayat case in Lodi’, Cultural Dynamics, 19
(1): 39–66.
Maley, Y. (1985) ‘Judicial discourse: the case of legal judgment’, in J. E. Clark (ed.) The Cultivated
Australian, Hamburg: Buske, 159–75.
——(1987) ‘The language of legislation’, Language and Society, 16: 25–48.
——(1994) ‘The language of the law’, in J. Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law, London: Longman, 11–50.
——(2000) ‘The case of the long-nosed Potoroo: the framing and construction of witness testimony’,
in S. Sarangi and M. Coulthard (eds) Discourse and Social Life, London: Longman, 246–69.
Maley, Y. and Fahey, R. (1991) ‘Presenting the evidence: constructions of reality in court’, International
Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 4(10): 3–17.
Mandler, J.M. (1984) Stories, Scripts and Scenes: Aspects of Schema Theory, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Manzo, J. (1996) ‘Taking turns and taking sides: opening scenes from two jury deliberations’, Social
Psychology Quarterly, 59: 107–25.
Manzoor, S. (2007) ‘The language of loneliness’, The Guardian, 12 September 2007.
Marchant, R. and Page, M. (1997) ‘The memorandum and disabled children’, in H. Westcott and J.
Jones (eds) Perspectives on the Memorandum: Policy, Practice and Research in Investigative Interviewing,
Aldershot: Arena.
Marshall, C. (2007) ‘24-year term for Californian in terrorism training case’, New York Times, 11 Sep-
tember 2007.
Maryns, K. (2004) ‘Identifying the asylum speaker: reﬂections on the pitfalls of language analysis in the
determination of national origin’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 11(2): 240–60.
——(2006) The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgian Asylum Procedure, London/Manchester: St.
Jerome Publishing.
Mason, I. and Stewart, M. (2001) ‘Interactional pragmatics, face and the dialogue interpreter’, in I.
Mason (ed.) Triadic Exchanges: Studies in Dialogue Interpreting, Manchester: St Jerome.
Matoesian, G. (1993) Reproducing Rape: Domination through Talk in the Courtroom, Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1995) ‘Language, law and society: policy implications of the Kennedy Smith rape trial’, Law and
Society Review, 29: 669–701.
——(1997) ‘“You were interested in him as a person”: Rhythms of domination in the Kennedy Smith
Rape Trial’, Law & Social Inquiry, 22(1): 55-93.
——(1999) ‘The grammaticalization of participant roles in the constitution of expert identity’, Language
in Society, 28(4): 491–521.
——(2000) ‘Intertextual authority in reported speech: Production media in the Kennedy Smith rape
trial’, Journal of Pragmatics, 32: 879–914.
——(2001) Law and the Language of Identity: Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith Rape Trial, Oxford/
New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2005a) ‘Nailing down an answer: participations of power in trial talk’, Discourse Studies, 7(6): 733–59.
——(2005b) Review of J. Cotterill, “Language and power in court: a linguistic analysis of the O.J.
Simpson trial”’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9: 619–22.
REFERENCES
643

——(2008a) ‘You might win the battle but lose the war: multimodal, interactive, and extralinguistic
aspects of witness resistance’, Journal of English Linguistics, 36(3): 195–219.
——(2008b) ‘Role conﬂict as an interactional resource in the multimodal emergence of expert iden-
tity’, Semiotica, 171(1/4): 15–49.
Matsumoto, K. (1999) ‘And-prefaced questions in institutional discourse’, Linguistics, 37(2): 251–74.
Mayer, J. (1993) ‘Individual moral responsibility and the criminalization of youth gangs’, Wake Forest
Law Review, 28: 943–86.
Mayes, P. (1990) ‘Quotation in spoken English’, Studies in Language, 14(2): 325–63.
Maynard, D.W. (1984) Inside Plea Bargaining: The Language of Negotiation, New York: Plenum Press.
——(2006) ‘Comment – bad news and good news: losing vs. ﬁnding the phenomenon in legal set-
tings’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 477–97.
Medford, S., Gudjonsson, G.H. and Pearse, J. (2003) ‘The eﬃcacy of the appropriate adult safeguard
during police interviewing’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 8: 253–66.
Meehan, A.J. (1986) ‘Record-keeping practices in the policing of juveniles’, Urban Life, 15(1): 70–102.
——(1989) ‘Assessing the “police-worthiness” of citizen’s complaints to the police: accountability and
the negotiation of “facts”’, in D.T. Helm, W.T. Anderson, A.J. Meehan and A.W. Rawls (eds) The
Interactional Order: New Directions in the Study of Social Order, New York: Irvington, 116–40.
Mehan, H. (1996) ‘The construction of an LD student: a case study in the politics of representation’, in
M. Silverstein and G. Urban (eds) Natural Histories of Discourse, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Mellinkoﬀ, D. (1963) The Language of the Law, Boston, MA: Little Brown and Co.
Mencap (1999) Bullying Wrecks Lives: The Experience of Children and Young People with a Learning Disability.
Available online at: www.mencap.org.uk/document (accessed 16 July 2009).
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008) Homegirls: Language and Cultural Practice among Latina Youth Gangs, New
York/Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2009) ‘McJob’, Merriam-Webster Online: www.merriam-webst
er.com/dictionary/McJob (accessed 23 March 2009).
Mertz, E. (2007) The Language of Law School: Learning to Think Like a Lawyer, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Mesthrie, R., Swann, J., Deumert, A. and Leap, W. (2000) Introducing Sociolinguistics, Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins.
Mey, J.L. (2001) Pragmatics: An Introduction, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Meyer, P.N. (1996) ‘Desperate for love II: further reﬂections on the interpenetration of legal and
popular storytelling in closing arguments to a jury in a complex criminal case’. Available online at:
http://tarlton.law.utexas.edu/lpop/etext/usf/meyer30.htm.
Mildren, D. (1999) ‘Redressing the imbalance: aboriginal people in the criminal justice system’, Forensic
Linguistics, 6(1): 137–60.
Miller, G.A. (1956) ‘The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for
processing information’, The Psychological Review, 63: 81–97.
Miller, J.M. and Lehto, M.R. (1987) Warnings, Vol. 2: The Annotated Bibliography with Topical Index,
Ann Arbor, MI: Fuller.
Milne, R. and Bull, R. (1999) Investigative Interviewing: Psychology and Practice, Chichester: Wiley.
Milne, R., Savage, S. and Williamson, T. (eds) (2006) Investigative Interviewing, Uﬀcolme, Devon: Willan
Publishing.
Milton, J. and de Sena França, L.H. (2001) ‘The selection and training of interpreters in the community
at the Catholic University, São Paulo (PUC-SP)’, paper presented at the Critical Link 3 conference.
Available online at: www.criticallink.org/ﬁles/CL3_Milton_deSenaFranca.pdf (accessed 12 July 2009).
Minnick, W. (1968) The Art of Persuasion, Boston, MA: Houghton Miﬄin.
Mir, M. (1993) ‘Direct requests can also be polite’, paper presented at the 7th Annual International
Pragmatics Conference, University of Illinois.
Mnookin, J.L. (2001a) ‘Fingerprint evidence in an age of DNA proﬁling’, Brooklyn Law Review, 67: 13–70.
——(2001b) ‘Scripting expertise: the history of handwriting identiﬁcation evidence and the judicial
construction of reliability’, Virginia Law Review, 87: 1723–1845.
REFERENCES
644

Moenssens, A.A. (1997) ‘Handwriting identiﬁcation evidence in the post-Daubert world’, UMKC Law
Review, 66: 251–343.
Moﬀett, D. (2003) ‘Petrona’s story’, Palm Beach Post, 28 September 2003. Available online at: www.
petronatomas.com/article.shtml (accessed 9 July 2009).
Moje, E. (2000) ‘“To be part of the story”: the literacy practices of gangsta adolescents’, Teachers College
Record, 102(3): 651–90.
Mojediddi, W. (2006) ‘How politics inﬂuenced the case of US v. Hamid Hayat’, Chance Lecture, Boalt
Law School, UC Berkeley, 5 September 2006.
Moore, A. (1989) ‘Trial by schema: cognitive ﬁlters in the courtroom’, UCLA Law Review, 37: 273–340.
Moore, C. (2006) ‘The use of videlicet in Early Modern slander depositions: A case of genre-speciﬁc
grammaticalization’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics, 7(2): 245–263.
Moos, A. (2008a) ‘Forensische Sprechererkennung mit der Messmethode LTF (long-term formant dis-
tribution)’, unpublished MA thesis, Universität des Saarlandes, Department of Phonetics and Phonology.
Available online at: www.psy.gla.ac.uk/docs/download.php?type=PUBLS&id=1286
——(2008b) ‘Long-term formant distribution (LTF) based on German spontaneous and read speech’,
paper presented at the 17th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and
Acoustics, Lausanne.
Moosmüller, S. (1997) ‘Phonological variation in speaker identiﬁcation’, Forensic Linguistics, 4: 29–47.
Moreno, J. (2004) ‘What happens when Dirty Harry becomes an (expert) witness for the prosecution?’,
Tulane Law Review, 79: 1–54.
Morris, D. (1977) Manwatching, New York: Abrams.
Morris, R. (1999) ‘The gum syndrome: predicaments in court interpreting’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(1): 6–29.
——(2008) ‘Missing stitches: An overview of judicial attitudes to interlingual interpreting in the crim-
inal justice systems of Canada and Israel’, Interpreting, 10: 34–64.
Morrison, G.S. (2008) ‘Forensic voice comparison using likelihood ratios based on polynomial curves
ﬁtted to the formant trajectories of Australian English /ai/’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
the Law, 15: 249–66.
——(2009) ‘Comments on Coulthard & Johnson’s (2007) portrayal of the likelihood-ratio framework’,
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences, in press.
Mortimer, A. (1994) ‘Asking the right questions’, Policing, 9: 111–24.
Moser-Mercer, B. (2003) ‘Remote interpreting: assessment of human factors and performance para-
meters’. Available online at: http://aiic.net/ViewPage.cfm/article879 (accessed 23 May 2009).
Moston, S. and Stephenson, G. (1993) ‘The changing face of police interrogation’, Journal of Community
and Social Psychology, 3: 101–15.
Mulholland, M., Pullan, B.S., Melikan, R.A. and Pullan, A. (2003) The Trial in History, Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Mullennix, J.W., Johnson, K.A., Topcu-Durgun, M. and Farnsworth, L.M. (1995) ‘The perceptual
representation of voice gender’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 98: 3080–95.
Müller, C. (ed.) (2007) Speaker Classiﬁcation, Vols. 1 and 2, Berlin: Springer.
Munson, B. and Babel, M. (2007) ‘Loose lips and silver tongues, or, projecting sexual orientation
through speech’, Language and Linguistics Compass, 1: 416–49.
Myers, C. (1997) ‘Note: encouraging allocution at capital sentencing: a proposal for use immunity’,
Columbia Law Review, 97: 787–818.
Myers, M.L., Iscoe, C., Jennings, C., Lenox, W., Minsky, E. and Sacks, A. (1981) Federal Trade Com-
mission StaﬀReport on the Cigarette Advertising Investigation, Washington, DC: Federal Trade Commission.
Nakane, I. (2007) ‘Problems in communicating the suspect’s rights in interpreted police interviews’,
Applied Linguistics, 28(1): 87–112.
National Association of Judiciary Interpreters & Translators Position Paper (February 2009) ‘Telephone
interpreting in legal settings’. Available online at: www.najit.org/Publications/Position Papers/Tele-
phone Interpreting.pdf (accessed 9 July 2009).
National Crime Faculty (2000) A Practical Guide to Investigative Interviewing, National Crime Faculty,
Bramshill: National Crime Faculty and National Police Training.
REFERENCES
645

National Research Council of the National Academies (NRC) (2004) Forensic Analysis: Weighing Bullet
Lead Evidence, Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
——(2009) Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward, Washington, DC: The
National Academy Press.
Nelson, L.D.M. (1987) ‘The drafting committee of the third United Nations conference on the law of
the sea: the implications of multilingual texts’, British Yearbook of International Law, 57: 169–99.
New Oxford American Dictionary (2001) Oxford: Oxford University Press.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission (NSWLRC) (2004) Blind or Deaf Jurors (Discussion paper
No 46). Sydney: New South Wales Law Reform Commission.
Newbury, P. and Johnson, A. (2006) ‘Suspects’ resistance to constraining and coercive questioning
strategies in the police interview’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 13(2): 213–40.
Nichols, S. and Good, T. (2004) America’s Teenagers – Myths and Realities: Media Images, Schooling and the
Social Costs of Careless Indiﬀerence, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Nickerson, R.S. (1998) ‘Conﬁrmation bias: an ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises’, Review of
General Psychology, 2: 175–220.
Nieland, R.G. (1979) Pattern Jury Instructions: A Critical Look at a Modern Movement to Improve the Jury
System, Chicago: American Judicature Society.
Nolan, F. (1983) The Phonetic Bases of Speaker Recognition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——(1997) ‘Speaker recognition and forensic phonetics’, in W.J. Hardcastle and J. Laver (eds) The
Handbook of Phonetic Sciences, Oxford: Blackwell, 744–67.
——(2003) ‘A recent voice parade’, International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 10: 277–91.
——(2005) ‘Forensic speaker identiﬁcation and the phonetic description of voice quality’, in W.J.
Hardcastle and J. Mackenzie Beck (eds) A Figure of Speech: A Festschrift for John Laver, Mahwah:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Nolan, F. and Grigoras, C. (2005) ‘A case for formant analysis in forensic speaker identiﬁcation’, Inter-
national Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 12: 143–73.
Nord, C. (1997) Translating as a Purposeful Activity: Functionalist Approaches Explained, Manchester: St
Jerome.
Norris, S. (2004) Analyzing Multimodal Interaction, New York: Routledge.
Nowak, A. (2004) Power Speaking, New York: Allworth Press.
Nunan, D. (1993) Introducing Discourse Analysis, London: Penguin.
Nunberg, G. (2001) ‘That’s correct’, California Lawyer. July, Available online at: www-csli.stanford.edu/
~nunberg/CLRedskins.pdf.
O’Barr, W.M. (1982) Linguistic Evidence: Language, Power and Strategy in the Courtroom, New York:
Academic Press.
O’Barr, W.M. and Conley, J.M. (1990) ‘Litigant satisfaction versus legal adequacy in small claims court
narratives’, in J.N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds), Language in the Judicial Process, New York and London:
Plenum.
Ochs, E. (1979) ‘Transcription as theory’, in E. Ochs and B.B. Schieﬄen (eds) Developmental Pragmatics,
New York: Academic Press, 43–72.
Ochs, E. and Capps, L. (2001) Living Narrative: Creating Lives in Everyday Storytelling, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Ofshe, R. and Leo, R. (1997a) ‘The decision to confess falsely’, Denver Law Review, 74(4): 979–1122.
——(1997b) ‘The social psychology of police interrogation: the theory and classiﬁcation of true and
false confessions’, Studies in Law, Politics and Society, 16: 189–251.
Okawara, M. (2006) ‘Linguistic analysis of some Japanese trademark cases’, unpublished doctoral thesis,
University of Sydney.
Oksaar, E. (1987) ‘Idiolekt’, in U. Ammon, N. Dittmar and K.J. Mattheier (eds) Soziolinguistik: Ein
internationales Handbuch, Vol.1, Berlin: de Gruyter.
Old Bailey Proceedings Online (www.oldbaileyonline.org), May 1856, trial of William Palmer
(t18560514–490).
Oliver, R. (1957) The Psychology of Persuasive Speech, New York: David McKay Company, Inc.
REFERENCES
646

Olsson, J. (2003) ‘Preliminary observations on author variation in mobile phone texting’, unpublished
ms. Available online at: http://www.thetext.co.uk (accessed 29 August 2009).
——(2008a) Forensic Linguistics, 2nd edn, New York: Continuum.
——(2008b) ‘Statement of witness: report into allegations of intellectual property infringement with
respect to the Internet domain name www.oraclecontractors.com’, unpublished manuscript.
Oppel, R. (1999) ‘No small change as pension plans are converted’, New York Times, 24 October 1999: 3, 12.
OPSI (2008) The Criminal Justice and Immigration Act. Available online at: www.opsi.gov.uk/acts.htm
(accessed 1 July 2009).
Ornstein-Galicia, J. (1987) ‘Chicano Caló: description and review of a border variety’, Hispanic Journal of
Behavioural Sciences, 9(4): 359–73.
Ortega Herráez, J.M. and Foulquié Rubio, A.I. (2008) ‘Interpreting in police settings in Spain. Service
providers and interpreters perspectives’, in C. Valero Garcés and A. Martin (eds) Crossing Borders in
Community Interpreting: Deﬁnitions and Dilemmas, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Oxford English Dictionary Online (2009) ‘McJob’. http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/00303924?quer-
y_type=wordandqueryword = McJobandﬁrst = 1andmax_to_show = 10andsingle = 1andsort_type
= alphaandcase_id = SWfP-3czyuD-15006andp = 1andd = 1andsp = 1andqt = 1andct = 0andad =
1andprint = 1. [entry dated March 2001] (accessed 23 March 2009).
Oyandel, M. and Samaniego, J. (2004) ‘Report written for the court’s consideration in a likelihood-of-
confusion case in 2005 involving rival trademarks Paltomiel and Palto con Miel’, Tribunal de Defensa
de la Libre Competencia, Sentencia N 24/2005, Republica de Chile, 4. Available online at: http://
mail.fne.cl/db/tabla.nsf/f34cb3b7c2bb5deb8425733e005faa18/4a2b5134307725af0425705a0052ecfe/
$FILE/Sentencia-24-2005.pdf (accessed December 2008).
Ozolins, U. and Hale, S. (2009) ‘Introduction: Quality in interpreting: a shared responsibility’, in S.
Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Critical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting. A Shared Responsibility, Amsterdam
and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Pacenti, J. (2002) ‘Secret safe place for newborn: teen’s statement on dead baby contradictory’, Palm
Beach Post, 4 December 2002. Available online at: www.mobile-da.org/secretsafeplacefornewborns/
newslistdetail.php?storyID=258 (accessed 10 July 2009).
Pahl, K. (2002) ‘Ephemera, mess and miscellaneous piles: texts and practices in families’, Journal of Early
Childhood Literacy, 2: 145–65.
Pascual, E. (2006) ‘Questions in legal monologues: ﬁctive interaction as argumentative strategy in a
murder trial’, Text & Talk, 26(3): 383–402.
Pavlenko, A. (2008) ‘“I’m very not about the law part”: non-native speakers of English and the Mir-
anda Warnings’, TESOL Quarterly, 42: 1–30.
Payne, C. (2007) ‘The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion: implications for trial advocacy’,
International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 14(2): 309–12.
Pecorari, D.E. (2002) Original Reproductions: An Investigation of the Source Use of Postgraduate Second Lan-
guage Writers, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Birmingham.
——(2008) Academic Writing and Plagiarism: A Linguistic Analysis, London: Continuum.
Pennington, N. and Hastie, R. (1986) ‘Evidence evaluation in complex decision making’, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51(2): 242–58.
——(1991) ‘A cognitive theory of juror decision making: the story model’, Cardozo Law Review, 13:
519–57.
——(1993) ‘The story model for juror decision making’, in R. Hastie (ed.) Inside the Juror: The Psy-
chology of Juror Decision Making, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pennycook, A. (1996) ‘Borrowing others’ words: text, ownership, memory and plagiarism’, TESOL
Quarterly, 30, 201–30.
——(2001) Critical Applied Linguistics: A Critical Introduction, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pérez González, L. (2006) ‘Interpreting strategic recontextualization cues in the courtroom: corpus-
based insights into the pragmatic force of non-restrictive relative clauses’, Journal of Pragmatics, 38:
390–417.
REFERENCES
647

Petty, R. and Cacioppo, J. (1986) ‘The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion’, Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 19: 123–205.
Petty, R. and Wegener, D. (1998) ‘Attitude change: multiple roles for persuasion variables’, in D. Gil-
bert and S. Fiske (eds), The Handbook of Social Psychology, New York: McGraw-Hill, 323–90.
Philips, S.U. (1986) ‘Reported speech as evidence in an American trial’, in D. Tannen and J. Alatis.
(eds) Language and Linguistics: The Interdependence of Theory, Data, and Application. Georgetown University
Round Table on Languages and Linguistics (GURT) 1985, Washington, DC: Georgetown University,
154–79.
——(1987) ‘On the use of WH Questions in American courtroom discourse: a study of the relation
between language form and language function’, in L. Kedar (ed) Power through Discourse, Norwood: Ablex.
——(1992) ‘Evidentiary standards for American trials: just the facts’ in J.H. Hill and J.T. Irvine (eds)
Responsibility and Evidence in Oral Discourse, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 248–59.
Phillips, S.A. (1999) Wallbangin’: Graﬃti & Gangs in L.A., Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Phoenix, A. (2008) ‘Analysing narrative contexts’, in M. Andrews, C. Squire and M. Tamboukou (eds)
Doing Narrative Research, London: Sage Publications Ltd, 64–77.
Pinker, S. and Ullman, M.T. (2002) ‘The past-tense debate: the past and future of past tense’, Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6: 456–63.
Plotnikoﬀ, J. and Woolfson, R. (2004) ‘In their own words; the experience of 50 young witnesses in
criminal proceedings’, NSPCC Policy Practice Research Studies, London: HMSO.
Poe-Yamagata, E. and Jones, M.A. (2000) And Justice for Some, Washington, DC: National Council on
Crime & Delinquency.
Polack, K. and Corsellis, A. (1990a) ‘Non-English speakers and the criminal justice system part 1’, New
Law Journal, 1634–36.
——(1990b) ‘Non-English speakers and the criminal justice system, part 2’, New Law Journal, 1676–77.
Pöllabauer, S. (2004) ‘Interpreting in asylum hearings: issues of role, responsibility and power’, Inter-
preting, 6: 143–80.
Pollner, M. (1974) ‘Mundane reasoning’, Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 4: 35–54.
Pomerantz, A.M. (1987) ‘Descriptions in legal settings’, in G. Button and J.R.E. Lee (eds) Talk and
Social Organization, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 226–43.
Post, R. (1987) ‘On the popular image of the lawyer: reﬂections in a dark glass’, California Law Review,
75: 379–89.
Pound, L. (1938) ‘Jottings’, American Speech, 13: 157–58.
Preston, D.R. (1993) ‘Folk dialectology’, in D. Preston (ed.) American Dialect Research, Philadelphia:
John Benjamins, 333–78.
Prince, E. (1981), ‘Language and the law: a case for linguistic pragmatics’, Working papers in Socio-
linguistics, Austin: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory, 112–60.
——(1984) ‘Language and the law: reference stress and context’, in D. Schiﬀrin (ed.) Meaning, Form and
Use in Context, Washington DC: Georgetown University, 240–52.
Pronin, E. and Kugler, M. (2007) ‘Valuing thoughts, ignoring behavior: the introspection illusion as a
source of the bias blind spot’, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43: 565–78.
Pronin, E., Lin, D.Y. and Ross, L. (2002) ‘The bias blind spot: perception of bias in self and others’,
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28: 369–81.
Pullum, G. (2004a) ‘Don’t say “lexeme” or we’ll break your legs’, Language Log. Available online at:
http://158.130.17.5/~myl/languagelog/archives/000618.html (accessed January 2008).
——(2004b) ‘It wasn’t Lexus, it was Lexis!’, Language Log. Available online at: http://158.130.17.5/
~myl/languagelog/archives/000632.html (accessed January 2008).
——(2004c) ‘Database company to Toyota: rename that automobile!’, Language Log. Available online
at: http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/000728.html (accessed January 2008).
Radelet, M., Bedau, H.A. and Putnam, C.E. (1992) In Spite of Innocence, Boston: Northeastern Press.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity among Adolescents, London: Longman.
Raymond, G. (2003) ‘Grammar and social organization: Yes/No interrogatives and the structure of
responding’, American Sociological Review, 68: 939–67.
REFERENCES
648

——(2004) ‘Prompting action: the stand-alone “so” in ordinary conversation’, Research on Language and
Social Interaction, 37(2): 185–218.
Read, D.S. (2007) Winning at Trial, Louisville, CO: National Institute for Trial Advocacy.
Reali, F. and Christiansen, M. (2006) ‘Processing of relative clauses is made easier by frequency of
occurrence’, Journal of Memory and Language, 57(1): 1–23.
Redlich, A.D and Goodman, G.S. (2003) ‘Taking responsibility for an act not committed: the inﬂuence
of age and suggestibility’, Law and Human Behavior, 27: 141–56.
Redlich, A.D., Silverman, M., Chen, J. and Steiner, H. (2004) ‘The police interrogation of children
and adolescents’, in Lassiter, G.D. (ed.) Interrogations, Confessions and Entrapment, New York: Kluwer/
Plenum, 107–25.
Redmayne, M. (2001) Expert Evidence and Criminal Justice, Oxford: OUP.
Reetz, H. and Jongman, A. (2009) Phonetics: Transcription, Production, Acoustics, and Perception, Chiche-
ster: Wiley-Blackwell.
Reid, J. and Associates (online) www.reid.com for a frequently updated compendium of trial and appeal
court decisions regarding Miranda, police interrogation and confession evidence.
Rendall, D., Kollias, S. and Ney, C. (2005) ‘Pitch (F0) and formant proﬁles of human vowels and
vowel-like baboon grunts: the role of vocalizer body size and voice-acoustic allometry’, Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 117: 944–55.
Rendle-Short, J. (2007) ‘“Catherine, you’re wasting your time”: address terms within the Australian
political interview’, Journal of Pragmatics, 35: 1503–25.
Renoe, C. (1996) ‘Seeing is believing? Expert testimony and the construction of interpretive authority
in an American trial’, International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, IX(26): 115–37.
Renton, D. (1975) The Preparation of Legislation, London: HMSO.
Revell, D.L. (2004) ‘Authoring bilingual laws: the importance of process’, Brooklyn Journal of Interna-
tional Law, 29(3): 1085–1105.
Reyes, A. (2005) ‘Appropriation of African American slang by Asian American youth’, Journal of Socio-
linguistics, 9(4): 509–32.
Richardson, M. (2004) ‘Trade marks and language’, Sydney Law Review, 9: 193. Available online at:
www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/journals/SydLRev/2004/9.html?query=%22Trade%20Mark
%22%20AND%20linguist (accessed December 2008).
Richardson, P.J. (ed.) (2006) Archbold 2006: Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice, London: Sweet & Maxwell.
Riding, A. (1999) ‘The crown court witness service: little help in the witness box’, The Howard Journal,
38(4): 411–20.
Rigney, A. (1999) ‘Questioning in interpreted testimony’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(1): 83–108.
Risinger, D.M. (2000) ‘Navigating expert reliability: are criminal standards of certainty being left on the
dock?’, Albany Law Review, 64: 99–152.
Risinger, D.M. and Saks, M.J. (1996) ‘Science and nonscience in the courts: Daubert meets hand-
writing identiﬁcation expertise’, Iowa Law Review, 82: 21–74.
Risinger, D.M., Saks, M.J., Thompson, W.C. and Rosenthal, R. (2002) ‘The Daubert/Kumho impli-
cations of observer eﬀects in forensic science: hidden problems of expectation and suggestion’, Cali-
fornia Law Review, 90: 1–56.
Roach, K. and Trotter, G. (2005) ‘Miscarriages of justice in the war against terrorism’, Pennsylvania State
Law Review, 109: 4. 967–1041. Available online at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=742628.
Robertshaw, P. (1998) Summary Justice, London: Cassell.
Roberts-Smith, L. (2009) ‘Forensic interpreting – trial and error’, in S. Hale and U. Ozolins (eds) Cri-
tical Link 5. Quality in Interpreting: A Shared Responsibility, Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benja-
mins Publishing Company, 13–36.
Robinson, W. (2005) ‘How the European commission drafts legislation in 20 languages’, Clarity, 53: 4–10.
Rock, F. (2001) ‘The genesis of a witness statement’, Forensic Linguistics, 8(2): 44–72.
——(2006) ‘Looking the other way: linguistic ethnography and forensic linguistics’, UK Linguistic Eth-
nography Forum Papers. Available online at: www.ling-ethnog.org.uk/documents/papers/rock2006.
pdf (accessed 12 July 2009).
REFERENCES
649

——(2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of Arrest and Detention, Basingstoke, London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Rogers, R., Harrison, K.S., Shuman, D.W., Sewell, K.W. and Hazelwood, L.L. (2007) ‘An analysis of
Miranda warnings and waivers: comprehension and coverage’, Law and Human Behavior, 31: 177–92.
Romero, B.G. (2008) ‘Here are your right hands: exploring interpreter qualiﬁcations’, University of
Dayton Law Review, 34(1): 15–33.
Rose, P. (2002) Forensic Speaker Identiﬁcation, London: Taylor and Francis.
——(2006) ‘Technical forensic speaker recognition: evaluation, types and testing of evidence’, Computer
Speech and Language, 20: 159–91.
Rose, P. and Morrison, G.S. (2009) ‘A response to the UK position statement on forensic speaker
comparison’ International Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, 16(1): 139–63.
Rosen, L. (2006) Law as Culture: An Invitation, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rosenne, S. (1983) ‘The meaning of “authentic text” in modern treaty law’, in R. Bernhardt, W.K.
Geck, G. Jaenicke and H. Steinberger (eds), Festschrift für Herrmann Mosler, Berlin and New York:
Springer, 759–84.
Ross, S. (1998) ‘Self-assessment in second language testing: a meta-analysis and analysis of experiential
factors’, Language Testing, 15: 1–20.
Rosulek, L.F. (2008) ‘Legitimation and the heteroglossic nature of closing argument in criminal trials’,
paper presented at Georgetown University Roundtable 2008, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
RRT (Refugee Review Tribunal, Australia). (28 August 2000). N00/34478. Decision and reasons for
decision. Available online at: www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/rrt/2000/835.html (accessed 19
March 2008).
RSAA (Refugee Status Appeals Authority, New Zealand) (2002) Refugee Appeal No. 73545/02.
Aviailable online at: www.refugee.org.nz/Fulltext/73545–02.htm (accessed 29 October 2004).
Rumelhart, D.E. and McClelland, J. (1986) ‘On learning the past tenses of English verbs’, in D.E.
Rumelhart and J. McClelland (eds) Parallel Distributed Processing, Boston, MA: MIT Press, 216–71.
Russell, S. (2000) ‘“Let me put it simply … ”: the case for a standard translation of the police caution
and its explanation’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 26–48.
Saarni, C. and Harris, P.L. (eds) (1989) Children’s Understanding of Emotion, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sabat, S. and Harré, R. (1992) ‘The construction and deconstruction of self in Alzheimer’s disease’,
Ageing and Society, 12: 443–61.
Sacks, H. (1972) ‘Notes on police assessment of moral character’, in D. Sudnow (ed.) Studies in Social
Interaction, Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 280–93.
——(1984) ‘Notes on methodology’ (edited by Gail Jeﬀerson). in J.M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds),
Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 21–27.
——(1992) Lectures on Conversation, vols. I and II, (edited by G. Jeﬀerson), Oxford: Blackwell.
Sacks, H. and Schegloﬀ, E. (2002) ‘Home position’, Gesture, 2: 133–46.
Sacks, H., Schegloﬀ, E. and Jeﬀerson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation’, Language, 50(4): 696–735.
Salfati, C.G. and Bateman, A.L. (2005) ‘Serial homicide: an investigation of behavioural consistency’,
Journal of Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 2: 121–44.
Sanchez, R. (1983) Chicano Discourse: Sociohistoric Perspectives, Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Sanday, P.R. (1996) A Woman Scorned: Acquaintance Rape on Trial, New York: Doubleday.
Sanders, A., Creaton, J., Bird, S. and Weber, L. (1997) Victims with Learning Disabilities: Negotiating the
Criminal Justice System, Oxford: University of Oxford Occasional Papers.
Sanders, J. (2001) ‘Complex litigation at the millenium: Kumho and how we know’, Law and Con-
temporary Problems, 64: 373–415.
——(2007) ‘Expert witness ethics’, Fordham Law Review, 76: 1539–84.
Sanderson, P. (2007) ‘Linguistic analysis of competing trademarks’, Language Matters, 38: 132–49.
Santtila, P., Fritzon, K. and Tamelander, A.L. (2005a) ‘Linking arson incidents on the basis of crime
scene behaviour’, Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 19: 1–16.
REFERENCES
650

Santtila, P., Junkkila, J. and Sandnabba, N.K. (2005b) ‘Behavioural linking of stranger rapes’, Journal of
Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 2: 87–103.
Sarcevic, S. (1997) New Approach to Legal Translation, The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Savage, C. (14 May 2009) ‘A judge’s view of judging is on the record’, The New York Times. Available
online at: www.nytimes.com/2009/05/15/us/15judge.html (accessed 31 August 2009).
Saxton, B. (1998) ‘How well do jurors understand jury instructions? A ﬁeld test using real juries and real
trials in Wyoming’, Land and Water Literary Review, 33: 59.
Saywitz, K. (1995) ‘Improving children’s testimony: the question, the answer and the environment’, in
M.S. Zaragoza, J. Graham, G.C.N. Hall, R. Hirschman, and S. Yossef (eds) Memory and Testimony in
the Child Witness, London: Sage, Vol 1: 109–40.
Scelfo, J. (2001) ‘When law goes pop’, An Interview with Richard Sherwin, Stayfree Magazine, Issue 18.
Available online at: www.stayfreemagazine.org/archives/18/sherwin.html.
Schachter, D. (2001) The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind Forgets and Remembers, Boston, MA and
New York: Houghton Miﬄin Company.
Schane, S. (2006) Language and the Law, London: Continuum.
Schank, R.C. and Abelson, R.P. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human
Knowledge Structures, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Scheck, B., Neufeld, P. and Dwyer, J. (2000) Actual Innocence, New York: Doubleday.
Schegloﬀ, E.A. (1987) ‘Some sources of misunderstanding in talk-in-interaction’, Linguistics, 25: 201–18.
——(1988) ‘Presequences and indirection: applying speech act theory to ordinary conversation’, Journal
of Pragmatics, 12: 55–62.
——(2007) Sequence Organization: A Primer in Conversation Analysis, Vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schiﬀrin, D. (1981) ‘Tense variation in narrative’, Language, 57(1): 45–62.
——(1994) Approaches to Discourse, Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1996) ‘Narrative as self-portrait: sociolinguistic constructions of identity’, Language in Society, 25:
167–203.
Schötz, S. (2006) ‘Perception, analysis and synthesis of speaker age’, unpublished PhD. dissertation,
Lund University, Sweden. Available online at: http://person2.sol.lu.se/SusanneSchotz/downloads/
Thesis_S_Schoetz_2006.pdf
——(2007) ‘Acoustic analysis of adult speaker age’, in C. Müller (ed.) Speaker Classiﬁcation I: Funda-
mentals, Features, and Methods, Berlin: Springer.
Schriver, K. (1997) Dynamics in Document Design, New York: Wiley.
Schulhofer, S. (1996) ‘Miranda’s practical eﬀects: substantial beneﬁts and vanishingly small social costs’,
Northwestern Law Review, 90: 500–563.
——(1998) Unwanted Sex: The Culture of Intimidation and the Failure of Law, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Schwarzer, W.W. (1981) ‘Communicating with juries: problems and remedies’, California Law Review,
69: 731.
Schweda Nicholson, N. (22 November
2008) Unpublished interview with Rabbi Fred Neulander’,
New Jersey State Prison, Trenton.
Scollon, R. (1998) Mediated Discourse as Social Interaction: A Study of News Discourse, London: Longman.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2003) Discourses in Place: Language in the Material World, London:
Routledge.
Searle, J. (1969) Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language, London: Cambridge University Press.
——(1975) ‘Indirect speech acts’, in J. Cole and J. Morgan (eds) Syntax and Semantics Vol. 3, Speech Acts,
New York: Academic Press: 59–82.
Seebohm, T. (2004) Hermeneutics: Method and Methodology, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Seidman, A.W., Seidman, R.B. and Abeyesekere, N. (2001) Legislative Drafting for Democratic Social
Change: A Manual for Drafters, London: Kluwer Law International.
Sharrock, W.W. and Watson, D.R. (1989) ‘Talk and police work: notes on the traﬃc in information’,
in H. Coleman (ed.) Working with Language, New York: Norton, 431–49.
REFERENCES
651

Shaw, S and Weir, C.J. (2007) Examining Writing in a Second Language, Studies in Language Testing 26,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press and Cambridge ESOL.
Shepherd, E. (1991) ‘Ethical interviewing’, Policing, 7: 42–60.
Shepherd, E. and Milne, R. (2006) ‘“Have you told management about this?” Bringing witness inter-
viewing into the 21st century’, in A. Heaton-Armstrong, E. Shepherd, G. Gudjonsson and D.
Wolchover (eds) Witness Testimony: Psychological, Investigative and Evidential Perspectives, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 131–52.
Sherwin, R.K. (2002) When Law Goes Pop, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shipman interviews audio ﬁles. Available online at : http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/uk/2000/
the_shipman_murders/the_shipman_ﬁles/613627.stm (accessed 31 March 2009).
Shipman trial transcript. Available online at: www.the-shipman-inquiry.org.uk/trialtrans.asp (accessed
12 August 2009).
Shoop, J. (1994) ‘Image of fear: minority teens allege bias in gang proﬁling’, Trial, 30(3): 12–16.
Shuy, R.W. (1982) ‘Topic as the unit of analysis in a criminal law case’, in D. Tannen (ed.) Analyzing
Discourse: Text and Talk, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 113–26.
——(1990a) ‘The analysis of tape recorded conversations’, in P.P. Andrews and M.B. Peterson (eds)
Criminal Intelligence Analysis, Loomis, CA: Palmer Press, 117–48.
——(1990b) ‘Warning labels: language, law, and comprehensibility’, American Speech, 65(4): 291–303.
——(1993a) Language Crimes: The Use and Abuse of Language Evidence in the Courtroom, Malden, MA and
Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1993b) ‘Using language evidence in money laundering trials’, American Speech, 68(1):3–19.
——(1997) ‘Ten unanswered language questions about Miranda’, Forensic Linguistics, 4(2): 175–95.
——(1998a) Bureaucratic Language in Government and Business, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
——(1998b) The Language of Confession, Interrogation, and Deception, Thousand Oaks, CA and London:
Sage Publishing.
——(2001) ‘Discourse analysis in the legal context’, in D. Schiﬀrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton (eds)
The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell, 437–52.
——(2002) Linguistic Battles in Trademark Disputes, Basingstoke/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2005) Creating Language Crimes, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2006) Linguistics in the Courtroom: A Practical Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2008) Fighting over Words: Language and Civil Law Cases, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shuy, R.W. and Staton, J.J. (2000) ‘Review of Grisso, Thomas “Instruments for assessing understanding
and appreciation of Miranda Rights”’, Forensic Linguistics, 7(1): 131–36.
Sieberg, D. (20 January 2004) ‘Microsoft takes on teen’s site MikeRoweSoft.com.’ CNN News. Avail-
able online at: http://edition.cnn.com/2004/TECH/internet/01/20/rowe.ﬁght/index.html (accessed
25 August 2009).
Silverstein, M. (1998) ‘The improvisational performance of culture in realtime discursive practice’, in R.
K. Sawyer (ed.), Creativity in Performance, London: Ablex, 266–312.
Silverstein, M. and Urban, G. (1996) ‘The natural history of discourse’, in M. Silverstein and G. Urban
(eds), Natural Histories of Discourse, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1–17.
Simo Bobda, A.S., Wolf, H.G. and Lothar, P. (1999) ‘Identifying regional and national origin of Eng-
lish-speaking Africans seeking asylum in Germany’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(2): 300–319.
Simon, D. (2004) ‘A third view of the black box: cognitive coherence in legal decision making’, Uni-
versity of Chicago Law Review, 71: 511–84.
Simons, H. (2001) Persuasion in Society, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Simpson, A.P. (2001) ‘Dynamic consequences of diﬀerences in male and female vocal tract dimensions’,
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109: 2153–64.
Simpson, A.P. and Ericsdotter, C. (2007) ‘Sex-speciﬁc diﬀerences in f0 and vowel space’, Proceedings of
the 16th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Saarbrücken, Germany, 933–36. Available online at:
www.icphs2007.de/conference/Papers/1333/1333.pdf.
Simpson, A.W. (ed.) (1984) Biographical Dictionary of the Common Law, London: Butterworths.
REFERENCES
652

Sinclair, J.M. and Coulthard, M. (1992) ‘Towards an analysis of discourse’, in M. Coulthard (ed.),
Advances in Spoken Discourse Analysis, London and New York: Routledge, 1–34.
Sinclair, J.M. and Renouf, A. (1988) ‘A lexical syllabus for language learning’, in R. Carter and M.
McCarthy (eds) Vocabulary and Language Teaching, Harlow: Longman, 140–58.
Singler, J. (2004) ‘The “linguistic” asylum interview and the linguist’s evaluation of it, with special
reference to applicants for Liberian political asylum in Switzerland’, International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 11(2): 222–39.
Skehan, P. (1998) A Cognitive Approach to Learning Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slater, S. and Valente, C. (2009) ‘Barclays to end ﬁnal salary pensions’. Available online at: http://uk.
reuters.com/article/idUKTRE5522Y620090603 (accessed 3 June 2009).
Slembrouck, S. (1992) ‘The parliamentary Hansard “Verbatim” Report: the written construction of
spoken discourse’, Language and Literature, 1(2): 101–19.
Slobin, D.I. (1966) ‘Grammatical transformations and sentence comprehension in childhood and
adulthood’, Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 5(3): 219–27.
——(1996) ‘Two ways to travel: verbs of motion in English and Spanish’, in M. Shibatani and A.
Thompson (eds), Grammatical Constructions. Their Form and Meaning, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——(2001) ‘Discourse analysis in the legal context’, in D. Schiﬀrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton (eds)
The Handbook of Discourse Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell, 437–52.
Sloboda, J. (1986) ‘Reading a case study of cognitive skills’, in A. Gellatly (ed.) The Skillful Mind,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slobogin, C. (2003) ‘Toward taping’, Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law, 1: 309–22.
Smart, C. (1986) ‘Feminism and the law: some problems of analysis and strategy’, International Journal of
the Sociology of Law, 14: 109–23.
——(1989) Feminism and the Power of Law, London: Routledge.
Smith, B.H. (1980) ‘Narrative versions, narrative theories’, Critical Inquiry, 7: 209–18.
Smith, V.L. (1991) ‘Prototypes in the courtroom: lay representations of legal concepts’, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 61: 857–72.
——(1993) ‘When prior knowledge and law collide: helping jurors use the law’, Law and Human
Behavior, 17(5): 507–36.
Snedaker, K. (1991) ‘Storytelling in opening statements: framing the argumentation of the trial’, in D.
Papke (ed.) Narrative and the Legal Discourse: A Reader in Storytelling and the Law, Liverpool: Deborah
Charles Publications, 132–57.
Solan, L. (1993) The Language of Judges, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
——(1998) ‘Linguistic experts as semantic tour guides’, Forensic Linguistics, 5 (ii): 87–106.
——(1999) ‘Can the legal system use experts on meaning?’, Tennessee Law Review, 66: 1167–99.
——(2008) ‘Talking like a person, thinking like a lawyer (and vice versa)’, in M. Solly, M. Conoscenti
and S. Campagna (eds) Verbal/Visual Narrative Texts in Higher Education, Bern: Peter Lang.
Solan, L.P. and Tiersma, P. (2004) ‘Author identiﬁcation in American courts’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4):
448–65.
——(2005) Speaking of Crime: The Language of Criminal Justice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Solomon, N. (1996) ‘Plain English: From a perspective of language in society’, in R. Hasan and G.
Williams (eds) Literacy in Society, London: Longman, 279–307.
Spassova, M.S. and Grant, T. (2008) ‘Categorizing Spanish written texts by author gender and origin by
means of morpho-syntactic trigrams’, paper presented at the Conference, Curriculum, Language and the
Law, Dubrovnik, 18–21 September.
Spence, G. (1995) How to Argue and Win Every Time, New York: St. Martin’s Griﬃn.
Spence, L. (1997) Legacy, Athens, OH: Swallow Press/Ohio University Press.
Spencer-Wendel, S. (10 July 2004) ‘Teen suspect gets probation in baby’s death’, Palm Beach Post.
Available online at: www.palmbeachpost.com/news/content/auto/epaper/editions/saturday/news_0
4fe26f6f445312f003f.html (accessed 9 July 2009).
Spiecker, S. and Worthington, D. (2003) ‘The inﬂuence of opening statement/closing argument orga-
nizational strategy on juror verdict and damage awards’, Law and Human Behavior, 27(4): 437–56.
REFERENCES
653

Springer, J. (16 April 2008) Unpublished interview, Port Jeﬀerson, NY.
Stamatatos, E. (2006) ‘Authorship attribution based on feature set subspacing ensembles’, International
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Tools, 20: 1–16.
Stanisławski, J., Billip, K. and Chociłowska, Z. (1986) Podre˛czny słownik angielsko-polski [A Practical
English–Polish dictionary], 7th edn, Warsaw: Wiedza Powszechna.
Stayfree Magazine, Issue 18. Available online at: www.stayfreemagazine.org/archives/18/sherwin.html.
Stephen, F. ([1863] 1890) A General View of the Criminal Law, 2nd edn, London: Macmillan.
Stephen, L. (1991) Hours in a Library, London: The Folio Society.
Stokoe, E. (2009) ‘“For the beneﬁt of the tape”: formulating embodied conduct in designedly uni-
modal recorded police-suspect interrogations’, Journal of Pragmatics, 41 (10): 1887–1904.
Stokoe, E. and Edwards, D. (2007) ‘“Black this, black that”: racial insults and reported speech in
neighbour complaints and police interrogations’, Discourse & Society, 18(3): 355–90.
——(2008) ‘“Did you have permission to smash your neighbour’s door?” Silly questions and their
answers in police-suspect interrogations’, Discourse Studies, 10(1): 89–111.
Stone, M. (1995) Cross-examination in Criminal Trials, 2nd edn, London: Butterworths.
Storey, R. (1997) The Art of Persuasive Communication, Farnham: Gower Publishing Limited.
Stratman, J.F. and Dahl, P. (1996) ‘Readers’ comprehension of temporary restraining orders in domestic
violence cases: a missing link in abuse prevention?’ Forensic Linguistics, 3 (ii): 211–31.
Streeck, J. (2008) ‘Gesture in political communication: a case study of the democratic presidential can-
didates during the 2004 primary campaign’, Research in Language and Social Interaction, 41(2): 154–86.
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis: Computer-assisted Studies of Language and Culture, Oxford: Blackwell.
Stuntz, W.J. (2001) ‘Miranda’s mistake’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 975–99.
Stygall, G. (1991) ‘Texts in oral contexts: the “transmission” of jury instructions in an Indiana trial’, in
C. Bazerman and J. Paradis (eds) Textual Dynamics of the Professions, Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin Press.
——(1994) Trial Language: Diﬀerential Discourse Processing and Discursive Formation, Amsterdam and Phi-
ladelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
——(2002) ‘Textual barriers to United States immigration’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal
Process, Houndmills: Palgrave.
Stylianou, Y. (2008) ‘Voice transformation’, in J. Benesty, M.M. Sondhi and Y. Huang (eds) Springer
Handbook of Speech Processing, Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Sudnow, D. (1965) ‘Normal crimes: sociological features of a penal code in a public defender’s oﬃce’,
Social Problems, 12: 255–76.
Sullivan, M. (2005) ‘Maybe we shouldn’t study “gangs”: does reiﬁcation obscure youth violence?’,
Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 21: 170–90.
Sullivan, R. (2002) Sullivan and Driedger on the Construction of Statutes, 4th edn, Toronto: Butterworths.
Summerﬁeld, T. and McHoul, A. (2005) ‘Family as a commonsensical device and its place in law’,
International Journal for the Semiotics of Law, 18(3): 242–61.
Svartvik, J. (1968) The Evans Statements: A Case for Forensic Linguistics, Göteborg: University of
Gothenburg Press.
Swales, J.M. and Bhatia, V.K. (1983) ‘An approach to the linguistic study of legal documents’, Fach-
sprache, 5(3): 98–108.
Swann, J., Deumert, A., Lillis, T. and Mesthrie, R. (2004) A Dictionary of Sociolinguistics, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Szymczak, M. (ed.) (1978) Słownik je˛zyka polskiego [Dictionary of the Polish Language], Warsaw: PWN.
Tabory, M. (1980) Multilingualism in International Law and Institutions, New York: Sijthoﬀ& Noordhoﬀ.
Tagg, C. (2009) A Corpus Linguistics Study of SMS Text Messaging, unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Birmingham.
Tamony, P. (1986) ‘Coca-Cola: the most-lawed name’, in K. Harder (ed.) Names and Their Varieties: A
Collection of Essays on Onamastics, Lanham, MD: American Name Society/University Press of Amer-
ica, 197–202.
REFERENCES
654

Tannen, D. (1986) ‘Introducing constructed dialogue in Greek and American conversational and lit-
erary narrative’, in F. Coulmas (ed.) Direct and Indirect Speech, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 311–32.
——(1989) Talking Voices, New York: Cambridge University Press.
——(1993) Framing in Discourse, New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2004) Conversational Style, New York: Oxford University Press.
——(2007) Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue and Imagery in Conversational Discourse, 2nd edn, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, N. and Joudo, J. (2005) The Impact of Pre-Recorded Video and Closed Circuit Television Testimony by
Adult Sexual Assault Complainants on Jury Decision Making: An Experimental Study, Canberra: Australian
Institute of Criminology. Available online at: www.aic.gov.au/publications/rpp/68/index.html
(accessed 16 June 2009).
Tennessee Pattern Jury Instructions – Criminal, 4th edn (1995) New York: West.
Thomas, G.C. (1996) ‘Plain talk about the Miranda empirical debate: a “steady-state” theory of con-
fessions’, UCLA Law Review, 43: 933–59.
——(2004) ‘History’s lesson for the right to counsel’, University of Illinois Law Review, 545–97.
Thornborrow, J. (2002) Power Talk: Language and Interaction in Institutional Discourse, London: Longman.
Thornton, G.C. (1996) Legislative Drafting, London: Butterworth.
Tiersma, P. (1993) ‘Reforming the language of jury instructions’, Hofstra Law Review, 22: 37.
——(1995) ‘Dictionaries and death: do jurors understand mitigation?’, Utah Law Review, 1.
——(1999) Legal Language (hbk), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2000) Legal Language (pbk), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——(2002) ‘The language and law of product warnings’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) Language in the Legal Pro-
cess, Basingstoke, Hampshire and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 54–71.
——(2005) ‘The new Black’s’, Journal of Legal Education, 55: 386.
——(2007) ‘The language of consent in rape law’, in J. Cotterill (ed.) The Language of Sexual Crime,
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 83–103.
Tiersma, P. and Solan, L. (2002) ‘The linguist on the witness stand: forensic linguistics in American
courts’, Language, 78: 221–39.
Titze, I. (1994) Principles of Voice Production, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Todd, R. (2008) ‘Court interpreters inadequate?’, Law Times, 21 April.
Tonkin, M., Grant, T. and Bond, J.W. (2008) ‘To link or not to link: a test of the case linkage prin-
ciples using serial car theft data’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 5: 58–77.
Toolan, M. (2001) Narrative: A Critical Linguistic Introduction, 2nd edn, London: Routledge.
Towner, B. (2008) ‘What are they talking about? 50 words that kids think you don’t know’, AARP
Bulletin, 39.
Tracy, K. (1997) ‘Interactional trouble in emergency service requests: a problem of frame’, Research on
Language and Social Interaction, 30: 315–43.
——(2009) ‘How questioning constructs judge identities: oral argument about same-sex marriage’,
Discourse Studies, 11(2):199–221.
Tracy, K. and Craig, R.T. (2009) ‘Membership category terms in court discourse about same-sex
marriage’, paper presented at 9th Biennial Conference on Forensic Linguistics/Language and Law, Amsterdam.
Travers, M. (1997) The Reality of Law: Work and Talk in a Firm of Criminal Lawyers, Aldershot: Ashgate.
——(2006) ‘Understanding talk in legal settings: what law and society studies can learn from a con-
versation analyst’, Law and Social Inquiry, 31(2): 447–65.
Trenholm, S. (1989) Persuasion and Social Inﬂuence, Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Trinch, S. (2005a) ‘Acquiring authority through the acquisition of genre: latinas, intertextuality and
violence’, Speech, Language, and the Law, 12(1): 19–47.
——(2005b) ‘Disappearing discourse: performative texts and identity in legal contexts’, paper presented
at the International Linguistic Association, 50th Anniversary Conference on Language and Law, New
York City, April 2005.
——(forthcoming) ‘Disappearing discourse: performative texts and identity in legal contexts’, Critical
Inquiry in Language Studies, 7(1–2).
REFERENCES
655

Trinch, S. and Berk-Seligson, S. (2002) ‘Narrating in protective order interviews: a source of interac-
tional trouble’, Language in Society, 31: 383–418.
Trosborg, A. (1995) ‘Statutes and contracts: an analysis of legal speech acts in the English language of
the law’, Journal of Pragmatics, 23: 31–53.
——(1997) Rhetorical Structures in Legal Language: Discourse Analysis of Statutes and Contracts, Tübingen:
Gunter Narr Verlag.
Trudgill, P. (1988) ‘Norwich revisited: recent linguistic changes in an English urban dialect’, English
World-Wide, 9: 33–49.
Tschäpe, N., Trouvain, J., Bauer, D. and Jessen, M. (2005) ‘Idiosyncratic patterns of ﬁlled pauses’, paper
presented at the 14th Annual Conference of the International Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics,
Marrakesh.
Tuebner, G. (1993) Law as an Autopoietic System, Oxford: Blackwell.
Tully, B. and Cahill, D. (1984) Police interviewing of the mentally handicapped: an experimental study, The
Police Foundation, UK.
Turell, T. (2004) ‘Textual kidnapping revisited: the case of plagiarism in literary translation’, in Speech,
Language and the Law, 11(i): 1–26.
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) (2007) The 1951 Refugee Convention:
Questions and Answers, Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
——(2008) 2007 Global Trends: Refugees, Asylum-seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Per-
sons, Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Uviller, R.H. (1988) Tempered Zeal, Chicago: Contemporary Books.
——(1996) Virtual Justice: The Flawed Prosecution of Crime in America, New Haven CT: Yale University Press.
Valentine, B. (1995) The Gang Intelligence Manual, Boulder, CO: Paladin Press.
Vanderveken, D. (1990) Meaning and Speech Acts, Volume I: Principles of Language Use, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Vernon, M. and Coley, J. (1978) ‘Violation of constitutional rights: the language impaired person and
the Miranda Warnings’, Journal of Rehabilitation of the Deaf, 11(4): 1–8.
Vihman, M. (1996) Phonological Development: The Origins of Language in the Child, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Vinkhuyzen, E. and Szymanski, M.H. (2005) ‘Would you like to do it yourself? Service requests and
their non-granting responses’, in K. Richards and P. Seedhouse (eds) Applying Conversation Analysis,
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 91–106.
de Vries, L. (2002) ‘Guilt by association: proposition 21’s gang conspiracy law will increase youth vio-
lence in California’, University of San Francisco Law Review, 37: 191–225.
Wachal, R.S. (1966) ‘Linguistic evidence, statistical inference and disputed authorship’, unpublished
PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin.
Wadensjö, C. (1998) Interpreting as Interaction, London and New York: Longman.
Wagenaar, W.A., van Koppen, P.J. and Crombag, H.F.M. (1993) Anchored Narratives: The Psychology of
Criminal Evidence, Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Wagner, A. (2002) ‘The legal discourse of the Common Law: a game of chess’, International Journal for
the Semiotics of Law, 15: 345–60.
Waldman, A. (2006) ‘Prophetic justice’, The Atlantic, October issue.
Walker, A.G. (1986a) ‘Context, transcripts, and appellate readers’, Justice Quarterly, 3(4): 409–27.
——(1986b) ‘The Verbatim Record: the myth and the reality’, in S. Fisher and A.D. Todd (eds), Dis-
course and Institutional Authority, Norwood, NJ: Erlbaum, 205–22.
——(1987) ‘Linguistic manipulation, power and the legal setting’, in L. Kedar (ed.), Power through Dis-
course, Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 57–80.
——(1990) ‘Language at work in the law: the customs, conventions, and appellate consequences of
court reporting’, in J.N. Levi and A.G. Walker (eds), Language in the Judicial Process, New York:
Plenum Press, 203–44.
——(1999) Handbook on Questioning Children: A Linguistic Perspective, 2nd edn, Washington, DC: ABA
Center on Children and the Law.
REFERENCES
656

Walker, A.G. and Warren, A. (1995) ‘The language of the child abuse interview: Asking the questions,
understanding the answers’, in T. Ney (ed.) True and False Allegations of Child Sex Abuse: Assessment
and Case Management, New York: Bruner-Mazel, 153–62.
Walkley, J. (1987) Police Interrogation: A Handbook for Investigators, London: Police Review Publications.
Wall, J.F. (1970) Andrew Carnegie, New York: Oxford University Press.
Walter, B. (1988) The Jury Summation as Speech Genre, Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benja-
mins Publishing Company.
Walton, D. (1989) Informal Logic: A Handbook for Critical Argumentation, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Wang, W.S-Y. (1980) ‘Assessing language incompetence’, The Linguistic Reporter, 22(8): 2.
Wardhaugh, R. (1985) How Conversation Works, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wason, P.C. and Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1972) Psychology of Reasoning: Structure and Content, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Watson, D.R. (1983) ‘The presentation of victim and motive discourse: the case of police interrogations
and interviews’, Victimology, 8: 31–52.
——(1990) ‘Some features of the elicitation of confession in murder interrogations’, in G. Psathas (ed.)
Interaction Competence: Studies in Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis, Washington, DC: Uni-
versity Press of America, 263–95.
Watson, E.R. (1952) Trial of William Palmer, revised edition, London and Edinburgh: William Hodge.
Watts, R.J. (2003) Politeness, Cambridge: CUP.
Webb, V. and Katz, C. (2006) ‘A study of police gang units in six cities’, in A. Egley. C.L. Maxson, J.
Miller, M.W. Klein. (eds) The Modern Gang Reader, 3rd edn, Los Angeles CA: Roxbury, 349–60.
Wei, L. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
——(2000) ‘Dimensions of bilingualism’, in L. Wei (ed.) The Bilingualism Reader, London: Routledge, 3–25.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M.I. (1968) ‘Empirical foundations for a theory of language
change’, in W. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds) Directions for Historical Linguistics, Austin, TX: Uni-
versity of Texas Press, 95–195.
Weir, C. (1990) Understanding and Developing Language Tests, London: Prentice Hall.
Weisﬂog, W.E. (1987) ‘Problems of legal translation’, Swiss Reports presented at the XIIth International
Congress of Comparative Law, Zürich: Schulthess, 179–218.
Weisselberg, C.D. (2001) ‘In the stationhouse after Dickerson’, Michigan Law Review, 99: 1121–67.
Wells, J.C. (1999) ‘British English pronunciation preferences: a changing scene’, Journal of the Interna-
tional Phonetic Association, 29: 33–50.
Wells, W.A.N. (1991) An Introduction to the Law of Evidence, S. Australia: A. B. Caudell.
Westcott, H. and Cross, M. (1996) This Far and No Further: Towards Ending the Abuse of Disabled Chil-
dren, Birmingham: Venture Press.
Whalen, J. (1995) ‘A technology of order production: computer-aided dispatch in public safety com-
munications’, in P. ten Have and G. Psathas (eds) Situated Order: Studies in the Social Organization of
Talk and Embodied Activities, Washington, DC: University Press of America, 187–230.
Whalen, J., Zimmerman, D.H. and Whalen, M.R. (1988) ‘When words fail: a single case analysis’,
Social Problems, 35: 335–62.
Whalen, M.R. and Zimmerman, D.H. (1990) ‘Describing trouble: practical epistemology in citizen calls
to the police’, Language in Society, 19: 465–92.
Whipple, G. (1911) ‘The psychology of testimony’, Psychological Bulletin, 8: 307–9.
White, A. and Mansﬁeld, C. (2002) ‘Literacy and contract’, Stanford Law and Policy Review, 13: 233–66.
White, J.B. (1982) ‘The invisible discourse of the law: reﬂections on legal literacy and general educa-
tion’, Michigan Quarterly Review, 420–38.
White, W.S. (2001) ‘Miranda’s failure to restrain pernicious interrogation practices’, Michigan Law
Review, 99: 1211–47.
——(2006) ‘Deﬂecting a suspect from requesting an attorney’, University of Pittsburgh Law Review, 68: 29–75.
Whiteside, S. (2001) ‘Sex-speciﬁc fundamental and formant frequency patterns in a cross-sectional
study’, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 110: 464–78.
REFERENCES
657

Wieder, D.L. (1974) ‘Telling the code’, in R. Turner (ed.) Ethnomethodology: Selected Readings, Har-
mondsworth: Penguin, 144–72.
Wigmore, J.H. (1913) The Principles of Judicial Proof, Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company.
Wikipedia (2008) ‘Microsoft vs. MikeRoweSoft’. Available online at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Mike_Rowe_(student) (accessed December 2008).
Williams, A. (1939) ‘Hamburger progeny’, American Speech, 14(2): 154.
Williams, A., Garrett, P. and Coupland, N. (1999) ‘Dialect recognition’, in D. Preston (ed.) Handbook of
Perceptual Dialectology, Philadelphia: Benjamins, 345–58.
Williams, J. (1992) ‘The question of plagiarism and breach of copyright in the dictionary-making pro-
cess (with particular reference to the UK)’, in H. Tommola, K. Varantola, T. Salmi-Tolonen and J.
Schopp (eds.), Euralex ‘92 Proceedings. Papers submitted to the 5th EURALEX International Congress on
Lexicography in Tampere, Finland, 4–9 August 1992, Department of Translation Studies, University of
Tampere: Tampere, 561–70.
Williamson, T.M. (1993) ‘From interrogation to investigative interviewing: strategic trends in police
questioning’, Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 3: 89–99.
——(2006) Investigative Interviewing, Uﬀcolme, Devon: Willan Publishing.
Winter, E. (1994) ‘Clause relations as information structure: two basic structures in English’, in M.
Coulthard (ed.) Advances in Written Text Analysis, London: Routledge, 46–68.
Winton, R. (10 October 2008) ‘Gang member is ﬁrst to be lifted from city’s court-imposed limits’, San
Francisco Chronicle, p. B4.
Wodak, R. (2007) ‘Pragmatics and critical discourse analysis: a cross-disciplinary inquiry’, Pragmatics and
Cognition, 15(1): 203–25.
Wolchover, D. (1989) ‘Should judges sum up on the facts?’, Criminal Law Review, 781–92.
Wood, L. and Kroger, R. (2000) Doing Discourse Analysis: Methods for Studying Action in Talk and Text,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Woodbury, H. (1984) ‘The strategic use of questions in court’, Semiotica, 48(3/4): 197–228.
Woodhams, J. and Hollin, C. (2008) ‘Incorporating context in linking crimes: an exploratory study of situa-
tional similarity and if-then contingencies’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 5: 1–23.
Woodhams, J. and Toye, K. (2007) ‘An empirical test of the assumptions of case linkage and oﬀender
proﬁling with serial commercial robberies’, Psychology, Public Policy, Law, 13: 59–85.
Woodhams, J., Grant, T.D. and Price, A.R.G. (2007) ‘From marine ecology to crime analysis:
improving the detection of serial sexual oﬀences using a taxonomic similarity measure’, Journal of
Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 4: 17–27.
Woodhams, J., Hollin, C. and Bull, R. (2007) ‘The psychology of linking crimes: review of the evi-
dence’, Legal and Criminological Psychology, 12.: 233–49.
——(2008) ‘Incorporating context in linking crimes: an exploratory study of situational similarity and
if-then contingencies’, Journal of Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 5: 1–23.
Woods, N. (2006) Describing Discourse: A Practical Guide to Discourse Analysis, London: Hodder Arnold.
Wooﬃtt, R. (1991) ‘“I was just doing X … when Y”: some inferential properties of a device in
accounts of paranormal experiences’, Text, 11(2): 267–88.
Woolls, D. (2003) ‘Better tools for the trade and how to use them’, International Journal of Speech, Lan-
guage and the Law, 10(i): 102–12.
——(2006) ‘Plagiarism’, in K. Brown (ed.) The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd edn, Vol. 9,
Oxford: Elsevier.
——(forthcoming) ‘Detecting plagiarism’, in L. Solan and P. Tiersma (eds), The Oxford Handbook of
Language and Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woolls, D. and Coulthard, R.M. (1998) ‘Tools for the trade’, International Journal of Speech, Language and
the Law, 5(i): 33–57.
Wootton, A.J. (1981) ‘Two request forms of four year olds’, Journal of Pragmatics, 5: 511–23.
——(2005) ‘Interactional and sequential features informing request format selection in children’s
speech’, in A. Hakulinen and M. Selting (eds) Syntax and Lexis in Conversation, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 185–207.
REFERENCES
658

Worth, R. (2004) ‘Translating crime reports by cellphone’, New York Times, 22 April. Available online
at:
www.nytimes.com/2004/04/22/nyregion/translating-crime-reports-by-using-a-cellphone.html
(accessed 8 August 2009).
Wowk, M.T. (1984) ‘Blame allocation, sex and gender in a murder interrogation’, Women’s Studies
International Forum, 7: 75–82.
Wright, J. (2005) ‘The constitutional failure of gang databases’, Stanford Journal of Civil Rights & Civil
Liberties, 2: 115–42.
Wrightsman, L.S. and Kassin, S.M. (1993) Confessions in the Courtroom, Newbury Park: Sage.
Yarmey, D. (forthcoming) ‘Factors aﬀecting lay persons’ identiﬁcation of speakers’, in L.M. Solan and
P.M. Tiersma (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Language and Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ye, Z. and Zhou, X. (2008) ‘Involvement of cognitive control in sentence comprehension: evidence
from ERPs’, Brain Research, 1203(8): 103–15.
Yermish, S. (2006) ‘Crawford v. Washington and expert testimony: limiting the use of testimonial
hearsay’, Champion Magazine, 30 November: 12–16.
Yoo, I.W. and Blankenship, B. (2003) ‘Duration of epenthetic [t] in polysyllabic American English
words’, Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 33: 153–64.
Zgółkowa, H. (ed.) (1994) Praktyczny słownik współczesnej polszczyzny [Practical Dictionary of Con-
temporary Polish], Poznan´: Kurpisz.
Zimmerman, D. (1984) ‘Talk and its occasion: the case of calling the police’, in D. Schiﬀrin (ed.)
Meaning, Form and Use in Context: Linguistic Applications, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press, 210–28.
——(1992a) ‘The interactional organization of calls for emergency assistance’, in P. Drew and J. Heri-
tage (eds) Talk at Work: Social Interaction in Institutional Settings, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 418–69.
——(1992b) ‘Achieving context: openings in emergency calls’, in G. Watson and R.M. Seiler (eds)
Text in Context: Contributions to Ethnomethodology, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 35–51.
Zimmerman, D. and Wakin, M. (1995) ‘Thank You’s and the management of closings in emergency
calls’, paper given at the 90th Annual Meetings of the American Sociological Association, Washington, DC.
REFERENCES
659


Index
911 call 21, 95–97
999 call 21, 95, 101, 110
Aboriginal 216–17, 274, 310, 452, 460, 591–93,
596, 601
acceptability 214, 479
account(s) 35, 51, 110, 127, 133, 139–42,
146–47, 149–50, 153, 156, 163, 165, 193–94,
198, 216, 317, 385, 395, 447, 461, 551,
555–56, 579, 602
accountability 148–52
acquaintance rape 266–67, 269, 272, 276,
279
adequacy 38, 121, 171, 267, 365–67, 369, 371,
373, 375, 377, 395
adequate warnings 371–72
adjacency pairs 340
admissibility of evidence 311
admissibility of expert 397, 401, 478, 610
admission 14, 113, 116, 121, 123, 151–53, 165,
291–92, 319–20, 324, 329, 398, 611
adverbial expressions 3, 65, 67–68
adverbials 8, 11, 68–72, 74–75, 77
adversarial 5, 37, 121, 139, 153, 196, 198,
214, 218, 229, 267, 276, 279, 313, 322, 333,
346, 395–96, 400, 403, 422, 427, 448, 546,
609, 611
adversarial system 5, 37, 196, 313, 346, 395–96,
400, 403, 609, 611
advertisements 334, 361, 369–70
advocacy 72, 192, 194–96, 198, 209, 232, 396,
403
advocates 55, 189, 329, 414, 450, 596
aﬃrmative consent 266
Afghanistan 412–13, 415–16, 418–19, 563
aggravating 109, 215, 234, 262–63
Ainsworth, J. 4, 6, 8, 111, 127, 130, 317, 329,
351, 602–3, 607
Aldridge, M. 5, 21, 26, 126, 147, 157, 210, 221,
296, 300, 304, 312–13, 333, 335, 340–41,
346, 602, 609
allocution 4, 231–34, 236–40, 242–45, 247–48
ambiguity 10, 11, 39–40, 49, 62, 70, 86, 108,
122, 366, 443, 449, 452, 475, 561, 564–65,
568
American National Standards Institute 369, 373
American Tobacco Company 376
Appeal Court 475–76
appeals 75, 80, 174, 189, 219, 234–35, 252, 335,
400, 411, 413, 453, 458
appropriate adult 127, 129, 156–57
Archer, D. 2, 4, 185–92, 194–99, 216, 594
argument 3, 5, 9–11, 22–23, 43, 46, 160, 194–
95, 198, 200, 203, 212, 218–25, 227–30,
232–33, 236–37, 239, 244, 266, 269, 272,
318, 322–28, 340, 344–45, 367, 422, 477–78,
481, 483, 512, 580
asylum seeker 15, 175, 411–13, 415, 420–22,
613
Atkinson, J. 23, 156, 168, 209, 267–68,
276, 335
attorney 2, 32–35, 82, 111, 113, 115, 119–20,
130, 232, 242, 254, 256, 270, 273–74, 276,
278, 283, 317, 319, 323–24, 326, 329, 369,
459, 466, 542, 546, 548–56, see also lawyer
Australia 2, 127, 312–13, 351, 412–15, 422,
443–44, 453–54, 458, 462, 477, 486, 591,
593–96, 598, 600–601, 606, 608
authorship 5–6, 292, 352, 404–5, 479, 487, 490–
92, 503–6, 508–12, 514–15, 517, 520–22,
525–27, 576, 584, 598, 601, 612–15
authorship attribution 503–4, 510, 612–13
authorship identiﬁcation 487, 503, 506
automatic speaker recognition 393
awareness raising 5, 309, 312, 412, 421–22
661

Baldwin, J. 153, 171, 474
Barnes and Noble form 56–57
Basic Law 47–49, 85
Bayesian 388, 394, 484, 515
Benneworth, K. 4, 21, 23, 126, 139, 142, 148–
49, 154, 156, 335
Bermuda 608
Bhatia, V. J. 3, 8–12, 23, 37–38, 40–45, 47, 50,
83–84, 91, 602–3
bias 5, 214, 237, 255, 292, 398–400, 403–4,
406–7
bilingualism 443, 446
blame allocation 33, 276, 278
Bridgewater, Carl 534
British National Corpus (BNC) 73–75, 483
Broeders, T. 380, 480–82
Brown Corpus 73–74
burden of proof 188, 256–57, 259, 313, 324
burger 360–61
California 3, 9–10, 15, 65–67, 69, 71, 73, 124,
202, 213, 231, 233, 251–54, 256, 259, 262–
63, 281–82, 284, 286–90, 295, 315, 318–19,
332, 459, 490, 529, 604–5, 613
California Jury Instructions 9, 15, 252, 259, 604
Cao, D. 3, 8, 78–79, 91
CarMax 354–58
case linkage 517–18, 520
categorical 144, 365–66, 368, 480–81
caution 3, 7–8, 61, 124, 130, 258, 367, 369,
373, 603, 605–7
CDA see critical discourse analysis
certainty 11–12, 38, 73, 357, 401, 413, 416, 418,
463, 483, 556, 601, 604
Chaski, C. 404–5, 510, 521
child sexual abuse 141, 226, 230
child witness 23, 26, 147, 216–17, 296–305,
312–13
cigarette package warning 368–69, 371–72, 377,
603
cleaning product 375
closed interviewing 141, 152, see also
interviewing
closed questions 140, 336–37, 341, 343–46, see
also questions
closing arguments 199, 201, 212, 216, 218–25,
227–31, 267, 318, 323, 328, 330
closing speech 4, 23, 31, 197, 201, 212, 214,
218, 338, 602
coarticulation 392
Codes of Practice 129–30
coercion strategies 427
coercive questioning 310, 333
coerciveness 210, 334, 336–37, 342
cognitive bias 5, 396
cognitive interviewing 127
collocation 205, 513–14
collusion 527, 577, 611
common law 41–43, 46–49, 65, 276, 335,
594–95
communicative competence 426
communicative eﬀectiveness 426, 433
communicative function 445
communicative proﬁciency 429
communicative strategies 427, 429
communities of practice 202
complainant 25, 147, 185, 205–6, 213–14, 216,
265–67, 269, 273–79
computational forensic linguistics 576–77,
586–87
confession(s) 112–13, 123–24, 315–19, 321,
328–29, 331
conﬁdence 106–7, 110, 214–15, 299, 312–13,
327, 357–58, 406, 413, 434, 438, 480–81,
525, 538, 587, 606, 610
conﬁrmation bias 398–99
conﬁrmation-seeking questions 207, 210
Congress 48, 52–53, 55–56, 73, 366, 370, 372
congruence 103, 105–6
Conley, J. 65, 199, 211, 231, 248, 265, 267–68,
279, 310, 334–35, 541
consent 25, 43–45, 205, 217, 266–67
consistency 6, 37, 170, 180, 226, 391, 447, 490,
509–10, 512, 514–15, 517–18, 520–22, 537
conspiracy 41–42, 166–67, 234, 288, 560–62
consumer product warning 5, 366–77
contingency 98, 100–102, 105–8, 110
contract 11, 42, 61, 80, 84, 452, 467, 476, 561
control 9, 15, 22, 24, 38–39, 41, 43, 45, 49, 103,
105–7, 110, 128, 175, 178, 191, 205, 207–10,
221, 223, 258, 267–70, 272, 274–76, 279,
299, 335–36, 342, 346, 352, 362, 379, 399,
419, 427, 456, 529–30, 603, 611
controlling question 268, 269, 272, 274–75, 279
conversation 4, 6–7, 24–25, 28, 122, 137, 139,
155–57, 163, 167, 190, 197, 247, 299, 315,
322, 338, 342, 365, 429, 432, 451, 467, 485,
488, 544, 564, 566, 571–72
conversation analysis 4, 6, 139, 155, 157, 163,
167
conversational agendas 573
conversational strategy 322, 429, 562–64, 568
Copycatch 526–27, 531, 611–12
copyright 352, 523, 532, 594
core narrative 203–4, 206–7
corpus linguistics 5, 8, 14, 504, 615
corroboration rules 265
COSCO corpus 3, 11, 71
Cotterill, J. 1, 8, 130, 154, 200–203, 205–6,
208–9, 212–14, 217, 220–21, 230–32, 248,
279, 317, 335, 338, 341, 345–46, 377, 425,
606
Coulthard, M. 1–2, 6, 10, 14–15, 27, 172, 174,
202, 207–8, 231, 248, 316, 329, 358, 392,
INDEX
662

395, 399, 403, 427–28, 439, 473–74, 477,
482–83, 486, 504, 507–9, 513, 515–18, 520,
523, 525–27, 534–36, 541, 577, 598, 602–3,
608, 611–12
Council for the Registration of Forensic
Practitioners (CRFP) 610
counsel 27, 41, 45, 113–14, 117–21, 170, 174,
186–89, 192–98, 201, 204–5, 207–9, 211–12,
256, 284, 292, 334, 337–38, 340–46, 353,
444, 452, 465, 467, 484, 596, 608, see also
advocate
court transcripts 335
court trial 23, 31–32, 35
courtroom 4–5, 7–8, 13, 23–24, 32–33, 49,
66–67, 81, 156, 169–75, 178, 185–87,
190–92, 194–96, 198–99, 204, 223–27,
232, 235, 237, 240, 242, 247–48, 267–68,
274, 276, 301, 310–12, 335–36, 342, 346,
351, 395, 401, 404–5, 427, 440, 443,
448, 453, 455, 463, 474, 506, 541–42,
544–46, 556, 574, 591, 594–95, 600, 603,
608, 610
courtroom discourse 24, 175, 274, 276, 335,
346, 448, 545, 595
courtroom genres 4, 183
courtroom interaction 156, 185–86, 342, 427,
463, 545
courtroom narratives 204
credibility 23, 32, 35, 77, 192, 195, 209,
211–13, 222–23, 236, 242, 267, 269,
271–73, 279, 297, 322, 333, 441, 446, 450,
548, 555
credit card 51–52, 55–60, 63, 603
crime categories 203
crime narrative 133, 196, 220, 225, 228
crime story 199–203, 205, 208, 212, 215, 220,
224
criminal act 141, 282, 555
criminal trials 21, 192, 194, 196, 199, 206,
212, 257, 282, 397–98, 478, 486, 548, 591,
594, 605
criminality 95, 294, 575
critical discourse analysis 4, 334, 604
cross-examination 14, 21, 21–23, 31–33, 35,
137, 156, 170, 174, 186–87, 192, 194–95,
209–12, 231, 233–34, 268–69, 271–73,
275–76, 279, 290–91, 298, 310, 310–11,
313, 318–19, 324, 333–40, 342–46, 403,
427, 437, 449, 473, 477, 542, 546, 548,
572, 596, 598–601, 603, 610
cross-examination strategies 334–35, 338, 343
cross-examiner 31, 186, 210–11, 269, 333–34,
336, 342, 345, 427, 598
Crown Prosecution Service 170, 298, 306,
609
cultural mythologies 266–67, 269, 274, 279
CUSUM 478
Danet, B. 9, 41–42, 50, 205, 207, 209, 221–22,
268, 334, 448
Daubert 7, 289, 295, 396, 400–402, 404–5, 407,
477–79, 485, 504–5, 610, 613
Dawid, A. 484
death penalty 233–34, 237, 248, 262–63, 282,
397, 559
declarative questions 336–38, 340
declaratives 146, 207, 268–69
defence 3–4, 22–23, 27, 32, 42, 113, 122, 129,
131, 170–71, 173, 177–80, 186–87, 189,
191–97, 200, 202, 205, 207, 211–13, 215,
218–22, 224–29, 233–34, 237, 242, 267,
269–70, 272–74, 276, 278–79, 283, 292, 294,
298, 301, 306, 310, 317, 319, 322–24,
326–28, 333–34, 374, 398, 402, 428, 432,
438, 459, 461, 465–66, 477, 481, 542, 546,
548, 551, 555–56, 568, 572–73, 575, 603,
605–7, 611
defence argument 4, 219, 224, 226–28
defence attorney 32, 242, 270, 273–74, 317,
319, 323–24, 326, 328, 568, see also attorney
defence counsel 186–87, 192–97, 207, 292, 310,
see also counsel
defence lawyer 219, 222, 229, 233, 267, 269–70,
272, 278–79, 402, 573, see also lawyer
defendant 4, 10, 24, 34, 61, 70, 73, 86, 112,
116–18, 122–23, 170, 185–92, 194–96, 202,
204–6, 209, 213, 215, 219–21, 224–28, 233,
253, 257, 259–63, 266, 273–75, 277, 282–83,
286–89, 290–91, 298, 317–20, 324, 330–31,
334, 336, 353, 362, 364, 373–74, 397, 399,
423, 428, 452, 457, 459, 461, 465, 479,
542–44, 546, 548–56, 559–63, 565, 572–74,
592, 596, 607
defense argument see defence argument
defense attorney see defence attorney
defense lawyer see defence lawyer
defense see defence
deliberation 88, 199, 201, 214, 261, 315, 327–
28, 553
DeLorean 561
denial 4, 22, 32, 140, 143–44, 153, 173, 177,
188–89, 247, 268, 290, 352, 548
detainee 12, 423–36, 439
diachronic 185, 198, 216
dialect 222, 355, 381, 385–86, 391, 393,
413–19, 421, 485, 487, 489, 492, 521, 533,
593
dialogue 12, 14, 130, 223, 238, 242, 268, 328,
544, 600, 608
dictionary 71, 91, 233, 263, 356–57, 360,
362–63, 474, 532–34, 538, 579
diﬀerential speaking rights 274
direct address 238, 242, 245
direct examination 33, 191, 205, 207, 210, 234,
267, 276, 278, 541–42, 546, 548, 550, 556
INDEX
663

direct reported speech 23, 31–33
direct speech 31, 205, 448
directive 58, 69, 366–67
disclosure 52, 55–56, 58, 133, 152–53, 299, 314,
609
discourse analysis 4, 14–15, 77, 123–24, 139,
141, 153, 156, 218, 229, 231, 369, 492, 560
discourse level 446, 448
discourse marker 185, 340, 342, 448–49
discourse rules 24, 133
discrimination 53, 202, 520
DNA 111–12, 316, 380, 396–97, 406, 473, 484,
486, 490, 505
document comparison 59, 576, 586
drafting 12, 42, 44–46, 48–49, 67, 69–70, 75–
76, 82–85, 87–88, 135, 254
Drew, P. 4, 21, 23, 25, 28, 33–35, 95, 97–99,
102, 109–10, 156, 163, 175, 209, 211, 267–
68, 275–76, 335, 448, 602
drugs 77, 170, 173–74, 235–36, 369–70, 381
Dumas, B. 5, 8, 14, 60–61, 231, 365–67, 371–
72, 374, 377, 474, 603–4
Eades, D. 1, 5, 15, 77, 172–73, 209, 216, 274,
310–11, 335, 351, 411–15, 418, 422–23, 437,
453, 460, 469, 474, 541, 593, 601, 603, 613
eﬀective warning 367–68, 375
Ehrlich, S. 5, 21, 127, 209, 216, 265, 268–69,
272, 276, 280, 310, 333, 335, 541–42, 603
electronic jihad 563, 571–72
emergency call 21, 95–99, 101, 107, 110, 244,
456
emphatic repetition 214
English Caution 605
English common law system 276
English language ability 423–24, 427
English language proﬁciency 423–25, 437–38
entitlement 4, 98–102, 104–10, 131
ethics 358, 407
evaluation 33, 35, 61, 64, 127, 132, 203–6, 211–
15, 236, 287, 311, 383, 395, 398, 427, 434,
441, 446, 450, 485–86, 512, 530, 550, 556,
574, 581, 583, 585
evidence 3–5, 7, 22, 25–27, 30–35, 47, 68, 73,
77, 81, 96–97, 100, 104, 111–14, 117–19,
121–23, 126, 129, 130–32, 138, 141–43, 146–
47, 152–53, 158, 163–65, 167, 169–81, 186–
90, 192–201, 203, 205–8, 211–15, 217–19,
223–27, 232–33, 235, 237, 239, 248, 251,
253–57, 259–60, 265–68, 270, 274–75, 281–
82, 284, 287–92, 297–98, 306–7, 310–13,
316–18, 320, 322–23, 327–31, 334, 336–37,
340, 345, 354, 356, 358, 360, 364–65, 371–
72, 374, 379, 381, 384–86, 388–93, 395–96,
398–404, 407, 411, 415–16, 418, 421–24,
427–29, 433–34, 436–39, 441, 446, 448, 450–
52, 460–61, 473–75, 477–86, 491, 504, 506,
508–9, 511, 514, 516–18, 521–22, 527, 531,
534–35, 538, 558–61, 563–65, 568–69, 572–
75, 588, 591–601, 603, 605, 607, 609–11
evidence-in-chief 297–98, 306, 310, 312, 609
evidential goals 201
evidential phase 201, 205–6
evidential rules 196
examination-in-chief 194, 205–6, 207, 210
examination questions 21–22, 333, 335–37,
339–40, 346
expert 2, 5–7, 14, 24, 53, 81, 203, 206, 211,
225–29, 281, 287–92, 294–95, 309, 317,
337–38, 341, 343–45, 347, 353, 358, 374,
379–80, 383–84, 386, 388, 390, 393, 395–
406, 411–12, 421–23, 427, 434, 436, 439,
441–42, 452–53, 459, 461, 473–75, 477–83,
485, 504, 506, 514, 563, 593–604, 609–11,
615
expert linguist 7, 395–96, 400, 406, 411, 473–
74, 506, 602, see also expert witness
expert opinion 452, 480, 504, 615
expert testimony 288–89, 292, 294, 397, 400–
401, 404–5, 473
expert witness 7, 14, 24, 206, 225–26, 228–29,
281, 289, 309, 317, 337–38, 341, 343–45,
374, 396, 399, 402–3, 423, 442, 459, 461,
473–74, 477, 593, 595–601, 603–4, 609–11
expertise 3, 7, 104, 123, 281, 287, 289, 316,
338–39, 341, 359, 364, 373, 398, 402–3,
412–15, 419–22, 424, 446, 452–53, 473–74,
477, 486, 587, 593–94, 598–99, 610
extenuating circumstance 262–63
f0-variability 387, 392
face threat 132, 191
Fairclough, N. 14, 128, 231–32, 247, 603
faithful interpreting 445
false confession 5, 112, 315–19, 321, 328–29,
331, see also confession
false negative 588
false positive 587
familiar-speaker identiﬁcation 380
FBI 315, 317–20, 323, 328, 330, 332, 397, 399,
558, 560–61, 563, 568
Federal Reserve Board 52, 55–57
Federal Trade Commission 369, 372
federally mandated warning 369–72
felicity condition 132
felony 186–87, 189, 194, 196, 224, 234, 260
Felton Rosulek, L. 4, 21, 31, 218–23, 230–31,
317, 324, 595, 602, 608
ﬁllers 375, 392
ﬁngerprint 117, 397, 399, 490, 505, 527–28
Flesch Reading Ease test 114
folk linguistic 413–14, 416–20
foreign accent 381, 385–87
forensic document examiner. 593
INDEX
664

forensic evidence 200
forensic linguistics 1–2, 6–7, 14–15, 156, 218,
221, 248, 364, 392, 397, 400, 403, 405–6,
411, 455, 459, 468, 486, 505, 508, 517, 537,
541, 546, 556, 558, 576–77, 586–87, 591,
593–94, 602–3, 609–10
forensic narrative 200, 202, 204, 209
forensic phonetician 473, 484, 613
forensic psychology 517
forensic speaker identiﬁcation 378
forensic stylistics 352, 479, 487, 492, 503–6, 512
formant 379, 382, 384–85, 387–91, 393, 483
formant tracking 388
forms of address 211
framing 129, 191, 238, 434, 491, 548
Fraser, B. 132, 365, 367, 369, 421–22, 446,
Fraser, H. 172, 181, 335, 613
French, P. 3, 9, 80–81, 85–86, 88, 90, 368, 380,
385, 474, 479, 484, 486, 535
Frye Test 400–402, 407, 504, 610
function words 579, 581–83, 587
fundamental frequency 383–84, 387
fuzzy matching 579
Garﬁnkel, H. 27–28, 155–56
genericide 361
genre 4, 13, 38, 73, 75, 91, 128, 183, 185, 199–
201, 213, 216, 295, 318, 346, 429–30, 432,
443, 488
Gibbons, J. 1, 10, 25, 50, 130, 134, 138, 140,
142, 172–73, 192, 200–201, 203, 206, 211,
216, 218, 231, 268, 279, 301, 333, 335–36,
338, 341, 344, 448, 453, 460–61, 464, 468,
474, 541, 606
glottalisation 392
Goﬀman, E. 130, 218, 227, 552, 554
graﬃti 281–82, 284–87, 291–92, 294–95
grammatical level 446–47
grammatical parallelism 242, 244–45
Grant, T. 6, 391, 405, 474, 482–83, 485, 491–
92, 503, 505, 507–8, 510, 517, 521–22, 610,
612–13
gratuitous concurrence 310
Gray, P. 7, 287, 403, 432, 481, 603, 608–9, 611
Grebler, G. 5–6, 315, 564, 570, 603
Hale, S. 5, 156, 192, 340, 342, 440, 443, 445–
50, 452–55, 460, 468–69, 594, 602, 608
handwriting 397–98, 404, 415, 481, 492, 610
hapax 526, 531, 585, 587
Hardcastle, R. 393, 478
Harrison, P. 323, 327, 385, 479, 484, 486, 498
Haworth, K. 4, 6, 15, 21, 23, 35, 127, 156, 169,
173, 180, 306, 335, 607–8
hazard 368
hazardous 366, 369, 370, 373
health hazard 370–71
hearsay 31, 190, 196, 203, 208, 281, 289–92,
341
hearsay rule 31, 190
hedging 71, 208, 320
Heﬀer, C. 1, 4, 14, 21, 77, 196, 199–204, 206–
7, 209–15, 219, 223, 230–32, 248, 263, 318,
334–35, 351, 474, 605, 610
Heritage, J. 13, 25, 27–28, 71, 96–97, 150, 165,
168, 175–76, 267, 272, 448
Heydon, G. 1, 23, 25–26, 29, 123, 141–42, 156,
178, 181, 335
Hoey, M. 513
Hollien, H. 393, 482–83
Holt, E. 3, 8, 21, 23, 29–30, 33, 36, 126, 143,
151, 223, 247, 331, 608
hot tub 599–600, 603, 611
Howard, R. 525, 538
hung jury 234
hypothetical 53–54, 144, 161, 289–90, 319–20,
365–66, 368, 371
hypothetical warning 365–66, 368, 371
IAFL see International Association of Forensic
Linguists
IAFPA see International Association for Forensic
Phonetics and Acoustics
identiﬁcation 246, 394, 577
identity 14, 91, 99, 102, 104, 129, 133, 175–76,
216, 218–20, 222–23, 229, 232, 235–37, 240,
247, 248, 273, 280–81, 358, 379, 386, 388,
390, 393, 518, 522, 527, 530, 535, 541–42,
546, 550–51, 553–56, 579, 581–82, 584
idiolect 6, 391–92, 487, 489, 507, 509–15, 520–
22
illocutionary 243–44, 291, 376, 445–48, 460
immigration 5, 47, 62, 82, 175, 411–15, 420,
451, 456
imperative 99–100, 119, 366–68, 448
imperative warnings 368
impersonal 9, 11, 47, 61, 152, 226, 255, 260–61
implicature 132, 192
indictment 202, 326, 458, 572
indirect reporting 31–33
indirect speech 31–33, 448
inference 58–59, 136, 170, 215, 255, 266, 270,
272, 426, 433, 437, 451, 475, 574, 607
inferencing 122, 365, 367, 515
inform 15, 52–53, 108, 114, 188–89, 266, 279,
365, 368, 372, 445, 466, 610
information 25, 28, 39, 43–44, 51–53, 55–56,
58–59, 61–62, 66, 75, 80–81, 84–85, 87, 90,
95, 97, 104, 106–7, 113–15, 118, 123, 126,
130–31, 133–38, 140, 147, 150, 170, 174,
176–77, 189–91, 202, 207–8, 218–19, 221,
223, 225, 227–29, 232, 234–35, 237, 242,
253, 268–70, 272, 274, 276, 282–83, 286,
288, 290, 294, 298, 302, 306, 309, 312, 316–
INDEX
665

17, 325–26, 328–29, 334, 336, 339, 345–46,
356, 366–68, 370–77, 381, 383–86, 390–93,
397, 399–400, 404, 406, 412, 419, 425–27,
429–30, 432–34, 436–37, 439, 441, 447–48,
450–51, 456, 466, 480, 483, 508, 511, 515,
527, 529, 534, 542, 544–45, 549, 562–63,
573–74, 576, 585, 597, 603, 606–7, 610
information-seeking 190, 207, 345
informative warning 374
intelligence analysis 559–60, 572–75
intelligence gathering 573
interaction(s) 1, 3–4, 7–8, 12–14, 21, 23–24, 27–
28, 35–36, 59, 95, 99, 119, 126, 129–30, 136,
138–41, 146, 152–53, 155–56, 163, 167, 169,
171–76, 178–79, 181, 185–86, 188, 192–93,
196–97, 224, 228, 247, 267, 274–75, 294,
330, 338, 342, 418, 423, 425, 427, 429, 433,
437, 441, 443, 453, 455, 460, 463–64, 466–67,
476, 511–12, 541, 544–45, 551, 606, 608, 615
interjection 4, 144, 158, 167, 607
intermediary 298, 307, 309, 312, 451, 462
internal evaluation 204–5, 214
International Association for Forensic Phonetics
and Acoustics (IAFPA) 378, 485, 613
International Association of Forensic Linguists
(IAFL) 1, 592, 598
International Journal of Speech, Language and the
Law 1, 154, 216, 346, 378, 422, 468, 486
interpretation 3, 12, 28, 37–41, 43, 45–49, 70,
122–23, 156, 197, 206, 210, 226, 232, 268,
281, 283, 286, 291–92, 335, 365, 398, 424,
440–44, 453, 465, 467, 475, 484, 488, 491–
92, 537, 594, 608
interpreted interaction 441, 608
interpreter 2, 44–45, 48, 126, 226, 309, 412–14,
423–25, 440–41, 443–53, 455–68, 535, 602,
608, 615
interpreting process 445, 448, 468
interrogation 2–4, 93, 111–24, 127, 139, 153–
54, 156, 167, 202, 315–20, 322, 324–25, 327–
31, 423, 459, 602
interrogative(s) 25, 191, 272
interruption 27, 122, 194–95, 209–11, 231, 335,
441, 452
inter-speaker diﬀerences 387
intertextually 3, 203
interview records 127, 181, 534, 608
interview(s) 3–4, 6–8, 13–14, 21, 23–32, 35–36,
125–42, 144–59, 161, 163, 167, 169–81, 231,
237, 276, 283, 292, 296–307, 309–13, 319,
322–23, 325, 327–28, 331, 346, 371, 379,
399, 412, 414, 417, 420, 423–30, 433–37,
439, 444, 451–52, 455, 458–61, 463–64, 466,
475–76, 514–16, 518, 534, 536, 596, 606–8
interviewee 3, 21, 23–26, 29–30, 35, 126–27,
132–34, 162, 170, 172, 175–80, 299, 301,
412–14, 423, 606–7
interviewer 3, 13, 24–29, 30–31, 35, 55, 129,
132–35, 139–43, 146, 153, 170, 172, 175–80,
298–309, 311–12, 412, 414, 419, 423–24,
436–37, 439, 606–7
interviewing style 4, 146–47, 152–53
intonation 25, 122–23, 308, 336, 553–54, 580
intra-speaker variation 388, 393
investigative interviewing 7, 15, 127–28, 139,
153–54, 311, 607–8
investigative legal system 609
investigative police interviews 296
Jaccard’s coeﬃcient 518
Jeﬀerson, G. 155, 157, 159, 161, 175
Jessen, M. 5, 15, 378, 382, 384–85, 387–89,
391–93, 474
jihad 315, 328, 330, 561–66, 568–69, 571–72,
574
Johnson, A. 1–3, 6, 8, 10, 14, 21, 23, 25–27,
29–30, 36, 126, 134, 141–42, 146, 150–51,
153, 156, 172, 202, 207–8, 223, 247–48, 317,
331, 335, 345, 384, 395, 399, 403, 427–28,
439, 474, 477, 486, 523, 525–27, 529–31,
534, 541, 577, 585, 602, 608, 611–12
Johnstone, B. 202, 491, 512–13, 522
Jones, Danielle 508, 514
judge 1, 2, 3–5, 7–8, 12–14, 23, 32, 35, 41, 61,
65–67, 69, 72, 74, 76–77, 116–17, 173–75,
185–88, 192–200, 203, 208, 213–15, 218,
222–23, 225–27, 229, 233–34, 237, 240–41,
248, 251–55, 262, 266–68, 270–72, 274, 276,
279, 281, 287–88, 292, 300–301, 309, 312,
317–18, 329, 331, 333–36, 339, 345, 353–56,
358, 361, 372, 400–401, 404, 419–21, 435,
442, 463, 466, 468, 474–78, 481, 491, 543,
548, 573, 575, 591, 594–600, 602–5, 608–11
Judge Jeﬀreys 190
Judge Judy 66–68, 77
judgement 8, 33, 67, 266, 404, 412–13, 415,
420–21, 424, 446, 452, 481, 607
judgment see judgement
judicial attitude 3, 67
judicial rape 265
junior mark 352
juries see jury
juror 5, 62, 156, 186, 189, 199–203, 205, 209–
10, 214–15, 218–19, 222–23, 225–27, 229–
30, 232, 234, 236–37, 242–44, 246, 248, 251–
56, 258–60, 262–63, 266, 289–90, 292, 310,
317–18, 324–25, 327–28, 331, 450, 476, 484,
553, 560, 571, 574, 604
jury 3–9, 10, 13, 15, 22–23, 32–33, 35, 60–62,
112, 156, 174–75, 186, 189–90, 192–93,
196–203, 207, 210–16, 220, 222–34, 237,
239–40, 242–48, 251–55, 259–64, 266–68,
270, 272, 274, 276, 279, 281, 288–92, 295,
298, 301–3, 309, 313, 315, 317–18, 322–24,
INDEX
666

328–30, 332–33, 336, 355–56, 358, 372–74,
406, 441, 450, 468, 474–84, 491, 517, 542,
544, 547–48, 552–55, 559, 571–72, 591,
594–96, 598, 603–5, 607–8, 611
jury decision-making 200, 215
jury instruction 7–9, 10, 15, 60–62, 201, 213,
216, 231, 251–52, 255, 259, 263–64, 281,
474, 603, 603–5
jury questionnaire 202
jury selection 199, 201–2
jury trial 186, 200–201, 212, 290, 318
Kennedy Smith rape trial 32, 272–73, 546
Komter, M. 29, 134, 140, 142, 156, 173–74,
181, 463
Kredens, K. 5–6, 15, 156, 455, 512–13, 523,
532, 602, 608, 612
Kumho Tire Company 295, 401, 407, 479
label 25, 216, 300–301, 366–77, 391, 479, 480–
81, 484
Labov, W. 200, 203–4, 206, 417, 421, 487–88,
491, 503–4, 506
LADO 411–15, 418–22, 613
land claims 592
Language Analysis in the Determination of
Origin 411–15, 418–22, 613
language assessment 426, 428–29, 433
language contact 411
language diﬃculties 423
language mixing 414
language performance 426, 429
language testing 425–27
language variation 411, 417, 512, 514
Law and Order 66, 233
Law Commission 396, 402, 478, 485–86, 610
lawsuits 362–63, 368
lawyer 1–4, 7–9, 21, 23, 27, 31–33, 35, 65, 75–
76, 79–82, 85, 88, 90–91, 114, 117–21, 155–
59, 161–64, 167, 170, 175, 178, 185–87, 193–
96, 198–203, 205–9, 212, 218–34, 252, 254,
262, 267–72, 274–79, 278, 294, 301, 309–10,
312, 329, 333–35, 337, 343, 345–46, 362–63,
395–96, 402–4, 414, 425, 438, 441–42, 448–
51, 454–55, 463–65, 474, 481, 483–84, 526,
536, 570, 573–74, 591, 593–600, 602–4,
607–11, see also attorney
lawyer interventions 167, 607
lawyer-client talk 159
lawyer-initiated actions 4, 167
lay participant 4–5, 24
lay people 1, 203, 333–34, 338, 340–41, 423,
425, 484, 602
lay readers 14, 51, 61–64, 603
leading questions 208, 210, 268, 303, 323, 328,
458
legal categories 212
legal communication 8
legal context 5–6, 8, 13–14, 31, 43, 70, 172–73,
181, 274, 356, 368, 409, 455, 459, 466, 469,
603
legal documents 3, 8, 23, 61, 78–84, 87, 155
legal framework 201
legal interaction 1, 3, 12–13, 23, 155–56, 167
legal language 1, 3, 5, 8–11, 23–24, 51, 60, 63,
65, 69–70, 72, 77–79, 81, 84–85, 213, 256,
545, 602, 604
legal register 3, 65, 72, 613
legal requirements 133, 366–67, 466, 558
legal standards 288, 331, 366
legal texts 1, 3, 9, 14, 50, 62–63, 78–82, 156,
281, 603
legal writing 8, 37, 51, 65
legalese 8–9, 11, 23, 255–56
legislation 3, 41–42, 46, 50, 80, 84–85, 87–88,
90–91, 129, 170, 185, 194, 265–66, 296, 367,
369, 594–96, 601
legislative history 369
legislative writing 9, 37, 43, 50
legislature 3, 9, 40–41, 43, 46, 48–49, 85–86
leniency plea 231, 241, 244, 248
Levy, J. 251–52
lexical choice 220–21, 235, 244, 335, 341, 346,
447
lexical landscaping 341
lexical priming 513, 521–22
lexical repetition 212
lexical similarity 584
Lexis-Nexis 71–72, 613
Liberia 420
‘Liberty City’ case 560
likelihood ratio 479, 482–86
linguistic disadvantage 424
linguistic expert 3, 5, 7, 123, 316, 358–59, 364,
414–15, 421–22, 477, see also expert
linguistic individual 509–10, 512–14, 522
linguistic intelligence 238
linguistic proﬁle 426–29, 433–36, 438
linguistic resources 46, 73, 426, 513, 521
linguistic strategies 223, 230, 244, 310, 531
linguistic variable 491, 503–5
listening comprehension 428, 432
litigants-in-person 334, 337, 341–42, 345–46, see
also pro se litigants
litigation 52–53, 55, 72, 79, 81–82, 351–53,
359, 361–64, 366, 369, 374–75, 395–96, 402–
4, 406, 594
Loctite 373–74, 377
locutions 243
Lombard speech 387
Maley, Y. 8–10, 12, 24, 40, 50, 79, 201, 207,
437, 448, 473–74, 610
mark 352–53, see also trademark
INDEX
667

marked address term 133
master narrative 202–3, 218
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) 373–74
Matoesian, G. 6, 15, 25, 32, 36, 77, 209–10,
216, 228, 265, 272–75, 280, 310, 317, 335,
338, 341, 541, 545–46, 557, 595, 603, 608
McDonald’s 334, 343–45, 362–64, 377
McJob 363
McMenamin, G. 6, 478–79, 483, 487, 489, 491,
503–4, 506, 510, 512, 613
Meadow, Professor 473, 478, 484, 544
mens rea 10, 141, 154, 159, 167, 170, 176
metadiscursive comment 200, 211
methodological issues 454, 545
minimal witness story 206
Miranda v. Arizona 111, 113, 116–17, 124
Miranda Warning 7–8, 111–24, 130, 138, 317,
329, 331, 425, 458–59, 461, 479, 603, 606–7
miscommunication 26, 90, 174, 300, 425, 433
mitigating 148, 150, 152–53, 215, 233–34, 262–
63, 319
mitigation 132, 148, 151, 208, 242, 262–63
mobile phone 389, 508
modal verbs 10, 61, 99–101, 308, 431
modality 10, 218, 336, 543, 583, 585
Molloy, P. 399, 534
monologic 130, 231
Morrissey 512
motivation 276, 283, 382, 384, 387, 391, 399,
546–47, 562, 585
motive 123, 149, 196, 225, 282, 285, 396, 546,
548, 551, 556, 562, 573
multilingual 5, 9, 79–80, 84–85, 87–88, 90–91,
391
multilingualism 385, 411, 418
multimodal 6, 329, 541–46, 551–52, 554–56,
603, 608
multimodality 6, 338, 541
murder 32, 134–37, 139–41, 143, 150, 170, 186,
191, 197, 207, 226, 231–37, 240, 244, 247,
253, 260–62, 287, 292, 316, 322, 425, 458–
59, 474, 508, 515–17, 534, 559, 604
naïve speaker identiﬁcation 380
narratees 201
narrative action 202, 204
narrative clause 204, 206
narrative construction 175, 207
narrative discourse 200, 206
narrative ﬂow 209
narrative gaps 212
narrative mode 200, 203, 213
narrative schemas 202
narrative script 201–3
narrative sensibilities 213
narrative style 208, 232
narrative turns 206, 208
narrative typiﬁcations 202
narrative(s) 4, 25–27, 30, 36, 60, 77, 123, 133–
34, 136, 142, 144–48, 150–53, 175, 192, 196,
199–209, 211–20, 222, 225, 228, 230–32,
235–36, 238, 246–47, 276, 278–79, 296–97,
301–3, 305, 315, 317–18, 320, 324, 326–27,
329–31, 334, 341, 344, 435, 455, 461, 475,
535, 541–42, 549, 551–52, 555–56
narratology 200
narrator 201, 212
national origin 412–14, 422
nationality 47, 411, 413–14, 422
native speaker 5, 11, 366–67, 411, 414, 419–23,
425, 438–39, 461, 474, 509, 580, 608
negation 11, 22, 61–62, 236, 253, 311, 346
negative face 132
negative politeness features 343
negativity 236
negligence 86, 257–58
Nicholl, Jenny 508, 514–17
Nolan, F. 380–81, 388, 391–93
non-native detainees 423, 439
non-native speakers 5, 366–67, 423, 425, 438–
39, 580, 608
non-standard variety 416
O’Barr, W. 10, 65, 199, 208–11, 231, 240, 243–
44, 248, 265, 267–68, 279, 310, 334–35, 448,
450, 541
observer eﬀects 398
oﬃcers’ questions 4, 157–58, 163, 167
open interview 141, 146, 153
open questions 276, 302, 336
opening question 146–51
opening speech 196–98, 200
opening statement 186, 199, 201, 203–6, 212
opinion 5–6, 33, 68, 71–72, 76, 111, 113–14,
117–18, 122, 160, 198, 205, 222, 225–26,
233, 255, 287, 289–90, 292, 344, 362, 393,
401–4, 406, 415, 419, 423, 427, 429, 437–38,
451–52, 471, 473–74, 477–83, 485, 504,
514–17, 526–27, 532, 535, 537, 587, 594,
596–99, 610
oral narrative 231–32
orientation(s) 13, 31, 132–33, 157, 165, 167,
203–4, 206, 384, 541–42, 544–45, 552, 554–
55
PACE see Police and Criminal Evidence Act
paradigmatic 200, 203, 206, 213, 215
paradigmatic genre 213
paradigmatic mode 200, 206
participant roles 130
participants 3–5, 23–25, 27, 35, 37, 51–55, 58–
60, 99–100, 126, 129–30, 133–34, 137, 156–
57, 161, 163, 167, 172, 175–76, 186, 195–96,
200, 220, 222–23, 227, 237, 249, 253, 267,
INDEX
668

274, 335, 343, 400, 433, 441, 443, 445–46,
453, 541–43, 545, 552, 555–56
passive 84, 57, 61–62, 196, 224, 253, 255, 260,
306, 308, 438, 447, 468, 556, 584
patchwriting 525
patriarchal ideology 273
pattern jury instructions 7, 9, 15, 61, 252, 604,
see also jury instruction
PEACE (method of interviewing) 127–29, 133,
139, 153, 297, 316
Pecorari, D. 525, 538
peer review 289, 401, 479, 504, 506, 610
Pennycook, A. 421, 523
pension plan 51–55, 58, 60
people with learning disabilities 306
performance 56, 59, 170, 212, 222, 298, 309,
312, 328, 343, 398, 400, 426–29, 432–33,
435–36, 439–41, 444, 453, 459, 464, 491,
504, 506, 510–11, 541, 544, 551, 554–55, 608
performance features 433
performance samples 427, 429, 433
performative 9, 317
perjury 187–88, 361
perlocution 244, 376, 445–48
phonetic details 387, 391–92
phonetics 5, 378, 392–94, 483, 485, 560
phonological disabilities 307
pitch 381, 383–84, 387, 483, 613
plagiarism 6, 352, 474, 523–32, 534, 537–38,
577, 585, 588, 611–12
Plain English 9, 46, 63, 84, 595
plea 4, 170, 199, 215, 231, 233, 235–38, 240–
44, 247–48, 451, 465
plea deal 233
plea for leniency 4, 233–35, 242, 247
polar questions 207, see also yes/no questions
Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) 123,
130, 141, 157, 172, 316, 424, 534
police assistance 95–98, 102, 107–10, 120, 456
police call handlers 4
police caution 7–8, 61, 124, 603, 606–7, see also
caution, English caution
police interrogation 111–15, 118–19, 121–24,
138–39, 153–56, 167–68, 316, 329, 331, 335,
463
police interview(s) 3–4, 8, 13, 21, 23–25, 29,
31–32, 35–36, 126, 128–30, 132–35, 137–42,
146, 151, 153–54, 156–58, 167, 170, 172–76,
178, 296–98, 310, 331, 379, 399, 424, 426–
27, 429–30, 433–36, 439, 455, 458, 460–61,
463–64, 475, 515–16, 518, 534, 607–8
police interviewer 13, 24, 29, 31, 139, 142, 146,
153, 172, 175–76, 424, 436, 439
police interviewing 139, 141, 153, 156
police oﬃcer 2, 11, 15, 23, 32, 35, 95, 97, 105–
6, 121, 126, 129–30, 134, 138, 140–42, 153,
156–60, 162–63, 165, 167, 177, 179, 206,
215, 283, 287–90, 296–98, 301, 310–11, 329–
30, 381, 424, 435, 441, 444, 456, 458, 460–
63, 466, 534, 605–6, 608
police procedure 132, 138, 157, 438, 461
police talk 141–42
police-suspect interview 141, 163, 169, 172–73,
176, 180, see also police interview
positive face 132
positive politeness strategies 343
power relations 129, 133, 141, 172, 334, 437, 611
powerful and powerless language 231
powerful language 303
powerful speech 242, 450
powerless language 231, 303
powerless witnesses 208–9
precision gesture 552–54
pregnant women 371–72
preliminary instruction 199, 201–2
presumption of innocence 186, 188
presupposition 13, 192, 210, 268–70, 272, 279
Prisoners’ Counsel Act 196
pro se litigant 334, 337–38, 342–43, 346
product liability cases 374, 377
product liability law 366–67
product warnings 5, 8, 61, 365, 367–69, 375, see
also warning
proﬁle 112, 316, 334, 352, 379–80, 426–29,
433–36, 438, 484, 535, 573
promise 111, 263, 365, 367, 405, 560, 600
proposition 40, 45, 69, 166, 180, 222, 268–70,
272, 274, 584, 604
prosecuting lawyer 3, 276, 279, 608
prosecution 4, 10, 22–23, 29, 116, 119, 146,
151, 169–70, 173–74, 177–80, 186–88, 192,
194–97, 201–2, 204–5, 209, 211–12, 214–15,
219–21, 224–29, 234–35, 237, 241, 247, 257,
262, 286–87, 295, 298, 300, 306, 310, 313,
322–24, 327–28, 330–31, 333–34, 438, 444,
459, 482, 542, 546, 548, 558, 561–66, 570–
75, 597, 607, 609, 611
prosecution argument 29, 226–27
prosecutor 32–33, 121, 178, 186, 200, 205, 233–
34, 82, 298, 575
qualitative 139, 141, 153, 224, 490–91, 526,
530, 533, 537
qualitative analysis 141, 153, 490, 530, 533
quantitative 58–60, 219, 224, 334, 484, 489,
491–92, 510, 526, 530, 533, 537
question form 163, 207, 210, 306, 338, 346, 435
question type 306, 334, 336–37, 448–49
question-answer format 208
question-answer sequences 167, 267, 276, 342
question-answer style 231
rape complainants 216
rape law 266, 269, 279
INDEX
669

rape law reform 279
rape shield provisions 265
rape statutes 265–66, 269
rape trial 32–33, 36, 187, 265–67, 269, 272–73,
276, 279, 333, 542, 546, 548, 556
rate of error 289, 401, 404, 479, 504
readability 9, 114, 369, 375
reasonable doubt 6, 117, 211, 219, 257, 259–60,
480, 484, 604–5
rebuttal 212, 224, 228, 318, 323–28, 353, 403,
551
rebuttal argument 212, 224, 318, 323, 325–26,
328
recontextualisation 128, 130, 133–35, 137–38,
174–75
recontextualise 130, 228
reference corpora 613
reform of legal language 9
reformulation 140, 150–51, 153, 211, 317
refugees 411–12, 613
register 3, 9–11, 65, 72, 238, 243–44, 300, 353,
359, 361, 445, 449, 461–62, 466, 478, 601,
613
regulatory 12, 80, 208, 375, 591, 610
reiteration 132, 212, 246
reliability 88, 113, 122–23, 153, 181, 212, 287–
90, 292, 317, 324, 330–31, 356, 380, 404–5,
421, 424, 441, 474, 477, 486, 504, 609
reliable narrator 211
remuneration 404, 440, 453, 608
repeating question 3, 29–30, 35
reported speech 3, 8, 23, 25–26, 29, 31–33, 35–
36, 143, 168, 223, 241–42, 246–47, 328, 330–
31
responsibility 5, 14, 27, 77, 123, 148–49, 198,
227, 240, 258, 262, 324, 421, 441, 451, 453,
501, 524, 542, 549, 551, 555, 595, 600
rhythmic function 549
right of/to silence 20, 130, 133, 170, 605, 607
right to legal advice 127, 130
rights 4, 6, 9, 41, 56, 68, 79, 82–83, 90, 111,
113–24, 129, 132–33, 159, 167, 202, 274,
316, 319, 329, 352, 359, 361–63, 411–12,
423, 425, 458–62, 466, 558, 602, 606–7, 615
rights invocation 121, 133
risk 9, 33–34, 75, 88, 90, 112, 147, 243, 267,
274–75, 316, 319, 331, 366–69, 372–74, 376,
491
risk assessment 376
Rock, F. 1, 4, 8–9, 11–12, 61, 118, 123–24,
126, 129, 134, 172, 425, 433, 461, 602, 606–
7
Rose, P. 386, 388, 390–92, 394, 481–82, 484–
86, 498
Rosulek, L. Felton 4, 21, 31, 218–23, 230–31,
317, 324, 595, 602, 608
rules of evidence 196, 201, 203, 205, 207–8, 522
Sacks, H. 27–28, 155–56, 175, 548, 557
safety information 366–67, 373–77
sampling 425, 503
scenario 45, 48, 172, 205, 240, 320, 376, 380,
385, 430, 536–37, 545, 559, 561–64, 571–72,
574
scepticism 109, 130
Schegloﬀ, E. 155, 160, 163, 175, 548, 557
schema 23, 215, 202, 211, 560, 565, 568–69,
572–73
Schumer box 55–58
scripts 201–3, 214
Searle, J. 231, 243, 365, 369, 448
second language acquisition 391
selection of witnesses 206
selective accounting 134
semantic prosodies 205
senior mark 352
sentence 11–12, 30–31, 39–40, 43–44, 57, 62,
69, 76, 84, 115, 118, 130, 170, 179, 215,
232–34, 237, 242–43, 247–48, 257, 282, 285,
287, 293, 308, 345, 438, 445–46, 497–98,
527–30, 536–37, 575, 577–87, 589, 606, 611
sentence comparison 578, 589
sentencing 7, 199, 215, 231, 233, 285, 468, 594–
95
sexual and legal terminology 142
sexual assault trial judgments 266
sexual battery 273
sexual stereotype 266, 269
Shepherd, E. 139, 299
Shipman, Harold 27, 170–71, 173–74, 207–8,
215, 335, 608
short-term memory 62
Shuy, R. 6, 8, 14, 60–61, 63–64, 114, 122–24,
130, 138, 156, 172, 316–17, 322, 326, 331,
351–52, 355–56, 358, 362–64, 366, 368–69,
373–75, 377, 395, 405, 407, 460, 473–74,
558, 560–61, 563–64, 573, 575, 603, 610
signiﬁcant witness 134
signiﬁcant witness interview 134
SMOG readability scale 114
smokers 375–76
smoking 341, 367, 370–73, 376
SMS text messages 508, see also text messages
sociolect 385–87
sociolinguistic 99–100, 130, 175, 281–82, 295,
425, 429, 432, 437, 512–14, 521–22, 613
sociolinguistic background 429
sociolinguistic complexity 425
sociolinguistic setting 99
socio-pragmatic 3, 21, 23, 437
Solan, L. 5, 14, 65, 70, 77, 115, 119, 123–24,
281, 287–88, 292, 295, 329, 359, 395–96,
404–5, 427, 475–76, 478–79, 486, 504, 541,
609–10
speaker characteristics 381, 385–86, 392
INDEX
670

speaker classiﬁcation 381, 383–87
speaker comparison 379–81, 385–87, 391–93,
484, 486
speaker identiﬁcation 2, 378–80, 391–94
speaker proﬁling 379–81, 385–86, 392
speaker recognition 393, 406
speaker-speciﬁc characteristics 381, 386–87, 392
spectrogram 388
speech act 9, 31, 53, 55, 62, 122, 130, 231, 243,
282, 308, 330, 366–67, 369, 375, 448, 544,
549, 560–61
spontaneous speech 387, 389–90
statement 25, 38–39, 53, 55–56, 67, 69, 79, 81–
82, 90, 111, 116–21, 123, 129, 132–38, 141,
145, 160, 172, 174, 181, 186, 199, 201–6,
210–12, 220, 223–24, 226–29, 233–48, 252,
255, 260, 262–63, 289–90, 292, 315, 324,
336, 343–45, 365–67, 369, 371, 373–74, 376,
379–80, 382, 393, 399, 402, 416–18, 458,
463, 476–77, 486, 489, 491, 495, 534–36,
538, 556, 561, 569–72, 575, 583, 585–88,
592, 599, 611–13
statute 11, 28, 37, 39, 41, 52, 61–62, 72, 80–81,
85, 288, 353, 372, 596
statutory reform 266, 279
story 14, 27, 29, 35, 77, 81, 118, 130, 134, 144,
146–47, 153, 160, 171, 175, 178, 186, 195,
199–203, 205–9, 211–12, 214–16, 219–20,
224–25, 227–28, 232, 234–35, 237, 239, 242,
244–45, 247–48, 263, 279, 296–97, 301, 303,
308, 315, 317–18, 320, 324, 328–31, 412,
426, 430, 435–36, 460, 466, 556, 572
story constructions 201
story model 200, 214–15
story of the crime 203
story of the trial 212
story-teller 232, 239
storytelling 27, 212, 232, 322, 329
stranger rape 266
stress 65, 75, 204, 309, 312, 344, 355, 381, 404,
461, 467, 550
stuttering 382
Stygall, G. 3, 8, 14, 23, 51, 62–63, 202, 206,
208–9, 222–23, 230–31, 602–3
style 4–6, 42, 45, 49, 69, 76, 82–84, 128, 146–
48, 152–53, 156, 175, 181, 195, 207–9, 218,
231–32, 258, 283, 292, 294, 303, 313, 325,
355, 366–67, 376, 387–88, 392, 405, 416,
445, 448–50, 455, 485, 487–92, 498, 503–6,
512, 515–18, 520–22, 527, 568, 589, 600, 609
style marker 6, 489, 491–92, 503–5
stylistic analysis 479, 487, 491, 503–6
stylistics 488
stylometry 6
summing up 23, 25, 198, 213–14, 605
Supreme Court 3, 65–70, 72, 75, 86, 112, 114,
116–17, 119, 121–22, 124, 233, 252–53, 276,
373, 396, 401–2, 468, 478, 504–5, 532, 601,
607, 613
Supreme Court opinions 65
Surgeon General 366–67, 370
suspect recording 390
suspect testimony 139
suspect(s) 4, 6, 9, 23–27, 29–31, 36, 103–4,
111–24, 126, 129–30, 132–34, 137, 139–43,
146–48, 150, 152–59, 162–65, 167, 169–70,
172–73, 175–76, 178–81, 234, 298, 315–17,
319–20, 322, 328–30, 378–80, 382, 388, 390,
399, 406, 412, 425, 444, 447, 455–56,
458–64, 466, 479–81, 484, 490, 495,
497–98, 514–16, 518, 528–31, 535, 537,
558–60, 563, 573, 575, 577, 598, 606–7,
612–13
tag question 25, 207, 210, 306, 336–38, 340–41,
345, 449
task force 253–54
task outcomes 433
task-based tests 426
tasks 58–60, 65, 313, 378–79, 392–93, 395,
426–27, 429, 432–34, 436, 461, 577
tax revenues 367, 375
taxonomy of question 268
terrorism 6, 90, 315, 328, 331, 383, 486, 558–
62, 564, 572–73
testimony 23, 30, 35, 118, 123, 137, 139, 163–
65, 186, 189–91, 197, 201, 207–8, 212, 219,
224, 226, 231, 233–34, 237, 256, 265, 267–
68, 273–74, 276, 282, 285, 287–90, 292, 294–
95, 298, 306–7, 317, 331, 335, 338, 346, 351,
353, 359, 372, 374, 396–97, 400–402, 404–5,
473, 478–79, 542, 575, 599
testimony style 207–8
text message(s) 6, 405, 473, 480, 482–83, 508–9,
514–15, 517–21, 608, 613
textual coherence 232
threat 73, 111–13, 132, 190, 273, 282, 286–87,
294, 362–63, 365–66, 398, 486, 559
Tiersma, P. 5, 8–10, 14–15, 23, 60–62, 64, 70,
115, 119, 123–24, 172, 185, 191, 198–99,
213, 251, 253, 255, 259, 262–64, 266–67,
287–88, 292, 295, 329, 359, 366–69, 375,
377, 404–5, 478–79, 486, 504, 541, 594, 602,
604, 610
tobacco 5, 366, 368, 372–73, 375, 377
tobacco company 372–73
tobacco industry 368
Tobacco Institute 368, 372
tobacco products 366, 375, 377
Toolan, M. 31, 205
topic 2, 7–8, 13–15, 21, 24, 26–27, 40, 56, 60,
122–23, 127, 156, 161, 210, 219, 222, 224–
25, 229, 232, 238, 267, 299, 304–5, 311, 324,
334, 344, 369, 375, 393, 412, 414, 429–30,
INDEX
671

432, 435, 453, 466, 523, 525, 531, 545, 551,
559–60, 563–66, 569–71, 573, 587, 602, 611
topic analysis 560
topic sequencing 375
trademark 351–64, 405, 474, 594, 598, 601
transcript 122–23, 167, 169–74, 283–84, 287,
290, 321, 379, 399, 458, 463, 574, 580
transcripts of police interviews 427
transformation 26, 28, 36, 134, 138, 175, 180,
380
transformational processes 134–37
translation 88, 91, 464
trial 4, 8, 21, 25, 27, 32–33, 35–36, 53, 66, 70,
117, 122, 170, 172–73, 185–92, 194–207,
209, 211–16, 218–24, 228, 230–31, 233–35,
237, 242, 248, 251, 255–56, 259–60, 265–67,
269, 272–73, 275–76, 279, 282–84, 287, 289–
92, 298, 310, 313, 315–18, 320, 322–24,
328–31, 334–35, 337, 344, 346, 353–54, 361,
372, 374, 401, 404, 435, 440, 455, 458–59,
465, 468, 473, 477–78, 481, 516–17, 535,
542, 545–46, 558, 560–63, 571, 573–75, 593,
597, 599, 604, 608, 611
trial lawyers 207, 209, 212
trial practice 47, 273
trial process 199–200, 313
tribunal 38–39, 267, 451, 592
Trudgill P 294
truth bias 237
Turell T 474, 531
Turnitin 523–24, 612
turn-taking 9, 23, 185, 208–10, 231, 267, 305,
308, 456
turn-type pre-allocation 267
UCAS 538, 585–89, 611–12
UK Forensic Science Regulator 610
UK Law Commission 478, 610
UK police caution 603, 606–7, see also caution,
English caution
unfamiliar-speaker identiﬁcation 380
United Nations High Commission for Refugees
411
United Nations Refugees Convention 412
unreliability 112, 212, 613
‘utmost resistance’ standard 272
Van Wyk trial 479
variation 87, 216, 281, 388–89, 391–93, 411,
413, 417, 419, 463, 485, 487–89, 491–92,
497–98, 503–6, 510–12, 514, 520–22, 583
velarisation 392
verdict 174, 178, 186, 188, 199, 215, 234, 251–
52, 255, 259, 262, 317, 328, 372–74, 482,
532
veriﬁcation 146, 200, 205, 216, 587
victim blame 148, 152–53
victim impact statement 234, 242
victim(s) 5, 30–31, 34, 95, 117–18, 126, 136–37,
139, 141–44, 146–50, 152–53, 159, 186, 191,
195–96, 215, 219–21, 224–29, 234, 241–43,
248, 260–62, 265–66, 273, 275, 278, 287,
291, 307, 310–11, 346, 361, 380, 448, 455–
56, 493, 514–15, 541–46, 548–56
video-link 608
video-recorded interviews 296
vocal loudness 387
vocal tract 379, 382, 384–85, 388–89, 391
voice 12, 41, 46, 67, 136, 165, 218, 224–29,
232, 239, 246, 260, 328, 336, 379–82, 384–
87, 391, 393, 404, 406, 429, 443, 446, 457,
482–86, 492, 530, 542, 551, 555–56, 610, 613
voice analysis 379, 492, 610
voice comparison 379
voice disguise 384–85
voice line-up 379–80
voice parade 380
voice proﬁling 379, 381
voice quality 381, 387, 391, 393
voice transformation 380
voir dire 202, 237
vowel lengthening 549, 552
vowel space 384
vulnerable witness(es) 5, 296–97, 310–13, 333,
609
Walker, R. 4, 21, 95, 172, 174, 268, 302, 306,
314, 335, 351, 602
warn 5, 119, 331, 369, 373–74, 466
warning 5, 7–8, 51, 53, 55, 61, 111–20, 122–23,
130, 361, 363, 365–77, 425, 459, 479, 523,
538, 603, 606–7
warning adequacy 367, 369
warning information 375–76
warning label 366–77
Watson, D. 25, 28, 123, 139, 150, 156, 198
wh-questions 191, 207, 268, 303–5, 336–37,
342
William Kennedy Smith 216, 272–73, 546
witness 3–7, 11, 14, 21–24, 26–27, 31–35, 77,
79, 81–82, 95, 113, 126, 134–37, 139, 147,
156, 160, 162, 170, 172, 174–75, 185–89,
191–201, 203, 205–13, 216–19, 221, 223–29,
235, 256, 267–69, 273–76, 279, 281, 287,
289, 292, 295–305, 307–13, 315–17, 318,
322, 330–31, 333–46, 374, 379–80, 396, 399,
402–3, 407, 423, 435, 441–42, 444–47, 452,
454–56, 459, 461, 473–74, 477–78, 482, 486,
535–36, 542–43, 549, 551, 557, 593, 595–
601, 603–4, 608–11
witness examination 199, 203, 206–9, 333–34
witness interview 134, 172
witness statements 137
witness style 207
INDEX
672

witness testimony 35, 137, 201, 273, 346
Woolls, D. 6–7, 15, 474, 523, 525–31, 536, 538,
576–77, 603, 611–12
word classes 578–79
word order 253, 446, 584–85
wording 39, 88, 130, 132, 210, 213, 252, 259,
346, 366–68, 370, 372, 464, 531–32, 535, 606
writing 1, 3–4, 6, 8–13, 24, 37–38, 42–43, 46,
50–51, 65, 69–70, 72, 76, 84, 116, 123, 126–
29, 133, 136, 286, 289–91, 313, 339, 341,
402–3, 419, 421, 468, 477, 481, 487–92, 496,
498, 503–5, 525, 528, 531–32, 538, 588–90,
602–3, 609–10
written statement 116, 134–36, 181, 234
written text 3, 7, 72, 126–27, 130, 135–36, 335,
466, 503, 536, 541, 580, 603–4
yes/no question 268–70, 275–76, 306, 336–38,
461
Yorkshire Ripper 379–80
INDEX
673

