  
 
 
Download/Stream Book The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk : 
https://getaudiobooks.today/2023/09/21/the-identity-trap-by-yascha-mounk-
audiobook-free-listen-online/ 
 
Direct Link ▶ ▶ https://bit.ly/3PoFTKF (free sign up required) 
 
 
 
Book Description: One of our leading public intellectuals traces the origin of a set of ideas about 
identity and social justice that is rapidly transforming America—and explains why it will fail to 
accomplish its noble goals 
 
For much of history, societies have violently oppressed ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. It is 
no surprise that many who passionately believe in social justice came to believe that members of 
marginalized groups need to take pride in their identity to resist injustice. 
 

But over the past decades, a healthy appreciation for the culture and heritage of minority groups has 
transformed into a counterproductive obsession with group identity in all its forms. A new ideology 
aiming to place each person’s matrix of identities at the center of social, cultural, and political life has 
quickly become highly influential. It stifles discourse, vilifies mutual influence as cultural appropriation, 
denies that members of different groups can truly understand one another, and insists that the way 
governments treat their citizens should depend on the color of their skin. 
 
This, Yascha Mounk argues, is the identity trap. Though those who battle for these ideas are full of 
good intentions, they will ultimately make it harder to achieve progress toward the genuine equality 
we desperately need. Mounk has built his acclaimed scholarly career on being one of the first to warn 
of the risks right-wing populists pose to American democracy. But, he shows, those on the left and 
center who are stuck in the identity trap are now inadvertent allies to the MAGA movement. 
 
In The Identity Trap, Mounk provides the most ambitious and comprehensive account to date of the 
origins, consequences, and limitations of so-called “wokeness.” He is the first to show how 
postmodernism, postcolonialism, and critical race theory forged the “identity synthesis” that 
conquered many college campuses by 2010. He lays out how a relatively marginal set of ideas came 
to gain tremendous influence in business, media, and government by 2020. He makes a nuanced 
philosophical case for why the application of these ideas to areas from education to public policy is 
proving to be so deeply counterproductive—and why universal, humanist values can best serve the 
vital goal of true equality. In explaining the huge political and cultural transformations of the past 
decade, The Identity Trap provides truth and clarity where they are needed most. 
 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk PDF Download 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk KINDLE 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk EBOOK 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk EPUB 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk Read online 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk Full PDF 
The Identity Trap by Yascha Mounk Free Audiobook 
 
Listen The Identity Trap Audiobook Free Listen Iphone, The Identity Trap Audiobook Free 
Complete Android, The Identity Trap Audiobook Free Listen Streaming, The Identity Trap 
Audiobook Free Download Full, The Identity Trap Audiobook Free Download Online 

