

THE
GREAT AMERICAN
LAND BUBBLE

ROBERT MORRIS—PATRIOT AND FINANCIER
AMERICA’S FOREMOST LAND BOOMER

The
GREAT AMERICAN
LAND BUBBLE
The Amazing Story of
Land-Grabbing, Speculations, and Booms
from Colonial Days to
the Present Time
by
A. M. SAKOLSKI
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF FINANCE
COLLEGE OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK
HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
1932
Reprinted with the permission of Harper & Row
JOHNSON REPRINT CORPORATION
111 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003
JOHNSON REPRINT COMPANY LTD
Berkeley Square House, London, W. 1

THE GREAT
AMERICAN LAND BUBBLE
Copyright, 1932, by Harper & Brothers
Printed in the U. S. A.
FIRST EDITION
I-G
History of American Economy: Studies and Materials for Study A series of reprints of the important studies
and source books relating to the growth of the
American economic system.
General Editor: William N. Parker
First reprinting, 1966, Johnson Reprint Corporation Printed in the United States of America

PREFACE
LAND speculation in the United States has been a national business. Yet no
history of it has hitherto been written—and small wonder! Pecuniary speculation
has ever been looked upon as a dubious business. It therefore has been
conducted largely in secret and without enduring records. Arduous research is
required by those who delve into its intricate dealings. From time to time,
however, an historian or research student has given to the public intimate or
fragmentary accounts of isolated episodes relating directly or indirectly to
American land speculation. To these authors I wish to convey my
acknowledgment of valuable assistance. In the present volume no attempt has
been made to give a detailed account of all important speculative land
transactions. Moreover the story is restricted to speculation and is not directly
concerned with the loss or growth of great fortunes from real estate investment.
In the preparation of the manuscript, credit is due to Miss Alice Strass. To
Professor H. S. Commager of New York University I owe a debt of gratitude for
valuable suggestions, and to Professor John Hastings of the College of the City
of New York for the preparation of the maps. Mr. Myron L. Hoch of the
Department of Economics at the City College gave valuable assistance in the
preparation of the work for publication.
A. M. SAKOLSKI
May, 1932

Contents
Chapter I.
Pre-Revolutionary Precedents
Chapter II.
The Post-Revolutionary Wild-land Mania
Chapter III.
Parceling Out the Empire State at Wholesale
Chapter IV.
Parceling Out the Empire State at Retail
Chapter V.
The Ohio Land Lure
Chapter VI.
The Georgia “Yazoo” Land Frauds
Chapter VII.
Washington, America’s First Boom Town
Chapter VIII.
Filling Up the “Old Northwest”
Chapter IX.
Louisiana Spanish Grants and their “Antedaters”
Chapter X.
The Texas Fever
Chapter XI.
Generating the Panic of 1837
Chapter XII.
California’s Golden Land Gambles
Chapter XIII.
Railroad Land Jobbery
Chapter XIV.
Jay Cooke’s “Banana Belt”
Chapter XV.
“Main Streets” and “Broadways”
Chapter XVI.
Florida—the Latest Phase
 
Index

Illustrations
Robert Morris, Patriot and Financier—America’s Foremost Land Boomer
The Black Line Marks the “Indian Boundary” Beyond Which the Colonists Were
Ordered Not to Go
Patrick Henry
Benjamin Franklin
Taken from Jedidiah Morse’s The American Geography, Published in London,
1794. Circles Show Claims of the Ohio, Illinois, and Wabash Companies.
Indiana Is Placed Just West of Maryland
Sir William Johnson, British Indian Agent in the Northern Colonies
James Duane
Timothy Pickering
James Greenleaf
The Prospectus of the North American Land Company Issued in London.
Morris’ Effort to Interest British Speculators
Gouverneur Morris, Statesman, Diplomat, and Land Agent
William Constable, Principal Proprietor of Macomb’s Purchase
Jeremiah Wadsworth
The Map of Macomb’s Purchase Which James Constable Took to Europe. The
Adjoining Tracts Are Marked as “Thick Settled Sections” When They Were
Still Wilderness
Le Roy de Chaumont, Proprietor of Northern New York Lands
New York State Parceled Out at Wholesale
Advertisement of the Pulteney Estate in the Hartford Courant, January 14, 1807
An Early Map of Holland Purchase, Published in France in 1803 in Jean
Phillippe Louis Bridel’s Le pour et le contre, ou avis à ceus qui se proposent
de passer dans les Etats-Unis d’Amérique
Broadside of Holland Land Company, April 24, 1821, Announcing the Failure to
Plan to Sell Out to the State, and Offering New Terms to Settlers

Prospectus of the Compagnie de New York
The Ohio Land Grants
Madame de Staël, Who Speculated in Northern New York Lands
Bronze Tablet Commemorating the Grant to Ohio Company of Associates, on
the Portal of the Sub-treasury Building, New York City
William Duer
Joel Barlow
John Cleves Symmes
A Miami Land-Warrant
Jonathan Dayton
First Partition of the Yazoo Territory
James Wilson, Associate Justice of the U. S. Supreme Court
The First Plan of the City of Washington, Engraved in 1792 and Used in Selling
the “Lots”
The Second Partition of the Yazoo Lands as Shown by Jedidiah Morse in His
American Gazeteer, published in 1797
One of the “Yazoo Frauds” Pamphlets
An Early View of Washington
Thomas Law, an Englishman Who Bought Real Estate in the Federal City
An Illustration of Early Western Town Jobbing
A Contemporary Portrait of Nicholas Longworth Embellished with His Favorite
Fruit and Beverage
The Banks of the Ohio. Mr. Longworth’s Vineyards
Morris Birkbeck
John Jacob Astor
Aaron Burr
Location of the De Bastrop Claim, Based upon Map in the U. S. Land Office
Moses Austin
Stephen F. Austin in 1836
Stephen F. Austin in Hunting Costume
The Principal Texas Grants Based on Map Published in 1836
Daniel Webster, Whose Interest in Western Lands Was Both Private and Public

Chicago in 1831
Map of Chicago, Dated 1836, Showing Location of the “Canal Lots” and Tracts
Bought and Resold by Charles Butler, G. B. Hubbard, and Associates
The “Proposed” New Brighton, Staten Island, Development
William B. Ogden, First Mayor of Chicago and a Large Real Estate Proprietor
San Francisco in 1848
Map of San Francisco about 1851
John Augustus Sutter, on Whose Estate Gold Was Discovered
John C. Frémont
Robert Rantoul, Jr., Who Obtained the Land Grant for the Illinois Central
Railroad
George Francis Train
Laying the Track of the Pacific Railroad
Jay Cooke
Map of Location of the Northern Pacific Land Grant, “Banana Belt,” Which
Inspired J. Proctor Knott’s Famous Speech
Duluth, the “Zenith City of the Unsalted Seas” in 1871
The Circle Marks the Location of the “Bonanza Farms”
Harvesting on a Bonanza Farm
The City of New Babylon on Paper
The City of New Babylon in Fact
Martin Chuzzlewit Selects His Lot in the Thriving City of Eden
The Thriving City of Eden in Fact
Making More Land in Florida to Meet the Demand of Speculators
The Davis Island Country Club Built on Land That a Year Previous Was Under
Water
Skyscrapers Rising on the Miami Waterfront in November, 1925
An Alluring and Artistic Full-page Advertisement of Boca Raton

THE
GREAT AMERICAN
LAND BUBBLE

CHAPTER I
PRE-REVOLUTIONARY PRECEDENTS
AMERICA, from its inception, was a speculation. It was a speculation to
Columbus. It was considered a speculation by the kings of Spain, France and
England. They looked upon it as a source of riches in gold, silver and pelts. It
was from the land that these precious goods were produced, and the ownership
of the land was as essential to them as the political jurisdiction over it. Royal
favorites were accordingly given vast territories, and land was distributed to
individuals and companies as royal rewards.
The colonial charters granted in England to individuals and companies gave
proprietorship of the soil, but the king reserved political jurisdiction and control,
as well as the mineral rights. Thus, Penn and Calvert and Oglethorpe received
merely grants of land. The governing and feudal rights which they assumed were
revocable at the royal will, and as the colonies became more densely settled and
advanced in political status, the king appointed governors to rule over them.
When the proprietary right to the soil had been given, the possessors of these
rights or their assigns continued to hold the land originally allotted to them.
James, Duke of York, to whom his affectionate brother had presented the whole
Dutch province of New Amsterdam, and more besides, began to sell or
otherwise dispose of his vast domain. He granted to Lords Carteret and Berkeley
most of the province of New Jersey. These sold out to two companies,—the
“Proprietors of East Jersey” and the “Proprietors of West Jersey” respectively,—
companies which continued in existence during the eighteenth century, though
they lost their feudal rights as early as 1702. James also made other lavish
grants. Some of these were revived in later years, causing serious trepidation to
property owners whose titles were threatened by new claimants.
Thus, the conveyance of unoccupied lands to private individuals or
companies, which undertook the management, settlement and resale, was a
common practice in colonial times. In fact, much of the early English settlement

of America was conducted on this plan. The London and Plymouth companies
were ostensibly trading companies, but the motive of land speculation, though
not openly expressed, was an important factor in the settlement of the colonies.
As population began to fill up the accessible regions within colonial charter
grants, the acquisition of large unsettled tracts for pecuniary gain came more and
more into vogue.
During the first hundred years of North American colonization, economic
conditions gave little encouragement to private land schemes. Land was too
plentiful. A few such enterprises were undertaken, however. Thus, as early as
1661, the Colony of Massachusetts sold to a few individuals for £400 a large
tract on the Kennebec River in Maine. This became known as the “Kennebec
Purchase.” The heirs held it for nearly a century without doing anything with it.
In 1753, they incorporated as the “Proprietors of the Kennebec Purchase” and
proceeded to dispose of their holdings. The corporation continued in existence
until 1816.1 “The Pejebscot Company” was another Maine land deal. None of
these held out promise of profit to proprietors until about a quarter century
before the Revolution.
About this time, wealth had accumulated in the colonies. Free land, obtained
under crown grants, or “head rights,” had ceased. Cities and channels of trade
were established and population gradually pushed forward to the Alleghany
foothills. The vast unoccupied tracts beyond became a lure. Few dared to settle
in the region. Actual ownership was held by the Indians, and claimed by the
French. This was not a discouragement, however. Did not the territories
occupied by the flourishing colonies once belong to the Indians? And was it not
bought from them for mere trifles? Why not, then, establish similar colonies to
the west, and start anew in building up land values. To the descendants of the
pioneer colonials, the backwoods, Indians, and hostile Frenchmen presented no
serious obstacles.
Proprietorship of large landed estates, moreover, was highly regarded by the
colonials. It was an emblem of nobility. It carried with it political as well as
pecuniary preferment. This was particularly characteristic of the South. There,
during the colonial days the presence of large landed estates, engrossed in
comparatively few hands, fostered a landed aristocracy. Land ownership,
therefore, was desirable for social and political, as well as for pecuniary reasons.
The Virginian was not much of a “gentleman” unless he lived in the midst of
countless acres. If he was a non-resident owner, or a large “patentee” of the
crown, he employed land agents on the spot to look after his estates or to sell and

lease his holdings. Grants of land in the southern colonies were a source of
continual political intrigues. In fact, land grabbing in the South began before the
importance of either negroes or tobacco was recognized.
As the areas east of the Alleghany Mountains were gradually engrossed, and
as towns and plantations spread out to the Piedmont sections, covetous eyes
were pointed toward the vast unsettled domain to the westward. The political
sovereignty and administrative control of the territory were in doubt. Various
colonies claimed a share of the westward area as part of their original charter
grants. The charter limits were not fixed, so that the conflicting claims
overlapped. This brought about disputes regarding ownership and right to the
control of the soil. Intercolonial jealousy and territorial greed led the rival
claimants to take measures, secretly and openly, to assert their rights by actual
occupation or by royal conveyances.
. . . . .
The first definite move to obtain a large grant of western land was made in
1748, when a group of Virginians, styling themselves the “Ohio Company,”
obtained a crown grant of 500,000 acres west of the Alleghanies adjacent to
Virginia. The next year another group of forty-six Virginia gentlemen styling
themselves “The Loyal Company” received an additional 800,000 acres near by.
Both grants were made by the Governor and Council of Virginia. The locations
were not surveyed nor definitely marked out. That of the Ohio Company was to
be located “south of the Ohio River,” and the Loyal Company’s grant was to be
“in one or more surveys beginning on the bounds between Virginia and South
Carolina and running westward to the North Seas.” The companies were to
locate their lands, and make return of surveys within four years’ time.
Both set about to secure their grants. Christopher Gist, one of the noted
surveyors of Virginia, was sent in October, 1750, to “search out” and to discover
the Ohio Company’s lands. He went down the Ohio as far south as the present
site of Louisville. During his journey he made strong overtures of friendship
with the Indians. He was enthusiastic about the project. “Nothing,” he said, “is
wanting but cultivation to make it a most delightful country.”
In the meantime, the “Loyal Company” group was not idle; its proprietors
sent Dr. Thomas Walker, of Albermarle, Va., to make a reconnaissance, and to
discover a proper place of settlement. The two “companies” then became
engaged in a controversy, and neither made a survey or fixed the bounds of their

grants. The apparent ease with which they obtained land donations led to other
schemes, and aroused an epidemic of interest in distant western wild lands. Not
only was the land ownership eagerly sought after, but the establishment of new
colonies, with separate and distinct governments, was planned. Favoritism and
collusion infested the Virginian colonial government, due in large part to the
persistence of speculators in western land grants. Lobbyists were sent to London
to obtain the crown’s sanction to land-grabbing schemes and the question of the
disposal of the vast western domain won from the French infested British
politics. “One half of England is now land mad,” wrote George Croghan, of
Philadelphia, one of the land schemers, to Sir William Johnson, on March 30,
1766, “and everybody there has their eyes fixed on this country.”2
George Washington and his half-brothers, Augustine and Lawrence
Washington, were concerned in the Ohio Company. Thus, Washington, early in
his political career, was brought into contact with land grabbing. From this time
on, until the outbreak of the Revolution, his interest in western lands was
supreme. He was one of the most active land speculators of colonial times. He
was, moreover, a surveyor by profession. As a “land agent” of Lord Fairfax,
whose estates comprised over 5,000,000 acres, he became infected with the
“wild land” virus. Besides taking an active part in pressing the claims of the
Ohio Company, he, together with his neighbors, the Lees, formed “The
Mississippi Company” and petitioned, in 1768, for an additional large grant.
The French and Indian War interrupted for a while Washington’s land
schemes, but following the peace treaty in 1763, he entered whole-heartedly into
western land acquisitions. Virginia had set aside a large section of territory west
of the Alleghanies as bounties for its soldiers in the war, and Washington eagerly
set about to secure the claims of the veterans. While thus garnering the means of
acquiring lands, he secretly employed an agent, his old frontier friend, Captain
William Crawford, to seek out and preëmpt the best locations. He had even
entered upon plans of colonization and thought of importing Germans from the
Palatinate as settlers.
Nor was he dismayed or discouraged, when, in 1763, a royal proclamation
arrived from London, forbidding the colonial governors from granting patents
for land beyond the sources of any of the rivers which flow into the Atlantic
from the west and northwest. This he scornfully treated as a “scrap of paper.” In
writing to his friend and agent, Crawford, who had taken up his residence in the
back country on the Youghiogheny River, the future Father of his Country set
forth definitely his speculation aims:

I offered in my last to join you in attempting to secure some of the most
valuable lands in the King’s part, which I think may be accomplished after
awhile, notwithstanding the proclamation that restrains it at present and prohibits
the settlement of them at all; for I can never look upon that proclamation in any
other light (but this I say between ourselves) than as a temporary expedient to
quiet the minds of the Indians. It must fall, of course, in a few years, especially
when those Indians consent to our occupying the lands. Any person, therefore
who neglects the present opportunity of hunting out good lands, and in some
measure marking and distinguishing them, for his own, in order to keep others
from settling them, will never regain it.3

THE BLACK LINE MARKS THE “INDIAN BOUNDARY” BEYOND WHICH THE COLONISTS
WERE ORDERED NOT TO GO
“If you will be at the trouble,” he adds, “of seeking out the lands, I will take
upon me the part of securing them, as soon as there is a possibility of doing it,
and will, moreover, be at all the cost and charges of surveying and patenting the
same.”
George Washington had an eye for business. Had he not become a great

general and the Father of his Country, he probably would have been a foremost
colonial financier and landlord. “It may be easy for you to discover,” he wrote
Crawford, “that my plan is to secure a good deal of land. You will consequently
come in for a very handsome quantity; and as you will obtain it without any cost
or expenses, I hope you will be encouraged to begin your search in time.” He
directed that “if it were practical, to get large tracts together,” and suggested the
neighborhood of Fort Pitt (Pittsburgh) but “not to neglect others of a greater
distance, if fine bodies of it lie in one place.” In fact, he had “no objection to a
grant of land upon the Ohio, a good way below Pittsburgh, but would first
willingly secure some valuable tracts nearer at hand.”
Washington had some apprehension of conflict with the Ohio Company, but
he promised Crawford to make inquiries “so we may know what to apprehend
from them.” Above all, he cautions the utmost secrecy: “I recommend,” he
added, as a final admonition, “that you keep the whole matter a secret, or trust it
only to those in whom you can confide, and who can assist you in bringing it to
bear by their discoveries of land. This advice proceeds from several very good
reasons, and in the first place, because I might be censured for the opinion I have
given in respect to the King’s proclamation, and then, if the scheme I am now
proposing to you were known, it might give the alarm to others, and by putting
them upon a plan of the same nature before we could lay a proper foundation for
success ourselves, set the different interests clashing, and probably, in the end,
overturn the whole.”
Crawford “heartily embraced” the colonel’s offer. He promised shortly to set
out in search of lands. “This may be done,” he said, “under a hunting scheme.”
He acknowledged that other land seekers had approached him, with similar
offers, “but have not agreed to any; nor will I with any but yourself or whom you
think proper.”4
In view of the caution required in carrying out the location of lands, the
matter proceeded slowly. It was not until October 5, 1770, that Washington left
his comfortable country seat at Mount Vernon ostensibly on a hunting trip in the
western wilderness. In his diary he carefully noted the physical features of the
terrain over which he passed. He was not lacking in a knowledge of land values.
On October 15 he wrote:
Went to view some land, which Captain Crawford had taken up for me near
the Youghiogheny. . . . This tract, which contains about one thousand six
hundred acres, includes some as fine land as ever I saw, and a great deal of rich

meadow. . . . The lands, which I passed over today, were generally hilly, and the
growth chiefly white oak, but very good notwithstanding; and, what is
extraordinary, and contrary to the property of all other lands I ever saw before,
the hills are the richest land; the soil upon the sides and summits of them being
as black as coal and the growth walnut and cherry. The flats are not so rich, and a
good deal more mixed with stone.
He next took a trip down the Ohio, with a small company of white men and
Indians, to view some tracts along the Great Kanawha River, which had been set
aside by Virginia as bounty land to officers and soldiers. Here again he carefully
noted the qualities of the soil:
The land on both sides this [the Great Kanawha] river, just at the mouth, is
very fine, but on the east side, when you get towards the hills, it appears wet, and
better adapted for meadow than tillage.
Returning to the confluence of the Kanawha and Ohio rivers, he “marked
two maples, an elm and hoop-wood tree, as a corner of the soldiers’ land (if we
can get it), intending to make all the bottom from hence to the rapids in the Great
Bend into one survey.” “I also marked, at the mouth of another river,” he added,
“an ash and hoop-wood for the beginning of another of the soldier’s surveys.”
Part of these “soldiers’ lands” not long afterwards came into Washington’s
possession. On August 20, 1773, less than three years after his exploration, there
appeared the following advertisement in the Maryland Journal and Baltimore
Advertiser:
Mount Vernon in Virginia, July 15, 1773.
The subscriber having obtained patents for upwards of twenty thousand acres
of land on the Ohio and Great Kanawha (ten thousand of which are situated on
the banks of the first-mentioned river, between the mouths of the two Kanawhas,
and the remainder on the Great Kanawha, or New River, from the mouth or near
it, upwards, in one continued survey) proposes to divide the same into any sized
tenements that may be desired, and lease them upon moderate terms, allowing a
reasonable number of years rent free, provided, within the space of two years
from next October, three acres for every fifty contained in each lot, and
proportionably for a lesser quantity, shall be cleared, fenced, and tilled; and that,
by or before the time limited for the commencement of the first rent, five acres
of every hundred, and proportionably, as above, shall be enclosed and laid down
in good grass for meadow; and moreover, that at least fifty fruit trees for every

like quantity of land shall be planted on the Premises. Any person inclinable to
settle on these lands may be more fully informed, of the terms by applying to the
subscriber, near Alexandria, or in his absence to Mr. Lund Washington; and
would do well in communicating their intentions before the 1st of October next,
in order that a sufficient number of lots may be laid off to answer the demand.
As these lands are among the first which have been surveyed in the part of
the country they lie in, it is almost needless to premise that none can exceed
them in luxuriance of soil, or convenience of situation, all of them lying upon the
banks either of the Ohio or Kanawha, and abounding with fine fish and wild
fowl of various kinds, as also in most excellent meadows, many of which (by the
bountiful hand of nature) are, in their present state, almost fit for the scythe.
From every part of these lands water carriage is now had to Fort Pitt, by an easy
communication; and from Fort Pitt, up the Monongahela, to Redstone, vessels of
convenient burthen, may and do pass continually; from whence by means of
Cheat River, and other navigable branches of the Monongahela, it is thought the
portage to Potowmack may, and will, be reduced within the compass of a few
miles, to the great ease and convenience of the settlers in transporting the
produce of their lands to market. To which may be added, that as patents have
now actually passed the seals for the several tracts here offered to be leased,
settlers on them may cultivate and enjoy the lands in peace and safety,
notwithstanding the unsettled counsels respecting a new colony on the Ohio; and
as no right money is to be paid for these lands, and quitrent of two shillings
sterling a hundred, demandable some years hence only, it is highly presumable
that they will always be held upon a more desirable footing than where both
these are laid on with a very heavy hand. And it may not be amiss further to
observe, that if the scheme for establishing a new government on the Ohio, in the
manner talked of, should ever be effected, these must be among the most
valuable lands in it, not only on account of the goodness of soil, and the other
advantages above enumerated, but from their contiguity to the seat of
government, which more than probable will be fixed at the mouth of the Great
Kanawha.
GEORGE WASHINGTON.
It appears from the foregoing announcement, that Washington proposed to
settle the lands and not to sell them. He wished settlers to “clear, fence and till
the tenements,” and make other improvements, for which a period of free rental
would be granted. How like the English practice! And how much opposed to

democratic principles! But Washington, until he set out to lead the embattled
farmers in the struggle for political freedom, was a Virginian landlord. These
gentry were fast assuming all the traits, characteristics and privileges of the
landed aristocracy of the mother country. Land was not only the badge of wealth.
It was the emblem of nobility. The first families of Virginia not only sought land,
but they sought to retain it. When the King’s proclamation restricted the
settlement of the western wild lands, and forbade all land purchases from the
Indians, it not only created resentment against the British Government, but it
gave an opportunity to the common folk, the landless yeomanry, to assert
themselves and take a hand in the determination of the popular will. The
Revolutionary War eventually resulted in abolishing land ownership as a basis of
political prestige. To this movement, Washington and his landed associates of
Virginia slowly and calmly yielded. True patriot that he was, he ungrudgingly
sacrificed his personal interests in the common cause.
While engaged in war and in politics, Washington’s western lands remained
much as he had obtained them. His interest in the western country, however, did
not abate. When peace released him from his commission, and he returned to his
Mount Vernon estate, he revived his dreams of western settlements. He had
become “land-poor” and possibly, with the hope of bringing value to his distant
holdings, he fostered schemes of public improvements. The Potomac Company,
which sought to improve navigation to the heights of the Alleghanies, and by a
canal or portage open up water communication with the region beyond, was a
child of his brain. But his western lands brought him little satisfaction, though at
the time of his death he still owned about seventy-one thousand acres, more than
half of which were wild lands lying west of the Alleghanies. Some of this he had
received as bounty for his military services. Robert Morris and other land
jobbers, subsequent to the Revolution, sought in vain to interest the “General” in
their various deals, but he refused.
Judging by his correspondence and his diaries, Washington had incurred a
strong dislike of “land jobbing,” both for political and for pecuniary reasons.
“From a long experience of many years,” he wrote Presley Neville, in 1794, “I
have found distant property in land more pregnant of perplexities than profit. I
have therefore resolved to sell all I hold on the western waters, if I can obtain the
prices which I conceive their quality, their situation, and other advantages would
authorize me to expect.”
Washington, while President, however, on advice of George Clinton, of New
York, did purchase 3,000 acres in the Mohawk Valley for £1,800. He borrowed

the money from Clinton. Subsequently, he sold about two-thirds of the property
at a profit of £1,500 and repaid the debt. He also bought lots in the City of
Washington. At his death these were valued at $19,132.
. . . . .
Washington and his brothers, in their land deals, had many rivals and
associates among prominent Virginians. These banded together, either in groups
or in “companies.” There were the Lees, the Nicholsons, the Carters, the Masons
and the Byrds. Patrick Henry, as well as Peter Jefferson, a surveyor and the
father of Thomas Jefferson, were deeply concerned in it. Further south, in the
Carolinas, there were also men who eagerly grasped for the fertile regions
sloping towards the Mississippi.
Judge Richard Henderson of North Carolina, the employer and backer of
Daniel Boone, promoted the settlement of the Kentucky region and claimed
ownership to a vast unsettled tract there. He organized a group of land grabbers
under the name of “The Transylvania Company.” Ignoring the British
interdiction against Indian land purchases, he obtained from the Cherokees in
1773 about one-half of the present State of Kentucky, and immediately began
settling the land. He advertised widely for pioneers and “shareholders.” In his
announcements, Henderson waxed enthusiastic. “The country [Transylvania]
might invite a prince from his palace, merely for the pleasure of contemplating
its beauty and excellence, but only add the rapturous idea of property, and what
allurements can the world offer for the loss of so glorious a prospect?”5
Henderson and his associates ran into a noose of intercolonial conflict. They
endeavored, during the Revolution, to get the Continental Congress to erect their
territory into another state, but Patrick Henry and Thomas Jefferson, in the
interests of Virginia, had their Indian purchase declared illegal. The Kentuckians,
however, threatened to fight, and to appease the irate speculators, Virginia
granted land to actual settlers, and finally closed out the Transylvania claim by
giving Henderson’s company 200,000 acres.
Though small tracts were granted freely to Kentucky settlers, land jobbing
soon became general in this new territory. The widespread tendency towards
engrossment resulted in large importations of slaves into Kentucky, the
redundant descendants of which, in later years, had to be sold “down the river.”
As Kentucky was settled by zeal for land ownership and by the greed of land
grabbers, so, also, was Tennessee. John Sevier, a hero of King’s Mountain, the

colonizer and first governor of the new “State of Franklin” (which later became
Tennessee), held title to immense tracts in that region, and, still unsatisfied,
continuously grasped for more.
Patrick Henry is generally held to have been one of the most violent of the
Revolutionary Fathers in his denunciation of British tyranny. Every schoolboy
knows his slogan “Give me Liberty or give me Death.” But was there a selfish
personal motive in this defiance? Could he not have said, “Give me Liberty or
give me Death”—(and then, under his breath)—“let me have western lands.”
Jefferson described Henry as being “insatiable in money”—and his participation
in the Georgia land frauds described in Chapter VI may bear this out.
Aside from this cupidity, however, there is strong historical proof that Henry
was actively engaged in western land deals when the British proclamation
against western settlement, as well as other “acts of tyranny,” materialized. With
Dr. Thomas Walker, agent of the “Loyal Company,” also a notorious colonial
land grabber, he became identified, beginning in 1767, in speculations in western
lands. And in conjunction with William Byrd, a member of the Virginia
Governor’s Council, he conducted secret negotiations with the Cherokee tribes
for land in the forbidden area. Moreover, he was the personal counsel of the Earl
of Dunmore, colonial governor of Virginia, when the latter became a participant
in the Illinois land schemes, described below. Following the Revolution, Henry
continued to be active in land deals and died possessed of a large landed estate.
Patrick Henry, like Washington, was a man of business as well as a patriot.
He was said to be “peculiarly a judge of the value of lands.” When the
Revolutionary War broke out, he realized that the Indian purchases were likely to
be nullified. In a deposition made by him in 1777, and now contained in the
Virginia Calendar of State Papers, he states that on becoming a member of the
first Continental Congress he determined “to disclaim all concern and
connection with Indian purchases, although shares were frequently offered him.”
The reasons given for this resolution were the enormous extent of the purchases,
the probability of being called upon to settle disputes over such claims, and, in
the event of war, the likelihood of the soil being claimed by the American states.
Because of this attitude, Henry, together with Jefferson, during the Revolution
vigorously opposed the private claims to western lands. The land fever, however,
again took hold of him when peace was restored.
When the British Government began to take active measures to break up land
“bootlegging,” and to put a stop to dreams of riches in western territory,
Virginia’s political resentment was naturally aroused. Even Thomas Jefferson,

who, in later life, frowned upon speculation and land grabbing, held the view in
1774 that the land did not belong to the British king, and that it was time for the
colonies “to declare that he has no right to grant lands of himself.” So he boldly
wrote in the Declaration of Independence, as one of the British king’s
usurpations: “He has endeavored to prevent the Population of these States; for
that purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to
pass others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of
new Appropriation of Lands.”6
There is nothing reprehensible in the land hunger of the southern patriots.
The British laws discouraged manufacture in America, and hampered colonial
trade. Virginian capitalists were restricted in their private enterprises chiefly to
raising tobacco and corn, or trading in negroes. Tobacco frequently furnished
little or no profit, and slave driving was distasteful to the best families of the
landed aristocracy. Speculation in lands was the chief source of rapid rise to
wealth, and it was considered an honorable and respectable occupation. “It does
not detract from Washington’s true greatness for the world to know the material
side of his character,” wrote Professor Herbert Adams, of Johns Hopkins
University, in 1885. “To be sure, it brings Washington nearer to the level of
humanity to know that he was endowed with the passions common to men, and
that he was as diligent in business as he was fervent in his devotion to country. It
may seem less ideal to view Washington as a man rather than as a hero or
statesman, but it is the duty of history to deal with great men as they actually
are.” And let us accept this judgment in considering the participation of
Washington and his compatriots in colonial land-jobbing schemes.
. . . . .
Another great American—the “First Civilized American,” a biographer calls
him—also contracted the western land fever. Benjamin Franklin’s many-sided
occupations—printer, philosopher, diplomat, postmaster, statesman—did not
keep his mind from gainful pursuits or desires for gain. Be it said of him,
however, that he was induced by his son to participate in one of the largest
western land deals ever concocted in the American continent. He was not a
prime mover of the proposition. But he willingly and eagerly promoted it.
During Franklin’s second visit to England in 1766, as agent of Pennsylvania,
his enterprising son, William Franklin, then Governor of New Jersey, in
association with Sir William Johnson, the British Government’s Indian Agent in

the northern colonies, together with several wealthy Philadelphians, conceived
the idea of buying the claims of French settlers to land in Illinois. They later
expanded their proposed purchase to an immense tract west of the Ohio River.
They wrote Benjamin Franklin, requesting him to use his influence to get the
British Government’s permission.
He was for it at once. “I like the project of a colony in the Illinois Country,”
he wrote his son, “and will forward it to my utmost here.” He thought that Sir
William Johnson’s “approbation will go a great way in recommending it, as he is
much relied upon in all affairs that may have any relationships with the Indians.”
But Johnson had an eye on the Indian lands himself, and besides advising others
about purchases in the outlying sections, personally through gifts from the
Indians engrossed large tracts, particularly in the Mohawk Valley. The town of
Johnstown, N. Y., still marks the seat of his domain.7
Franklin’s reward for his services was a share in the deal. “I thank the
company for their willingness to take me in, and one or two others that I may
nominate,” he wrote his son, on September 12, 1766. “I wish,” he added, “you
had allowed me more [nominees], as there will be in the proposed country, by
my reckoning, nearly sixty-three million acres, and, therefore, enough to content
a great number of reasonable people, and by numbers we might increase the
weight of our interest here.”
Franklin thus knew the frailties of politicians, or else he knew human nature.
Like John Law, in his “Mississippi Bubble,” he sought to gain political
approbation by distributing “shares” to the powers that be. He interested a
prominent London banker, one Thomas Walpole, who became the nominal head
of the affair. The deal thus became known as the Walpole Grant. In Philadelphia,
it was called the “Vandalia Company.” The members included, besides William
Franklin and Sir William Johnson, Colonel George Croghan, his assistant, and
Joseph Galloway, the richest merchant of Philadelphia, who, as a Tory, escaped
to England at the outbreak of the Revolution. Other prominent members were
John Sargent, and Samuel and Joseph Wharton of Philadelphia. The Whartons
were influential Indian traders in the Illinois country. Colonel Croghan, like his
superior, Sir William Johnson, was an active land grabber, and engrossed large
tracts of wild land south of the Mohawk Valley. A part of his lands in this section
was acquired from him by William Cooper, progenitor of James Fenimore
Cooper, and founder of Cooperstown, N. Y.
The shares in the Vandalia Company were distributed in all to about thirty-
two persons, some of whom were in England. Shares were privately offered to

selected persons. Writing to John Foxcroft, February 4, 1772, Franklin stated
“that he had advanced for your share [i.e., Foxcroft’s share], what has been paid
by others, . . . and I shall in the whole affair, take the same care of your interest
as my own.”
Franklin’s proposal for “a new colony” dragged along for six years without
definite results. The matter was referred by the British Cabinet to the Board of
Trade. The president of this board was Lord Hillsborough. He was secretly
opposed to it, but deluded Franklin in pretending that it met his approval. It was
he who suggested that the originally proposed tract of 2,500,000 acres be
expanded into “enough to make a province.” When he finally disapproved it and
received the support of the board in this decision, Franklin’s resentment was
bitter. “Witness his [Hillsborough’s] duplicity,” he wrote his son, “in
encouraging us to ask for more land, pretending to befriend our application.”
But Franklin won out, notwithstanding Hillsborough’s objection. It may have
been due to the remarkable arguments he employed in his printed reply to the
Board of Trade’s decision; or it may have been the belief of the British Cabinet
that, by acceding to the petition for a new colony, the outraged and revolting
colonists might be appeased.
The grant came too late. On March 2, 1775, Franklin departed for America,
never again to set foot in England. When he arrived in Philadelphia, the colonists
had already revolted, and land schemes were temporarily set aside. The Vandalia
Company never thereafter pressed its claims, and nothing is known regarding the
disposition of its shares. The region of the proposed “new colony” was, after the
Revolution, formed into the Northwest Territory, and this section, as shall be
shown later, became the favorite field of the post-Revolutionary land gamblers.
Some of the members of the Vandalia Company were concerned in other
western land schemes. One of these was organized in 1775 as the “Indiana Land
Company,” probably the first application of the name “Indiana” to the Northwest
Territory. The claim to land was based on a grant of a large tract, made
November 3, 1768, in what is now West Virginia, by the Six Nations at Fort
Stanwix to “Chief” William Trent in liquidation of depredations. Among the
shareholders were Samuel Wharton, Joseph Galloway, Robert Callender, Levi
Andrew Levi, and David Franks, all wealthy and prominent Philadelphians.8
The Revolutionary War did not put an end to the “claim.” Wharton in 1776
published a pamphlet, entitled-View of the Title to Indiana, in which he defended
the company’s rights to the lands. In 1781, he republished this in enlarged form,
under the title Plain Facts; being an examination into the Rights of the Indian

Nations of America to their respective Countries and a Vindication of the Grant
from the Six United Nations to Proprietors of Indiana, etc. Although Wharton
pressed the validity of the “proprietors” claims, Congress then and thereafter
gave little heed thereto.
. . . . .
Another alleged “purchase from the Indians,” on a still more elaborate scale,
which was effected just prior to the Revolution, was the basis of a larger and
more enduring western “land claim.” It was destined to worry Congress for more
than a generation.
Notwithstanding the British Government’s edict, forbidding the private
purchase of lands from the Indian tribes, William Murray, an Indian trader, and
several of his business associates, in 1773 formed a plan to buy from the
aborigines an immense tract of country between the Mississippi, Illinois and
Ohio rivers. After a “pow-wow” lasting a month, the sale was consummated.
According to the land claimants, it was attended by “many persons of both
descriptions and the Indians were carefully prevented from obtaining any
spiritous liquors during the whole continuation of the negotiation.”9 On July 5,
1773, “for a very large and valuable consideration,” the deed was delivered to
the “Illinois Land Company.”10
There is some evidence that the “purchasers” when they secured the “deed”
from the Indians knew of the British Government’s opposition to the acquisition
of Indian lands. But they endeavored to obtain political influence to support their
title. Thus, William Murray wrote Bernard Graetz, his associate, soon after the
purchase, that he was assured by Colonel George Croghan, the British Deputy
Indian Agent, “that Lords Camden and York personally confirmed to him the
opinion of Lord Mansfield respecting the Indian title.” “So courage, my boys!”
he added. “I hope we shall yet be satisfied for our past vexations attending our
concern in Illinois.”

PATRICK HENRY

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

TAKEN FROM JEDIDIAH MORSE’S, The American Geography, PUBLISHED IN LONDON, 1794.
CIRCLES SHOW CLAIMS OF THE OHIO, ILLINOIS AND WABASH COMPANIES. INDIANA IS
PLACED JUST WEST OF MARYLAND.
Not content with the large purchase in the Illinois country, Murray
commenced another negotiation. This time it concerned a tract on the Wabash
River. Everything connected with the transaction, it was asserted, “was
conducted openly and fairly,” and the contract concluded October 8, 1775, by the
“Wabash Land Company,” “for a very large and valuable consideration.”
The Revolutionary War prevented the purchasers from “taking possession.”
In the meantime, the two companies were combined into “The United Illinois
and Wabash Land Companies,” and under this high-sounding name the
proprietors sold their shares during and subsequent to the period of hostilities.
In reading through the reputed Indian deeds assigned to the United Illinois
and Wabash Land Companies, we come upon some familiar Philadelphia names
of Revolutionary times. Among them are the Franks, the Graetzes, and the Levis,
all prominent Jewish merchants and Indian traders, and staunch supporters of the
Revolution—patriots who are today a pride to their descendants. Several of these

were members of the Indiana Company referred to above. In addition, there were
Robert Callender, William Murray, Alexander Ross and David Sproat, James
Milligan, John Ingles, and Andrew and William Hamilton of Philadelphia,
Thomas Minshall of York, Pa., and Joseph Campbell of Pittsburgh. The
purchasers of the Wabash lands included, in addition to the above, several
prominent personages. There were, first, “the Right Honorable John Earl of
Dunmore, Governor of the colony and dominion of Virginia,” and “the
Honorable John Murray, son of the said Earl.” Like Washington, these colonial
officials treated the king’s proclamation against purchasing lands from the
Indians as a “scrap of paper.”
Maryland citizens also were participants, as were also several from “the
Illinois country.” Other prominent persons, who were not direct purchasers,
became shareholders in the “United” companies. Among these were James
Wilson, learned Philadelphia jurist, and subsequent Justice of the United States
Supreme Court; Robert Morris, financier of the Revolution; and Silas Deane,
merchant of Wethersfield, for a time the confidential agent of the Continental
Congress in France. Both Wilson and Morris, as shown in the following
chapters, became immersed in land-grabbing deals after the Revolution. Morris’
participation in the Illinois and Wabash Companies, however, was not large. He
held an 84th share of the purchase in 1781, and he did not take an active part in
pressing the claims of “the companies.” But Wilson became its head. As late as
1797, he was president of the “United” companies. The extent of his holdings is
not revealed, but it may be assumed that it was quite large. Silas Deane’s
correspondence with him, when the former was in London, following his
dismissal from his French mission by Congress, shows that Wilson was very
desirous of selling “shares.” On April 1, 1783, Deane wrote Wilson, “I could not
do anything with the Illinois lands during the War, and now, when much might
be done with them, if a tolerable chance for a title appeared, I dare not venture to
attempt anything.” He later (July 24, 1783) inquired of Wilson regarding the
affairs of the company, since the lack of information has “prevented my doing
anything either with my own interest or with the shares put into my hands for
sale in Europe.”
Deane’s previous efforts to unload “shares” in France were equally
unsuccessful. Writing from Paris, September 4, 1780, to John Shee, a
shareholder, he said, “I have a prospect of doing something with the shares of the
Illinois and Wabash lands, but I fear your limits are rather higher than they will
go at”; and he added, “I shall from time to time acquaint you, through our

mutual friends, Messrs. Morris and Wilson, of my proceeding in this affair,” thus
showing that these two “land jobbers” were backing his merchandising efforts.
Before hostilities with the British had ceased, the “proprietors” of the Illinois
and Wabash Companies petitioned Congress for a recognition of their title. It
received meager consideration, and was thrown out on the ground that the
Indians who sold the land never owned it. In 1791, after the establishment of the
federal government, Congress was again memorialized. And again, in 1797, in
1804, in 1810 and in 1811. Each time the petitioners comprised new and
prominent names. Thus, in 1810, the name of Robert Goodloe Harper, former
Congressman, Senator and eminent jurist, and an associate of Robert Morris and
others in post-Revolutionary land speculations, appears as one of the
“proprietors and agents.” Solomon Etting, a prominent-Jewish merchant of
Baltimore, also became a “proprietor” and signed the petitions.
Finally, on January 30, 1811, a committee of the House of Representatives
definitely reported against recognition of the grant on the ground that the deed
from the Indians was without the sanction of the government and that “any
recognition of the claim would encroach upon the great system of policy wisely
introduced to regulate intercourse with the Indians.” Thus ended the “Illinois and
Wabash” speculation.
. . . . .
It must not be assumed that the New Englanders, as a group, were not
concerned in the pre-Revolutionary land-grabbing schemes. Yankee land greed is
proverbial. Unlike the southern speculators, however, they did not, in colonial
days, seek out immense regions west of the Alleghanies, though in later times
they were caught in the maelstrom of western land speculation. Before the
colonists took up arms against the authority of George III, the settled portions of
New England were already overcrowded, and modest fortunes had been
accumulated as a result of rising land values. Connecticut, in particular, felt the
need of an outlet for surplus population. Packed within narrow limits and
confined to rocky hills, the sturdy Yankee farmers looked with envious eyes
upon the rich unoccupied lands to the westward. Silas Deane, who, as a young
man, collected material for a history of his native state, Connecticut, repeatedly
urged the need of an outlet for her people, and pointed out to Robert Morris and
others that the western unoccupied lands would thus become the most valuable
to speculators.

The desire of possession was strengthened by the belief that these lands came
within the charter limits of the Connecticut colony. Did not their royal grant
read, “westward to the South Sea”? Then why wait before moving westward for
the sanction of the other colonies, who also claimed an endless extension of their
boundaries into unknown regions? By the middle of the eighteenth century,
Connecticut farmers and merchants were already emigrating into New York,
Pennsylvania, Nova Scotia and even into the Floridas. The urge for new soil was
strong in them even at this early period.
The adventuresome spirit of the Connecticut pioneers was fostered by the
fever of speculation, as well as by desire for new land. In one colonial “land
settlement” episode, at least, speculation played an important role. This was the
“Susquehannah Company” project, a bold attempt to possess a strip in western
Pennsylvania lying in what was then known as the Wyoming country.
In May, 1753, a group of 150 persons petitioned the Connecticut Legislature
for a tract on the Susquehanna River, sixteen miles square, and containing
163,840 acres. The legislature refused the grant, but this did not dishearten the
petitioners. They formed, on July 18, 1753, at Windham, Conn., an association
“to spread Christianity as also to promote their own Temporal Interest.” And
they distributed “shares” among themselves.
The proposition then took on a business aspect. The number of “shares” was
increased, and rights to subscribe offered at from $2 to $5 per share.11 It
attracted speculators. The shares soon rose in value. Lawyers, clergymen and
politicians began buying shares. The Reverend Ezra Stiles, President of Yale
College, grandfather of the poet-physician Oliver Wendell Holmes, took 2¾
shares. The Governor of Connecticut, Roger Walcott, who had become rich
through local land deals, supported the project.
Without legal sanction, the promoters boldly declared that they would form a
new western state. They, accordingly, hired John Henry Lydius, a Dutch trader,
to buy the tract from the Indians. Lydius invited some chiefs of the Six Nations
to his home in Albany, got them gloriously drunk, and got a “deed” for the land.
In the meantime, two rival companies, called the “Delaware Companies,” also
claimed to have acquired land on the Susquehanna. Like rival banks in modern
days, they were soon merged. Some settlers were quietly sent to take possession
of the claim. But before they could be ordered away by the Pennsylvania
proprietors, they were massacred or dispersed by the hostile Indians.
Governor Penn, of Pennsylvania, endeavored to forestall another “squatting”
attempt, by leasing the Susquehanna lands to Indian traders and local land

jobbers. But still the Yankees were not discouraged. The next batch of “settlers”
sent out were well supplied with arms and ammunition. Open warfare ensued
between “the Company” and the “Penemites.” Under these disturbing
circumstances, it was difficult to sell the lands for profit. Whole townships had
to be offered free to get actual settlers. “Shares” had to be given away in order to
obtain political support. The Connecticut governor, Jonathan Trumbull, as well
as Pelatiah Webster, and Joseph Galloway, the wealthy Philadelphian, were
granted shares “for their kind services.” Moreover, the Connecticut Legislature
finally validated the company’s land claims. This helped some, for, in spite of
the military opposition of Pennsylvania, there were already settled in the region
about two thousand of the company’s adherents at the outbreak of the
Revolution.
The warfare did not cease when Pennsylvania and Connecticut were united
by the bond of political union. It was, however, more literary than military in
character. Various pamphlets, broadsides and newspaper articles for and against
the “Connecticut Claims” appeared. Pennsylvania, in 1786, formed Luzerne
County of the region and appointed Timothy Pickering, a venturesome land
speculator, to treat with the Connecticut settlers. Their squatters’ titles were
confirmed, but nothing was allowed “shareholders” for unoccupied lands.
Incidentally, Pickering acquired a large share of the lands for himself.
The Connecticut speculators did not accede to this arrangement. A group of
the “shareholders” threatened actual revolt. They selected “General” Ethan Allen
—this time inspired not by “the Great Jehovah” or “the authority of the
Continental Congress,” but by a liberal gift of “shares”—to fight the “Penemitish
land thieves.” Allen was to bring down his Green Mountain boys to chase away
the “Penemites.” But he merely issued a fiery proclamation of advice to the
settlers. “Crowd your settlements,” he wrote; “add to your numbers and strength;
procure firearms and ammunition; be united among yourselves . . . Nor will I
give up my interest to usurpers without trying it out by force of arms. . . . If we
have not fortitude enough to face danger in a good cause, we are cowards
indeed, and must in consequence of it be slaves, and our posterity, to Penemitish
land thieves. Liberty and Property, or slavery and poverty are now before us, and
our wisdom and fortitude, or Timidity and folly must terminate the matter.”
It was a judicial decision, and not fortitude nor folly, that terminated the
matter. Both Congress and the United States courts denied the validity of the
Connecticut claims. Whatever may have been the wisdom of the outcome, it is
certain that the “Susquehannah Company” speculators lost out. Yet, in after

years, the lands they defended so courageously in relentless border warfare were
engrossed by anthracite coal concerns, who reaped fortunes by extracting the
precious mineral underlying the soil.
. . . . .
The colonial New Yorkers were conspicuously absent from participation in
the early western land-grabbing schemes. This was due, however, primarily to
the geographical location of the colony, wedged in between New England and
the controversial territory lying westward, rather than to freedom from the
manias that affected the rest of the colonies. The lack of definite boundaries, the
presence of strong Indian tribes in the wild and unallotted regions, and the
reluctance of the New York colonial governors to make “crown grants,” in a
large measure, prevented a westward movement of New York’s colonial
population.
However, the wild mountainous region which lay directly north of the
Hudson was an attraction to the land grabbers, particularly after its liberation
from the menace of the French invaders. Sir William Johnson, as already noted,
preëmpted large and valuable tracts north of the Mohawk River, and divided it
up among his half-breed children. As the Indian Agent of the British
Government, however, he jealously guarded the Indian lands in the province
against encroachment by the speculators. He, nevertheless, as we have already
seen, was one of the promoters of the Vandalia project. He died in 1774 on the
eve of the Revolution—a bitter foe of the colonists’ cause for freedom. His
lands, though divided among his large progeny, reverted to the state, because of
his heirs’ disloyalty to the Revolutionary cause.
Shortly before Sir William Johnson’s death, Joseph Totten and Stephen
Crossfield, ship carpenters in New York, under a probable pretense of seeking a
source of fine shipmasts, petitioned the governor of the province for the right to
buy the Indian title to a tract of about 800,000 acres, lying north of Sir William
Johnson’s lands, and comprising a large part of the present Warren and Hamilton
counties.
The petition was granted and the purchase made at “Johnson Hall” with the
solemnity usual when Indian chiefs were present. It was soon discovered,
however, that Totten and Crossfield were merely a screen for land jobbers. This
displeased the crown’s officers, and the patent to the grant was withheld, though
preliminary fees, estimated at $10,000, had been paid by the petitioners. The

“proprietors” (some thirty in number), however, did not delay in making surveys
in the tract, and divided the “townships” among themselves. These proprietors
included Joseph and Ebenezer Jessup, already large landowners in the same
region, Philip Livingston, Jacob Watson, Christopher Duyckink, and Peter Van
B. Livingston, prominent business men of colonial New York.
Most of the land in the Totten and Crossfield grant reverted to the state,
following the Revolutionary War. Several of the proprietors, notably the Jessups,
were Tories and escaped to Canada and England. Their property was confiscated.
The claims of the Tory “proprietors” who had remained in the state during
hostilities were subsequently upheld. Robert and Philip Livingston, scions of
Livingston Manor, were each granted a township of 24,000 acres. Effingham
Lawrence received a township in 1786, as did John Thurman and Jacob Watson.
Alexander Macomb, whose “Great Purchase” of Adirondack lands is described
in Chapter III, acquired five townships in 1787, through assignment of other
claims. A half million acres that had reverted to the state was sold to the
Saratoga and Sacketts Harbor Railroad as late as 1855, at five cents an acre.
Even at this low price, the railroad company, which endeavored to construct a
rail highway over the mountains to Lake Ontario, could not “make a go” of it,
and much of the land was later sold under foreclosure proceedings or for taxes.
A part is today comprised in the Adirondack State Park.
. . . . .
New York, before the Revolution, also had her “land” quarrels with the other
colonies. The ill-defined boundaries of the Dutch province led to constant
conflicts and legal controversies with her neighbors. There was a bitter dispute
with New Hampshire regarding the political jurisdiction of Vermont. New York
claimed the section, but New Hampshire, in 1749, acting on the principle that
possession is nine points of the law, began to make free grants to both New
Hampshire and Massachusetts citizens. Whole “towns” of 23,000 acres, more or
less, were granted to selected groups of individuals. It is estimated that between
1749 and 1764, Governor Benning Wentworth granted 131 townships to more
than six thousand persons. Among the grantees appear the names of many
prominent colonial New Englanders, who had no intention of ever settling on the
lands. Samuel Adams was among them. He was known as a speculator in both
Maine and New Hampshire lands in this period. The governor granted himself,
in all, about 65,000 acres, and is reported to have accumulated considerable

wealth from the heavy fees exacted by him for grants.12
New York’s protest against this high-handed business was brought before a
British commission and received a favorable decision. Vermont was allotted to
the future Empire State. The attorney for New York in the case was James
Duane, a young politician, whose father owned an estate of 6,000 acres of wild
land lying just west of Albany, in the present town of Duanesburg. Duane,
possibly because of his connection with the Vermont controversy, contracted the
wild land mania. He not only bought out his brother’s interest in Duanesburg,
but also acquired other large tracts in the Mohawk Valley and elsewhere. He
proceeded to settle his lands with Germans from Pennsylvania. He also bought
heavily of Vermont “grants” after 1764, when the territory was allotted to New
York. Altogether he is said to have acquired more than 65,000 acres, at a cost of
about $100,000.
His speculations, however, were highly unsuccessful. When, Vermont was
granted its “independence,” following the Revolutionary War, and became the
fourteenth state, Duane’s title to the lands was not upheld. All that his heirs
received was a sum of $2,621.29 from the total amount of $30,000 which the
“Vermonters” paid to New York for a quit claim of all rights of the latter’s
citizens in the Green Mountain State.
Because of his land deals, while acting as the state’s attorney, Duane was the
butt of political criticism. He was led to appear in person in his own defense
before the state legislature in 1781. He was charged with receiving Vermont
grants “under immoderate quitrents, and excessive fees of office,” and he was
also accused of “holding many thousand acres of land which had never before
been granted by the Crown.” To this he merely answered that he “had never
made a purchase or obtained a grant of land with any view to its sale.” He was
therefore not a “land jobber.” This cleared him politically of all corruption.13
Duane, who had married a daughter of Colonel Robert Livingston, a “lord”
of Livingston Manor and a participant in the Totten and Crossfield Purchase,
gave up land grabbing as a business, after the failure of his Vermont deals. He
was successful in other fields, however. He was the first Mayor of the City of
New York, and the first United States Circuit Court Judge appointed by
President Washington.
. . . . .

Colonial land grabbing, as a whole, was merely an advance chapter in the
epic of American land speculation. The fever abated during the Revolution, but
was not eradicated. It broke out with more violent and more sustained fury
almost immediately after hostilities with the mother country had ceased. It is to
this new phase of land speculation to which we now turn.
1 Maine Historical Collections, Vol. II, pp. 268-294.
2 The Sir William Johnson Papers, Vol. V, p. 129. See also, C. W. Alvord, The Mississippi Valley in
British Politics, Cleveland, 1917.
3 Herbert B. Adams. “Washington’s Interest in Western Lands,” Johns Hopkins University Studies,
Third Series, No. 1, January, 1885. Italics are mine.—A. M. S.
4 Adams, op, cit., p. 58.
5 See A. Henderson, “A Pre-Revolutionary Revolt in the Old Southwest” in Mississippi Valley
Historical Review, Vol. 27, p. 198 et seq.
6 Italics are not in the original.
7 In a letter to William Franklin, dated May 3, 1776, Johnson asserted “it has always been my practice
to avoid engaging in lands to the great loss of my family, neither have I a foot of land from the Indians.”
(Sir William Johnson Papers, Vol. IV, p. 197.) The large tract north of the Mohawk Valley given him by the
Canajoharie Indians in 1760 was confirmed by royal grant in 1769.
8 See Pennsylvania Magazine of History, Vol. XIV, pp. 218, 219.
9 See Memorial of the United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, Baltimore, 1816.
10 A copy of the deed is contained in American State Papers, “Public Lands.” Vol. I. The original copy
was acquired by Cyrus H, McCormick.
11 See J. P. Boyd, “Connecticut’s Experiment in Expansion, The Susquehannah Company, 1753-1803,”
in Journal of Economic and Business History, November, 1931.
12 See Publications of the Colonial Society of Massachusetts, Vol. XXV, PP. 33-38.
13 Samuel W. Jones, Memoir of James Duane, 1852.

CHAPTER II
THE POST-REVOLUTIONARY WILD LAND MANIA
LORD CORNWALLIS surrendered on October 19, 1781, and the British troops
sailed away from New York shortly thereafter. This left the struggling colonists
free from enemy armed forces on their soil and relieved the strain on their master
business minds of the successful conduct of the war. Their thoughts accordingly
turned again to gainful ventures. Trade and shipping projects had almost ceased
during the hostilities. Aside from privateering, little profit and much risk were
involved in overseas trading. Accordingly new fields for material gain must be
opened up. Before the Revolution, the colonists had been kept free from the
unsavory stockjobbing schemes that beset England in the early part of the
eighteenth century. Corporations, as a form of business enterprise, were
practically unknown on American soil, and joint stock associations were few,
and usually frowned upon. There were no securities in America, except possibly
the state and federal debts—which for the most part were not interest bearing
and were of little present or prospective value. The bulk of permanent wealth
was in ships and land. Due to the ravages of war, ships were relatively few. Land
there was in plenty.
Colonial experience also gave proof of the profitableness of land ownership.
Many early settlers who had taken up tracts of land for development and resale
had become rich. On July 24, 1783, Silas Deane wrote from London to James
Wilson:
It clearly appears to me that the two great objects of America must be the
settlement and cultivation of good lands and the establishment of manufactures.
If we review the rise and progress of private fortunes in America, we shall find
that a very small proportion of them has arisen or been acquired by commerce,
compared with those made by prudent purchases and management of lands.
There was, therefore, a revival of land speculation schemes. These multiplied

with renewed and intensified energy, particularly after the nation was established
under the Constitution. In fact, the new machinery of government gained strong
adherents from the capitalist classes, because of the belief that the value of lands
“must be greatly increased by an efficient Federal Government.”1 The early land
lust, which the colonists inherited from their European forebears, was not
diminished by the democratic spirit of the Revolutionary fathers. Large estates,
indeed, could no longer be a badge of nobility, but the growth of colonial
fortunes through land acquisitions and sales led to the belief that this would
continue to be an important means toward affluence as well as political and
social prestige.
The spirit of speculation seemed to pervade the whole population. Foreigners
then traveling in America took note of it. “Were I to characterize the United
States,” wrote William Priest in 1796, “it would be by the appellation of the land
of speculations.” The French nobleman and scholar, La Rochefoucauld, in his
monumental work on the social and political life in the newly created states,
gives detailed and vivid descriptions of some of the vast land schemes of the
time. He concluded that, “though land speculations have given rise to great
fortunes in America, they have also been the cause of total financial ruin and
disastrous bankruptcy.”
Theodore Dwight, Richard Parkinson, Isaac Weld and others give similar
accounts of the widespread land mania. “You are concerned about my land
speculations,” wrote Timothy Pickering, a soldier of the Revolution, to his sister
in 1796. “All I am now worth was gained by speculations in land. In 1785 I
purchased about twelve thousand acres in Pennsylvania which cost me about one
shilling in lawful money an acre . . . The lowest value of the worst tract is now
not below two dollars an acre.”2
Others as eagerly counted their prospective profits. It was thought that half
or more of the Europeans would eventually remove to the United States to enjoy
the blessings of liberty and independence. “There is at this time,” Silas Deane
wrote to James Wilson in 1783, “a general spirit for emigration from Europe to
America, which I think ought to be improved by the Wabash and Illinois
proprietors to settle their lands.”3 This impending immigration would tend to
increase land values. The population of the states must soon double.
As the settled areas along the Atlantic seaboard were already occupied, the
new immigrants would be forced to take up the wild lands at constantly
increasing prices. “It clearly appears,” wrote Robert Goodloe Harper, “that the

population of the United States doubles in about twenty years, but to show there
is no desire to exaggerate any favorable circumstances, suppose it takes twenty-
five years to effect this. Now of these states, many are full of inhabitants who
occupy all lands, and of the others it is supposed that they are half settled; but
supposing half of each state to be unoccupied, it follows that in twenty-five years
there would be an increase of inhabitants sufficient to settle this vacant half. The
average price of the lands in the settled half of the United States uncultivated,
cannot be at less than eight dollars an acre—sixteen times the price at which the
lands of the [North American Land] company are sold for its shareholders.”
But it was not land greed alone that led to the wild speculative deals
following the establishment of our national government. Several of the
individual states, after their separation from the mother country, became the
proprietors of vast unsettled domains, the limits of which in some cases they
themselves could not ascertain. These same states had become heavily involved
in debt through maintaining their troops and answering the calls for funds from
the Continental Congress. They had issued “debt certificates” and other “scrip,”
which they could neither redeem nor meet the interest payments thereon. In this
impoverished condition they sought to relieve themselves of their obligations by
offering lands in settlement of their debts. Thus, private land speculation grew
out of public poverty. It furnished a lever to the general optimism regarding the
need for additional territories to provide for the expected rapid increase in
population.
The post-Revolutionary land speculation was further fostered by the floating
supply of military land warrants. Several of the states, particularly New York,
Pennsylvania and Virginia, rewarded their soldiers with allotments of their
public domains. Virginia issued warrants covering sections now comprised in
Kentucky, West Virginia and Ohio. Pennsylvania issued two classes of warrants,
reserving separate areas for each. One, given for losses due to currency
depreciation, was designated as the “Depreciation Lands.” The other, granted to
Pennsylvania soldiers, were known as “Donation Lands.” New York and Georgia
likewise set aside “military tracts.” The warrants representing these land claims
were eagerly bought up by speculators and, in some cases, such warrants formed
the basis of large land development schemes.
Philadelphia appears to have been the center of the land warrant business.
The large land holdings of Robert Morris, John Nicholson, James Wilson,
William Bingham and Timothy Pickering arose chiefly through the wholesale
purchase of warrants. Henry Lee, the father of Robert E. Lee, Wilson Cary

Nicholas, a Virginia governor, and George Keith Taylor, brother-in-law of John
Marshall, obtained tracts in a similar manner, which they marketed among
Philadelphia and New England speculators. These land-hungry individuals,
living far from the regions to which they endeavored to acquire title, employed
local agents, called “discoverers,” to select and survey lands purchased by means
of military warrants. Naturally, the system fostered fraud, villainy and deceit. As
stated by a shrewd contemporary observer, Timothy Dwight, in speaking of the
gamble in Virginia military warrants, “several patents were often placed
successively on the same tracts. These patents were sold again and again in other
states, where the nature of the measures pursued were perfectly unknown. When
the purchaser went to look for his land, he found it already occupied . . . and
himself the purchaser of a mere bit of paper.”4
Then there was the vast national domain! When the states agreed to settle
their conflicting claims to the immense territory lying west of the Alleghanies by
ceding this region to the newly created government, they made the young federal
republic perhaps the largest possessor of landed property in the civilized world.
Yet it was a bankrupt national government. Its notes, “scrip,” “certificates,”
“indents” and other forms of floating indebtedness were overdue and unpaid.
The public land was proposed as a means of debt liquidation. Jefferson in 1782
estimated that 5,000,000 acres could readily be sold at a dollar per acre in
government debt certificates and the whole national debt soon paid with the
proceeds from additional sales. Hamilton, more astute in business affairs,
however, had a better idea of values. He opposed the issue of currency based on
land as security, and held firmly to the belief that wild lands in the immense
tracts could afford little relief from the national debt burden. He was satisfied to
pledge the lands as security for national obligations, but desired to withhold their
wholesale disposal until conditions created sound values and a genuine demand
for them. Indeed, Hamilton, as we shall see later, was one of the few outstanding
statesmen of his time who was not lured into the maelstrom of wild land
speculation.
After the Ordinance of 1787, when Congress provided a government
organization for the Northwest Territory—then a howling wilderness overrun by
Indian tribes—speculators or “land jobbers,” as they were then called, again cast
their eyes on the back country beyond the Alleghanies. Petitions for grants of
vast tracts at nominal prices poured into Congress. But, despite the feebleness
and poverty of the national government at the time, only two large grants—those
to the Ohio Company, and the Symmes Purchase—were actually made. The

establishment of a new government under the Constitution, in 1790, together
with the success of Alexander Hamilton’s scheme for funding the national debt,
relieved the nation from the necessity of sacrificing its domain to the “land
jobbers.”
These land jobbers, as a group, were men of large caliber. Many had been
prominent in public affairs during the war—as soldiers, as statesmen, as
diplomats. Many were men of business who had engaged actively in trading and
shipping before the war, and who were eager to regain the wealth the war had
denied them. They possessed a spirit of boldness inherited from their pioneer
ancestors. They feared not to assume risks in the hope of large gains. The very
atmosphere about them seemed to favor their speculations. Although
“speculation” was a term of contempt, and popular hatred was nourished against
the “jobber,” the “get-rich-quick” fever was engendered. It spread throughout the
length and breadth of the thirteen states. As stated by Timothy Dwight, “The
splendor of the object fascinated the eye of every rich adventurer and vast
purchases were made by various individuals.”
The principal centers of the wild land mania were in the large towns, notably
Philadelphia, New York, Hartford and Boston. Each town had its own “deals,”
but the big operators did not confine themselves to any particular territory or
district. “Whatever land was offered for sale,” again comments Timothy Dwight,
“they appeared ready to buy and actually bought quantities which outran every
sober thought.” Their purchases extended from the shores of Lake Erie to the
Gulf of Mexico, from the woodlands of Maine to the prairies of the Mississippi.
The outlying lands allotted to the new republic, as well as the less remote
sections east of the Alleghanies, were comprised in their operations.
Foremost among the principal actors in the post-Revolutionary wild land
mania was the patriot and financier, Robert Morris. No other business man in
America was better known in his time, at home or abroad. His large commercial
adventures before the colonies were separated from the mother country, and his
relationships with the leading foreign financiers, peculiarly fitted him for the
office of Superintendent of Finance, to which Congress appointed him in 1781.
No man ever had a more difficult task than he in raising funds for the bankrupted
colonies joined together in a patchwork nation. Yet he was called “Bobby, the
cofferer,” and the meager newspapers of the time caricatured him unmercifully.
Though Morris deserves undying homage as a public official, as a financier
in private life he has little claim to greatness. He engaged in the wildest
speculative adventures. He was a high liver, displaying his extravagance with the

utmost ostentation. He caused the financial ruin of numerous friends and
associates. And he spent several years in a debtors’ prison. He died in 1806, at
the age of seventy-two, “lean, low spirited and poor.”
SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON,
BRITISH INDIAN AGENT IN THE NORTHERN COLONIES

JAMES DUANE
(From A Godchild of Washington, by Catherine Schuyler Baxter)
TWO COLONIAL NEW YORK LAND PROPRIETORS

TIMOTHY PICKERING

JAMES GREENLEAF
TWO POST-REVOLUTIONARY LAND JOBBERS
Like most wealthy Americans of pre-Revolutionary times, Morris invested in
estates and plantations. With Thomas Willing, his partner in the shipping
business, he had purchased before the Revolution an indigo plantation in
Louisiana, but this was soon abandoned. Busy with public finances during the
war, he had little time for schemes of personal gain. Yet even during this period,
he took an occasional “flyer” in privateering or in land grabbing. Thus (as shown
in the previous chapter), in 1781 he bought an interest in the United Illinois and
Wabash Companies. He also acquired a tract of land at Trenton Falls on the
Delaware River, which he called Morrisville. In this deal he had been accused of
purchasing with a view to speculating on its selection as a site for the federal
capital, but as will be shown later, there is no clear evidence of this motive.
Just how Morris began his wild schemes of land speculation may probably
never be known. Undoubtedly, as one of his biographers states, he was led into
these ventures by his belief in the rapid growth of the country. There is clear

evidence from his correspondence with Silas Deane, the American commissioner
to France, that during the Revolutionary War, land speculation was in his mind.
In writing to Deane from Philadelphia, March 31, 1780, he requests him to
determine “whether it is practicable to make sale [in Europe] of vacant lands in
America by sending out drafts or surveys, descriptions and certificates, to
ascertain the situation, qualities of land, titles, etc., and in what part of the
continent lands are most desired by such persons as would be inclined to
speculate, for I am ready to join you in any operations of this kind that would
turn advantageously to ourselves.”5
It was not until ten years later, however, when he was United States Senator
from Pennsylvania, that Morris entered into the land business on a large scale.
Regarding this, William Maclay, who was then Morris’ senatorial colleague,
wrote in his Journal, March 16, 1790:
Mr. Morris, after sitting awhile, turned to me and began a familiar chat. At
last, he asked me to walk to one side, from our seats, and asked me if back lands
could still be taken up. I told him, yes. He immediately proposed to me to join
him in a speculation in lands, which, he thought that he, from his connections in
Europe, could sell at one dollar per acre. I paused a moment. Said as our waste
lands were totally unproductive, such a thing ought be beneficial to the public as
well as ourselves, that in these points of view I saw no objection.6
The hint of using his European connections to sell at a profit the
Pennsylvania back lands, which could then be bought from the state at a few
cents per acre, led Maclay to believe that Morris “is for what the speculators call
‘dodging’—selling the land in Europe before he buys it here.”
There is no proof, however, that Morris intended operating in this manner.
He generally acquired his holdings before he offered to resell them and, although
he solicited foreign purchasers, his European connections as an aid in his land
speculations proved a keen disappointment to him and finally led to his ruin.
It seems probable that Morris became deeply interested in wild lands through
the success and persuasion of a brilliant and energetic young Pennsylvanian,
John Nicholson. When still a youth, with no known antecedents or family
connections, Nicholson in 1785 was appointed Comptroller-General of
Pennsylvania. In this office he supervised the disposal of state lands, by means
of which Pennsylvania was endeavoring to repay its citizens and soldiers for
losses due to currency inflation and for unpaid war services. Nicholson, through

his official position, was able to make the best selections of these lands. He soon
became the largest landowner in Pennsylvania, acquiring title to about four
million acres. Like Morris, he extended his purchases to other states. The burden
of carrying this vast acreage was undoubtedly too much for the young
speculator. It was natural, therefore, that he should turn for help to Morris,
reputed to be the most affluent person in Pennsylvania.
Morris became an active associate of Nicholson in 1793. Their confidence in
each other lasted to the bitter end. Nicholson died December 5, 1800, at the age
of forty, while a fellow prisoner of Morris in the “Prune Street Prison” in
Philadelphia—Morris called it “the hotel with the grated doors.” Even while in
jail, Nicholson was active. To pay his prison expenses he published for a while a
paper with the appropriate title, The Supporter or Daily Repast. But prison life
was fatal to him. At his death, his debts, it was said, aggregated twelve million
dollars.7
Another partner of Morris, who joined with him about 1794, was James
Greenleaf, contemporaneously known as the “celebrated land jobber.” Greenleaf,
scion of a prominent and prolific New England Huguenot family, of which the
poet Whittier was also a member, had, when still young, amassed a comfortable
fortune in his mercantile operations. For a time following the Revolutionary War,
he was a partner in the shipping business of James Watson, a prominent
capitalist of both Hartford and New York. Both partners individually speculated
sporadically in “wild lands,” and participated in various gigantic land schemes of
the time. But the shipping business required Greenleaf’s presence abroad, so in
1786 he went to Holland. Here, he cultivated close business relationships with
Dutch speculators in American debts. Through the Amsterdam banking house of
Daniel Crommelin & Sons, he negotiated several loans aggregating $1,300,000
on pledge of United States bonds and United States Bank shares. In 1793 he was
made American consul at Amsterdam, but returning the same year to America,
he was lured away from trade by the prospects of profitable land speculation,
particularly in the new federal city of Washington. His partner, Watkins, refused
to join him in these ventures, so Greenleaf sought a new connection. He
endeavored to get Alexander Hamilton to join him but without success. In his
letter to Hamilton, dated July 27, 1796, he represented himself as having a net
estate, which “with ease could be liquidated and made to produce five million
dollars.”
Greenleaf succeeded in interesting Morris and Nicholson in his Washington
speculations, and became their partner in other land deals. He left New York and

took up his residence in Philadelphia and Washington where he personally
attended to the affairs of the land-jobbing triumvirate. Failure of their schemes
led to discord and litigation. All three were imprisoned in Prune Street, but
Greenleaf succeeded in obtaining his release after a few months. Soon thereafter,
he married Ann Allen, a descendant of the Penns. His last years were spent in
Washington, on the growth of which he had staked his whole fortune, and lost.
Old Washingtonians may still recall that the present site of the United States
arsenal, in the southern part of the city, where the Eastern Branch runs into the
Potomac, was for many years called “Greenleaf’s Point”—a reminder of the
city’s pioneer promoter.
In accordance with the common practice of large land dealers of the time,
Morris, Nicholson and Greenleaf formed “companies” to put through their land
schemes. As their associations were unincorporated, the lands they owned were
usually assigned to trustees. “Shares” were then issued, each representing a pro
rata equity in the trusteed property. It was these “shares” or “scrip” which was
generously offered to the land-hungry public.
The first company formed by Nicholson was the “Pennsylvania Population
Company,” which controlled about 450,000 acres lying north and west of the
Alleghany River. It was years afterward discovered to be richly underlaid with
coal. The “Asylum Company” of Pennsylvania, designed for purchase by French
émigrés was another concern of Morris and Nicholson. Their greatest venture, in
association with Greenleaf, was the “North American Land Company,” the
largest land trust ever known in America, if the railroad land grants following
the Civil War are excluded from this category. Of this venture we shall speak
later.
Morris and Nicholson were located in Philadelphia, where Greenleaf had
joined them in 1794. In this “City of Brotherly Love” there were others almost
equally prominent as land speculators, but, unlike Morris and Nicholson, several
succeeded in disposing of their speculative purchases before succumbing to
bankruptcy. James Wilson, Associate Justice of the United States Supreme
Court, who, as already shown, was a large shareholder in the Illinois and Wabash
Companies, bought up quantities of soldier warrants, took up large tracts, but
happily for him, resold much of this to other speculators. He did not gain wealth
from his numerous land deals, however, and died a bankrupt. Thomas McKean,
who in 1808 was Governor of Pennsylvania, also owned many tracts in western
Pennsylvania. While governor, he deeded a princely estate consisting of 300,000
acres to his daughter who had married the Marques de Yrujo, minister from

Spain to the United States. She could do nothing with it, so that most of her land
was sold in later years for non-payment of taxes.
Perhaps the most successful of the Philadelphia capitalists of Revolutionary
fame, who indulged in land purchases on a large scale, was William Bingham.
Bingham, like Morris, was a wealthy shipper, trader and politician. But unlike
Morris he retained his shipping business after the Revolution, and therefore did
not succumb entirely to the land lure. He was a large purchaser of land in the
“Erie triangle”—the northwest strip of Pennsylvania bordering on Lake Erie. He
plastered New England with offers of these tracts, but without success, and
finally sold them to a group of Dutch capitalists. He also purchased a large part
of the southern strip of New York, known as the “ten townships” in which the
city of Binghamton is now located. His largest acquisition, however, was a
2,000,000-acre tract in Maine, which he obtained for a mere pittance from
William Duer and General Henry Knox, Washington’s first War Secretary. This
became known as “Bingham’s Million Acres.” It was willed to his five
daughters, among whom was the wife of Alexander Baring, the English banker.
The land was held almost intact until about 1828 when, through the skill of a
land agent, it was sold in small lots and engendered one of the wildest wild land
manias that has ever infected New England.8
Prominent New York and New England capitalists vied with their
Philadelphia brethren in land-jobbing schemes. In 1784, just one year after
American independence was acknowledged, a group of New York capitalists
organized the first bank in the city, the “Bank of New York.” It was originally
intended that this institution should be a “land bank.” The subscribers were to
pay one-third of their subscriptions in cash, and for the other two-thirds land
security was to be given. Alexander Hamilton, who prepared the bank’s
constitution, was opposed to this idea. He knew the dangers of issuing paper
money without a specie backing. So through his influence the bank was
established “on liberal principles, the stock to consist of specie only.” Yet there
were numbered among its organizers the leading land jobbers and manipulators
of New York State. Prominent among these were William Constable, a wealthy
trader and shipper, Alexander Macomb, his partner in land deals, Jeremiah
Wadsworth, of Hartford, James Watson, partner of James Greenleaf, William
Remsen, Aaron Burr, Nichols Low, and others. But the bank itself, under the
guidance of Hamilton, kept clear of land deals and thus maintained its position
as a “specie bank” to this day.

Among the prominent New Yorkers of post-Revolutionary days who were
severely infected with the “wild land” virus were the brothers, David and
Samuel Ogden, and Abraham and Thomas Ludlow Ogden, respectively the son
and grandson of David Ogden. They were members of the numerous “Jersey
Ogdens,” and were related to Gouverneur Morris by marriage. The town of
Ogdensburg, on the St. Lawrence River, is a reminder of the part they played in
developing this section. They appear, however, not to have gone beyond their
means in engrossing lands, as there is no record of their insolvency, though in
1816 a William Ogden became bankrupt and assigned to his creditors lands
located in various counties of Northern New York. David Ogden became one of
New York’s prominent attorneys and resided in Whitestone, L. I., from 1789
until his death in 1800. A Tory during the Revolutionary War, he succeeded in
having his Jersey estates, valued at $100,000, restored to him after the cessation
of hostilities.
Alexander Macomb, who was associated in land deals with the Ogdens and
who became a leading New York “land grabber,” was born in Ireland in 1748,
emigrated to America in his youth, and became a fur merchant in Detroit. His
travels along the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River acquainted him with
the vast extent of the northern New York wilderness, of which he became, in
name at least, the “great purchaser.” But his career as a land speculator was
short-lived, for soon after his “great purchase” in 1791, he became involved with
William Duer in security speculation, and landed in a debtors’ prison. After his
release he attempted to recoup his fortune by acquiring land on the Harlem River
near Spuyten Duyvil, at a place still known as “Macomb’s Dam.” He died in
1832, in Georgetown, D. C., at the home of his son, General Alexander
Macomb. By a queer twist of fate General Macomb defended from the British at
Plattsburg, N. Y., the very territory that his father had acquired from New York
State twenty-three years earlier for a shilling an acre—land for which New York
State is now paying many millions of dollars to reacquire as a forest reserve.
Of William Duer, Macomb’s partner in a bold attempt to corner the federal
debt, we shall speak much hereafter. Like many other of the post-Revolutionary
land speculators, he had been a purveyor for the American army. He was born in
Devonshire, England, in 1747, the son of a rich West Indian planter, and came to
New York in 1768. During the Revolution he served as a member of the
Continental Congress, and in 1785 was appointed to the Board of Treasury,
which was created to manage the national finances after Robert Morris resigned
as Superintendent of Finance. As the husband of “Lady Kitty,” the daughter of

the self-styled “Lord Sterling,” Duer was socially prominent in New York where
he dined and wined in lavish style with the aristocratic gentry of the day.
Speculative ventures appealed to him. He did not confine his operations to land,
but entered boldly into security deals, buying heavily of United States
Government bonds and the stock of the First Bank of the United States.
Duer borrowed heavily to further his speculative aims, and when the market
for federal securities collapsed in March, 1792, he was forced into a debtors’
prison. He had caused the ruin of many of his friends, and so great was the
public rancor against him that a mob attacked the jail in which he was confined
and threatened to hang the gambler. It was then that Duer appreciated the
strength of prison walls, from which he, like Robert Morris in Philadelphia,
sought in vain to escape. Although it is believed that through the influence of
Alexander Hamilton he succeeded in obtaining a release temporarily, he
remained in prison until his death on May 7, 1799. One of his sons, William A.
Duer, became president of Columbia College, and another, John Duer, was a
judge of the New York Supreme Court and a leading authority on insurance law.
Gouverneur Morris, jovial statesman, diplomat and financier, occupied a
peculiar position in the field of early American land speculation. There is no
evidence that he bought heavily on his own account, though he participated in
the New York wild land deals and undoubtedly sought great riches from this
source. But, at the end of the Revolution, he was already land poor with his
extensive Morrisania estate abutting on New York city. This he had inherited
from his ancestors. He certainly knew the expense and difficulties of land
development. Yet, like his friend and namesake, Robert Morris, in the latter
years of his long life he was deeply engrossed in land deals. He did not own all
the lands in which he was interested, however, but acted as the sales agent of
others. To him was assigned the task of caring for and disposing of the many
large tracts of wild land in New York State.
Gouverneur Morris undoubtedly became active in land deals through his
official association and friendship with Robert Morris. As will be shown later, he
is suspected of having been a silent partner of Robert when the latter entered
upon his first great speculation in western New York lands, in 1789. He soon
thereafter went to England and France with “lands for sale.” Later Gouverneur
was appointed American minister to France. Here, in the midst of his official
duties, he was active in endeavors to dispose of lands. Monroe, arguing in the
Senate against Morris’ confirmation as minister, hinted that he (Morris) “was the
agent of speculators in lands and debt certificates.” Even after his resignation in

1794 as minister, Morris remained in Europe several years attending to his land
business. He succeeded, however, in disposing of only a few tracts. One of his
customers was the great financier, Jacques Necker, father of Madame de Staël,
who bought a large parcel in northern New York. Following his return to
America, in 1798, Morris continued to act as general sales agent for the owners
of New York wild lands.
Concerning William Constable, who for a number of years was probably the
largest individual owner of tracts of land in New York State, not a great deal is
known. He was born in Dublin in 1752, the son of an English army surgeon. In
the years immediately following the Revolutionary War, he was one of New
York’s leading merchants, doing a large shipping and trading business with
Europe. He was among the first Americans to send ships to China. Unlike other
large land operators of his time, he was not prominent politically, and does not
appear to have held public office. He was associated with Macomb in the “Great
Purchase,” of northern New York lands and, after the latter’s failure, he, together
with Daniel McCormick, took over Macomb’s contract. In 1792, he made a trip
to Europe to dispose of the lands, but was only partially successful.
It is quite evident that Constable’s speculations were not very profitable, for
in July, 1801, he and his brother, James Constable, were compelled to convey
some of their northern New York lands to creditors in payment of notes. Among
these creditors were John Jacob Astor, who received 15,000 acres, but soon
resold to Hezekiah B. Pierrepont, Constable’s wealthy son-in-law. Later, all of
Constable’s lands were assigned in trust to the Bank of New York, but after his
death, in 1803, his heirs appear to have recovered a considerable portion thereof.
His three executors were his brother, James Constable, and his two sons-in-law,
James McVickar and Hezekiah B. Pierrepont. The latter, a resident of Long
Island, who became rich through buying up Revolutionary debt certificates,
acquired most of the lands from the heirs. A son, William Constable, took up his
residence in northern New York at a place named Constableville (in Lewis
County), still to be located, but with much difficulty, on the map of New York
State.
New Englanders were ever by nature bold adventurers, so that following the
Revolutionary War, Hartford and Boston were hotbeds of land speculation. The
fever swept through the whole population, and “land scrip” floated about almost
everywhere in this section. For generations many of these certificates were
stowed away in garrets or strong boxes, to be resurrected as curiosities of bygone
days. The New Englanders did not confine their land greed to any one region or

territory. They bought heavily in both the East and the West, in the North and the
South. Many could never identify the location of their purchases—and in some
cases the land acquired was fictitious. Surveys, if made at all, were made
carelessly, and land frauds were as prevalent then as in later years.
A notorious case of fraud, swallowed by the gullible and land-hungry New
England gentry, was brought to light in 1897 by James N. Granger, who
published an account of the journey made in 1786 by Judge Erastus Granger,
brother of Gideon Granger, Washington’s Postmaster-General.9 The journey was
made into the wilds of western Virginia, for the purpose of locating tracts of land
sold to Connecticut speculators by a group of prominent Virginian land warrant
jobbers. Among the sellers were Wilson Cary Nicholas, who, in 1814, became
Governor of Virginia, Henry Carter Lee (“Light Horse Harry”), the father of
Robert E. Lee, General John Preston of Smithfield, and George Keith Taylor of
Petersburg, a brother-in-law of John Marshall. These men conveyed deeds to a
tract of 300,000 acres to Connecticut capitalists for $30,000. When the survey
was made it figured out only 133,874 acres. The deception was blamed on
“Harry” Lee, and this popular Virginia hero and progenitor of the Confederacy’s
greatest general was arrested in Boston just as he was preparing to embark for
the West Indies. He soon compromised by giving up some of his Pennsylvania
land holdings to his victims. His partners, Preston and Nicholas, were also
prosecuted in Virginia, but there is no record of the outcome. They probably also
compromised the claims of the irate Connecticut Yankee speculators.
There were other similar cases of fraud and deceit. Thus, Oliver Phelps
purchased 100,000 acres near the present site of Charleston, W. Va. The land was
located, however, 100 miles from the nearest settlement, and no title whatever
was ever held by the sellers. As stated by James N. Granger: “Speculation of a
more crazy type cannot be found. The best of New England capitalists and
business men placed hundreds of thousands of dollars in schemes they had never
investigated and did not take the trouble to explore.”
A mere enumeration of the land speculators in New England following the
Revolutionary War would fill pages. Foremost among them, however, was
Oliver Phelps of Hartford. He was born in Windsor, Conn., in 1749, and later
moved to Suffield in the same state. During the Revolutionary War he acted as a
deputy for Jeremiah Wadsworth in procuring supplies for the Continental and
French armies. Settling for a while in Massachusetts, he became a member of the
General Court, and one of the Governor’s Council. With this political influence
he, in association with Nathaniel Gorham, of Cambridge, succeeded in

purchasing from Massachusetts in 1788 that state’s title to the western portion of
New York State. Though, as we shall see later, the partners were unable to fulfill
the terms of the purchase contract, Phelps grew rich rapidly, estimating his
wealth at $1,000,000 by 1795. Land lust then intoxicated him. He bought heavily
in wild lands in Virginia, Georgia and elsewhere. He was also the chief promoter
of the Connecticut Company which acquired the Connecticut Western Reserve in
Ohio. But his land deals availed him little in the end. He took up his residence at
Canandaigua in western New York in 1802, later becoming a Congressman and
judge. He died in 1809, in comparative poverty, and only a small village in New
York State bears his name as a reminder of the man, who had the ambition and
the boldness to purchase a territory comprising about one-sixth of the Empire
State.
Associated in deals with Phelps were the “Connecticut Wadsworths”—
Jeremiah and James—who bought and held land around Rochester and became
“Lords of Geneseo.” They, also reached far and wide for land holdings,
acquiring land in Michigan and Ohio, as well as in the Genesee country. They
were prominent in business affairs both in Hartford and in New York. Jeremiah
Wadsworth, who during the war had been an intimate associate of Robert
Morris, Alexander Hamilton, and other financiers, was one of the founders of the
Bank of New York, to which he was elected president in 1785. He was also
influential in the establishment of the Bank of Hartford in 1781, most of whose
directors were prominent land gamblers. The Wadsworths, like other wild land
speculators, at first attempted to sell their holdings in small tracts, but this
appearing unprofitable, they followed the English practice of granting long-term
leases. Since they had paid cash for their lands, they could afford to hold on to
them. To this day their heirs and descendants possess numerous acres of the
richest agricultural lands in New York State.
Massachusetts post-Revolutionary politicians and capitalists, like those of
Connecticut, were also infected with land greed. Among those who acquired
extensive holdings for a time were Postmaster-General Gideon Granger, Jr.,
General Henry Knox, first Secretary of War, and Timothy Pickering of Salem,
Mass.; also James Sullivan, Rufus Putnam, and Andrew Craigie, all prominent
politicians and business men. Of Granger—who was deeply concerned in the
Georgia land frauds, which are described in a later chapter—John Randolph, of
Virginia said, “His gigantic grasp embraces with one hand the shores of Lake
Erie, and stretches with the other to the Bay of Mobile.” Knox was more
moderate. He participated in New York purchases, and was concerned with

William Duer in speculation in Maine lands, but fearing the adverse political
effect arising from the popular hatred of land jobbers, he crawled out by selling
his interest to William Bingham, of Philadelphia.
In their land dealings these men, almost without exception, had one object in
view, viz., to dispose of their holdings at a profit in a short time. Unlike
European land grabbers they did not acquire land as a badge of wealth or as an
emblem of nobility. They did not seek to own large estates; to work them and
thereby obtain a source of income or riches. The social prestige of landed
property had begun to fade in North America even in pre-Revolutionary days.
Although in the South large plantations were common and agriculture was the
chief source of income for rich and poor alike, in the northern regions,
particularly along the Atlantic coast, the tilling of the soil was merely a
necessary supplement to the economic life of the people. It was not a source of
wealth as were trading and shipping. Only in the notable case of “the
Wadsworths of Geneseo” were large tracts acquired and held for leasing and
development. Others sought to sell their lands as best they could—at a profit, if
possible. Hence, the speculators, instead of drawing wealth from the land
directly, aimed merely to extract wealth indirectly from their fellows’ pockets.
Thus, the early land schemes, unlike many modern ventures of the same
class, were not conducted on the principle of enhancing land values by making
improvements and other applications of capital to bring out the natural resources
and productive qualities of the soil. Their main idea was to obtain the advantages
of the “unearned increment”—the added value which comes from growth of
population and material wealth.
The national public land policy had much of the same motive. Both the
individual states and the national government looked upon their public domains
as assets to be cashed as quickly as possible and the proceeds to be applied to the
extinguishing of their debts or for current use to meet government expenditures.
This accounts for the important sales of large tracts of public land soon after the
Revolution. The policy was changed in later years when land was disposed of in
Small quantities as encouragement towards settling rather than for immediate
pecuniary gain.
Having acquired large acreages, the post-Revolutionary speculators were
generally at their wits’ ends to dispose of them. Three methods were generally
followed. They would offer to resell in large tracts to wealthy men in Europe or
America. Or they would set up “land offices” and offer parcels to individuals or
small groups for settlements; or they might hold them as an investment for resale

when lands were less abundant. The first method, as we shall see in the
following chapter, met with success in very few instances. Wild lands in large
tracts were too plentiful to invite purchases at enhanced prices by the wealthy
seeking investment. Moreover, there were expenses attached to land ownership.
This, the “land-poor” aristocracy of both Europe and America have sadly
experienced. The land must be developed, roads must be built, and, worst of all,
taxes must be paid. When the owners are wealthy non-residents, the local
communities are likely to tax them unmercifully.
Robert Morris and his contemporaries failed to see all this in their manifold
land deals—though they were made to realize it in the end. In the prospectus
advertising the “North American Land Company,” it was boldly stated:
The proprietor of back lands gives himself no other trouble about them than
to pay taxes, which are inconsiderable. As nature left them, so they lie till
circumstances give them value. The proprietor is then sought out by the settler
who has chanced to pitch upon them, or who has made any improvement
thereon, and receives from him a price which fully repays his original advance
with interest.
How utterly misleading! First of all, the settler is slow in coming. Moreover,
he is generally poor and must be given credit. He must also struggle against
nature and savages, must build roads, clear rivers, construct schools and
churches, pay taxes, and maintain his family against starvation and disease.
History proves that the pioneer unlike the city immigrant cannot readily be made
the object of exploitation.
Strenuous efforts were put forth by the early land jobbers to dispose of their
holdings in Europe. A number of agents were sent abroad for this purpose, but
they accomplished little. As already stated, Gouverneur Morris, in spite of his
popularity and sociability, made relatively few sales of importance in France—
though he did sell some land to Jacques Necker, Le Ray de Chaumont and a few
other French émigrés. Joel Barlow, the Connecticut poet, whom William Duer
sent to France during the revolutionary political upheavals there to dispose of his
“Scioto lands” before he actually owned them, had hard sledding—and almost
all of the French settlers he sent over to settle in Ohio returned to their native
land, poorer and disgusted. William Constable was successful in selling a part of
his Adirondack lands to Louis Chassanis and Le Ray de Chaumont, French
noblemen, but this sale represented only a small part of Macomb’s Great
Purchase. Robert Morris’ sales of Genesee lands to English and Dutch capitalists

were made mainly in America through the agents of the purchasers.
As an aid to their efforts to dispose of lands in Europe, the speculators made
use of edifying literature. Periodicals, pamphlets and treatises were published
giving alluring descriptions of America, its resources and its advantages. Several
of these were written on this side of the Atlantic. Thus, Tench Coxe, the
prominent Philadelphia attorney, published in 1794 his View of the United States
of America, for circulation in England. Robert Goodloe Harper, a Congressman
from South Carolina, and interested with Morris in land speculation, published a
spirited defense of the North American Land Company (see illustration on next
page). Similarly, Judge William Cooper, prominent as a land agent in New York
State, wrote an alluring description, entitled Guide to the Wilderness, and
Manasseh Cutler published in French and English his Description of Ohio.
Brissot de Warville, about the same time, published in Paris and London his New
Travels in America, which bristled with descriptions of investment opportunities
in the new republic.
British writers were also employed. William Winterbottom published in 1795
an elaborate work of four volumes, entitled An Historical, Geographical and
Commercial View of the American United States, in which he described several
tracts of lands for sale and mentioned an American land agency office in Thread-
needle Street, London. Gilbert Imlay, a former captain in the American army,
and “commissioner in laying out lands in the back settlements” published in
London, in 1797, his Topographical Description of the Western Territory of
North America. This work went through several editions. The 1797 edition
contained a description and plan of organization of the North American Land
Company, promoted by Morris, Greenleaf and Nicholson, an account of which is
reserved for later chapters.
A shorter and more direct appeal to the land-hungry English was made by
one John Dewhurst in a pamphlet published in 1794, entitled Observations on
the Present Situation of American Landed Property. Dewhurst was plainly a land
agent. He begins with the bold statement that “there exists at the present crisis,
the means of employing money to greater advantage and upon principles (when
facts are known) more obviously secure than has occurred at any former period
in any country in the world. It is by the purchase of lands in America.” He
deplores the British prejudice against America and the fear of settling in distant
places, and offers information on tracts of land principally situated in New York,
Pennsylvania and New Jersey to all who will come to his office at 17 Norfolk
Street, Strand.

The propaganda spread abroad by American land agents naturally invited
opposition. Richard Parkinson, an Englishman, made a tour of America during
1798-1800, and published in 1805 a book strongly condemning the purchase of
American lands: “If a man wishes to obtain property [in America] to any great
extent,” he remarked, “he cannot do it with comfort or satisfaction. He may
purchase a considerable portion for a small sum of money, but he will derive
little or no income from it. As he cannot let it out to rent, he must cultivate it
himself with a great number of negroes, for white men are not only expensive,
but ungovernable.” When speaking of the English “boosters” of America, among
whom he includes Tom Paine, William Cooper, Imlay, Priestley, and others,
Parkinson states:

THE PROSPECTUS OF THE NORTH AMERICAN LAND COMPANY ISSUED IN LONDON.
MORRIS’ EFFORT TO INTEREST BRITISH SPECULATORS
(Courtesy of the New York Public Library)

GOUVERNEUR MORRIS, STATESMAN, DIPLOMAT AND LAND AGENT

WILLIAM CONSTABLE, PRINCIPAL PROPRIETOR OF MACOMB’S PURCHASE
(From a portrait by Gilbert Stuart)

JEREMIAH WADSWORTH
Those authors who have represented America as possessing peculiar
advantages, are all men who have left this kingdom in anger, and described the
plausible benefits likely to be obtained by adventurous speculators before they
knew any more of the country than those who have never seen it: they write with
a determination to do all the harm they can to their mother country.10
Considerable opposition also developed from French sources. The French
minister in the United States, Joseph Fauchet, representing the new revolutionary
government, in his official and private letters uttered warnings to his countrymen
against investments in American lands. The agents of “les grands proprietaires”
he wrote from Philadelphia, “are vile deceivers,” and their efforts to get
Frenchmen to emigrate is furthered by such émigrés as Talleyrand and the Due

de Noailles, who “thus hope to cause a considerable part of the French
population to desert their country.” Fauchet was particularly unfriendly to Robert
Morris, whom he called le plus grand agioteur de ce pay-ci (the greatest of
American speculators). In 1794, he published two letters in France attacking
Morris, especially respecting the character of the latter’s Georgia lands, called
the “Pine Barrens.” Fauchet claimed that he had evidence, that the title to these
lands was worthless and that Morris was “selling them to innocent French
investors.” Morris in the same antagonistic vein replied in a letter published in
the Philadelphia American Advertiser, denying that he invited the French to buy
his lands. At this, the minister of the French Republic became further incensed
and complained bitterly to his government of the “indecent diatribe” of Mr.
Morris against him.11
Thwarted and hampered in efforts to attract large purchasers of their holdings
at home and abroad, most of the speculators were either compelled to abandon
their lands to their creditors or turn them back to the states for non-payment of
taxes. As shall be shown later, only a few awaited the slow process of piecemeal
disposal. For this purpose they employed land agents and opened up “land
offices.” Oliver Phelps who moved to Canandaigua is credited with opening
there the first private land office in America. Traveling land agents, it appears,
became a general nuisance. William Priest, an English musician, in his Travels in
the United States, written in 1797, thus describes a harangue of a land agent:
When we made our stay at the tavern on the road [from New York to Boston]
I observed one of my fellow travellers (who was very eloquent on this subject)
take every opportunity of singing forth the praises of New Virginia (a rich tract
of country west of the Alleghany mountains). . . . The northwest wind continuing
. . . the morning was very cold; and we breakfasted with a number of strangers.
Our orator does not lose this opportunity of holding forth on his favorite topic. I
recollect the latter part of his harangue was to the following effect: “There,” says
he, (while the New Englanders were staring with their mouths open) “when I
clear a fresh lot of land on any of my plantations, I am obliged to plant in six or
seven years with hemp, or tobacco before it is sufficiently poor to bear wheat.
My Indian corn grows twelve to thirteen feet high: I’ll dig four feet deep on my
best land, and it shall then be sufficiently rich to manure your barren hills; and as
to the climate, there is no comparison; this cursed cold northwest wind loses all
its severity before it reaches us: our winters are so mild that our cattle require no
fodder, but range the woods all winter: and our summers are more moderate than

on your side of the Alleghany.”12
These “agents” in most cases did not sell parcels of land or give clear title and
deed to property. They marketed merely the “shares,” “scrip,” or “warrants” of
“companies” and “associations” organized by the land jobbers. The “scrip”and
“warrants” represented usually a claim to a definite acreage, but the “shares,”
though having a face value expressed in currency, were a claim to nothing in
particular. Thus, Timothy Pickering, of Salem, who occupied various posts in
Washington’s cabinet, and who plunged deeply into land speculation, disposed
of twenty-six tracts of land in Pennsylvania, aggregating about 19,000 acres to
an “association” of thirty-four “subscribers,” for $33,300. The “association” was
divided into 333 shares of $100 each, eighty-three of which Pickering reserved
for himself. Pickering was given power of attorney to take care of the lands and
to dispose of them “according to his judgment.”13 The same method of land
disposal, as we shall see later, was also used by Oliver Phelps, Robert Morris,
John Nicholson, William Duer, John Cleves Symmes, Manasseh Cutler and
others of the prominent land promoters of the period. Failure to sell the lands in
a reasonable time generally made the “shares” worthless—since the usual
outcome of the land deal was reversion to the state for non-payment of taxes.
The wild land speculation in America, which reached its zenith soon after the
establishment of the new government under the Constitution, steadily and
rapidly declined after 1795. At the beginning of the new century, public interest
in land speculation had greatly subsided. The collapse of most of the large land
companies, together with the adoption of a national policy to distribute the vast
western public domain in small parcels at a nominal price, discouraged private
land-jobbing schemes. The popular contempt for land speculators, however,
persisted, so that statesmen and financers for many years thereafter refrained
from openly associating themselves with wild schemes of land development. In
the meantime, also, other fields of speculative endeavor such as commodities
and securities had come into vogue. Land speculation, however, was again and
again to play its part in the annals of pecuniary avarice and greed in the United
States. We now pass on to the leading episodes in this drama of American
cupidity.
1 See Charles A. Beard, An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States, p. 50.
2 Pickering, The Life of Timothy Pickering, Vol. Ill, p. 296.
3 The Deane Papers, Vol. V, p. 164, published in Collections of the New York Historical Society, 1890.

4 Dwight, Travels, Vol. IV, p. 185.
5 Deane Papers, Vol. IV, p. 117.
6 Journal of William Maclay (1927 Edition), p. 209.
7 See Allen C. Clark, Greenleaf and Law in the Federal City, p. 42.
8 See pages 240, 241.
9 See Connecticut Quarterly, Vol. III (1897), p. 101.
10 Richard Parkinson, A Tour in America, Vol. II, p. 642.
11 See the Annual Report of the American Historical Association, 1903, Vol. II, p. 678 et seq.
12 William Priest, Travels in the United States of America, p. 155.
13 Pickering, The Life of Timothy Pickering, Vol. IV, p. 28.

CHAPTER III
PARCELING OUT THE EMPIRE STATE AT
WHOLESALE
WHEN the Revolutionary War was over, New York State was a mere skeleton of
its present self. The white inhabitants were settled, for the most part, along the
shores of the Hudson River, but pioneers had already moved westward along the
Mohawk River as far as “the German Flats.” Here, the sturdy Herkimer and his
fellow Germans beat back Major St. Leger and his Indian and Tory allies, thus
making possible the victory of Saratoga. Beyond these regions, to the west and
north, was wilderness. The once powerful Six Nations had been decimated to a
few scattered Indian villages. Though they still occupied the territory they could
offer no resistance to the oncoming white man. The dangers of savage warfare
which retarded the settling of the land were, therefore, removed.
But the ownership and control of the unsettled region west of the Mohawk
Valley was still in dispute. Both Connecticut and Massachusetts claimed it. New
York maintained that it was within its domain, and resisted the claims of the
New England colonies to the region. The Indians, of course, had legal title to it
—but that was no great obstacle. A few barrels of rum, and a supply of shawls,
blankets and trinkets, could buy them off.
The Continental Congress, the only cementing force that held the young
republic together, was anxious to promote harmony at home as well as abroad. It
succeeded in having the sister states, Massachusetts and New York, negotiate a
peaceful settlement of the controversy. On December 16, 1786, New York, in
return for political authority over the territory, ceded to Massachusetts the
preëmption right to “all that part of the state lying west of a line beginning at a
point in the north line of Pennsylvania, eighty-two miles west of the northeast
corner of the state, and running from thence due north through Seneca Lake to
Lake Ontario.” Within this vast domain, comprising more than six million acres,
New York reserved for itself the ownership right of merely a strip of land one

mile wide along the Niagara River.1
Massachusetts thus became the possessor—subject to the extinguishment of
the Indian title—of a vast western empire, for which she had no earthly need,
and which she would gladly dispose of at a price. Impoverished by the war, and
with her treasury “scrip” passing current at about 30 per cent of its par value,
Massachusetts in April, 1788, eagerly accepted an offer from Nathaniel Gorham
and Oliver Phelps, two of her citizens, to purchase the entire tract for
$1,000,000, payable in Massachusetts “consolidated scrip” in three annual
instalments. The sale was made subject to the extinguishment of the Indian title,
the cost of which was to be borne by the purchasers. In July, 1788, Phelps and
Gorham, “by treaty” at Canandaigua, “purchased” from the Indians the easterly
portion comprising about 2,600,000 acres, or slightly more than one-third of the
total region. Payment for this section, which has since been known as the
“Phelps and Gorham Purchase,” was covered by the first of the three annual
instalments, so that, on November 21, 1788, the title to the land was conveyed
by Massachusetts to Phelps and Gorham. The other two-thirds still remained
unpaid for. A sharp rise in the market value of Massachusetts “scrip,” due to
Alexander Hamilton’s plan to have the federal government assume the states’
indebtedness, was unfavorable to the two land jobbers. They were unable to
meet the second instalment and so the unpaid-for portion reverted to
Massachusetts.
The Phelps and Gorham acquisition did not pass without rivalry and
opposition. Previous to the cession of the territory to Massachusetts, a group of
prominent New Yorkers at Hudson, N. Y., formed the “New York Genesee Land
Company.” Among the promoters and shareholders were John Livingston, Peter
Schuyler, Dr. Caleb Benton, Robert Troup and other politicians. They leased, or
claimed to have leased, the Massachusetts lands from the Indians for 999 years
at an annual rental of $2,000 in Spanish dollars. In February, 1788, just two
months before the sale to Phelps and Gorham, and before the extinguishment of
the Indian title, Benton and Livingston petitioned the New Lork Legislature to
recognize the lease. The petition was peremptorily rejected, and Massachusetts
also denied the validity of the lease.
The promoters, however, would not be downed. They employed agents to go
about the state, lavishing presents on the politicians and the Indians to win their
favor. They even suggested the formation of a separate state. For this, one of the
members was jailed on a charge of treason. Livingston and his associates then
proposed a settlement by presenting a proposition to the New York commission

for holding treaties with the Indians to obtain from the state a direct conveyance
of all the Indian lands, the Genesee Company to be remembered by a grant of
1,000,000 acres. Since Massachusetts had already been granted the preëmption
right to the territory, this was likewise rejected. However, in 1793, the New York
Legislature passed an act for the relief of the Genesee Company, by conveying to
its members certain lands in the northern part of the state known as the “Old
Military Tract,” but there is no record that the land was ever claimed or a deed
granted.
Phelps and Gorham were not without the assistance of others in their
purchase from Massachusetts. Each originally associated with himself a group of
speculators, and these were contemplating rival bids for the domain. They soon
came to an agreement to present a joint bid in order to avoid competition. It is
believed that Robert Morris had a hand in the deal. He certainly knew of what
was going on, for when the purchasers were unable to meet the second
instalment of the agreed price, Morris stepped in and made the purchase of the
unpaid-for portion.
In the meantime, Phelps, acting as the agent of his associates, was making
efforts to dispose of the land they had acquired. He immediately began surveys.
To him may be ascribed credit for first employing the method of laying out the
lands into rectangular townships of six miles square, though most authorities
ascribe the inauguration of the system to Thomas Jefferson.2 As soon as
townships were surveyed, they were offered for sale in whole or in part. By
1790, about fifty townships had been sold to individuals and companies, about
half of the area. The largest purchase was made by General Jeremiah
Wadsworth, wealthy capitalist of Hartford and New York, with whom both
Phelps and Morris had been closely associated during the Revolution in the
Quartermaster’s Department of the Army.
Wadsworth acquired a strip of land of about 30,000 acres, bordering on the
Genesee River. Its chief settlement was a place called by the Indians “Big Tree,”
but later known as Geneseo, located not far from the present site of Rochester.
Jeremiah Wadsworth conveyed some of the land to his young cousins, James and
William Wadsworth, and appointed them his land agents. The tract comprised
one of the choice sections of the Phelps and Gorham purchase, and was
considered the most valuable. For this, Jeremiah Wadsworth paid one dollar per
acre. Like other land purchasers of the time, he bought on credit, giving bond
and mortgage as security for the debt.
James and William Wadsworth, accompanied by axmen, and provided with

crude agricultural implements, moved to the tract in 1790, and took steps to
settle it and to dispose of the neighboring lands. They imported cattle, and began
the growing of staple crops. They also erected grist and lumber mills. Both fell
ill with a fever—“the ague,” for which this section was noted—and “became
low-spirited,” but not discouraged. It was soon found, however, that little could
be accomplished at their place of settlement in Geneseo. Accordingly, James
made repeated trips to Connecticut and New York City to effect sales both for
himself and for other landowners. But he accomplished little. His next step was
to draw up an elaborate prospectus of “the Genesee lands,” and take it with him
to England, in the hope of negotiating sales. Here he ran against the competition
of the agents of Robert Morris and others who also were peddling American
lands. The rivalry between them resulted in James Wadsworth’s duel with two of
the Kane brothers, whose sister was the wife of Robert Morris’ son, Thomas
Morris.3
James Wadsworth remained in England from February, 1796, to November,
1798. His prospectus, which made a strong point of a republican form of
government as the only sure basis of prosperity, did not gain many friends for
him among the English, and he returned somewhat embittered and prejudiced
against all things British. He did, however, adopt, through necessity rather than
choice, the British practice of settling lands through leaseholds rather than sales.
Moreover, he and his brother used their “land” profits and commissions in
extending their acreage, and thus became the largest individual owners of
cultivated lands in New York State. The estate would have been considered a
magnificent principality in Europe. The result of this policy was that the
Wadsworths, almost alone among the early American landholders, retained their
estates. Through generations of soldiers, statesmen and scholars, they have
resided in the Genesee Valley as “Lords of Geneseo.”
As already indicated, when Phelps and Gorham surrendered the unpreëmpted
two-thirds of their purchase of the western part of the Empire State, Robert
Morris became the purchaser. The sale was made to Samuel Ogden, March 8,
1791, by “deed poll, reciting that the purchase therein mentioned was made by
him at the special insistence and request of Robert Morris.” Previous to this
deed, Morris, on November 18, 1790, had also acquired from Phelps and
Gorham all their unsold lands, about 1,200,000 acres. Accordingly, Phelps and
Gorham were “cleaned out,” and Robert Morris became nominally the sole
owner of about 5,000,000 acres of the soil of New York. Nathaniel Gorham died
a bankrupt soon afterwards, but Oliver Phelps, as we shall see, continued in the

land-grabbing business. In his deed to Morris, Phelps reserved a small tract for
himself where the village of Canandaigua is located. Here he later took up his
residence, erected the first “land office” in the state, and became prominent in
local politics. He was joined in 1816 by his old friend and associate in land
deals, Gideon Granger, who also emigrated from Connecticut to the wilds of
western New York. Phelps died in 1809, a comparatively poor man. Granger
lived until December 31, 1822.
Robert Morris, despite his reputed affluence, was not in a position to carry
through his Genesee purchases alone. Like Phelps and Gorham, he had unnamed
associates. These comprised the leading New York land jobbers of the period.
Samuel Ogden, whose purchase of the state lands along the St. Lawrence will be
described below, is reported to have had a share in the deal. He participated to
the extent of 300,000 acres; Gouverneur Morris assumed responsibility for
250,000 acres; R. Loderston and William Constable took 100,000 and 50,000
acres, respectively. As the aggregate participation of these four associates
amounted to but 700,000 acres of a total of about 4,000,000 acres, Morris, after
all, bore the chief burden of the purchase. The price he paid to Massachusetts
was £45,000 (in the state’s currency), or approximately $200,000. In addition,
Morris paid Phelps and Gorham £30,000 Massachusetts currency, for the
1,200,000 acres which he purchased from them directly.4
In those days these were large sums. Morris’ resources were unequal to the
burden so he made haste to dispose of his “Genesee lands.” As the Indian title
had not been extinguished on the tract acquired by him directly from
Massachusetts, cash sales of this region were out of the question. Accordingly,
his efforts were directed towards the sale of the Phelps and Gorham tract, which
had already been “purchased” from the aborigines. This he accomplished
apparently without much difficulty, for his London agent, William Temple
Franklin, grandson of Benjamin Franklin, sold the whole section to an
association, comprising Sir William Pulteney, John Hornby and Patrick
Colquhoun for £75,000, or about twice as much as it cost Morris.
In later years, Morris regretted the bargain, claiming that he sold too cheaply.
But he needed the cash to settle with Massachusetts for the western section of
the Genesee lands, and to procure the Indian title. His shortage of ready money
may be surmised from the fact that soon after his Genesee purchase he
mortgaged a portion of the acreage to W. S. Smith, as agent of Sir William
Pulteney, for a loan of $100,000.
Having disposed of the “Phelps and Gorham Tract,” Morris next proceeded

to offer his remaining Genesee lands. He could not give a clear title to
prospective purchasers because he himself had acquired only the “right of
preëmption” from Massachusetts. It was necessary to get a bill of sale from the
Indian owners. Before accomplishing this, however, Morris dispatched his son,
Robert Morris, Jr., to offer the lands in England and Holland. He also continued
to employ William Temple Franklin as a foreign sales agent.
While these were searching for purchasers, a group of Dutch bankers, some
of whom had amassed fortunes from speculations in American government
debts, sent to America a confidential agent to seek out money-making
opportunities. This agent was Theophile Cazenove, a Swiss, who had taken up
residence in Amsterdam, and who, through his brother’s banking house in
London, J. Henry Cazenove & Co., had influential British connections. He was
“an expansive, jovial person, of infinite affability and bonhomie, and a man who
knew the world and how to get on with it.”5
Coming from the moneyed gentry of prosperous Holland, Cazenove was
eagerly sought after and importuned by the numerous land jobbers of the time.
That he was socially entertained by them, in both New York and Philadelphia, is
without question. Before making any land purchases, however, he reported from
time to time to his Dutch principals, furnishing them with details of money-
making opportunities that were brought to his attention. He at first bought
heavily of American government debts, but soon concluded that more money
could be made in land purchases. Naturally, he was tempted to this conclusion
when large tracts were offered him at less than a dollar an acre. In Holland land
could be obtained only at prices a hundredfold higher.
Moreover, at this time, the numerous tribe of land jobbers, particularly those
who were unable to meet maturing payments on their contracts, looked upon him
as a godsend. James Wilson, Alexander Macomb, William Duer, Andrew
Craigie, and the whole Connecticut group of “wild land” grabbers, applied to
him for loans. As Cazenove made his headquarters in Philadelphia, he was
brought into close contact with Robert Morris, and soon came under his
influence. Morris pointed out to him the great advantages of the “Genesee
Country.” He argued that, without the slightest difficulty, the purchase of a
million acres would soon produce a profit of a million and a half dollars. The
country offered remarkable resources in pot and pearl ashes, maple sugar and
whiskey. Cazenove sent two Dutch engineers there to make a personal
investigation. These convinced him that the territory was extremely favorable as
to both climate and natural resources.

Accordingly, Cazenove, on December 13, 1792, contracted to purchase
conditionally from Morris the two most westerly tracts of his Genesee lands,
totaling 1,500,000 acres. For one tract of a million acres he agreed to pay
£75,000 sterling cash. This amount was to be considered a three-year loan,
secured by the land, if Cazenove’s Dutch masters decided not to hold it. The
remaining half million acres was to be paid at the same rate, i.e., £37,500
sterling, or about 1½ shillings an acre, provided the Dutchmen decided to take it.
Morris agreed to make the necessary surveys and to extinguish the Indian title.6
When this deal had been completed and the papers signed, word was
received that Robert Morris, Jr., had already sold in Holland 1,500,000 of the
remaining acres of the Genesee lands directly to Cazenove’s Dutch masters. This
caused the elder Morris considerable consternation, since he had intended to
retain a part of the Genesee lands for later sale at a higher price. However, he
had already launched upon further wild land speculations and was greatly in
need of cash. So he confirmed the sale. Thus, Dutch bankers had obtained an
option to 3,000,000 acres of New York State soil, comprising a region one half
as large as Holland and of greater prospective wealth and resources.
The Dutch evidently thought they had made a good bargain, for they
immediately consolidated their purchases, formed a company (the “Hollandshe
Land” company), divided the shares among themselves and set about to dispose
of a part of their holdings. They also, through the enthusiasm of their agent,
Cazenove, acquired about one million acres additional lands in Pennsylvania.
These came largely from Judge James Wilson, who, in his eagerness to corner
the Pennsylvania land warrants, “bit off more than he could chew.” One of the
chief Dutch speculators, Peter Stadnitzki, published in Holland a prospectus
entitled, Information Concerning a Negotiation of Lands in America.7 This was
for home consumption, as there is no record of an English or German translation,
and it was never circulated on this side of the Atlantic. It may be assumed that it
was read with great interest by Dutch speculators, since its author had, on
previous occasions, pointed out to them the large profits gained from dealings in
United States debt certificates. Similar profits, of course, could be made in
speculations in American lands.
Robert Morris had thus disposed of all except about a half million acres of
his Genesee lands. This unsold tract was, for a while, known as “Morris’
Reserve.” It was soon sold to W. & J. Willink, also Dutch bankers. As a result of
Morris’ efforts, all of New York State, lying west of Seneca Lake, with the

exception of the mile strip along the Niagara River (that had been reserved to
New York State in the compromise agreement with Massachusetts), was
acquired by Dutch and English land speculators. This is all the more remarkable
because when these foreign capitalists made their purchases, the New York laws
prohibited alien ownership of lands. But in 1798, largely through Aaron Burr’s
influence, the statute was amended so as to give the Dutch and the English
owners legal title to their Genesee purchases.
It took Morris some time to extinguish the Indian title. The delay was
attributed to the Indian wars in Ohio. Finally, in 1797, Thomas Morris, Robert’s
oldest son, with the aid of the Wadsworths of Geneseo, gathered the Indians
together at the Wadsworth homestead at Big Tree. Here also assembled
representatives of the United States Government, of Massachusetts and of the
Holland Land Company. Robert Morris personally could not be present, since at
this time he was kept a prisoner by his creditors, in his country place on the
Schuylkill, known as “The Hills.” He could not satisfy “these cormorants,” who
eventually had him marched off to jail. The father, however, had sent a speech to
be read to the Indians. But the redskins insisted on dealing only with the “white
man with the big belly.” With whooping and yelling, they declared that the
council fires were covered up. They were actually on the point of scattering,
when young Thomas Morris, by the diligent use of his persuasive powers, helped
along by a plentiful supply of whisky and of feminine trinkets—and with
promises never fulfilled—again brought back both warriors and squaws. He
finally induced them to sell their lands for $100,000.
Thus ended Robert Morris’ first great land deal. It was the beginning of a
number of similar gigantic speculations, which finally landed “the Financier” in
a debtors’ prison. In later years, Morris felt that he had been too hasty in selling
this valuable territory. In 1800, when writing of his affairs while in the Prune
Street Prison, he noted:
If I had contented myself with these Genesee purchases, and employed
myself in disposing of the land to the best advantage, I believe that at this day I
should have been the wealthiest citizen of the United States. That things may
have gone otherwise, I lament more on account of others than on my own
account.
The Dutch purchasers, after some legal entanglements in which Aaron Burr
figured conspicuously, were put in possession of their New York lands. They
almost immediately set up an organization for disposing of them in small tracts.

Before following this part of the story, however, we will turn to other gigantic
land transactions which came about through the early parceling out of the
Empire State.
. . . . .
When New York State became a free and independent commonwealth, it
acquired title to the unpatented crown lands within its territory. It also took over
the confiscated properties of the loyalists. These lands comprised vast domains
lying north of the upper reaches of the Hudson River and westward to the section
ceded to Massachusetts. Along with the other colonies who had struggled for
seven years against the mother country, the state government had become
impoverished. Cash funds were urgently needed. So when peace returned, the
plan of raising money by sale of state lands was favorably received. The state
legislature, on May 5, 1785, passed “An Act for the Speedy Sale of the
Unappropriated Lands of the State.” It empowered a land commission,
comprising the principal state officials, to dispose of any unsold lands as it might
deem proper.
As a preliminary step to offering lands, the commissioners ordered a survey
made of two ranges of townships on the south side of the St. Lawrence River. It
then offered these tracts at public auction. The proposed sale was advertised in
the Albany Gazette, June 7, 1787; to take place at the “Merchants Coffee House”
in New York City. An “upset price” of a shilling an acre was fixed by the
commissioners. Another condition was that an actual settlement should be made
on each forty acres within seven years after patents were granted to purchasers.
The auction commenced July 10, 1787. An endeavor was first made to sell in
small tracts, but through agreement among the expectant purchasers, or possibly
by collusion with the land commissioners, no bids were received. Moreover, it
was agreed that successful bidders to any part of the tract would immediately
convey their purchases to Alexander Macomb, who was the designated agent of
the conspiring group of land jobbers contemplating the purchase of the entire
section.
The deal was successfully carried out. Macomb’s bids were accepted and his
purchases forthwith conveyed, for a consideration of £3,200, to Samuel Ogden
and associates “in trust” for himself. The transaction thus became known as the
“Ogden Purchase.” The principal participants in the deal, besides Alexander
Macomb and Samuel Ogden, were General Henry Knox, Washington’s Secretary

of War, and Robert and Gouverneur Morris. The associates divided up the land
among themselves, Ogden and Macomb taking 90,000 acres, Knox taking
44,114 acres, and Robert and Gouverneur Morris, 60,641 acres each. Macomb,
because of insolvency, was later compelled to sell out his holdings to William
Constable. Knox and Robert Morris also appear to have disposed of their
commitments shortly after the sale.
As the territory comprised in the “Ogden Purchase” was still claimed by the
British at the time of its sale by New York State, and a Canadian garrison still
held Oswegatchie, on the present site of Ogdensburg, the purchasers could do
practically nothing with their acquisition until after the signing of Jay’s Treaty in
1795. In this compact, Great Britain definitely assigned the southern bank of the
St. Lawrence to the United States.
In the meantime, the New York land commission was advertising for bids for
other tracts in the northern Adirondack section, so that Ogden and his associates
had opportunities to amplify their acquisitions. By 1792, the land commissioners
had disposed of 5,542,173 acres for a sum slightly in excess of $1,500,000.
Some small tracts brought three shillings an acre, some two and a half shillings,
but the bulk of the lands went for less. Alexander Macomb, pioneer New York
“plunger” and a friend of Governor George Clinton, one of the land
commissioners, bid for a tract of 3,635,200 acres at eight pence per acre, payable
in six annual instalments, and got it. His acquisition is still designated in deeds
as “Macomb’s Great Purchase.” It now comprises most of St. Lawrence,
Jefferson and Franklin counties, and constitutes today the heart of the wonderful
Adirondack Reserve, the pride of every New Yorker.
Macomb made two applications for the land he wanted. The first, made in
April, 1791, was rejected on the ground that it comprised too great an area. The
second, made the next month, merely described more definitely the territory
desired, but was about as large in area. It comprised almost all the
unappropriated land between the St. Lawrence River and Lake Champlain,
including the Thousand Islands. Its extent may be inferred from the map on page
70.
In his formal application, Macomb named his price and terms as follows:
I will give eight pence per acre, to be paid in the following manner, to wit:
One sixth part of the purchase money at the end of one year from the day on
which this proposal shall be accepted, and the residue in five equal annual
instalments on the same day, in the five next succeeding years. The first payment

to be secured by bond, to the satisfaction of your honorable Board, and if paid on
the time limited and new bonds to the satisfaction of the Board executed for
another sixth of the purchase money, then I shall be entitled to a patent for one
sixth part of said tract, to be set off in a square, in one of the corners thereof, and
the same rule to be observed as to the payments and securities and grants or
patents, until the contract shall be fully completed. But if at any time I shall
think fit to anticipate the payments, in whole or in part, in that case I am to have
a deduction on the sum so paid, of an interest at the rate of six per cent, per
annum, for the time I shall have paid any such sum before the time herein before
stipulated.
Of course, Macomb in bidding for the vast acreage was acting in conjunction
with other capitalists. His silent partners appear to have been William Constable
and Daniel McCormick, wealthy New York merchants. Shortly after the
purchase, when Macomb became bankrupt and was forced into a debtors’ prison,
he conveyed his interests to Constable and McCormick. In fact, there are letters
of Constable which tend to show that the whole “Macomb Purchase” had been
planned by him, and his name appears in connection with the earliest resales of
the acquired properties.8 Other land jobbers were also undoubtedly interested in
the deal, among whom was Jonathan Dayton, speaker of the House of
Representatives from 1797 to 1799, and a partner of John Cleves Symmes in an
Ohio land purchase. Dayton has a “township” named after him in the
“purchase.” It is quite probable also that Gouverneur Morris may have had a
hand in it, although he was abroad at the time. Macomb, we know, as early as
April 16, 1791, appointed Morris as his attorney to sell the lands in France, but
no sales appear to have been made. He also tried to sell his interest in the
purchase to Cazenove, the Dutch emissary, but the latter was too shrewd to be
enticed into the deal. He considered the location too remote, the climate too cold,
and the soil of too poor quality.9
The sale of a big chunk of the Empire State at a price per acre of a loaf of
bread did not pass without notice even in those early days. Cries of treason and
fraud arose. One Dr. Josiah Pomeroy made oath that it was merely a scheme to
annex New York to Canada. Handbills protesting against the grab were publicly
distributed. Governor George Clinton, who was chairman of the state land
commission, was bitterly attacked for approval of the sale, and was threatened
with impeachment. Aaron Burr, who as the state’s attorney-general was one of
the land commissioners, also had to endure much political abuse.

THE MAP OF MACOMB’S PURCHASE WHICH JAMES CONSTABLE TOOK TO EUROPE. THE
ADJOINING TRACTS ARE MARKED AS “THICK SETTLED SECTIONS” WHEN THEY WERE
STILL WILDERNESS
(Reproduced from a copy in the National Library of Paris)

LE ROY DE CHAUMONT, PROPRIETOR OF NORTHERN NEW YORK LANDS
Philip Schuyler, a Federalist opposed to the democratic administration of
Clinton, wrote his son-in-law Alexander Hamilton, January 29, 1792:
I have been pressed by several persons to draft a bill for the future conduct of
the Commissioners of the Land Office, in the preamble of which they wish to
convey a censure on the board for the conduct of the sale to Mr. Macomb.
Considering a measure of this kind as a two-edge sword, I have advised that if
even it were proper, it would not be prudent until matters more important to the
state have been decided upon.

Thus, Schuyler feared he might involve his own party adherents in the
scandal. Or he regarded the land as of so little value as not to be worth making
its loss a political issue. Melancthon Smith, one of the wild land jobbers of the
period who then had a seat in the legislature, strongly urged legislative approval
of the deal and won out. In April, 1792, after an acrimonious debate, the New
York Legislature “highly approved of the conduct of the Commissioners of the
Land Office in the judicious sales by them.” Consequently, when Constable and
McCormick paid the required instalments of the purchase price, they received
the state patents to the immense tracts.
On May 31, 1796, in New York City, in the presence of Constable and
McCormick, “purchasers under Alexander Macomb,” the Indian title to the
property was extinguished. Under the purchase treaty, “the people of the State of
New York agreed to pay the Indians, styling themselves, the Seven Nations of
Canada, on the third Monday of August next the sum of one thousand two
hundred and thirty-three pounds, six shillings and eight pence, and the further
sum of two hundred and thirteen pounds, six shillings, and eight pence, lawful
money of the state on the third Monday in August, yearly, thereafter”—if the
five chiefs cared to come for it.
Macomb’s purchase had hardly been officially confirmed when Constable
sailed for Europe in the hope of disposing of the vast acreage to British and
French speculators. At this time France was in the throes of revolution, and it
appeared that the ci-devant aristocrats, robbed of their native estates, would be
glad to exchange their valuables for American lands. America was pointed out to
them as a haven of refuge. Constable, accordingly, through his friend
Gouverneur Morris, advertised his lands among the hard-pressed aristocrats. His
partial success in disposing of large parcels to several French notables is
reserved for later consideration.
In addition to the Ogden and Macomb purchases; the State of New York,
during the decade between 1790 and 1800, by various means, disposed of other
sections of its unappropriated public domain. The political outcry against the
land jobbers, however, put an end to the wholesale disposal of large tracts after
the turn of the century. Subsequent sales were on a much smaller scale. Those
who purchased tracts ranging from 1,000 to 100,000 acres comprised almost all
the leading capitalists and politicians then in the state. The list of names of the
“bidders” could have constituted the social register of the time. There were the
Cuttings, the Lows, the Roosevelts, the Ludlows, the Fenimore Coopers, the
Watkins and the Livingstons, names which survive not only in their living

descendants but are still retained by the villages and townships comprised in
their land purchases. Few of these held on to their acquisitions and large
acreages were returned to the counties for non-payment of taxes. The bankruptcy
of the chief land operators, together with the abundance of wild lands for actual
settlements in the fertile western territory then being opened up by the federal
government, discouraged speculation in eastern waste lands, with the result that
after 1795 prominent New York capitalists returned to trading, banking and
shipping as sources of wealth and income.
A contemporary opinion of the futility of land speculation, together with the
reasons for its existence, is well stated in a letter written by William Henderson
to William Constable, dated February 6, 1795. Henderson wrote:
The room for speedy profit on waste lands in general above a dollar an acre,
I do not, for my part, think very great. Indeed, the sudden rise which they have
taken may be considered in a great degree artificial! You will say perhaps, “Why
then do you purchase?” I reply, “because they have been an article in which there
is great speculation,” and therefore may answer “to sell again.”
Such has been the psychology of land speculation in America from that day
to this. Land purchases were made with a view to resale while a speculation
fever was on, and not for permanent investment. Purchasers did not care much
where or what were the areas they bought. They traded in land deeds as if they
were parcels of merchandise. They bought, sold, traded and mortgaged without
surveys, and without adequate description of boundary limits. Deeds to
purchases, in many cases, were never filed, and titles were frequently never
claimed. When taxes became burdensome, the land reverted to the state for non-
payment.
We cannot well pass over to the secondary phase of the parceling out of the
Empire State without briefly telling the story of an interesting episode in the
annals of early New York and Connecticut land speculation. A strip of land, 2½
miles wide and over 200 miles long, bordering the whole length of the
Pennsylvania-New York boundary, and once known as “The Gore,” had been
claimed for many years prior to 1800 by Connecticut under her original charter
grant. This claim was disputed by both Pennsylvania and New York.
Notwithstanding Connecticut’s doubtful title, a group of native speculators
offered to purchase it from their state.
This was in 1795. Connecticut at that time, though much impoverished,
desired to build an imposing statehouse at Hartford. Various means of raising

funds for this purpose, such as public subscriptions, lotteries, and the like, were
tried without success. An offer was made by two contractors, Andrew Ward and
Jeremiah Halsey, to complete the construction of the statehouse in return for a
conveyance of land “comprised within the original charter limits of this state,
and extending on the north line of Pennsylvania from the northeast boundary to
the northwest boundary.” This offer was made notwithstanding that part of the
land in question had already been sold by Massachusetts to Phelps and Gorham
and the remainder to Robert Harper, James Watson, William Bingham, and
others, by the New York commissioners of the Land Office.
The offer was accepted by the Connecticut Legislature, and the contractors
immediately organized the “Gore Company” to claim possession of the slender
strip of territory. Sundry new members were admitted as partners in the
association. The whole deal was soon swept into the flames of the current
Connecticut land gambles. “If we are able to erect our public buildings, school
our children and expound our Bible through wild lands with a dubious title, at a
vast distance and covered with Indians, we are certainly a most favored people.”
Thus, wrote Samuel Hopkins to his friend, Oliver Wolcott. “The prospect pleases
us,” he added, “but the lapse of time only can show how much they are
magnified by the fog of speculation.”10
NEW YORK STATE PARCELED OUT AT WHOLESALE

The Gore Company lost no time in offering the lands for sale. In this way the
promoters expected to get funds to pay for the work on the statehouse. About
twenty-five deeds for tracts in the “Gore” were passed within a few months after
its organization. In the meantime, the land was advertised as having increased in
value about tenfold. Five trustees were appointed to hold the land, and “scrip”
and shares were issued to those who chose to buy them. Altogether 384 shares
were distributed among Connecticut residents.
The “proprietors” soon had their troubles, however. The New York
Legislature, hearing of the deal, passed an act directing the governor to remove
all those who settled under the Gore Land Company claims, “and cause all the
buildings of such persons to be destroyed.” In accordance with this legislation,
Governor John Jay issued a proclamation expressly charging and commanding
all the magistrates and other citizens of New York “to oppose and prevent, by all
legal means in their power, any such intrusion, entry, sale or purchase . . . and to
give due notice of all such practices as may come to their knowledge; to the end
that proper measures may thereupon be immediately taken to maintain the
authority of the laws, and to bring the offenders to exemplary punishment.”
In May, 1796, the “proprietors” memorialized the Connecticut Legislature to
declare the state’s right to the land as “they were unjustly impeded from making
settlement.” Connecticut then appointed James Sullivan, James Wadsworth and
Alexander Wolcott to treat with New York regarding the title to “the Gore,” but
without avail. The offer to grant New York “the judicial right to the land on
condition that a settlement be made with the “proprietors” of the Gore Land
Company, was rejected. The dispute then was brought into the United States
Courts. Alexander Hamilton appeared for New York and James Sullivan of
Massachusetts for the Gore Land Company. The “proprietors” were assessed
$12.50 per share for legal expenses; the case was dragged along without
decision, and in 1799 an additional tax of $10.00 was levied on shareholders.
Many declined to pay and their shares were resold at auction. A quietus was
given to the whole gamble in 1800 when Connecticut renounced her claim to all
lands west of her eastern boundary, except her “Western Reserve” in Ohio. In the
meantime, the shares of the Gore Company had dropped from $1,000 to $70 per
share and many innocent Connecticut speculators were ruined. After repeated
appeals, in which it was stated that “many of the proprietors have been reduced
from a state of affluence to penury and a state of bankruptcy,” the Connecticut
Legislature in May, 1805, finally awarded the company $40,000 payable in four
installments, on condition that the state be given a complete release from the

shareholders. Thus ended the Connecticut Gore Land Company. It was but one
of the many wild schemes of wasteful speculation that infested the New England
region in the early post-Revolutionary period.
1 Massachusetts also was granted 230,000 acres lying upon the Susquehanna River between the Owego
and Chenango Rivers. This tract, known as the “Boston Ten Towns,” was sold to Samuel Brown and
associates of Stockbridge, Mass., in November, 1787. Several of the purchasers moved to the region and
settled on the land.
2 See Payson Jackson Treat, The National Land System, p. 180.
3 See Henry Greenleaf Pearson, James S. Wadsworth of Geneseo, pp. 8-11.
4 See William Graham Sumner, The Financier and Finances of the Revolution, Vol. II, pp. 258, 259.
5 Paul Demund Evans, The Holland Land Company, Buffalo Historical Society Publications, 1924, p. 5.
6 Evans, op. cit, p. 25.
7 This pamphlet is very rare. A copy is in the Library of Congress.
8 Alfred Lee Donaldson, History of the Adirondacks, Vol. I, p. 66.
9 Evans, The Holland Land Company, p. 12.
10 See “The Connecticut Gore Land Company,” in Annual Report of the American Historical
Association, 1898, p. 162.

CHAPTER IV
PARCELING OUT THE EMPIRE STATE AT RETAIL
“IF THE whole Holland Purchase was brought to the condition of a garden,
capable of yielding agricultural products to any given extent, it might be the
means of affording a very comfortable support to the inhabitants, but would
never enable them to pay for their farms, until capital is invested in rearing
towns and manufacturies to purchase and consume the surplus products, and
thus react upon the value of the land.”
The foregoing statement was made by Benjamin Barton, in February, 1827,
at a convention of delegates from the several counties comprising the Holland
Purchase to consider “the relations subsisting between the Holland Company and
the settlers on the said Purchase, and to propose some remedy by which the
settlers may be alleviated.” It illustrates correctly the difficulty in the way of
filling up rapidly large areas of unoccupied waste lands with settlers whose
single occupation is agricultural production. It points out, moreover, the
desirability, if not the necessity, of the investment of large sums (in addition to
the primary cost of the soil) by the owners of undeveloped sections, to foster and
encourage the growth of the country.
The post-Revolutionary wild land speculators in New York and other states
for the most part neglected this condition. As they were speculators or “land
jobbers” and not “land developers,” they did not buy to hold and develop, and
thereby gain a profit from the added values arising from making their properties
more desirable as homesteads and settlements. Their aim was a “quick turnover”
with as large a profit on as small an investment as possible.
When the wild land mania had subsided, however, and large tracts fell into
the hands of those who purchased for actual real estate investment, the business
side of the proposition took on a different aspect. It was now a matter of slow
disposal—a complicated and continuous undertaking covering many decades. It
is these experiences of the great New York State landholders in retailing and

parceling out their properties after they were acquired from the original
“speculators,” which now concern us.
. . . . .
As stated in the previous chapter, Robert Morris, soon after taking over from
Phelps and Gorham the unsold portion of their patent from Massachusetts, resold
it almost immediately to a syndicate of Britishers, comprising Sir William
Pulteney, John Hornby and Patrick Colquhoun. These organized themselves into
the Pulteney Association, and in 1792 sent over Captain Charles Williamson as
their agent to dispose of the land. Naturally, Williamson, on his arrival in
America, went to Morris in Philadelphia for advice and assistance. What Morris
advised is not definitely known, but, as he stated in a letter to W. & J. Willink,
Dutch bankers, March 16, 1795, “I chalked out his [Williamson’s] plan and line
of march. He has succeeded far beyond his expectations and I glory in it—
notwithstanding I sold the property so cheap and knew at the time the sacrifice I
was making.”
Williamson, at the expense of his employers, soon began extensive schemes
of development. He first built a road from Williamsport, Pa., on the Susquehanna
River to Williamsburg on the Genesee River, so as to give a commercial outlet to
his tract. He next planned the town of Bath, N. Y., “as a handsome progressive
city.” Here he constructed a theater, laid out a race track, and built a sumptuous
hotel. He introduced the printing press to the town and published a weekly, The
Bath Gazette. He also constructed a pretentious hotel at Geneva, N. Y., lying in
the northeastern part of the Pulteney Purchase.
Thus the agent of the Pulteney Company seems to have been given a free
hand with unlimited resources by the proprietors. Between 1792 and 1799, he
had expended $1,374,470 but had received only $147,974 for lands sold.1 Of
course, he made efforts both at home and abroad to sell and colonize his lands.
With this in view, he prepared and circulated anonymously a descriptive
pamphlet entitled Description of the Settlement of the Genesee Country, in a
Series of Letters from a Gentleman to a Friend. It was intended to entice the
wealthy British as well as the immigrant settlers to take up parcels of land in his
domain. “You will find the Genesee Country,” he wrote, “abounding with
situations both valuable to the farmer and amusing to the gentleman and man of
leisure.”
The place was a paradise for sportsmen. The newly created settlement at

Sodus on Lake Ontario, he pointed out, stood unrivaled for “fishing, fowling,
sailing or hunting, and perhaps no place in America can equal it.” “Fish of
various kinds, many of them from the ocean, can be had at pleasure, and a
species of soft shell green turtle may be procured in plenty, little inferior to the
green turtle brought from the West Indies.” With such appetizing allurements, he
hoped to create a British sporting center in the wilds of America.
In order to “hurry civilization,” Williamson attempted “hothouse
settlements” within the Pulteney Purchase. In “Coral Gables fashion,” he
furnished pastime and amusement to the inhabitants. One of his stunts was the
holding of country fairs near the site of his “land office” in Bath. Here his lands
were “boomed” between intervals of horse racing, dances and theatrical
performances. To these affairs he invited the sporting gentry of the country, and
entertained guests coming from as far south as Virginia. Those who attended
these events came away with “terraphobia” (as land speculation was then
derisively termed), just as “tourists” did in Florida more than a century later. A
letter to the Wilkesbarre Gazette, in October, 1796, quoted by Isaac Weld, the
English traveler, thus describes the allurements of Bath:
Gentlemen:
It is fearful to reflect that speculation has raged to such a degree of late, that
honest industry and all the humble virtues that walk in her train are discouraged,
and rendered unfashionable. It is to be lamented, too, that dissipation is sooner
introduced in new settlements than industry and economy.
I have been led to these reflections by conversing with my son, who has just
returned from the Lakes of the Genesee. . . . He has been to Bath, the celebrated
Bath, and has returned both a speculator and a gentleman, having spent his
money, swapped away my horse, caught the fever and ague, and, what is
infinitely worse, that horrid disorder which some call the “terraphobia.”
We hear nothing from the poor creature now (in his ravings) but of the
captain and Billy, of ranges, of townships, numbers, thousands, hundreds, acres,
Bath, fairs, races, heats, bets, purses, silk stockings, fortunes, fevers, agues, etc.,
etc. My son has part of a township for sale, and it’s diverting enough to hear him
narrate its pedigree, qualities, and situation. In fine, it lies near Bath, and the
captain himself once owned, and for a long time reserved, part of it. It cost my
son but five dollars per acre; he was offered six in half a minute after his
purchase; but he is positively determined to have eight, besides some precious
reserves. One thing is very much in my boy’s favor—he has six years’ credit.
Another thing is still more so—he is not worth a sou, and never will be, at this

rate. . . .—A Farmer.2
It will be noted from the above that Captain Williamson, like other land
agents of that day and this, sold land on liberal credit terms. All this brought in
little cash to the proprietors. Consequently, they grew impatient. They became
tired of constant capital outlays and small receipts from land sales. They
protested to Williamson, and eventually refused to honor his drafts.
Finally, in 1801, the Pulteney Association was split up. Sir William Pulteney
took over three-fourths of the unsold land, and the other partners the remainder.
Captain Williamson was dismissed as the resident land agent, and returned to
England. Robert Troup, a prominent New York politician, was appointed in his
stead. He held the office for thirty years. Although the race track at Bath
disappeared under a growth of scrub oak, and the theater was dismantled, the
Pulteney lands rose steadily in value during Troup’s administration, and sales
were more frequent. An advertising campaign was carried on in New England
and elsewhere to attract settlers. The War of 1812 brought new money into the
region from the army supplies it furnished to the troops guarding Lake Ontario.
Later, the building of the Erie Railroad through Steuben County, in which the
estate was located, added materially to its importance and increased the sales to
actual sellers.

ADVERTISEMENT OF THE PULTENEY ESTATE IN THE Hartford Courant, JANUARY 14, 1807
However, when the affairs of the Pulteney Association were finally wound
up about a century after its creation, it was estimated that if the sums represented
by the original purchase price had been invested at the lowest prevailing interest
rates, it would have been a more profitable investment of the proprietors.3
. . . . .
Theophile Cazenove, to whom was assigned the task of disposing of the vast

domain of the Holland Land Company, was not permitted by his Dutch masters
to follow a policy of land booming such as was attempted by the agent of the
English purchasers of a part of the Genesee Country. Instead of entering upon
schemes of development, he quietly and unostentatiously set about to offer small
tracts here and there to settlers.
Moreover, the Dutch, in spite of their vast acreage, acquired from Morris, did
not appear to be in a hurry to get rid of their enormous commitment. They even
sought and obtained more land. In 1791, through Cazenove, they purchased a
thousand out of a total of 2,500 shares of the Pennsylvania Population Company,
an association which had been organized by John Nicholson, to take over about
450,000 acres of Pennsylvania lands lying just south of the Holland purchase. As
stated in the previous chapter, they also acquired about a half million additional
acres in the same region from Judge James Wilson, who had preempted tracts
through speculation in Pennsylvania land warrants, but who was unable to make
payments thereon when due.
The tract of the Pennsylvania Population Company was incorporated with
those of the Holland Land Company, and for a time the two concerns were
generally regarded as one. However, disputes regarding the titles and other
difficulties in Pennsylvania led to the dissolution of the Population Company in
1813. Its lands were sold to Judge William Griffith, of New Jersey, and J. B.
Wallace, a Philadelphia attorney, for $180,000. Griffith later sold his interest to
Wurtz Brothers, merchants of Philadelphia, for $150,000, payable in English
goods. These Wurtz Brothers were interested in buying up lands containing coal,
and a decade later were instrumental in organizing the Delaware & Hudson
Canal Company. When their anthracite speculations proved a success, they
withdrew from partnership with Wallace, receiving $310,000 for their interest,
two-thirds of which, however, was in debts due from settlers.
Difficulties beset Cazenove and his Dutch masters in trying to profit from
their land deals. Since the owners were aliens, they were not legally permitted to
hold lands in New York State. Williamson had avoided this handicap for his
English employers, by becoming an American citizen soon after his arrival at
Philadelphia, and by receiving in his own name title to the Pulteney Purchase
directly from Morris. The Dutch, however, tried to get around the law by placing
their holdings in the name of “trustees,” but this was a clumsy expedient.
Accordingly, measures were taken to obtain exemption from the New York law
against alien ownership of landed property. As already stated, it was
accomplished on April 2, 1798, largely through the political influence of Aaron

Burr.
In his early political career, Burr endeavored to get rich along with the other
land jobbers of the time by buying large tracts on credit. He was a shareholder in
the Pennsylvania Population Company, owning one hundred shares, which,
however, he forfeited for non-payment. He also had contracted under a bond
with Cazenove to purchase 100,000 acres in the northern part of the Holland
Purchase, but he soon found payments beyond his financial means. He was,
therefore, threatened with suit against his sureties. In the hopes of bettering a bad
situation, he had united with other hard-pressed land speculators, in
commissioning James Wadsworth, who was then in England trying to sell
Genesee lands, to find English purchasers for their insecure holdings. To make
the task easier, Burr, who was a member of the New York Assembly, put through
a bill granting aliens the conditional right to hold land in New York.
The correspondence of Cazenove with his Dutch masters confirms the belief
that Burr obtained the passage of the law through bribes furnished by the Dutch
owners. They paid altogether $10,500, of which $3,000 went to Josiah Ogden
Hoffman, the attorney-general, and $5,500 went to Burr himself, albeit as a two-
year loan. Burr never repaid the loan, but his contract for the purchase of land
from the Holland Land Company was canceled. So he escaped from a bad
financial situation.4

AN EARLY MAP OF HOLLAND PURCHASE, PUBLISHED IN FRANCE IN 1803 IN JEAN
PHILLIPPE LOUIS BRIDEL’S Le pour et le contre, ou avis à ceus qui se proposent de passer dans les
Etats-Unis d’Amerique
Although the New York law permitted the Dutch proprietors to take title to
the land, it did not give them the right to reenter lands once the title had passed
from their hands. This prohibition was a serious handicap to the alien owners.
They dared not sell land on credit by taking a mortgage for the unpaid portion of
the sale price, since, as aliens, they could not bid in the land under foreclosure.
This led to sales conditioned on the final payment being made. Hence, no deeds
were granted to purchasers until they had paid in full. Settlers on the lands were
for the most part poor, and few could keep up their interest payments, to say
nothing of the required instalments of the principal. The result was a permanent
condition of vassalage on the part of the purchasers. These could not sell their
farms and reap the benefits of the improvements made thereon, because they
possessed no deeds confirming title. As late as 1802, in all Genesee County,
there were only thirty freeholders—in fact, “not enough to make up a jury.”
The State of New York in 1817, however, had begun the construction of the
Erie Canal. The Holland Land Company was asked to donate the necessary right

of way through its property. When this was promised, a law was passed on
March 5, 1819, repealing the restriction of reëntry of aliens on property sold by
them. Even with the prohibition removed, the Holland Company continued its
old practice of making contract sales, and deeds were offered at time of purchase
only in special cases.
When the “boom” in the wild land mania collapsed after the Morris-
Greenleaf-Nicholson failure in 1795, Cazenove realized that it was impossible to
dispose of large tracts of the enormous territory under his control. He
accordingly built up an organization for retail disposal. Land agents and
subagents were employed in eastern towns and seaports as well as abroad. Land
offices were opened in various settlements within the purchase. The principal
office was set up in the newly created town of Batavia, N. Y. (located at about
the central point of the domain), and Joseph Ellicott was placed in charge.
Ellicott was a renowned, though an eccentric surveyor. He was a brother to
Andrew Ellicott, the engineer, who completed the plan of Washington, the
“Federal City.” He held the office as resident land agent of the Holland Land
Company for twenty-one years. In this capacity he laid out the city of New
Amsterdam, now Buffalo, gave its streets the jaw-breaking names of the Dutch
proprietors and made it a flourishing town. He was careful enough to take the
choice lots for himself. Through a series of roads built through different parts of
“the Purchase,” he made the lands accessible to new settlers.
Through these means settlers came in steadily, though slowly. Every
encouragement was given them when no expense was involved. Little cash
payment was required of land purchasers and if instalments of interest and
principal were not paid when due, the defaults were added to the capital of the
debt, and the interest computed on the total amount. In some cases when cash
could not be paid, cattle and produce were accepted. As the Dutch owners had
paid cash for their lands, they did not press remittances from their debtors and
appear to have been satisfied to allow balances due them to accumulate at 7 per
cent interest, when the prevailing rate in Holland was 3 per cent. With this
liberality to new settlers the wild lands were gradually converted into farms.
Theodore Dwight, President of Yale College, who passed through the
Genesee country in 1810, wrote enthusiastically of its rapid settlement: “It is
questionable,” he says, “whether mankind has ever seen so large a tract changed
so suddenly from a wilderness into a well-inhabited and well-cultivated
country.”5 He estimated the white inhabitants then at between two and three
hundred thousands “all planted within 26 years.” And Captain Williamson also

wrote in 1799, ten years earlier:
A wilderness changed, in so few years, to the comfortable residence of a
numerous body of industrious people, who enjoy the comforts and conveniences
of life in a degree superior to most parts of the United States, affords matter of
curiosity to the intelligent traveler, and many respectable characters undertake
the journey for no other motives.
Though the liberality of the Holland Land Company toward its creditors is
generally admitted, this very liberality in time became a cause of great
discontent. The purchasers, unable to pay in full for their lands, practically
became tenants-at-will of the company. Complaints of this condition poured in.
The proprietors themselves grew tired of the situation, and in 1820 offered to
resell to the state all of their lands in the Genesee country. Gideon Granger, as
their attorney, submitted the proposiion to Governor DeWitt Clinton, who passed
it on to the legislature, with the remark: “This measure from a financial point of
view may be rendered beneficial. It will relieve a considerable portion of our
population from evils which are actually experienced, and from influence which
may be injuriously exercised. It will enable the State to extend encouragement to
the meritorious settlements which have already taken place.”6
Granger argued that “eighty to one hundred thousand people were subject to
the will of the Hollanders for their prosperity,” and inasmuch as the unsold lands
could be acquired at about one dollar per acre, and the bonds, mortgages,
contracts, etc., at a considerable reduction from face value, the state would be
making a good bargain by accepting the proposition. It was estimated that about
1,750,000 acres (about one-half of the original acreage) still remined unsold,
“much of it considerably valuable.”
The legislature did not take kindly to the proposition, so that conditions
remained unchanged. Wearied of steadily growing defaults and of inadequate
cash receipts, the proprietors appointed, in 1821, a new agent, Jacob S. Otto, to
replace Joseph Ellicott. Otto abandoned the former policy of leniency. Many of
the settlers were served with threats of dispossession. During the next ten years,
these dissatisfied debtors held public meetings, distributed pamphlets and had
“almost weekly conventions.” All this engendered political opposition to the
Holland Company. It resulted in the repeal of the company’s exemption from
state taxation on its unsold land, and to legislative threats to tax debts due on
land sales contracts for land belonging to non-residents.
Charles Butler, who at this time lived in Geneva, N. Y., and who in later life

became a wealthy New York capitalist through speculation in western lands,
sought a remedy for the situation. In March, 1830, the New York Life Insurance
and Trust Company was incorporated and empowered to lend on mortgages, up
to one-half of the value of the land. Butler went to New York and made
application to it for loans on behalf of the debtors of the Holland Land Company.
He then became the Holland Company’s land agent. In this way mortgages were
substituted for unpaid balances on sales contracts. Other New York trust
companies also granted loans, so that many of the farmers in the section, instead
of being tenants-at-will, became freeholders.
But the political animosity against the Holland Land Company continued.
Moreover, the law requiring the payment of taxes on its unsold lands made its
business unprofitable. Efforts were then made to wind up its affairs. The lands
and sales contracts were offered to local capitalists. In the meantime, real estate
and farm lands were booming throughout the country, and the Dutch proprietors
were thus given the long sought for opportunity to dispose of their holdings. A
syndicate headed by Trumbull Cary and George Say of Batavia, N. Y., acquired
early in 1835 the unsold lands and purchase contracts of the Holland Land
Company in Chautauqua County for about $1,000,000. The transfer of
ownership, however, did not allay the dissatisfaction of the debt burdened
settlers. In fact, the efforts of the new proprietors to force payment from them,
led to actual riots. A mob set fire to the company’s land office at Maysville in
Chautauqua County and another threatened to destroy the main office at Batavia.
For a while the latter place was surrounded with block houses and a constant
guard kept on hand.
In order to mend matters, Cary and Say called upon William H. Seward,
prominent politician and later Lincoln’s Secretary of State to treat with their
discontented tenants. Seward resided in Auburn, just east of the Holland
Purchase. He knew the calibre of the up-state farmer, and when the agency of the
proprietors in Chautauqua County was offered him, in 1836, he accepted. He
immediately began to follow the plan of Charles Butler in converting the
outstanding sales contracts into mortgages.
When Seward was running for Governor of New York in 1838, his political
opponents accused him of selling the debts owed by the settlers “to Wall Street,”
and of using Nicholas Biddle to raise money in England at 5 per cent, whereas
the settlers were made to pay 7 per cent. This accusation was answered in a
brilliant address to the citizens of Chautauqua County. In this, Seward made a
vigorous defense of his policy as agent of the Cary land syndicate. “In less than

eighteen months,” he said, “four thousand persons whom I found occupying
lands, chiefly under expired and legally enforceable contracts of sale, and
excited and embarrassed alike by the oppression and uncertainty of ever
obtaining titles, became freeholders.” Seward was elected governor in 1838, and
again in 1840, so that his land dealings proved in the end no detriment to his
political ascendancy.
BROADSIDE OF HOLLAND LAND COMPANY, APRIL 24, 1821, ANNOUNCING THE FAILURE
TO PLAN TO SELL OUT TO THE STATE, AND OFFERING NEW TERMS TO SETTLERS
While Seward was endeavoring to adjust the delicate situation of the new
proprietors in Chautauqua County, Jacob Le Roy and Herman Redfield, in behalf
of the Farmers Loan and Trust Company of New York, were negotiating for the
purchase of the Holland Company’s lands and securities in other counties. An
agreement was finally reached in December 31, 1835, whereby about 90,000
acres of unsold wild lands, and a mass of mortgages, unexpired sales contracts
and other indebtedness, were sold for $2,282,382, payable one-half in cash and
the remainder within two years.7

This left but a few remaining properties of the company in two other
counties. These were likewise sold to New York capitalists, who raised the
necessary funds through loans from the Farmers Loan and Trust Company of
New York City. Thus, by 1836, the Holland Land Company faded entirely from
the picture. Only its old stone “land office,” still standing at Batavia as a local
“landmark,” and a few boundary posts, now kept in local museums, are a
reminder that a group of Dutch capitalists once owned about a seventh of the
total area of the Empire State.
And little profit came from their speculation! According to Paul Evans, the
historian of the Holland Land Company, the original investment of the company
“was retrieved with interest of five to six per cent,” but he gives this estimate
“merely for what it is worth.”8
. . . . .
The story of the disposal of the northern New York lands comprised in the
Ogden and Macomb purchases is further proof of the futility of waste land
speculations. In this section, the lands were sold and resold in large tracts,
usually in townships or parts of townships. The original purchasers, as a rule,
attempted to be relieved of their acquisitions at a profit as soon as possible, and
in many cases, when profits were not forthcoming, they either turned their titles
over to their creditors or permitted their holdings to revert to the state for unpaid
taxes.
William Constable and Gouverneur Morris had the largest hand in the
disposal of these properties. Morris, as stated in the previous chapter, became a
“general land agent” both at home and abroad. When he returned from France in
1798, he continued to occupy himself with numerous land deals and remained in
this business to the end of his long career as lawyer, author, statesman, diplomat,
and financier. He died in 1816.
When Constable arrived in France in 1792, to offer his vast empire of waste
woods and mountains to distressed émigrés, he naturally sought the aid of the
astute American minister, who could bring him into contact with prospective
purchasers. It was undoubtedly through Morris’ assistance that Constable sold a
tract of “Macomb’s Great Purchase,” comprising 630,000 acres, to Pierre
Chassanis, just a few days before Louis XVI was guillotined. Chassanis was a
brother-in-law of James Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont, who in turn was the son
of Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont, the host in France of Benjamin Franklin.

These French noble gentlemen formed a company, called the “Compagnie de
New York,” and issued a prospectus, the title page of which is shown herewith.
According to this document, “The subscribers agreed to emigrate to America and
establish a settlement on the north side of the Black River, near Lake Ontario.”
The territory was to be known as “Castorland” which was translated into
English as “Beaverland.” A seal bearing a cut of a beaver was adopted as the
concern’s insignia.
The six hundred thousand acres mentioned in the prospectus were reduced to
200,000 acres in 1793, and were represented by two thousand shares, all of
which were sold at the original offer of 800 livres per share. The price received
by Constable for this tract was £25,000 in English currency.
The prospectus of “Castorland” gave an alluring description of the country,
describing trees, plants, roots, birds and fish. There were very favorable
conditions for producing maple sugar and potash, two important and necessary
articles of commerce at the time. The success of similar colonies recently
established was pointed out, particularly Judge Cooper’s venture on Lake
Otsego. Each “share” of the company was to be an “integral part and fraction of
the purchase” and no money was to be paid to Constable, the vendor, “until after
the title was received from America, clothed with all the formalities required by
the usages of the country.”

PROSPECTUS OF THE COMPAGNIE DE NEW YORK
(Courtesy of the New York Public Library)
The proprietors of Castorland lost no time in sending two agents to America.
These men, after many delays and hardships of travel, reached the location of the
purchase. As at this time real estate in New York could not be legally held by
non-resident aliens, the agents returned to New York City and sought the aid,
first, of Alexander Hamilton, and subsequently of Aaron Burr, to get the
legislature to remove this obstacle. This accomplished, the two agents again
visited Castorland with a corps of surveyors, but sickness and hardships severely
hampered their activities. In the meantime, the guillotine in Paris had ended the
careers of several of the original shareholders. One of the agents, Pharoux, was
drowned in the Black River in 1795, and the other, through sale of a part of the
company’s property, received sufficient cash to pay his bills, and so returned to
France. The colony was not long afterward abandoned, and the lands passed to
other proprietors—chiefly to Gouverneur Morris, in payment of commissions,

and to Le Ray de Chaumont, who had become an American citizen and had
taken up his residence in this back country.
When Chassanis and his associates could only obtain subscriptions to about a
third of the 600,000 acres that they had agreed to buy from Constable, the latter
in April, 1793, resold the returned portion, about 400,000 acres, to Charles J.
Michael de Wolf, of Antwerp, for 300,000 florins ($125,356). De Wolf then
transferred the land for 680,000 florins to a group of Belgian capitalists who
called themselves the “Antwerp Company.” They, however, did not propose a
colonization scheme similar to that attempted by Chassanis. In 1800, they
appointed Le Ray de Chaumont and Gouverneur Morris their joint agents to hold
and dispose of the land, “in trust.” Their agents could accomplish little in
making sales, and most of the land was later acquired by Le Ray de Chaumont.
Thus, James Le Ray, as he was known in the United States, was the residual
legatee of large tracts in the original Macomb purchase. He was an enterprising
émigré, who came to America in 1789, to collect the debts owing to his father by
the Revolutionary Government. The land mania took a strong hold on him. He
acquired tract after tract in northern New York. Much of it he resold, but his
generosity, combined with his inability to make large profits in land deals, as
well as other difficulties, kept him “land poor.” Like his father in France before
him, he became a bankrupt, and was compelled in 1824 to surrender his estates
to his son for the benefit of his creditors. His landed property at the time of
making the assignment consisted of:
30,759 acres in Franklin County
appraised at
$22,500
73,947 acres in St. Lawrence County
appraised at
106,000
143,500 acres in Jefferson County
appraised at
574,000
100,000 acres in Lewis County
appraised at
133,000
_______
 
________
348,206 acres
appraised at
$835,500
Strange to relate, the affairs of Le Ray’s estate were so well managed by his
son that all American claims were satisfied in full. While his property was being
liquidated, Le Ray abandoned his land office at LeRaysville, and retired to
France.
Le Ray was a noteworthy French-American citizen. His activities in settling
the northern area of New York State are far surpassed by his contributions to the
economic and social welfare of the inhabitants of the region. He was very much
interested in scientific agriculture, and in other progressive developments, and

endeavored to introduce new crops and new industries in the land of his
adoption. He was instrumental in bringing to his lands the finest breed of merino
sheep, taking these from the celebrated sheepfold of Rambouillet. He built roads,
established schools, endowed churches. He was fond of his children, and has
perpetuated their Christian names in such places as “Alexandria Bay” (named
after his daughter) and “Cape St. Vincent” (after his son), both on the St.
Lawrence River, where he was for a time a dominating spirit. He died in Paris in
1840, at the age of eighty-one.
Le Ray was associated in land deals with Gouverneur Morris, and it is
undoubtedly through his influence that Morris succeeded in selling several tracts
to Jacques Necker. Necker bought this land ostensibly for his daughter and her
children. Like Morris, he feared that “all kinds of property in Europe are
uncertain and wavering” and wished to transfer part of his wealth to peaceful
America. Madame de Staël, his daughter, later added purchases made on her
own account. One purchase comprised 23,000 acres in the town of Clare, St.
Lawrence County. The total acreage owned at her death was estimated at 30,000
acres.
The Duke of Rochefoucauld, who had witnessed the many tragedies of land
speculation in America, cautioned Madame de Staël against her speculations, but
Le Ray assured her that they would prove profitable undertakings. Morris also
aided in allaying her fears. As Madame de Staël, who was hard pressed by
Napoleon, and chased all over Europe, had expressed a wish to settle with her
family in America, Morris encouraged her by pointing out that “with us [in
America] it is within the reach of every one to attain the objects of his desire,
and he who is successful, enjoys the consciousness of possessing an influence
over the course of affairs.” Though he admitted that building castles in the
United States was a folly as ruinous as building castles in the air, the setting up
of “a little summer establishment in a new country, which is rapidly advancing,
and to pass there from three to five months of the fine season; to remain four
months more either in Philadelphia or New York, and to spend the remainder of
the year traveling, is a mode of life by no means repugnant of common sense.”
But despite the allurement held out by Morris and Le Ray, and an expenditure of
$20,000 in building roads and other improvements on her property, Madame did
not come to America. Her wilderness estate passed to her children at her death in
1817. These ordered it sold, and the land reverted to American ownership.
Madame de Staël was not the only French celebrity whom Le Ray induced to
risk a fortune in an American land venture. It was he who was responsible for

the purchase, in 1816, of a large tract of the northern wilds of New York by
Joseph Bonaparte, elder brother of the emperor. How it was brought about is
thus related by Vincent Le Ray:
Mr. Le Ray de Chaumont was at his estate in Touraine in 1815, when he
heard of Joseph Bonaparte’s arrival at Blois. He had known this prince before his
great elevation, and was his guest at Mortefontaine when the treaty of September
30, 1800, between the United States and France was signed there, but he had
ceased meeting him afterwards. Seeing, however, that misfortune had assailed
the prince, he remembered the man and hastened to Blois. The prince, having
invited Mr. Chaumont to dinner, said suddenly to him: “Well, I remember you
spoke to me formerly of your great possessions in the United States. If you have
them still, I should like very much to have some in exchange for a part of that
silver I have there in those wagons, and which may be pillaged any moment.
Take four or five hundred thousand francs and give the equivalent in land.” Mr.
Le Ray objected that it was impossible to make a bargain where one party alone
knew what he was about. “Oh,” said the prince, “I know you well, and I rely
more on your word than on my own judgment.” Still Mr. Le Ray would not be
satisfied by his flattering assurances, and a long discussion followed, which was
terminated by the following propositions, immediately assented to by the prince:
Mr. Le Ray Chaumont would receive four hundred thousand francs, and would
give the prince a letter for Mr. Le Ray’s son, then on the lands, instructing him to
convey a certain designated tract if, after having visited the country, (whither he
was then going) the prince confirmed the transaction; otherwise, the money to be
refunded.”9
Joseph Bonaparte, in time, came to America, visited the tract, and accepted
it. This, however, may have been from necessity rather than choice, as Le Ray
was unable to repay the loan. The former King of Spain could not take title to
the estate, since he was an alien, so the deed was made out to Peter Duponceau,
the learned Philadelphia lawyer of French extraction.
The original Bonaparte purchase was estimated at 150,000 acres, but it later
was reduced to 26,840 acres, valued at $40,260. As “Count Survilliers,” Joseph
Bonaparte took up his residence in America at Bordentown, N. J. But he
occasionally visited his vast woodland estate in the Adirondacks. He recognized
the qualities of the lands as a hunting preserve, but complained that he could not
find 200 acres of level ground to build a lodge on. In honor of his favorite deity,
the goddess of the hunt, he named his township “Diana.” A beautiful lake in his

domain still retains the name of Bonaparte. He petitioned the New York
Legislature for the privilege of acquiring title to the land, and the Act of March
31, 1835, which conferred upon him this right, is evidence that he meant to
retain it. He did not hold it long thereafter, however, but sold the whole property
for $80,000 to John La Farge, a merchant of Havre and New Orleans. La Farge
took up his residence for awhile at Penets Square near the tract, but about 1838
he moved to New York where he engaged extensively in real estate and other
business transactions and amassed considerable wealth. He was the confidential
agent of Louis Philippe who, as King of the French, realized the instability of his
job and invested heavily in America.
Although Joseph Bonaparte made but few and infrequent visits to his
Adirondack estate, a local poet of the region, Caleb Lyon, memorialized the
occasions in pleasing verse, thus:
Here he forgot La Granja’s glades,
Escurial’s dark and gloomy dome,
And sweet Sorrento’s deathless shades
In his far off secluded home.
The hunter loved his pleasant smile
The backwoodsman his quiet speech
And the fisher’s cares would he beguile
With ever kindly deeds for each.
He lived for others not in vain
His well kept memory still is dear.
Once King of Naples and of Spain
The friend of Bernardin St. Pierre.10
Gouverneur Morris, to whom may be ascribed the interest of Le Ray de
Chaumont, Jacques Necker and Madame de Staël in the northern wilderness of
New York, is also responsible for the large land venture of another prominent
European capitalist. It was he who persuaded David Parish, scion of a prominent
Scotch family, “The Lairds of Rossie,” (who for several generations successfully
conducted international banking at various European centers), to buy a large
estate in northern New York.
Morris, while in Europe, became intimate with John Parish of Antwerp,
whose son, David, came to America in 1804 on a financial mission. When
Morris returned to America in 1798, and continued his occupation as leading

American land hawker, he urged John Parish, through correspondence, to place a
part of his fortune in American estates. “Your oldest son,” he wrote November
12, 1806, “should own a large tract. This is the way to become a real baron
without a name.”
Accordingly, David Parish, after taking up his residence in America, became
a land baron. Through Morris’ advice he purchased the whole township of
Ogdensburg, comprised in the original Ogden purchase, together with many
hundreds of acres in the vicinity. For this he paid about $2 per acre. After the
tract was bought David Parish did not know what use to make of it. Morris and
Le Ray suggested that the land might be used for raising merino sheep. The soil,
they said, was an exact repetition of the Spanish district where sheep produce the
most wool.
Parish, therefore, commenced operations by importing about 3,000 merino
sheep from Spain at heavy cost. Merino sheep were then selling at fabulously
high prices. He also built a “baronial mansion” at Ogdensburg, “the Red Villa”
designed by the French architect, Renée, whom Parish brought over with him in
1811. This villa he equipped in European style, and visited it occasionally.
The wool raising idea, for awhile, took a strong hold on him. Vincent Nolte,
who in 1853 wrote an entertaining account of his American experiences,11
relates that while traveling with Parish from Philadelphia to Baltimore, he noted
some merino sheep in a field. “Look,” Parish exclaimed, “how they jump about.
They yield splendid wool.” But success does not seem to have attended Parish’s
wool-raising scheme. Aside from building a fine residence and a church at
Ogdensburg and laying out the towns of Parishville and Rossie (where he
attempted to establish iron works), he allowed the estate to retain its primeval
condition. Yet, Nolte estimates that he invested more than $350,000 in the
proposition. He brought over his nephew, George Parish, to take charge of it, and
returned to his banking business in Europe. George occupied the “baronial
mansion” for a number of years, bringing there his mistress, Madame Vespucci,
a Tuscan beauty, who had gained social prominence from her claim of descent
from Americus Vespucci. After George was recalled to Germany as “Baron von
Softenburg,” in 1834, Madame Vespucci retained possession of the mansion for
a few years. But she also wearied of the monotony of northern life, and returned
to Europe. The “old red villa” at Ogdensburg was allowed to become a ruin. Its
grounds were later cut up and the whole Parish estate was offered for sale, and
gradually parceled out.
Thus, David Parish failed to realize his ambition to become an American

baron. Though hardly a trace of his ownership of a vast northern New York
barony remains, his sojourn in America was not without substantial benefit to his
adopted land. It was he who suggested, in 1813, to Stephen Girard and John
Jacob Astor that they, in cooperation with him, purchase the entire issue of
$16,000,000 United States bonds, and thereby enabled the nation to carry on
successfully the “Second War for American Independence.”
Not all the prominent purchasers of the northern New York wild lands were
of foreign nationality. Both William Constable and Gouverneur Morris,
following their attempts to dispose of large tracts of the Macomb Purchase in
Europe, made offerings of large and small parcels to native capitalists.
Constable, who seems to have been a persuasive real estate salesman, as well as
a great shipper and trader, succeeded in selling, for £ 100,000, in June, 1792,
about 1,280,000 acres, or almost one-third of the total purchase, to Samuel Ward,
a prominent private banker in New York. This tract was located in the westerly
portion of the Macomb Purchase and is designated in the maps as the Boylston
Tract. Aaron Burr is reported to have been a silent partner in the purchase
transaction, but upon ascertaining that there was no prospect of quick profit, he
withdrew; so Ward completed the purchase alone. Ward, however, did not want
to hold the land, and soon returned a large part of it to Constable. He tried to
make out of it a quick “turnover” of his money. The portion he retained (668,000
acres) he soon resold in parcels to others.
James Greenleaf made a beginning of his vast land-jobbing business, by
buying 210,000 acres from Samuel Ward for £24,000, in New York currency.
Greenleaf mortgaged his entire tract to Philip Livingston for $38,000, to effect
the required payment. He then proceeded to seek a purchaser. He was fortunate
in finding one in John Francis, the son-in-law and partner of John Brown, a
wealthy Providence shipper and manufacturer. Francis had come to New York
City, where Greenleaf then resided, to dispose of a cargo of goods which was
expected to arrive at the port. While awaiting the arrival of the vessel, he was
entertained in “high society” by Greenleaf and Livingston, who were constantly
talking of their land speculations. Whether they purposely got the young
merchant under the influence of liquor or not is, of course, not recorded—but
there is pretty good evidence that Francis, without consulting his rich father-in-
law, turned over to Greenleaf $210,000, or some such sum, of the proceeds of
the cargo money, for an imperfect claim to the same number of acres of the
northern wilderness of New York.
It is reported by an eyewitness that when John Brown, the richest man in

Providence, learned of the foolish transaction put over on his son-in-law, “he
dropped his head into his hands and wept bitter tears of mortification and
disappointment.”12 The son-in-law died about four years thereafter, probably
also from mortification, so John Brown was left to struggle along with his
wilderness estate. In 1798, he obtained clear title to the property, at an aggregate
cost of about $250,000. He was required to buy off Livingston’s first mortgage,
and made other outlays to perfect his title. The estate became locally known as
“John Brown’s Tract,” and covers the most delightful section of the
Adirondacks, as it comprises the Fulton Chain of Lakes.
Brown retained the tract until his death in 1803. And he sought to exploit it.
He built a road into the region and endeavored to encourage settlements therein,
but with little success. At Old Forge, a saw mill, a grist mill, a few houses, and a
frontier tavern and schoolhouse were built. The whole estate was divided into
eight townships. To each of these townships, Brown, in the hope that they would
inspire good New England morals in the wilderness, gave such names as
“Industry,” “Perseverance,” “Frugality,” “Sobriety,” “Economy,” and the like.
When he died, he willed one or more townships to each of his heirs. Some of
these soon gave up the land rather than pay the taxes due thereon.
After John Brown’s death, his son-in-law, Charles Frederick Herreschoff, the
progenitor of the famous yacht builders of Bristol, took over the management of
the Adirondack estate. He offered strong inducements to settlers to come to the
tract, and allotted them farms, on condition that they clear and cultivate the land.
By this means, he hoped to sell neighboring parcels to later comers.
Of course, he didn’t succeed. The country was fine for hunting, fishing and
camping, but farming on it was out of the question. Accordingly, about 1815,
Herreschoff, like David Parish, indulged in the sheep-raising mania. A herd of
fine merinos were driven over the Berkshires all the way from Rhode Island to
take up a domicile in the northern wilderness. But no profit came from this
venture. Herreschoff next tried iron mining. The name of “Old Forge,” where his
smelting operations were carried on, is all that remains of this venture. Finally, in
1818, when financially ruined, and utterly discouraged in trying to exploit the
John Brown Tract, Herreschoff blew out his brains. This is but one of the many
tragedies growing out of the wild land mania which infested the Empire State in
the decades following the Revolutionary War.13
Thus, the great wild land purchases in northern New York, as a whole,
brought little satisfaction to those who originally or subsequently acquired them.

The area bordering along the St. Lawrence River, due to its water power
facilities, it is true, has become an industrial and commercial region of moderate
importance, but its progress has been slow. Much of the region elsewhere is still
barren waste land. Some of it has been cut over for lumber, and much of it
denuded for pulp. Some of it is still held as private game preserves and
woodland estates of the very rich, but the greater part has again been taken over,
albeit at heavy expense, by the people of the State of New York, as their public
domain—a playground and forest reserve for all time.
1 O. Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of the “Phelps and Gorham’s Purchase” p. 274.
2 Isaac Weld, Travels in America, (Fourth Edition), Vol. II, pp. 336, 337.
3 See “The Pulteney Purchase,” by Paul D. Evans, in the Quarterly Journal of the New York State
Historical Association, Vol. III, p. 102.
4 Evans, The Holland Land Company, p. 209; also Wandell and Minnigerode, Aaron Burr, Vol. I, p.
178.
5 Theodore Dwight, Travels, Vol. III, p. 510.
6 See New York Assembly Journal, 43rd Session (1820), p. 581.
7 Evans, The Holland Land Company, p. 393.
8 Evans, op. cit., p. 435.
9 See Franklin B. Hough, History of Lewis County, N. Y., p. 71.
10 Abstracted from Franklin B. Hough’s History of Lewis County, N. Y., P. 79.
11 Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres, or Reminiscences of the Life of a Former Merchant.
12 Alfred Lee Donaldson, History of the Adirondacks, Vol. I, p. 101
13 Donaldson, op. cit., pp. 89-110.

CHAPTER V
THE OHIO LAND LURE
“I HAVE learnt from experience,” wrote Lord Dunmore, Colonial Governor of
Virginia, to his chief, Lord Dartmouth, on December 24, 1774, “that the
established authority of any government in America, and the policy at home, are
both insufficient to restrain the Americans, and they do and will remove as their
avidity and restlessness incite them . . . They acquire no attachment to a place,
but wandering about seems engrafted in their nature, and it is a weakness
incident to it that they should forever imagine that the lands further off are still
better than those upon which they are already settled.”
Thus, the lure of the wooded hills and fertile plains west of the Alleghanies,
as we have already seen, dates back to colonial times. This vast, inland empire
stretching as far west as the Mississippi, threatened to disrupt the incipient union
of the thirteen states, but the spirit of compromise prevailed. The conflicting and
overlapping claims to territory were gradually surrendered to the national
government. The question arose: “What is to be done with it?” “Give it to the
soldiers,” demanded some. “Use it to pay off the national debt,” said others.
“Keep it for future use,” still others counseled, and there were those who held
that any who desired should have the right to settle on it.
Before deciding on a policy of disposal of its western domain, Congress
adopted a plan of government for it, and a system of administrative control. It
passed the Ordinances of 1784, 1785 and 1787. It created the Northwest
Territory. It prohibited slavery and guaranteed religious liberty in it, and
provided that the primary disposal of the soil should be left to the federal
government without interference or hindrance by local, state or territorial
authorities.
As early as 1784, Congress took up the question of disposing of western
lands. It was provided that no areas were to be sold until after they had been
surveyed. All surveys were to make provisions for “ranges,” “townships,” and

“sections.” As soon as a sufficient number of ranges were surveyed and the maps
prepared, one-seventh of the land therein was to be reserved for the soldiers, and
the remainder could be sold or otherwise disposed of by acts of Congress.
THE OHIO LAND GRANTS
Little time was lost in waiting for bids for land. In 1785, Nathaniel Sackett,
in behalf of himself and his associates, petitioned the Congress for a grant of
land, the boundaries of which would now cover most of the present State of
Ohio. Sackett offered no consideration “except an ear of Indian corn annually as
rental, if demanded.” He did, however, make it a condition of the proposed grant
that the land be settled and cultivated by those who obtained it. To effectually
prevent land jobbing, none of the settlers were to be permitted to sell their land
for a space of years.
But the Continental Congress was too heavily in debt to give away the land
freely. No heed, therefore, was given to Sackett’s petition. In the meantime, a
reverend gentleman from Massachusetts, Dr. Manasseh Cutler, had been
pondering over a colonization scheme in the Ohio country. He was desirous of
providing the hard-pressed New England yeomen with better and cheaper lands,
and incidentally, he may have had ideas of pecuniary gain. He was born at

Killingly, Conn., May 28, 1742, and graduated from Yale College in 1765. He
then studied law and began the practice of his profession at Martha’s Vineyard,
but soon gave this up for theology. Becoming a Congregational minister, he
served as chaplain in the American army during the Revolution. It is quite
probable that he became interested in the Ohio country through his friend, Rufus
Putnam, a hardy Revolutionary soldier, who had made a trip beyond the
Alleghanies, and returned an enthusiast. Anyway, in 1786, Cutler, together with
Putnam, formed a colonization association, which he called the “Ohio Company
of Associates.”
Of course, they offered shares in this enterprise “for a consideration.” The
capital was to be a million dollars in Continental certificates. It required a full
year before one-fourth of this capital was subscribed, but it was thought the
remainder could be readily obtained if Congress would give the “associates” an
option on a compact body of land on reasonable terms. This required a
modification of the land ordinance of 1785. Accordingly, the Reverend
Manasseh Cutler journeyed to New York to treat with Congress. Here, it is said,
he was largely instrumental in shaping the Ordinance of 1787, which established
the government of the Northwest Territory.
If the Reverend Dr. Cutler had no dreams of pecuniary gain or “land
grabbing” deals when he came to New York to present his petition to Congress,
he probably caught the fever then, or at least was subjected to a severe risk of
contagion. For at that time, Colonel William Duer was secretary of the Board of
the Treasury. This “Board,” composed of three members, managed the depleted
finances of the new republic. Duer, therefore, would have a hand in arranging
terms with Cutler regarding the purchase of western lands. He dined and wined
Cutler on his arrival, and promised him assistance. In fact Duer put a business
slant on Cutler’s undertaking, and proposed a partnership.
Cutler’s negotiations with Congress were discouraging, however. Cash was
demanded, and the poor New England clergyman did not have this in sufficient
amount. A minimum price of one dollar an acre had been placed on the public
lands, payable within three months after purchase. As the “Ohio Associates”
petitioned for 1,000,000 acres, Cutler knew that his shareholders could not raise
the required sum in so short a period. Duer then advised that, as a bait to the
impoverished government, Cutler should increase his application to 4,000,000
acres, and that 3,000,000 acres be assigned to a “company,” composed “of a
number of the principal characters of the City” of which he, Duer, would, “in
profound secret,” be the head. With so large a sum in prospect, Congress would

be willing to grant liberal credit terms. As a further inducement, Duer proposed
to give Cutler a large personal share in his land concern which was to take over
the excess acreage. This excess acreage, as shown on the accompanying map,
comprised the territory east of the Scioto River and west of the actual grant to
the “Ohio Associates.”
Cutler acceded to the proposition, and a bargain was struck with Duer, July
20, 1787, following “an elegant oyster dinner” in Brooklyn. In accordance with
its terms, William Duer, together with Samuel Osgood and Walter Livingston,
close friends and associates on the Board of the Treasury, used their influence (as
Cutler noted in his diary), “to bring over my opposers in Congress.” The
outcome was the approval by Congress of a purchase by Cutler and associates of
a tract in Ohio, covering five or six million acres, at one dollar per acre payable
in specie, or in “loan office certificates reduced to specie value, or certificates of
liquidated debts of the United States.” Payments were to be $500,000 on the
execution of the contract, another half million dollars when the tract was
surveyed, and the balance in six equal semiannual instalments with interest.
Whenever the aggregate sum of $1,000,000 was paid, a patent for a million acres
was to be given. The title to the remainder was to pass upon such conditions as
the Board of the Treasury might agree with the purchasers.1

MADAME DE STAËL, WHO SPECULATED IN NORTHERN NEW YORK LANDS
BRONZE TABLET COMMEMORATING THE GRANT TO OHIO COMPANY OF ASSOCIATES, ON
THE PORTAL OF THE SUB-TREASURY BUILDING, NEW YORK CITY

Thus, the Ohio Company and William Duer’s so-called “Scioto Project”
were launched as a joint proposition. The former may have been primarily a
colonizing scheme, without the stigma of speculation, but the Scioto Project was
an out-and-out land gamble. In order to put the proposition through, Duer had
promised to advance $100,000 to Cutler to enable him to effect the first payment
of a half million dollars. He also was to obtain assistance, if necessary, for the
Ohio Company to complete the payments required of it in order to obtain full
title to the quantity of land the “associates” actually desired. The payment for the
remaining three to four million acres was to be made by the “Scioto Associates,”
and if these payments were not made, the Ohio Company would still have full
title to its lands, and would not be injured by such failure. In fact, the Ohio
Company shareholders were kept in blissful ignorance of the real connection of
the Scioto speculation with their own enterprise.
Cutler returned to Boston in August, 1787, and reported his success to his
associates. He had, he said, “arranged the greatest contract ever made in
America.” Some of the “shareholders,” however, objected to the option on the
additional 3,000,000 acres included in the contract with Congress, and “declared
that they would withdraw from the company if anything beyond the original
purchase was undertaken.”2 No action on the proposition was necessary,
however, and the matter was allowed to stand. The principal efforts of the
“Directors and Agents” of the Ohio Company were to complete the list of
shareholders and obtain the first half million dollars (in depreciated government
debt certificates) required for the initial payment. For this purpose handbills
were circulated, traveling agents employed, and newspaper articles were
published throughout New England.
An appeal was made to both investors and “settlers” with such good effect
that despite the extreme scarcity of money at the time, a large part of the sum
was acquired. Duer and associates, in accordance with the private arrangement
with Cutler, made up the deficit, amounting to $143,279. Duer personally
subscribed for $30,000 of the “shares” of the Ohio Company. On October 27,
1787, Cutler paid over to the Board of the Treasury a half million dollars in debt
certificates of the United States then worth anywhere from $60,000 to $130,000.
From this time on, the affairs of the Ohio Company were severed from those
of the Scioto Project. Its history has been recorded in glowing eulogies as the
earliest phase of the westward movement. A commemoration tablet in bronze to
this effect has been placed on the old Sub-Treasury building in Wall Street, New
York. It notes that under an ordinance “passed here,” Manasseh Cutler, acting for

“The Ohio Company of Associates, an organization of soldiers of the
Revolutionary Army, purchased from the Board of the Treasury for settlement, a
portion of the waste and vacant lands of the (Northwest) territory.” On April 7,
1788, it continues, “Rufus Putnam, heading a party of fifty-eight, began the first
settlement at Marietta, and on July 15th, Arthur St. Clair, as first Governor,
established civil government in the territory. From these beginnings sprang the
States of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Wisconsin.”
So runs the legend. The project was free from the stigma of speculation. “No
land Company in America,” enthusiastically writes Archer B. Hulbert, an
American historian, “was ever formed with an eye more single in the welfare of
the poorest investor; no land company in our history surpassed the Ohio
Company in its manifold efforts to better the causes of the common people.”3
Such acclamations, to be swallowed whole, must be taken with a grain of
salt. Undoubtedly, the Ohio Company was more of a colonization scheme than a
land speculation. But a plain appeal to human cupidity was made in the original
prospectus. Among the “shareholders,” moreover, were many who had not the
least intention of emigrating west and who had not the slightest personal interest
in fostering land settlement for the downtrodden and impoverished
Revolutionary soldiery. Thus, Alexander Macomb, the great land plunger of
New York, held five shares in 1796. Alexander Hamilton was down for five and
a half shares. William Duer put in $30,000 (in debt certificates) as “an
investment.” The Scioto “trustees” originally held one hundred and forty-three
shares, representing about 200,000 acres, which shares, however, were forfeited
for non-payment. Many other of the “investors” also had their holdings forfeited
because of failure to meet payments when called for. They were not interested in
acquiring western wild lands. They wanted merely to profit from the rising
market value of their “shares.”
Measured by the financial outcome, the Ohio Company was not much of a
success. In March, 1792, the company petitioned Congress for relief. It had
made one payment of $500,000 in debt certificates, which, computed at the then
market value, was equal to less than 33 ⅓ cents per acre; but before the second
payment was due, the rise in the value of federal securities, due to Hamilton’s
funding scheme, together with the Indian war in the Ohio country, and the
proposals of Congress to reduce the price of western lands to settlers, threatened
the company with ruin. If the second payment could not be made, the title to the
lands would not pass, and the settlers could be evicted. Congress yielded to the
petition by reducing the average price of the lands to 50 cents per acre. The Ohio

Company, therefore, received about 1,000,000 acres of land for $500,000 in
government debts, worth during the time of purchase from 12½ to 50 cents on
the dollar. For about 215,000 acres it presented soldiers’ warrants.
Despite the Ohio Company’s strenuous colonization efforts, when the
directors of the company endeavored to make final assignments of the lands to
settlers and shareholders in July, 1793, there were but 230 males of 18 years and
upwards on the purchase. Indian warfare and frontier hardships had discouraged
emigrants. Yet, the venture was of inestimable value to American progress. “It
extinguished a half million of the public debt at a time when the treasury was all
but bankrupt; it was a concrete example of the wealth of the western lands; it
seemed to pave the way for other remunerative sales, and better than all this, it
placed on the frontier a most desirable body of settlers, many of them veterans of
the Revolution.”4
. . . . .
Though the Ohio Company’s success, from a financial viewpoint, was
disappointing, that of the Scioto Project, its illegitimate half-sister, was a
complete fiasco. Two days after the purchase contract was signed with the Board
of the Treasury on behalf of the “Ohio Company of Associates,” Colonel
William Duer, on behalf of himself and a small “inside” group of speculators,
entered into an agreement with Manasseh Cutler and his assistant, Major
Winthrop Sargent, by the terms of which the Ohio Company’s option on the
Ohio lands, exclusive of the 1,000,000 acres to be taken up directly by the
settlers, was divided into thirty equal shares, “thirteen to belong to Duer and his
assignees, thirteen similarly to Cutler and Sargent, and the remaining four to be
disposed of abroad for joint account.” The two groups were to share equally in
profits which might accrue in attempting to negotiate the sale or mortgage of the
same, “either in Europe or America . . . and in paying the purchase money due to
the United States.”5
This contract formed the sole basis of the Scioto Project. The concern was
never chartered. It was not even a recognized “association.” When Duer was
hard pressed by his French investors for an explanation of the real character and
composition of his “company,” he is reported to have made the following
statement:
The company known under the name of the Company of the Scioto, was

originally composed of thirty (30) shares belonging to as many owners. The
persons who held these shares were for the most part those who had much
influence in the formation of the Company of the Ohio at Marietta, or in the
Legislative or Executive branches of the Government. The original shares have
since been much sub-divided, but the general management of the Company’s
affairs, as well in America as abroad, has been entirely trusted to myself alone,
and I have for aid and counsel, two agents, who are Messrs. Royal Flint and
Andrew Craigie.6
Thus it was William Duer’s “bubble.” He seems to have interested, both
financially and otherwise, a group of prominent capitalists and land jobbers in
New York and Boston. Besides Royal Flint and Andrew Craigie, there were
Christopher Gore, of Boston, Nalbro Frazier, a Philadelphia merchant; James
Jarvis, John Holker, William Constable, Melancthon Smith and Seth Johnson of
New York. Several others were probably concerned in it, but the real
“proprietors” may never be known, as the whole affair was conducted in an
underhanded manner without responsible officers or offices, and without minutes
or records of proceedings. No attempt was made to interest the public in the
venture, and no efforts were employed to attract home settlers to the lands,
though there was an abortive plan of French colonization.
William Duer, like Robert Morris, Alexander Macomb, William Constable
and other land jobbers of the epoch, believed that American waste lands could be
readily sold in Europe. And he attempted to follow the practice the speculators
then called “dodging,” i.e., selling the land in Europe before paying for it here.7
The “Scioto Associates” certainly acted on this principle. All they had was a
contract to take over a portion of the option of the Ohio Company, an option not
originally desired by Manasseh Cutler and his associates, but forced upon them
through the need of Duer’s political influence in obtaining a land grant from
Congress. On the basis of this option they despatched to France the young
Hartford editor and poet, Joel Barlow, to offer the lands. They thus expected to
attract the hard-pressed and persecuted aristocracy as purchasers.
Barlow’s task was not easy, and his expense to the “Scioto Associates” was
heavy. Despairing, after many efforts, of selling large tracts to individuals, he
decided to form a French subsidiary company, called the “Compagnie du
Scioto.” This company agreed to purchase from the “Scioto Associates”
3,000,000 acres at about $1.00 per acre, payable in instalments. It was given the
privilege of reselling in large or small tracts, and could send out settlers to take

possession of the land. Barlow acted as its agent and manager. Because he gave
“shareholders” and land purchasers the right of immediate settlement, he
expected “to raise the reputation of the lands to such a degree that they will sell
them all off in the course of one year at a great profit.”
With this object in view the “Compagnie du Scioto” issued in Paris a
glowing prospectus for “an Establishment on the Ohio and Scioto Rivers in
America.” It contained much the same material used by Manasseh Cutler in his
advertisement of the Ohio Company’s project. The rough maps exhibited were
seriously misleading, and the statements and plans of the enterprise highly
overdrawn. Barlow, however, was “furnished with testimonies of so flattering a
nature, and with credentials of the first authority to the most respectable houses
in Paris” that he aroused the cupidity of the intelligent Frenchmen and created a
flood of public enthusiasm for the speculation. His land office in Paris became
so popular that he wrote his principals that they might reckon their profits at
“above a million,” and he even suggested a proposal that the French Government
exchange its American securities for shares in the “Compagnie du Scioto.” “The
present circumstances are so favorable,” he added, “and the object so popular,
many portions are already sold, and the people are preparing to embark in
January.”
This news was not entirely pleasing to the “Scioto Associates.” They had no
intention of establishing colonies and had made no provision for receiving
foreign settlers. They had hoped that some opulent French capitalists would take
their property off their hands “en bloc” at a great pecuniary profit to themselves.
In fact, they never intended that Barlow should divide up the tract into “shares,”
and they certainly could not back up Barlow’s warranty clause in his sales to
Frenchmen, guaranteeing purchasers against every kind of eviction and attacks.
However, they were overjoyed at the prospect of a handsome profit, and
made some preparation to receive the émigrés. Barlow was fearful, however, that
he had gone too far in making outright sale of lands that his principals did not
possess. On January 15, 1790, he wrote Duer:
Don’t for God’s sake fail to raise money enough to put the people in
possession. . . . Make every sacrifice rather than fail in this essential object. If it
fails, we are ruined. All our fortunes, and my character will be buried in the
ruins.8
The first shipload of the French settlers arrived in Alexandria, Va., in March,
1790. Duer had sent an agent, Colonel David Franks, one of the proprietors of

the old Illinois Company, to remove them as quietly and as secretly as possible,
to a site selected for their settlement. They and their wares were placed in
wagons and carted off to the Ohio country, but not without difficulties. Franks
notified Duer they complained bitterly against the cheap claret furnished them,
and demanded French wines. Near Winchester, Va., they entered into a fistic
encounter with the native farmers. Moreover, Franks was not furnished by Duer
with sufficient funds to pay the cost of cartage, and the wagoners threatened to
have him jailed for debt.
The discontent was increased by the heterogeneous character of the human
consignment. Among the Frenchmen who arrived were several ci-devant
notables who had purchased large tracts. They had organized themselves into an
association called the “Society of Twenty-four.” These included the Marquis de
Lezay-Marnésia, Count de Barth, Viscount de Malartic, and Madame de Leval.
They brought with them renters and sub-purchasers, and “indentured servants of
the worst class—even taken from the prisons.” When they arrived at the place of
settlement, euphoniously called “Gallipolis,” they were painfully disappointed,
and sent home letters denouncing the promoters of the speculation. They were
unfitted for and could not endure the hardships of pioneer life. Many soon
deserted.
Some of the “notables” went to New York and presented their bitter protests
to Duer. They were appeased for a while by assurance of protection from
prominent government officials to whom Duer had introduced them. Duer also
entertained them well and placed them into the best society. He succeeded partly
in interesting them in his Maine lands. But the poorer immigrants were not so
easily stalled. They experienced hunger and other privations as well as Indian
attacks. The few that remained suffered miserably. In the meantime, Duer,
together with Alexander Macomb and Andrew Craigie, and others of the
“Associates” had become involved in a disastrous speculation in government
bonds and bank shares. Several, including Duer, took up their residence in the
debtors’ prison. And they never paid for the Scioto lands.
But Joel Barlow, poet and diplomat, who was really responsible for the
colonization scheme that brought scandal into the Scioto deal, speculated
successfully in France following its collapse, became rich, and returned to
America. Here, he purchased an estate near the national capital; endeavored to
establish a national university, and ended his career in Cracow, Poland, in 1812,
while United States Minister to France.
Congress, merely as a charitable act, later made provision for the few

Frenchmen who remained in the Gallipolis colony. A law was passed giving
them patents to small allotments of land in the Scioto Valley. Thomas Ashe, an
Englishman, who visited the Ohio country, in 1806, describes the wretched
French colony, and concludes that “never was a place chosen, or rather approved
of with less judgment.” Of an estimated number of 500 families, not more than
sixteen families were left in 1800.9 Thus ended the Scioto fiasco. It was
conceived in the iniquity of avarice, nurtured in secret and underhanded
dealings, and was closed out as a national disgrace. John Bach McMaster, the
eminent American historian, who, despite his exaggeration and inaccuracy in his
short account of the project, aptly described it as “the most shameful piece of
land jobbery that ever disgraced our country.”10
. . . . .
Aside from Cutler’s purchase on behalf of the “Ohio Company of
Associates,” in which the Scioto Project was involved—Congress made only one
other sale of a large tract of public land for colonization purposes. This is known
as the Symmes’ “Miami Purchase.” In its outward aspects, it is an Ohio land
venture very similar to that of Manasseh Cutler and his associates.
John Cleves Symmes, in his application for a western land grant, pictured
himself, as Cutler had done before him, a friend of the Revolutionary soldier and
a promoter of western settlement. He was born in 1742, at Southold, L. I., of old
American pioneer stock. He was the fifth generation of the Symmes, and the
fourth generation of the Cleves family in America. As a young man he took up
the work of a surveyor, which may account partly for his later interest in lands. It
is not known definitely whether he read law, but his letters indicate that he
possessed considerable learning, and as an associate justice of the Supreme
Court of New Jersey and a pioneer federal judge in the Northwest Territory, he
acquitted himself well.

WILLIAM DUER
(From an etching by Max Rosenthal)

JOEL BARLOW
(From a portrait by R. Fulton)

JOHN CLEVES SYMMES
(Reproduced from Bond’s The Correspondence of John Cleves Symmes)
In 1770, Symmes moved to Sussex County, then on the western frontier of
New Jersey. He joined the patriotic cause at the outbreak of the Revolution, and
served in the New Jersey militia. His military record commended him as a tried
and able leader. His record in the civil service of his adopted state was also
honorable. Removing to Morristown, N. J., in 1780, he was elected to the
Continental Congress in 1785. Here he acquired the political influence and the
personal contacts which were of valuable assistance to him in putting over his
scheme of western colonization.
Jonathan Dayton, who became Symmes’ partner in the Ohio land deal, was
also a Revolutionary veteran and a member of Congress from New Jersey.
Dayton remained in Congress after the adoption of the Constitution, and was
Speaker of the House during the years 1793-1797. The strength of his political

influence, together with his superior business acumen, helped Symmes in his
negotiations with Congress. Although at times the two partners were somewhat
at loggerheads in their business relations, they never suffered a complete rupture
of their friendship.
Such is not the case of Symmes’ relationship with Elias Boudinot, his third
partner in the Ohio land purchase. Boudinot also was a Jerseyite, and of greater
political prominence than either Symmes or Dayton. He was at one time
President of the Continental Congress, and was a member of Congress under the
new Constitution, from 1785 to 1795. Like Symmes, he became very much
interested in western lands. It was his powerful political influence which was
largely instrumental in putting through Symmes’ “Miami Purchase.” He also
acquired a half interest in the tract which Symmes reserved for himself as a
speculation, and, in addition, became the owner of large sections in other parts of
the purchase. Toward the end, Boudinot and Symmes had a dispute regarding the
division of the “reserve lands” and the former took legal action to compel
Symmes to furnish him with deeds for his portion.
Although Boudinot and Dayton, as members of Congress, pushed through
the Miami Purchase, and became active participants in the deal, the origination
of the idea and the execution of the plan must be credited to John Cleves
Symmes alone. It is said that the “western urge” was communicated to Symmes
by his neighbor, Benjamin Stites, who went on a trading trip down the Ohio
River in 1786. Stites became an enthusiast regarding the prospects of the Ohio
country, and selected the region between the two Miami rivers as offering the
best locations for settlement. In the spring and summer of 1787, Symmes himself
visited the region and was likewise impressed with its resources and prospects.
At first he planned a colony on the Wabash River above Vincennes, in the
region formerly claimed by the United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies,
and went as far as to issue a “prospectus” addressed to the people of Kentucky.
This is described “as a masterpiece of its kind in the inducement it offered to
settlers.” In this document, Symmes announced that he hoped to “induce
Congress to lend a favorable ear” to his petition, since he meant “not to solicit a
grant merely for himself, but on behalf of all those who will signify to him their
wishes to become adventurers, and will subject themselves to a proper system
for safe settlement and the government which it is expected will be established
by Congress.”11
Notwithstanding his proposal of adherence to the government “which is
expected to be established by Congress,” the fact that Symmes addressed his

appeal to the “People of Kentucky”—then strongly dissatisfied with the federal
administration—and invited settlement, “with artillery and military stores”
before he ever had title to the land, led General Josiah Harmar, who was the
military governor of the district, to send a copy of the prospectus to the Secretary
of War for the information of Congress. Congress did nothing about the matter,
however, and on his return to the East, Symmes gave up the idea of the Wabash
settlement, and turned his attention to obtaining a grant in the Miami section.
Doubtless, he was influenced in this choice by the Congressional grant that
had just been made to the Ohio Company in the Muskingum Valley. The lands
bordering on the west of this grant, comprising the district between the Scioto
and Miami rivers, had been reserved by Congress for the holders of Virginia
military land warrants, so the section nearest to the Ohio Company’s land
available for private purchase was the region lying on the Ohio River between
the Miami and the Little Miami rivers. It was an ideal location for a settlement,
since the rivers afforded navigation for commerce with the southwest. Symmes
impetuously petitioned Congress for the whole of this region, comprising about
2,000,000 acres. He later reduced his demand to 1,000,000 acres, but was
particular to designate the most favorable boundaries. He insisted upon, and he
received, the same terms as Manasseh Cutler and Winthrop Sargent had been
granted, when acting for the Ohio Associates. The contract was signed October
15, 1788, and the first payment of $82,198 in debt certificates and soldiers’
warrants was made.
In the meantime, Symmes, in a determined effort to secure settlers, and in
order to make the required initial payment, had been issuing prospectuses,
pamphlets and advertisements. He invited Revolutionary veterans with land
warrants, and owners of federal debt certificates, to enter the deal. One of his
advertisements which appeared in the Brunswick Gazette, January 7, 1788,
reads, in part, as follows:
The subscriber having succeeded with Congress in obtaining that most
excellent tract of land on the northwest bank of the Ohio, between the great and
little Miami rivers, begs leave to state some particulars to those gentlemen who
may not meet with a small pamphlet already published on the subject.
In the first place it ought to be observed, that no dispute respecting titles in
the first instance, can possibly arise, these will be clear and certain, as the whole
purchase will be surveyed into sections of one mile square, and every line well
marked, and the sections numbered, and every number which may be sold shall

be recorded to the first person applying to the subscriber therefor. The land is
allowed (all circumstances considered) to be the best tract in the federal country:
It lies in north latitude thirty-eight degrees, and the same with Virginia. Horses,
cattle and hogs can live well in the woods, where there is abundance of food
through the winters, which are very moderate: Every kind of grain and vegetable
raised in the middle states grows here, with the addition of cotton and indigo,
which may be raised in sufficient quantities for family use. The land is generally
free from stone and a rich, easy soil for tillage. There are no mountains and few
hills, so that the country for the most part is level: It is extremely well watered
throughout, and surrounded on three sides by rivers navigable in the boating
seasons; vessels may be built here of two hundred tons burden, and being fully
freighted may be navigated with safety to New York, or any other sea-port. The
finest timber of every kind known in the middle states, with many other sorts of
more southerly production, grow in plenty here, but there is very little
underwood or brush. Millstones and grindstones are found in some of the hills.
Wild game and fish may be taken in abundance. Salt is now made to any
quantity, in Kentucke, opposite this tract on the south-east side of the Ohio,
where seven counties are already considerably settled and where any number of
neat-cattle may be had very cheap.
As payment was to be made in “debt certificates,” Symmes exchanged land
warrants for this currency. He also made actual sales of land prior to the grant,
something which was destined to cause him considerable trouble. But the
important transaction which concerns us, as a land speculation, was his
reservation of the most valuable section of the grant for himself. This reserved
section, consisting of over 40,000 acres, bordering on the Ohio River, and
covering the present city of Cincinnati, he divided up into twenty-four shares. He
made Elias Boudinot an equal partner in this territory and then offered and sold
to speculators a considerable part of these shares on their joint account, even
before he started west with his settlers. All this was done in advance of the
signing of the definite purchase contract. Symmes was so anxious to launch his
undertaking that he actually set out for Ohio in July, 1788, three months before
he obtained the right to the land, leaving to Boudinot and Dayton the task of
completing the legal formalities.

A MIAMI LAND-WARRANT
(Collection of the Historical and Philosophical Society of Ohio)

JONATHAN DAYION
It is generally believed that Symmes’ object was patriotic and idealistic, and
that it was free from the stigma of land speculation. That this is an erroneous
view is proven by his correspondence and his activities subsequent to making the
purchase. The fact that, from the very inception of his enterprise, he made a
reservation of the best section for the benefit of himself and partners is an
indication that his humanitarianism was diluted with personal avarice. In his
Trenton circular, addressed, “To the Respectable Public,” issued November 26,
1787, he openly stated:
The subscriber hopes that the respectable public will not think it

unreasonable for him, when he informs them that the only privilege which he
reserves for his trouble in the business, is the exclusive right of electing or
locating that entire and exclusive township which will be the lowest point in the
point of land formed by the Ohio and Miami Rivers, and those three branching
parts of townships which may be northwest and south of such entire township.
When this reservation, together with his hasty departure west before the
contract was signed, became known, it aroused considerable political opposition
to his grant. Both Dayton and Boudinot had much difficulty in overriding the
opposition. Competitive land companies insidiously attacked the idea of a
“proprietor’s reserve” by advertising that their own projects permitted all to
come in on equal terms. Judge Symmes met their attacks in a public statement,
published in the New Jersey Journal, March 19, 1788, in which he denied that
the proprietors’ lands along the Ohio and Miami Rivers were the most desirable.
The suspicion persisted, however, and an unsigned squib, in the same newspaper,
ironically described Symmes’ emigrants as “going west to the emolument of
certain gentlemen who have a particular genius for land jobbing.” In a letter to
Dayton, dated August 21, 1788, Symmes boldly stated:
My appropriation of a township at the confluence of the two Rivers, and the
mode adopted by me in disposing of the same, I still conceive, to have been my
province alone, and of which no one with propriety can complain.12
The proprietors’ “reserve” selected by Symmes, despite his public statement
to the contrary, covered the most accessible and fertile lands in the Miami
Purchase. It includes today within its limits the City of Cincinnati, that Queen
City of the West, in which Symmes originated the “town-jobbing” business,
which became a mania in the Northwest Territory for many years thereafter.
Each owner of the twenty-four shares representing the “proprietors’ reserve” was
required to pay £200 per share into a joint account of the original proprietors,
i.e., Symmes and Boudinot. For this payment, each share was to receive “a
square” in the proposed city (i.e., Cincinnati) and a proportionate part of the
remaining reserved section. In later years, some dispute arose among the
shareholders over the divisions of the lands, and, as already noted, Boudinot was
impelled to enter suit against Symmes to obtain his allotment.
Symmes lost no time in pushing land sales. For this purpose, he engaged a
number of agents in New Jersey as well as in the new settlement. Sales
continued for some time on a moderate scale in all parts of his purchase. When

final surveys of the tract were made, however, they revealed that it contained
only slightly more than one-half of the expected million acres. The proprietors
soon discovered that they had “oversold.”
This, at first, did not seriously disturb Symmes. He persisted continuously to
make demands on Congress for the full million acres designated in the contract.
One of his handbills, dated January 20, 1797, almost ten years after the date of
his purchase, reads as follows:
TO THE PUBLIC
It being a matter, no longer doubtful, that Congress will establish their
Contract with the Subscriber, in the fullest extent of One Million of Acres of
Miami Lands, It is hoped that all who wish to become purchasers, will not longer
suffer themselves to be amused with the idle reports against the Contract, but
purchase immediately from some Persons who have a right to sell. And those
Gentlemen who have already contracts for Miami Lands, are desired to make
payment as soon as possible to Wm. H. Harrison at Fort Washington, as the
Secretary of War has agreed to receive Twenty Thousand Dollars at Fort
Washington from the Subscriber, if the money be paid immediately for the use of
the Army.
JOHN CLEVES SYMMES
Jan. 20, 1797.
Thus Symmes was confident that he would get his million acres. He
accordingly continued to sell lands lying outside his grant. This caused him
considerable annoyance later, and ultimately led to his financial ruin. Numerous
suits were filed against him by purchasers whose titles were rejected by the
government. The judgments obtained by them brought him into a condition of
bankruptcy. His large land holdings were seized and sold piecemeal under the
hammer.
Moreover, after 1790, Congress adopted Hamilton’s plan of disposing of the
public domain in small plots on easy terms to individual purchasers, and
steadfastly refused to accede to Symmes’ petitions for the unpatented sections of
his million acres. He had contracted to pay for his grant at the rate of only 66 ⅔
cents per acre, payable in depreciated debt certificates. As Congress had placed a
minimum price of $2.00 per acre on public lands, Symmes saw a remarkable
opportunity for profit in his land deal with Congress. But Congress was

obdurate. The agitation against land grabbing was too strong to be politically
ignored. The petition of two designing land grabbers—Royal Flint and Joseph
Parker—for an Ohio grant was rejected. A similar petition for a tract on the
Mississippi River just south of Ohio, made by Colonel George Morgan, one of
the proprietors of the old Indiana Company, was also given little heed.
Henceforth, public land was not to be sold at wholesale to speculators.
The total acreage that Symmes had patented to him amounted to but 311,862
acres. The actual cost in specie was probably less than $50,000, but, of course,
Symmes and his associates incurred other expenses in acquiring and improving
the tract. Naturally, he was much embittered by his inability to receive all the
acreage he contracted for. This is reflected in his last Will and Testament, in
which he complains of having been treated “with the blackest ingratitude” by the
United States. “Many of those,” he stated, “who now laugh at my calamity, . . .
would this day be toiling in poverty had not my enterprise to this country, my
benevolence on the property that they have plundered from me, have made them
rich.”
Symmes undoubtedly served the country well in settling the Miami lands on
the Ohio. He took up his residence on his grant and was active in the
administration of its welfare. His difficulties were many. Indian attacks, settlers’
complaints, shortage of provisions, riots and disease were prevalent. He bore all
with indomitable courage. He is described by Thomas Ashe in 1806 as living in
a noble stone mansion, surrounded by improved farms, villages, and country
seats. “The banks of the River,” noted Ashe, “are settling with unparalleled
success, and the title to all the adjacent lands is bought up by individuals and
speculators who propose selling again at an advance price. Most of the prairie
ground are now as high as from twenty to fifty dollars per acre, and the
woodland adjoining the river at from five to sixteen dollars per acre.”13 Symmes
had paid Congress for the same land less than twenty years previous but a few
cents an acre.
As is customary in human experience, the pioneer and promoter did not
profit. Symmes died February 26, 1814, in almost hopeless poverty. Though his
venture was a great financial disappointment to him, due, as he claimed to “the
unjust claims against him founded upon the deepest conspiracy that had ever
destroyed the earnings of an industrious, frugal and adventurous life,” be
brought to completion his dream of a western colony which gave a fresh impetus
to American territorial growth and expansion at the beginning of the nineteenth
century. His claims to fame rest not alone on his enterprise in western settlement,

but because of his emigration to the frontier. Through his western venture he
became the father-in-law of the warrior President, William Henry Harrison, and
a great-grandfather of Benjamin Harrison, also a President of the United States.
Symmes had associated with him a number of prominent land jobbers, whose
cupidity and zeal were attracted by the speculation. In addition to Jonathan
Dayton and Elias Boudinot, there was James Wilkinson, soldier of the
Revolution, who had settled in Lexington, Ky., where, in addition to carrying on
an extensive trade with Louisiana, he speculated heavily in western lands.
Reentering the army in 1791, he continued his land deals, and later was
suspected of treasonable intrigues with the Spanish, and of complicity in Burr’s
Conspiracy. Even after his removal from the army in 1815, he kept up his
interest in land speculation. He died in Mexico City in 1825, when on a mission
to obtain a Texas land grant.
Israel Ludlow, prominent land surveyor in the Ohio country, who laid out the
Symmes patent, also became mildly infected with the land mania. Still another
was General Arthur St. Clair, first governor of the Northwest Territory.
Jonathan Dayton, together with St. Clair, Ludlow and Wilkinson, jointly
purchased from Symmes the tract between the Miami and the Mad rivers. On
this, Ludlow laid out the town of Dayton in 1795. The proprietors offered in
Cincinnati the “in-lots” at ten dollars a lot, and the “out-lots” at still lower prices.
The town jobbing proposition gave fair promise of success, until the site was
declared to lie outside the area of Symmes’ original grant. At this time, Jonathan
Dayton was speaker of the House of Representatives, occupying, as Symmes
expressed it, “honor’s easy chair” at $12 a day. His great political influence and
his “wire-pulling,” however, were not powerful enough to lead Congress to yield
to the petition to have the town bearing his name placed within the Symmes
Purchase. The “lot purchasers,” therefore, had to pay the “government price” to
the national land office, if they desired a clear title. Some of them did this, but
many of the purchasers of the “out-lots” abandoned their properties.
. . . . .
Symmes’ Miami Purchase was the last sale of government land at wholesale.
But it was not the last of the wholesale Ohio land gambles. The State of
Connecticut had persistently claimed title under its charter grant to territory
beyond its eastern boundary. After much haggling and bickering with the federal
government, a compromise plan was adopted whereby Connecticut in 1786

ceded to the nation all lands beyond the Alleghanies, but reserving a strip of
territory, comprising about 3,500,000 acres, bordering on Lake Erie. This
became known as the “Connecticut Western Reserve.” A part, covering about
one-half million acres, was set aside by the state and allotted to the residents of
New London and other Connecticut towns that had suffered from British
depredations. These were known as the “Fire Lands.” But the greater portion
was left undisturbed.
The state authorities did not press its disposal. Its citizens, however, already
intoxicated by their profits from speculation in government debt certificates, and
seeking for further opportunities for gain, were eager to get possession of this
fertile and accessible western domain. In order to obtain the support of the
dominant Congregational Church, a bill was introduced in the Connecticut
Legislature in 1791, proposing the sale of the land and using the proceeds for the
support of the ministry, thus dispensing with a portion of the state tax which was
then levied for their maintenance. Two years later, the bill was again introduced
in amplified form, allotting the proceeds to the support of all ecclesiastics in the
state. Though it passed, it created such strong opposition that in May, 1795, an
amendment to the measure was passed, applying the proceeds to the
establishment of a general school fund.
A committee was then appointed to effect the sale of the Western Reserve.
Rival bids were received. One group of bidders was headed by John Livingston,
of New York City, and another by Oliver Phelps, both previously concerned in
the western New York speculation. Phelps succeeded in buying off Livingston
by proposing to turn over to the latter’s syndicate all the land in the Western
Reserve in excess of 3,000,000 acres. The “Excess Company” was organized to
receive this surplus. This bubble concern was later sold for $50,000 to General
William Hull, the surrenderer of Detroit to the British. When the final survey
proved there was no excess acreage, Hull was threatened with the total loss of
his investment at one fell swoop. In order to avoid trouble with him, the
successful bidders for the Western Reserve gave him a share in their purchase.
Having eliminated competitive bidders, a syndicate, headed by Oliver
Phelps, struck a bargain with the Connecticut commission appointed to dispose
of the Western Reserve. For an aggregate sum of $1,200,000, the entire
unappropriated Ohio, lands of Connecticut were sold to a group of thirty-five
individuals, each of whom gave a separate bond to secure his portion of the
purchase. Payment in cash was to be made September 2, 1800, with interest at 6
per cent computed from September, 1797. Thus, the purchasers had ample time

to raise the required funds before their payments fell due. Oliver Phelps,
however, because of the magnitude of his individual participation, agreed to pay
on demand. It is quite evident that Phelps, who had safely crawled out of his
gigantic New York land venture, was the chief promoter as well as the chief
participant of the deal. Of the total sum of $1,200,000, he subscribed for
$168,185 on his own account, and jointly with Gideon Granger, Jr., he assumed
$80,000 additional. The remaining thirty-three subscribers took up various
amounts ranging from $85,000 downward. All were New Englanders, and the
chief participants were stockholders and “managers” of the recently organized
Bank of Hartford.
The purchasers immediately organized themselves into an association called
the “Connecticut Land Company.” The shares numbered 400 and were
distributed in accordance with the portion of the purchase price paid by each
subscriber. Each share, therefore, represented $3,000 of the purchase money, but
it was convertible into an indefinite quantity of land based upon the results of a
survey. It was the apparent intention of the shareholders to take over this land
and dispose of it at a profit. As a survey had not been made at the time of the
purchase, the separate proprietors deeded their respective claims to the land in
trust to John Caldwell, Jonathan Brace and John Morgan. Moreover, it was
required of the purchasers that they extinguish the Indian title, and also stand the
cost of the surveys. Accordingly, each share was assessed $10 to cover these
costs. In order to prevent the largest shareholders from dominating the affairs of
the association, a limitation was placed on the voting power, but in the partition
of the territory, every share was entitled to its proportionate quantity of land.
Isaac Cleaveland, a Connecticut surveyor, and also one of the proprietors, was
appointed the general agent of the company. He went west to make the surveys,
and, incidentally, he laid out the city of Cleveland.
When surveys of the purchase were completed, it revealed a total of
2,841,471 acres. Although some townships were sold in units to speculators, a
large part of the lands were drawn by lot by the individual proprietors, the last
drawing taking place in 1809. The resolution originally adopted by the
proprietors to resell only to actual settlers was not generally carried out.
It is quite evident that both the Connecticut state authorities and the
purchasers tried to avoid the appearance of “speculation” or “land jobbing” in
the deal. The sale was made to the “subscribers” individually, though no definite
“plots” could be assigned to each. Each bought a “pig in a poke.” But this was
not uncommon in those days of “wild land” sales. Moreover, the question of the

title and jurisdiction of the purchase was not settled. Connecticut’s claim to
western territory was never fully acknowledged by the other states. Neither did
the federal government consent to the political suzerainty of Connecticut in the
Western Reserve. When the agents of the Connecticut Company began to survey
the region, General Arthur St. Clair, Governor of the Northwest Territory,
claimed authority over it. A dispute arose. This seriously handicapped the resale
in Connecticut of the proprietors’ preëmption rights. They grew impatient, and
demanded that the status of their purchases be fixed. Finally, in 1800, in return
for a surrender by Connecticut of all claim to territory west of her eastern
boundary, Congress acknowledged her ownership right of the Western Reserve,
and accepted the political jurisdiction over it.
Then began the Connecticut trek to the west! It threatened to depopulate the
state. A rage for moving seized rich and poor alike. The Connecticut Company’s
lands were eagerly sought after and sold at favorable prices for the proprietors.
In 1809, they divided up the little that remained unsold and disbanded. A small
group of the shareholders pooled their plots, and under the cognomen of the
“Erie Company,” continued to dispose of lands to settlers until 1812.
So popular was the western lure to the Connecticut gentry that legislation
was urged to countermand it. “Young people in their plays at social gatherings
marched to rude melodies which taught them to dream that toward the setting
sun lay an earthly paradise with gates open to welcome them. From hill and
valley the processions hurried away. Today, many of our rural towns are scarred
and paralyzed by an outflow which has built up the continent to no small degree
at their expense.”14
Washington Irving’s description, in his charming Legend of Sleepy Hollow,
of Ichabod Crane’s desire to marry the fair Katrinka Van Tassel, and, with her
dowry, purchase supplies, oxen and a covered wagon and move westward, is a
contemporary delineation of the Connecticut Yankee’s urge:
As the enraptured Ichabod rolled his great green eyes over the fat meadow-
lands, the rich fields of wheat, of rye, of buckwheat, and Indian corn, and the
orchard burdened with ruddy fruit, which surrounded the warm tenement of Van
Tassel, his heart yearned after the damsel who was to inherit these domains, and
his imagination expanded with the idea how they might be readily turned into
cash and the money invested in immense tracts of wild land, and shingle palaces
in the wilderness. Nay, his busy fancy realized his hopes, and presented to him
the blooming Katrina, with the whole family of children, mounted on top of a

wagon, loaded with household trumpery, with pots and kettles dangling beneath;
and he beheld himself bestriding a pacing mare, with a colt at her heels, setting
out for Kentucky, Tennessee, or the Lord knows where.
But it was not Kentucky or Tennessee that Ichabod Crane’s Connecticut
brethren sought as a place of prosperous abode in the early part of the nineteenth
century. Many cleared wild tracts in the Holland Purchase in western New York,
but a large number passed by way of the “Pittsburgh Pike,” or the Buffalo
gateway, to the fertile plains of the Western Reserve. Here they laid out farms,
built roads, planned canals and started the city of Cleveland and other
flourishing communities. Here came the ancestors of the Shermans, the
Bancrofts, the Hayes, the Garfields, and the Cookes. Here in a space of ten years
were settled 150,000 white inhabitants, sturdy and steady, zealous to undertake
great things; and, when the land further west offered profitable gain or a promise
of a larger supply of material goods, they, like their ancestors, took up the
westward march and went.
1 See Joseph Stencliffe Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of American Corporations, Vol. I, pp. 132-
136.
2 See Cutler, Manasseh Cutler, Vol. I, p. 496.
3 Archer B. Hulbert, The Records and Proceedings of the Ohio Company, Vol. I, p. lxxvi.
4 Payson Jackson Treat, The National Land System, pp. 57, 58.
5 J. S. Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of American Corporations, Vol. I, p. 139.
6 Ibid., p. 231.
7 See Chapter II, p. 36.
8 Davis, op. cit., p. 221.
9 Thomas Ashe, Travels in America, Performed in 1806, Vol. II, p. 86.
10 John Bach McMaster, History of the American People, Vol. II, p. 146.
11 Beverley W. Bond, Jr., The Correspondence of John Cleves Symmes, pp. 278-281.
12 Bond, op. cit., p. 38.
13 Thomas Ashe, Travels in America, Performed in 1806 First Edition, Vol. II, p. 248.
14 P. H. Woodward, One Hundred Years of the Hartford Bank, p. 74. See also R. J. Purcell, Connecticut
in Transition, p. 154.

CHAPTER VI
THE GEORGIA “YAZOO” LAND FRAUDS
NOW we come to the most notorious and widespread of the early American land
gambles.
The State of Georgia, at the southern end of the colonial confederacy, had
performed its share in bringing about political independence, and following the
Revolution, like its sister states, laid claim to the immense territory lying
immediately to the west. South Carolina, however, contended that a part of this
land was comprised within her original charter limits, while the federal
authorities maintained that it was national domain, because it had been obtained
directly from the British crown. The Spanish king also asserted political
authority over much of the region as a part of Louisiana ceded to him by the
French.
While all these competing and conflicting claims were being debated, the
Chickasaws, Choctaws, Cherokees and Creeks roved over the region at will. It
was in their possession, and few white settlers dared to invade their ancient
hunting grounds. Over these tribes, the United States had established a
protectorate, and forbade Georgia or any other state to deal with them directly or
to take any action to dispossess them. In view of these difficulties and
uncertainty of title, the impoverished State of Georgia was quite ready to accept
any financial consideration for her doubtful claim, and sought to dispose of the
lands at the earliest and most favorable opportunity.
Nor were purchasers lacking! Despite its primeval condition, and the fierce
savage tribes, the territory had distinct commercial advantages. It bordered on
the Mississippi River, that Father of Waters which afforded the chief means of
commercial intercourse between the interior settlements and the Gulf of Mexico.
It contained numerous well-watered streams emptying into the Mississippi, and
therefore gave accessibility to trade and barter, a prime factor in creating land
values. One of these tributary streams was the Yazoo River. For some reason or

other, the name “Yazoo” originally was applied to the whole territory, which now
comprises the entire areas of Alabama and Mississippi.
In 1785, some enterprising citizens of South Carolina and Georgia, with an
eye to business, planned to get possession of a favorable section of the Yazoo
country. As customary, an effort was made to buy off the Indians. John Wood,
one of the promoters, succeeded in “purchasing” from the Choctaws a tract of
two or three million acres lying near the mouth of the Yazoo River. The exact
quantity was of little concern. Application was then made to Georgia for a grant
of the lands. But the state did not yet feel ready to dispose of the territory, when
its title was so strongly doubted. However, the legislature of Georgia organized
the territory into a county, and gave it the then popular French name of
“Bourbon.” Settlers were invited to move there. To these settlers, lands were to
be granted at not more than 25 cents an acre. Few settlers came, however. They
preferred not to run the danger of Indian tomahawks and Spanish bullets. One
John Holder, a captain in the Revolution, however, in 1789, proposed to conduct
four hundred Kentucky settlers to the present site of Vicksburg, but failed utterly.
The Georgia land speculators were not discouraged. Through the influence of
an unprincipled character, styling himself Thomas Washington, but whose real
name was Walsh (and who eventually was hanged at Charleston for
counterfeiting South Carolina debt certificates), a “land association” was formed
to acquire the region. It was called the “South Carolina Yazoo Company.” The
original promoters, in addition to Thomas Washington, were Alexander
Moultrie, William Clay Snipes and Isaac Huger of South Carolina. Among those
who joined later was Alexander McGillivray, a famous chief of the Creek tribe.
The “association,” on November 20, 1789, presented an elaborate petition to the
Georgia Legislature urging the confirmation of a grant of land. They announced
that they had already begun settlements in the region “as well from a motive of
general good to mankind and of happiness and prosperity to Georgia and the
union; as their own.” This, they thought, would please the authorities of Georgia,
who wished settlers as a buffer against the unfriendly Indian tribes. They also
appealed on the ground of commercial development. They had, they claimed
“established Connections in Europe, America and in this State; whereby an
affrican trade and European Commerce” would “take place at the Yazoo to an
immense and vast amount.”1
In view of the wild land mania of the period, it would be expected that others
would also seek “grants.” Three other companies presented petitions. These were
“the Virginia Yazoo Company,” in which Patrick Henry is reputed to have been

the moving spirit; the “Tennessee Yazoo Company” and the “Georgia Yazoo
Company.” Each of these offered compensation for the lands, the Georgia
Company bidding the highest price. But the Georgia Company’s bid was ignored
despite efforts to make it the favored applicant, and little heed was given to a
motion to demand a higher price than was offered for the region. Thus far, the
promoters or “jobbers” were exclusively Southerners, though it is possible that
northern capitalists had a hand in the business.
Georgia was evidently desirous of getting rid of the territory regardless of the
price that might be obtained for it. Perhaps it was because the legislators were
influenced by personal pecuniary awards. At least, it is recorded that without
much opposition or debate, an act was passed by the Georgia Legislature, with
the sanction of the governor, on December 21, 1789, granting the South Carolina
Yazoo Company a western tract “bounded by the Mississippi River, the thirty-
third parallel, the Tombigbee River and a line drawn from a point just above
Natchez.” This grant contained over 10,000,000 acres, covering the southern
section of Mississippi and Alabama. The Virginia Yazoo Company received a
grant, north of that given to the South Carolina Company, estimated to contain
11,400,000 acres. The Tennessee Company’s grant bordered on the southern
boundary of Tennessee, and contained 4,000,000 acres. Thus, more than twenty-
five million acres were disposed of. The total compensation to be received by
Georgia was slightly more than $200,000, or less than one cent per acre, payable
in the state’s depreciated debt certificates. Moreover, immediate payment was
not demanded, but a period of two years was allowed the purchasers in which to
tender compensation. But, in the purchase contracts, the state relieved itself of
the expense of keeping peace between the grantees and the Indians while
extinguishing the Indian titles.2

FIRST PARTITION OF THE YAZOO TERRITORY
What a bargain for these southern land grabbers! After the sale was made,
the three “companies” set to work to secure their grants. The South Carolina
Company, which was the most active in pushing its purchase, appointed Dr.
James O’Fallon, a Revolutionary soldier, its agent, to proceed to New Orleans
and secure the favor of the Spanish Government. On his way, O’Fallon visited
Tennessee and Kentucky. He secured the coöperation of John Sevier, Governor
of Tennessee, whose land grabbing was largely responsible for the settlement of
that state,3 and of General James Wilkinson, then in Kentucky, who was
carrying on intrigues with the Spanish Governor of Louisiana regarding the
separation of Kentucky from the Union. Both these adventurers were won over
with promises of shares in the company’s purchase. Colonization plans were
laid, and a “battalion” of militia was organized, “these troops being intended to
insure the great security of the Company’s rights.”
It was expected that Wilkinson and Sevier would each lead hundreds of
families to take up lands in the purchase. George Rogers Clark, the western
Revolutionary hero, and conqueror of the Northwest Territory, also was probably
concerned in this venture, as it was rumored that he would be chief in command
of the “battalion.”4
The act of Georgia in disposing of territory, the claim to which was not
recognized, and the prospect of consequent Indian warfare disturbed the peace of
mind of the First President of the United States. On Friday, April 30, 1790, he
entered in his diary:

Conversed with the Secretary of the Treasury, on the Report of the Secretary
at War’s propositions, respecting the Conduct of the State of Georgia, in selling
to certain companies large tracts of their Western territory and a proclamation
which he conceived expedient to issue in consequence of it. But as he had doubts
of the clearness of the ground in which it was proposed to build this
proclamation, and do other acts which were also submitted in the report I placed
it in the hands of the Secretary of State to consider and give me an opinion
thereon.5
Jefferson, the Secretary of State, who was outspoken in his denunciation of
land grabbing, and who, besides, disliked Patrick Henry, was firm in his opinion
that the grants were illegal.6 The President accordingly, issued his proclamation
on August 25, 1790. It warned the purchasers of the Georgia lands from
interfering at all with the treaty rights of the Indians, or in any way disturbing the
ownership of their lands.
But the intrepid O’Fallon persisted with his plans to establish the South
Carolina Yazoo Company on its lands. He even wrote to Estéban Mero, Spanish
Governor of Louisiana, that he “had insensibly prevailed” upon the members of
the South Carolina Yazoo Company “to get their consent to be the slaves of
Spain, under the appearance of a free and independent colony, forming a rampart
for the adjoining Spanish territories and establishing with them an eternal,
reciprocal alliance, offensive and defensive.”7
O’Fallon’s persistence brought another proclamation from the President, and
the United States District Attorney was directed to arrest him, if necessary. At
this, O’Fallon’s courage failed, and he gave up the enterprise. Wilkinson had
deserted him, and his associates declined to share responsibility for his actions.
So he returned to Kentucky, where he married a sister of George Rogers Clark,
and settled down. Moreover, the shares of the South Carolina Yazoo Company
did not attract purchasers. There was difficulty in raising the required funds.
Although the agent of the company offered to settle with Georgia in “debt
certificates,” the state treasurer refused to accept them, as the legislature had
passed a resolution requiring that debts due the state be received in specie only.
The Virginia Yazoo Company, likewise, died abortively. There is
considerable historical evidence that Patrick Henry, who we have already shown
had been active in grabbing western lands in the pre-Revolutionary period, was
deeply concerned in this speculation. His name appears among the shareholders,
and it was even thought that he intended to desert Virginia and depart to the wild

Yazoo territory.
Before entering upon the deal, Henry endeavored to assure himself that
Georgia had title to the lands. When convinced of this, he, together with David
Ross, Abraham B. Venable, Francis Watkins and other prominent Virginians,
formed the “Virginia Yazoo Company.” Before presenting their petition for a
grant, they made overtures for a consolidation with the South Carolina Company.
When this move failed, they purchased direct from the State of Georgia. Unlike
the directors of the South Carolina Company, however, the Virginians made no
colonization plans. They preferred “to complete their payments to the State for
the lands purch’d; next to quiet the Indian claims agreeable to Law, and to have
the permission and approbation of the General Govern’t for settlement and that
the first Emigrants shall be accompanied with Civil and Militia officers Legally
appointed.”8
Patrick Henry, however, was for settlement, even though federal approbation
was lacking. Thus, Washington, on April 8, 1791, entered in his diary:
Was informed by Jno. Lewis, who had, not long since been in Richmond,
that Mr. Patrick Henry had avowed his interest in the Yazoo Company; and made
him a tender of admission to it, which he declined; but asking him if the
Company did not expect the Settlement of the lands would be disagreeable to the
Indians, was answered by Mr. Henry that the Co. intended to apply to Congress
for protection, which, if not granted, they would have recourse to their own
means to protect the settlement.9
It never became necessary for the Virginia Company to take this action, for
their offer of payment to Georgia in depreciated debt certificates was not
accepted. Patrick Henry had bought up a large amount of this paper at about 10
per cent of the face value in preparation for the payment. He profited greatly by
this, because Hamilton’s funding scheme, whereby the federal government
assumed the state’s obligations, soon raised the value of the debt certificates.
Thus, Hamilton became the political idol of Henry, much to the disgust of
Thomas Jefferson.
The promoters of the Virginia Company attempted again to secure the same
grant in 1794, when Robert Morris, Wade Hampton, a wealthy South Carolina
planter, and other capitalists already immersed in other land speculations agreed
to furnish the funds. This move was also unsuccessful, and the threat to sue the
State of Georgia was never carried out. When the Virginia Yazoo Company’s

claim came before Congress in later years, it was thrown out on the ground that
its perpetrators were concerned in the fraudulent Georgia sales of 1795. Thus,
the Virginians received nothing for their trouble, and the money advanced by
them in preparation for the speculation was lost though they probably profited by
the advance in the market price of the Georgia debt certificates.
JAMES WILSON, ASSOCIATE JUSTICE OF THE U. S. SUPREME COURT

THE FIRST PLAN OF THE CITY OF WASHINGTON, ENGRAVED IN 1792 AND USED IN SELLING
THE “LOTS”
The outcome of the Tennessee Yazoo Company’s purchase did not differ
much from that of the other two companies. Zachariah Cox, one of the boldest
adventurers and entrepreneurs of the old Southwest, was the leading spirit of this
concern. He had an eye for business and saw clearly the advantages of
commercial settlements in promoting trade between the upper Mississippi River
region and the Gulf. After the Tennessee Company received its grant, he, in
coöperation with John Sevier, attempted to form a settlement at Muscle Shoals.
Cox was warned off by both the Indians and the federal government. In 1795, he
and his associates again renewed their efforts to settle the territory. He was
arrested by federal troops at Natchez for opening a land office, escaped, and was
recaptured at Nashville, but was soon released. He next planned the construction
of a canal to connect the Mississippi with the Mobile River, and thus open up
commerce between the interior and the Gulf of Mexico, without molestation by
the Spanish authorities. In this enterprise he was also unsuccessful. He finally
ended his restless life in New Orleans.

Thus, the first attempts of southern land jobbers to profit by Georgia’s
disposal of her disputed western domain ended in a complete fiasco. George
Washington, during a tour South in 1791, remarked in his diary that the “people
in South Carolina and Georgia appear to have abundant means to live on grounds
where they are settled,” and that they “appear to be happy, contented and
satisfied with the general government under which they are placed.” He noted,
however, that:
In Georgia, the dissatisfied part of them at the late treaty with the Ck. Indians
were evidently Land Jobbers, who maugre every principle of Justice to the
Indians, and policy to their Country, would, for their own immediate emolument,
strip the Indns of all their territory if they could obtain the least countenance to
the measure; but it is to be hoped the good sense of the State will set its face
agains such diabolical attempts. And it is also to be wished—and by many it was
said it might be expected—that the sales by the State to what are called the
Yazoo Companies will fall through.10
The President’s wish and expectation were not realized. The fever of wild
land speculation was prevalent. At this time, Robert Morris and his associates, as
noted below, were carrying on their Georgia “Pine Barrens” speculation, with
reputed enormous profits. The fertile Yazoo lands were, therefore, a tempting
morsel. The Georgia legislators were again importuned to sell the state’s western
domain. Nay, more! They were bribed to do so. This time the jobbers were not
merely small groups of southern gentlemen arranged by states. They comprised
the leading northern capitalists and statesmen, too numerous to list. They hailed
from Boston, Hartford, New York and Philadelphia, as well as from lesser
known sections in both the North and the South. Their participation involved the
common folk of every commercial center in their speculations.
The first proposal for a resale of the Georgia lands was made November 12,
1794, by John Wereat, agent of a triumvirate, consisting of Albert Gallatin,
Alexander J. Dallas and Jared Ingersoll, all prominent Pennsylvanians. They
offered to purchase the former grant of the South Carolina Yazoo Company, at
the original price. This price was insignificant, however, when compared with
rival bids. Gallatin’s agent then raised his bids, but they were again rejected. The
Pennsylvania speculators then apparently withdrew, and disclaimed further
connection with their agent’s proposals.
Next, four separate companies made an offer of $500,000 payable in specie
for a region comprising the bulk of Georgia’s western lands. The legislature

considered this proposal and a committee brought in a favorable report. The bill
was passed without much opposition, but the governor vetoed it. He doubted
whether it was a proper time for disposing of the domain. The price, moreover,
was too low, and the sale to large “companies” smacked of land jobbing and
monopoly. He insisted also that in any sale, proper provision should be made to
give Georgia citizens preference in settling in the territory.
In the meantime, John Wereat, probably acting on his own account and in the
expectation of being “bought off” by other bidders, continued to raise his bids,
but, as he had not reached the pockets of the legislators, they paid no attention to
his offers. They gave the excuse that he did not furnish sufficient security. A new
bill of purchase, embodying some of the governor’s suggestions, was then
introduced and hurriedly passed. The governor yielded. The act was signed on
January 7, 1795. By its terms, approximately 30,000,000 acres of American soil,
comprising the bulk of the States of Alabama and Mississippi, were sold for
$500,000 or about a cent and a half an acre.
The purchasers were four separate companies, to each of which was allotted
a definite stretch of territory. To the “Upper Mississippi Company” was assigned
the northwest section, comprising about 3,000,000 acres for $35,000. The
“Tennessee Company” obtained for $60,000 practically the same territory as that
granted the former concern of the same name, containing 4,000,000 acres. The
southwestern section comprised approximately 7,000,000 acres, and was sold to
the “Georgia Mississippi Company” for $155,000. The “Georgia Company”
received the largest grant of all, about 17,000,000 acres, for $250,000. One-fifth
of the purchase price, in each case, was deposited with the state treasurer.
Undoubtedly, additional but unknown sums went to individual legislators before
the passage of the act.
The unpaid balance of the purchase price in each case was required before
November 1, 1795, and was secured by a mortgage on the land. There was
reserved in the purchase 2,000,000 acres for the citizens of Georgia, who were
entitled to membership in any one of the companies, and whose subscriptions
counted as part of the purchase price. Georgia did not guarantee title against
other claimants, and disclaimed responsibility for the acts or the claims of the
Indians. The Indian title was to be extinguished in each instance by the
purchasers, with the approbation of the federal government. Within five years
after such title was secured, each company was required to begin colonization
within its respective purchase.
They were not small fry or common land jobbers who consented to these

provisions. Among those chiefly concerned in the deal was a noted United States
Senator, General James Gunn, of Georgia. He was the leading member of the
Georgia Company. General Wade Hampton, richest of southern planters, and
grandfather of the Congressman and Confederate general of the same name, was
a large shareholder in two of the companies. Robert Morris and James Greenleaf
were also heavily concerned. Greenleaf is reported to have participated
financially in the deal more than any other one individual. He was soon forced to
assign his proprietorship to others, however, because of approaching bankruptcy.
Among his assignees were Nathaniel Prime, the New York banker, James Wilson
and Andrew Craigie. Oliver Phelps, whose land-jobbing activities have already
been described, also was a participant in the Yazoo deals. Congressman Robert
Goodloe Harper, who was associated with Morris, Greenleaf and Nicholson in
the North American Land Company, and who prepared the prospectus of this
company, was also a participant. So was Congressman Thomas P. Carnes,
another heavy “investor.” The Honorable James Wilson, Judge of the United
States Supreme Court, though at this time heavily involved in Pennsylvania land
“scrip” speculations was a large subscriber. He held ten shares, representing
750,000 acres in the Georgia Company alone. He also obtained about 2,000,000
additional acres through assignment from Greenleaf. Zachariah Cox, despite his
disappointment at the outcome of his first Tennessee Company, was again a
prominent member of the second purchase. He held, on his own account, 450
shares in the new Tennessee Company, and was the agent of a number of other
shareholders. He had as fellow shareholders his former land jobbing associates,
John Sevier and William Blount, both pioneer Tennessee politicians and land
grabbers.

THE SECOND PARTITION OF THE YAZOO LANDS AS SHOWN BY JEDIDIAH MORSE IN HIS
American Gazetteer, PUBLISHED IN 1797
Arrangements were quickly made, by the speculators, to divide the shares of
each company into subshares for resale, and to subdivide the tracts for wholesale
distribution. As Theodore Dwight, a contemporary observer, noted: “The
territory was split up into endless divisions and sold in almost every part of the
Union. On the ocean of speculation great multitudes of sober and industrious
people launched the earnings of their whole lives, and multitudes became
indebted for large sums which they never possessed.”11
Almost immediately after the law authorizing the sale was passed, a part of
the Georgia Mississippi Company’s grant was resold for $1,138,000 (a great
advance in price over the original cost of $155,000) to the “New England
Mississippi Land Company,” for consumption among the land-hungry Yankee

gentry. James Greenleaf engineered the deal, and it was to him that the deed was
first conveyed. It was in this subdivision that Gideon Granger, Jr., the
Postmaster-General, who was active in Ohio land deals, and Perez Morton,
prominent Massachusetts statesman, were concerned. For this connection,
Granger had to bear the gibes and jokes of his political enemies, particularly
John Randolph, of Roanoke, the bitter foe of the Yazoo gamblers.
The “Mississippi scrip,” as the shares of the New England Mississippi
Company were commonly called, were scattered throughout this section. Its land
office in Boston for a while resembled John Law’s “Mississippi Company’s”
home in the Rue de Quincampoix, Paris. Speculators vied with each other to get
first in line to enter subscriptions for their shares. The “company” had bought its
tract on credit, and sold on equally liberal terms. The “scrip” passed from hand
to hand. The holders, in blissful ignorance for a time of what was going on in
Georgia, indulged in fanciful dreams of fabulous wealth.
But their hopes were soon to be dispelled. When the Georgia folk began to
realize the rotten deal put over by their legislators, a howl of protest arose. There
was indignation from the mountains to the sea. The grand juries of every county
but two presented the act authorizing the Yazoo sale as a public grievance. The
state constitutional convention which assembled in May “had its table heaped
with petitions, memorials and remonstrances. Hardly a freeman in the state but
put his name to some such document. Every member of the Legislature of 1796
came solemnly pledged to repeal the Act.”12
Vengeance was sought on the speculators, and Georgia became a perilous
residence for all concerned in the deal. James Gunn, the United States Senator
from the state, and leader of the “Georgia Company,” was repeatedly burned in
effigy. Other legislators, who were accused of bribery in connection with the
deal, were threatened with violence, and subjected to the most scurrilous
newspaper attacks.
The new legislature that met in January, 1796, immediately proceeded to the
question of repeal. In three weeks’ time, a bill was reported, denying the validity
of the grants, and recommending their repudiation. Accordingly, on February 13,
1797, the Georgia Legislature unanimously announced the sale unconstitutional
and void. “The two Houses then formed in procession, marched to the front of
the State House, and drew up before a bonfire in the road. The Committee
handed the paper, on which the hated act was printed, to the President of the
Senate. The President passed it to the Speaker of the House. The Speaker gave it
to the Clerk. The Clerk delivered it to the doorkeeper, and he flung it into the

flames.”13
The hopes of the Yazoo speculators were not so easily extinguished. They
looked for protection to the clause in the United States Constitution reciting that
“no State shall pass any law impairing the obligation of a contract.” But the
embittered Georgia freemen did not “give a rap” for the Constitution. They
ordered the bartered territory surveyed and cut up into small plots, and decreed
its distribution among Georgia citizens by means of a lottery. This was slow
work, and before it was completed Georgia had agreed to cede its Yazoo territory
to the United States for the sum of $1,250,000. A reservation was made,
however, that 5,000,000 acres should be set aside by the federal government to
satisfy the claims of the former purchasers.
Although subsequent to the repudiation, Georgia officials offered to refund
the payments that had been made to land purchasers, few took advantage of the
offer. Instead, they made haste to sell their lands. Prospectuses were distributed
throughout New England, and the Middle States. The lands of the Upper
Mississippi Company were sold mostly in South Carolina. The Georgia and
Mississippi companies disposed of many of their shares and “scrip” even before
the newspapers announced the repeal of the grants. Speculators in these shares
lost heavily. Boston alone is said to have sunk over two million dollars in
Georgia “scrip.” La Rochefoucauld, in his Travels, thus describes the mania:
“Every class of men, even watch makers, hairdressers, and mechanics of all
descriptions, eagerly ran after this deception.”
Imagine the disappointment of the “scrip” holders when the newspapers
announced the repudiation of the grants. “The shock throughout the Union
cannot be described,” remarked Theodore Dwight, who was then President of
Yale College and a witness of the spectacle. Men gathered on street corners to
discuss it. Newspapers and pamphleteers arrayed themselves for and against the
speculators, and a remarkable stream of controversial literature resulted. In one
of these pamphlets the author gives some sound advice to the “scrip” holders. He
recommended that these refuse to honor the notes they gave for payment. “By
your success,” he says, “millions of dollars now pledged on this speculation, will
be restored to the channels of industry,” and he ended by calling the speculation
“a system of fraud and swindling, more complicated in its machinery and varied
in its operations than any which has disgraced the character of man in this or any
age.”14

ONE OF THE “YAZOO FRAUDS” PAMPHLETS
It is quite evident, from the pamphlets issued by the defenders of the land
companies, that their chief reliance for protection was upon the United States
courts. Several suits were entered against the State of Georgia, and in one Patrick
Henry was employed as attorney. Congress was soon embroiled in the muddle.
When word of the second sale reached President Washington, he immediately
announced it to Congress with the admonition that unless something was done
about it, Indian troubles might be expected.
Congress was slow in acting, but on the advice of the Attorney General
regarding Georgia’s doubtful title to western lands, a law was passed,
authorizing a commission to settle the disputed ownership. The hopes of the
“scrip” holders were revived. Now they could deal with Congress. Surely, a just
and democratic body of national representatives, an organization that was always
known to uphold property rights, would not deny them indemnification!
The “scrip” and “shares” of the various companies again became an object of
speculation. They began to flow into the coffers of rich capitalists. These had in

mind the government “debt certificates” and “indents” issued during the
previous decade, which were paid off at par. The Yazoo claims may likewise
some day be paid off at face value! What a great chance for speculative profit for
those who could afford to tie up their money for a while!
These wealthy “scrip” holders, while garnering the floating supply from the
impoverished owners, began to “pull wires” to have their claims recognized by
the federal government. Among the “humble” petitioners who repeatedly
importuned “the Honorable Congress” for a consideration of their Yazoo claims
were such well-known capitalists as Nathaniel Prime, who organized the first
American private banking house; Leonard Bleecker, a founder of the New York
Stock Exchange; James Perkins and Leonard Jarvis, New York capitalists; James
Sullivan, eminent attorney of Boston; James Strawbridge, of Philadelphia, and a
host of others, who, though not participating in the original purchase, had
acquired thousands of dollars in claims from others.
But their speculations did not result in “easy money.” There was at this time
no Alexander Hamilton to put through a funding plan, and settle their claims in
full. Instead, there developed the most determined opposition, both in and out of
Congress. These “Yazoo claims” became a bugbear to the national legislature.
They popped up at each session of Congress from 1800 to 1814. At first a
proposition was made to compensate the “scrip” holders at 25 cents per acre, but
Congress would not stand for this “profiteering.” When compromises were
proposed, the fiery and bombastic Virginian, John Randolph, of Roanoke,
resisted them at every point. Throughout the rest of his political career, he was
“Anti-Yazoo” to the core. Because James Madison and the northern Democrats
favored settling the claims, they won Randolph’s bitter enmity, and brought
about the first split in the Democratic Party. In one of his “fire and brimstone”
orations, delivered in 1804, Randolph soundly berated his fellow Democrats who
were supporting the Yazoo claims as abettors of the Federalist cause:
What is the spirit against which we now struggle and which we have vainly
endeavored to stifle? A monster, generated by fraud, nursed in corruption, that in
grim silence awaits its prey. It is the spirit of Federalism! That spirit which
considers the many made only for the few. . . . When I behold a certain party
supporting and clinging to such a measure almost to a man, I see only men
faithful to their own principles. . . . But when I see associated with them, in firm
compact, others who once rallied under the standard of opposite principles, I am
filled with apprehension and concern. . . . If Congress shall determine to sanction

this fraud upon the public, I trust in God we shall hear no more of the crimes and
follies of the former administration. For one, I promise that my lips upon this
subject shall be closed in eternal silence. I should disdain to prate about petty
larcenies of our predecessors after having given my sanction to this atrocious
public robbery.15
Congress dilly-dallied with the “Yazoo Claims” until after March 16, 1810,
when Chief Justice John Marshall rendered his opinion in the case of Fletcher
vs. Peck. There could be no doubt, Marshall claimed, that the Georgia legislation
rescinding the sale of the Yazoo lands was an act impairing the obligation of a
contract and was therefore contrary to the Constitution. That the act secured its
passage through corruption and bribery was immaterial to the Chief Justice, and,
even if a court had examined the title and set it aside because of fraud, it could
not cause innocent third parties to suffer. Thus, it was manifestly the duty of
Congress to indemnify the Yazoo claimants.
After a delay of four years, Congress finally agreed to a settlement, and thus
the curtain was rung down on the final act of the Yazoo Frauds. In 1815, the
Secretary of the Treasury reported a total payment by the United States to the
Yazoo claimants, of $4,282,151.12, in a new but reliable kind of “Mississippi
scrip,” bearing the seal of the national government. The amount was divided in
accordance with the payments made by the original “scrip” and “share” holders.
All who voluntarily surrendered the evidences of their claims, or who had
received back any of the purchase money, were, to this extent, barred from
participation in the award. However, as it is quite evident that most of those who
presented their claims were not the original purchasers, but had acquired them
cheaply from distressed and disgusted holders, the benefits of the settlement,
therefore, accrued to wealthy speculators and not to those who first sought a
profit from an ownership of the wild Georgia back lands.
. . . . .
The western territory of Georgia was not the only section of that state that
figured prominently in the early wild land manias. Georgia, like most of the
other colonies at the outbreak of the Revolution, became possessed of immense
tracts of waste lands without inhabitants. These had been the property of the
colonial proprietor, General Oglethorpe, who, unlike the Penns and the Calverts,
did not take up his residence on his boundless domains. Before the

Revolutionary War was over, the state government endeavored to dispossess
itself of its proprietary heritage. It was land poor, and needed taxable resources.
As early as 1777, when its first state constitution was adopted, an act was
passed, granting 200 acres to every white head of a family, and 50 acres for each
member and for each slave, but limiting the maximum “head right” to 500 acres.
Of course, ownership was not recognized unless the land was settled. This right
to free land was, in 1780, extended to non-residents.
The “head right” system, however, did not accomplish the desired result of
populating the state, so in 1789 the law was amended, by giving authority to
justices of the peace to issue warrants for unappropriated land. All that was
required of claimants was a survey of the land at their expense. This liberality
resulted in a raid on Georgia lands, located principally in the present counties of
Franklin, Washington and Montgomery. Warrants for small plots were easily
obtained and resold, and most of them got into the hands of land jobbers.
Large tracts were also freely disposed of by Georgia. Count d’Estaing, the
French admiral who assisted the colonies, was granted a substantial acreage for
his Revolutionary services. D’Estaing sold his land to the Count de Colbert, who
resold it in England to Robert Morris, through the agency of William Constable
and Gouverneur Morris.16 Robert Morris then proceeded to add to his Georgia
possessions. In association with John Nicholson, he soon become the leading
proprietor of Georgia waste lands. How these large holdings were obtained has
never been satisfactorily explained. It is the “unsolved riddle of Georgia’s land
history.”17
Yet, it is known that four early governors of the state granted lands in large
quantities to single persons without the slightest authority under the law, and
contrary to all laws on the subject of “head right” grants. It is quite possible that
Morris and Nicholson purchased from the grantees, who had received their titles
in this way. It is also possible that they may have received patents direct from the
state authorities. There are early records which show that Morris and Nicholson
paid state taxes on the land for a few years. It was the taxes that the Georgia
government desired.
To most of these “free” Georgia lands the name of “Pine Barrens” was given.
Their sandy soil was covered with a luxuriant growth of pine trees, for which
Georgia, for over a century, was famous, and which in later years not only
afforded a lucrative article of export, but was the basis for its naval stores’
industry. But “barren” they certainly were in the post-Revolutionary days when

they were sold to Robert Morris and other land jobbers. As mentioned in a
previous chapter, “whatever land was offered for sale, they appeared ready to
buy; and actually bought quantities which outran every sober thought.”18
The Pine Barrens, though of so little value that neither Indians nor white
settlers could be attracted to them, became an important part of the lands of the
North American Land Company, which was organized in 1795, when Morris,
Greenleaf and Nicholson pooled their holdings. The inventory of the company
showed that out of a total of 6,000,000 acres, Georgia lands comprised 2,314,796
acres.
Morris, as previously noted, endeavored to get French purchasers for these
Georgia lands. There was already considerable French influence in South
Carolina and Georgia, and these lands were advertised as most suitable for the
émigrés. But he was brought face to face with the outspoken opposition of
Joseph Fauchet, French Minister to the United States. Though the Pine Barrens
were hawked about even before the second Yazoo grants were made, and it was
reported that they were a profitable speculation, they lacked buyers. There was,
of course, considerable doubt as to the validity of Morris’ title to them—and this
point was strongly emphasized by Fauchet. Most of the grants had not been
surveyed in accordance with the legal requirements. In 1798, the Georgia
Legislature, with the Yazoo fiasco fresh in mind, passed a law requiring all
landowners to survey and identify their holdings every ten years, beginning in
1799. The purpose was to compel holders under fraudulent grants to prove their
titles. The heritors of the North American Land Company, after Morris and
Nicholson’s failure, could not do this. Moreover, it was not worth the expense.
As taxes were not paid, the lands went back to the state. In fact, the State
Comptroller of Georgia reported in 1839 that “not more than half the land in the
region was worth owning or paying taxes for.”19
Yet, large tracts of it, in after years, were offered privately for sale or
colonization. In 1801, George Sibbald issued a pamphlet in Augusta, Ga.,
entitled Notes and Observations on the Pine Lands of Georgia, showing the
advantages they possessed. It was specifically addressed to persons emigrating.
Sibbald stated that he owned large bodies of pine land in Washington,
Montgomery and Bullock counties, beginning about 30 miles south of Savannah.
“The surveys I hold,” he said, “are well known in this State to be the first land
surveyed in large tracts.” Although he names some of the original grantees, he
does not divulge how he obtained title to them, but it may be assumed that he

bought them in at tax sales. He petitioned for, and received, an exemption from
taxes on the land until 1805 “on condition that he leave the State and seek
emigrants.” The land was offered to settlers and immigrants at 50 cents per acre.
It is not known to the author whether Sibbald’s lands constituted part of the
Pine Barrens of Morris and Nicholson. But a later proffer of lands in the region
shows conclusively what became of the Pine Barrens speculation. In a pamphlet
printed in Kingston, N. Y., in 1865, entitled, An Account of the Lands belonging
to Robt. L. Pell, in the State of Georgia, it is stated specifically that among the
original grantees were John Nicholson, Robert Morris, Jr., James Greenleaf,
James Wilson, R. L. Pell, James Cooper and John Shorter, and trustees of the
North American Land Company. Pell published the pamphlet in order to sell the
lands. He claimed ownership to four million acres of “valuable land for
timbering.” His holdings, therefore, included other tracts besides those acquired
by the North American Land Company. The district in which the property was
located underwent rapid exploitation by timber magnates after the Civil War.
Among those who invested heavily here in timbering projects was William E.
Dodge, one of the founders of Phelps, Dodge & Company, renowned in the
annals of the American copper industry. Dodge County in Georgia was created
as a testimonial of his large interest in the Georgia “Pine Barrens.”
It is a sad commentary on Robert Morris’ business judgment that lands which
he eagerly acquired as a speculation and actively sought to sell were still in as
wild and primeval condition almost a century after his death. But he seems never
to have inquired regarding the quality or locations of properties, as long as he
could obtain them cheaply and on credit. Either he had the utmost confidence in
the rapid filling up of unoccupied regions in the country, or he became madly
intoxicated by the prevailing wild land mania. He, Nicholson and Greenleaf
purchased indiscriminately in the South, West and East—from the sluggish
Savannah to the shores of Lake Erie. The modern searcher of land titles in any
district east of the Alleghanies and south of New England is apt to find the name
of Robert Morris or that of his partners in the early deeds. As stated by Allen C.
Clark, “When a tract in the Carolinas or the Virginias is subject to negotiation,
the lawyer from the metropolis must need travel through primeval forest whose
solemn stillness is unbroken save by the cawing of the inhabitants of the air and
the reverberating music of the axe, to the little remote brick courthouse, there to
ascertain if the title is a continuous chain from the original owner—Robert
Morris.”20

. . . . .
To the story of the “Yazoo” and “Pine Barrens” speculations could be added
others of a similar nature, also concerned with distant and unsettled regions
along the moving frontiers of American territory. As noted by Lord Dunmore,
the last Virginia colonial governor, an “engrafted trait” of Americans is “to
forever imagine that the lands further off are still better than those upon which
they are already settled.” This trait undoubtedly has been a potent force
promoting rapid national expansion, and, despite its tragedies of feverish
speculation, it has been an important factor in America’s economic progress.
But historians with their minds concentrated on politics have belittled or
ignored this force. Thus, Theodore Roosevelt, in his early work, The Winning of
the West, when commenting on the activities of the land companies in the old
Southwest, remarked: “These land companies possessed on paper a weight
which they did not have in actual history. They occasionally enriched and more
often impoverished the individual speculators; but in the actual peopling of the
waste lands they counted for little in comparison with the steady stream of
pioneer farmers who poured in, each to hold and till the ground he in fact
occupied.”
And yet, the chief exponent of the “strenuous life” admits that the land
companies “did possess considerable importance at certain times in the
settlement of the west, both because they in places stimulated that settlement and
because in other places they kept out the actual settlers.”21 But, as the following
chapters will show, the stimulation to settlements was a permanent force, while
the retardation was but temporary and sporadic. Speculation is essential to
human progress. Adventure and Cupidity, hand-in-hand, have spread
civilization.
1 Charles Homer Haskins, The Yazoo Land Companies, pp. 6, 7.
2 Haskins, op. cit., p. 8.
3 “All the settlers [in Tennessee], who had any ambition to rise in the world were absorbed in land
speculations. . . . They were continually in correspondence with one another about the purchase of land
warrants and about laying them out in the best localities.”—Theodore Roosevelt, The Winning of the West
(New Knickerbocker Edition), Vol. II, p. 360.
4 See Claiborne’s “Mississippi” etc. Vol. I, p. 157, note.
5 The Diaries of George Washington, Vol. IV, pp. 124, 125.
6 See Jefferson’s Works, edited by H. A. Washington, Vol. VII, pp. 467-469.

7 Haskins, op. cit., p. II.
8 Letter of David Ross to Governor Randolph, April 10, 1791, quoted in Haskins, op. cit., p. 19.
9 The Diaries of George Washington, Vol. IV, p. 157.
10 The Diaries of George Washington, Vol. IV, p. 196.
11 Theodore Dwight, Travels, Vol. I, p. 188.
12 McMaster, History,of the People of the United States, Vol. II, p. 480
13 Ibid. Vol. II, p. 480.
14 Abraham Bishop, Georgia Speculation Unveiled, Hartford, 1797.
15 Haskins, op. cit., p. 36.
16 Ellis Paxton Oberholtzer, Life of Robert Morris, pp. 307, 308.
17 S. G. McLendon, History of the Public Domain of Georgia, Chap. IX.
18 Theodore Dwight, Travels, Vol. I, p. 188.
19 Absalom H. Chappell, Miscellanies of Georgia, Part II, p. 49.
20Greenleaf and Law in the Federal City, p. 26.
21The Winning of the West (New Knickerbocker Edition), Vol. II, p. 411.

CHAPTER VII
WASHINGTON—AMERICA’S FIRST “BOOM
TOWN”
“IN AMERICA,” wrote the Duke de La Rochefoucauld in 1797, “where more
than in any other country in the world, a desire for wealth is the prevailing
passion, there are few schemes which are not made the means of extensive
speculations; and that of erecting the Federal City presented irresistible
temptations, which were not in fact neglected.”1
Thus, observed the philosophical French émigré after he had visited the
embryonic national capital located on the “banks of the Potowmack.” The
framers of the Constitution, wishing to have a seat for the federal government,
independent of the territory or jurisdiction of any state, provided that Congress
shall “exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such District
(not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by Cession of Particular States, and the
Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the United
States.”
The question of a national capital had been suggested even during the dark
days of the Revolution, and in the critical period following the peace with
England, but no action accomplishing this end had been taken. In the meantime,
however, speculation was rife as to a most suitable site. On January 29, 1783,
before the news of the peace treaty had arrived, the trustees of the corporation of
Kingston, N. Y., sent a memorial to the New York Legislature, praying that
“their estate be erected into a separate district for the Honorable Congress of the
United States,” and they offered for this purpose “a sufficient quantity of land.”
The application was formally presented to Congress by Alexander Hamilton and
William Floyd, the New York delegates. The corporation of Annapolis, Md.,
made a similar offer and tendered for the purpose 300 acres in the town. Its
citizens argued that Annapolis “is more central than any other city or town in the
federal states.” Both tenders were referred by Congress to the executives of the

various states with a notice that the matter would be brought up for consideration
the following October.
New Jerseyites also were desirous of having the seat of the Congress within
the borders of their state. On June 19, 1783, their legislature expressed a
willingness to invest Congress “with such jurisdiction, authority and power over
a district of twenty miles square as may be required by Congress, as necessary
for the honor, dignity, convenience and safety of that august body.” In addition,
they proposed to grant £30,000 in specie, “for the purpose of procuring lands
and erecting buildings thereon for the suitable accommodation of Congress.”
Virginia also sent in an offer, suggesting the town of Williamsburg. In
addition to 300 acres of land adjoining the said city, it would “present the palace,
the capitol and all the public buildings, together with a sum of money not
exceeding £100,000 this state’s currency, to be expended in erecting thirteen
hotels for the use of the delegates in Congress.” As an alternative, Virginia
offered to cede a district at any place on the Potomac, and to appropriate a sum
of £100,000 in Virginia currency for hotels, as well as 100 acres of land to be
used as sites for public buildings. If Maryland also desired to cede territory for
the same purpose, Virginia would coöperate and bear a share of the expense.
Thus, the hint of a location on the Potomac was given. Before Congress
proceeded to the consideration of these rival offers, a mutiny of the Pennsylvania
troops in Philadelphia in June, 1783, made it plain that, if this “august assembly”
of the thirteen federated states was to function freely and untrammeled, it must
have a seat of government independent of any other authority. No formal action
was taken, however, until more than a year later, though in the meantime
Congress moved to Princeton, then to Annapolis, then to Trenton, and next to
New York. It seemed as if the members were “trying out” the various locations.
Speculation continued, however, as to the place of permanent abode. The
passion for gain and the belief that wherever the selected “district” would be
located there would take place a pronounced increment in land values, caused
the deliberations of Congress to be closely watched. While convened at Trenton
in December, 1784, Congress passed a resolution appointing commissioners to
lay out a district on the banks of the Delaware, near the Falls, of not less than
two nor more than three miles square, and to erect buildings thereon, “in an
elegant manner,” for the use of Congress. Although the commissioners were
empowered to expend $100,000 for this purpose, no attempt was actually made
to carry the plan into effect. The next month, Congress moved to New York,
where it remained until after the adoption of the Constitution.

Shortly after the passage of the resolution of Congress, authorizing a site on
the Falls of the Delaware River, Robert Morris, who was one of the three
commissioners appointed to execute the plan, bought a tract of 2,500 acres in the
neighborhood. This site he called “Morrisville.” It was one of Morris’ first
important land speculations and its purchase created the suspicion that his
motive was to gain a profit at the expense of the nation. Morris’ biographers
deny this, however, and point out that he never urged his site upon Congress as a
location for a “federal district,” and that he continued to hold and develop the
land until it was sold by the sheriff subsequent to his bankruptcy in 1798.
Moreover, it does not appear from the Morris correspondence that he was
disappointed, when the Trenton site proposed by Congress in 1784 was later
abandoned. William Maclay, Morris’ fellow Senator from Pennsylvania, who
bore him considerable ill-will, noted in his journal on August 25, 1789, that
Morris had refused his request “to bring forward all the places which had been
mentioned for a permanent residence of Congress at one time.” Instead, Morris
answered “rather roughly,” “Let those that are fond of them bring them forward;
I will bring forward the Falls of the Delaware.” And this he did, “although the
President was every moment looked for to attend the Senate session.”2 In fact,
Maclay later remarked that he (Morris) “has had no other object in view than the
Falls of the Delaware, since he has been Senator; at least, this has been his
governing object.”
Maclay came from Harrisburg, Pa., and of course was deeply interested in
having the federal site fixed on the Susquehanna River. Morris’ residence was in
Philadelphia, and he therefore favored a site close to this metropolis in eastern
Pennsylvania. His personal interests may have influenced his attitude, but it does
not appear as Maclay declares that he was unwilling to “consent to it [the federal
seat] being anywhere else, unless it be on his own grounds at the Falls of the
Delaware.” In fact, Morris, a few days after Maclay penned the above, made a
motion in favor of Germantown, near Philadelphia, and appears to have
abandoned his support of the Falls of the Delaware.
Whatever may have been Morris’ purpose with reference to his purchase of
2,500 acres near Trenton Falls (it is possible he saw its advantages as an
industrial site), he did not hesitate to enter upon a gigantic speculation in the new
Federal City, after Congress, on July 16, 1790, definitely voted to locate the seat
of government on the river Potomac “at some place between the mouths of the
Eastern Branch and the Connogochaegue.”3 The site was selected in January,

1791.
It was some time before the commissioners, appointed to execute the plan of
the Federal City, could start things going. First of all, they had to buy off the
former property owners. Each of these wanted special privileges for his site, with
reference to the location of buildings and the planning of the district. One, “the
obstinate Mr. Burnes,” was obdurate and would not meet the terms of the
commissioners. It required a patriotic address by the “Father of his Country,” to
get the landholders to agree to sell out. He met them at Georgetown, the village
located in the selected area, and in the course of his remarks, “represented that
the contention in which they seemed engaged did not . . . comport either with the
public interest or that of their own; that while each party was aiming to obtain
the public buildings, they might, by placing the matter on a contracted scale,
defeat the measure altogether; not only by procrastination but for want of the
means necessary to effect the work” . . . and that “instead of contending,” they
had better, “by combining more offers make a common cause of it.”4
Washington’s advice was heeded. As the President noted in his diary, on
March 30, 1791:
The parties to whom I addressed myself yesterday evening . . . saw the
propriety of my observations: and that whilst they were contending for the
shadow, they might lose the substance; and therefore mutually agreed and
entered into articles of surrender for public purposes one half of the land they
severally possessed within bounds which were designated as necessary for the
City to stand with some other stipulations, which were inserted in the instrument
which they respectively subscribed.5
The “instrument” which they subscribed stated that “in consideration of the
great benefit we expect to derive from having the federal city laid off upon our
lands,” the subscribers agreed to convey in trust the whole of their lands upon
condition that “the President shall have the sole power of directing the federal
city to be laid off in what manner he pleases.”6 The lots, it was agreed, were to
be divided equally between the public and the former owners, and those taken by
the public were to be paid for at the rate of £25 per acre, with a deduction for
streets. Thus, one-half of the area of the proposed city was acquired by the
District Commissioners, representing the public, to be disposed of as they saw
fit. The other half could be retained by the original owners. As the
commissioners needed money for laying out the City and constructing public

buildings, they soon had “lots for sale.” So did the former landowners. These
were also desirous of realizing the profit that would come from the selection of
the site of the Federal City on their properties.
The first public sale of lots “in the Federal City” was scheduled to begin
October 17, 1791. It was expected that Major Charles L’Enfant, the City’s
designer, would have his map prepared, showing the complete layout and the
location of lots, but this distinguished “French gentleman” procrastinated and
blustered, and finally was dismissed in disgust. When the sale began, not only
was a general plan of the City lacking, but the bad weather prevented
prospective buyers from meeting on the ground which was to be “auctioned off.”
Yet the occasion was marked by the presence of George Washington, the
incumbent President, and Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, two future
Presidents of the United States.
The results were extremely disappointing. After three days of auctioning,
only thirty-five lots were sold for an aggregate sum of $8,756. The actual cash
received was but slightly more than $2,000, since, in accordance with common
usage from that day to this, liberal credit terms were granted. Only a quarter of
the purchase price was required in cash. The balance was payable in three annual
installments.
The price of lots ranged from $160 to $534. Whoever bought or held the lots
was required to build thereon. The promoters of the Federal City, moreover,
would permit no cheap or temporary structures. Buildings must be of at least two
stories, and of brick or stone. No building was to be higher than forty feet and,
on the avenues, not lower than thirty-five feet, thus assuring an harmonious sky
line. The idea was sanctioned, therefore, that the Federal District was to be a
magnificent city—an artistic city; in other words, a modern real estate
development, and not merely a “scene of speculative land operations or of the
erection of buildings for the use of the Government.”7
Modern, up-to-date real estate sales methods also were used in “booming”
the new city. As there was much political opposition to the selected site, and
much unfavorable gossip regarding the likelihood that Congress would ever
move to “the residence city,” some sort of “boostering” was deemed essential.
Newspapers were used then as now. On September 30, 1791, about two weeks
before the first sale was scheduled, there appeared in the Maryland Journal the
following alluring account of the proposed city:
The plan [of the city] was designed and drawn by the celebrated Major

L’Enfant, and it is an inconceivable improvement upon other cities of the world,
combining not only convenience, regularity, elegance of prospect and a free
circulation of air, but everything grand and beautiful that can possibly be
introduced into the City. It will not only produce amazement in Europe but meet
the admiration of all future ages.
Such it was proposed to be—and such a city it has become—but when
George Washington, President of the United States, Thomas Jefferson, his
Secretary of State, and a few other curious or interested spectators gathered at
Suter’s Tavern in Georgetown on October 17, 1791, to sell unsurveyed city lots
covered with woods and cornfields, the grandeur and beauty of the future
national capital might have been conceived, but not seen. Certainly it taxed the
imagination of even the most hopeful, for at the end of the third day, in spite of
free “wine and wood” furnished the prospective lot purchasers, “the business
seemed to flag,” as Washington stated, and the auction was called off.
But with all this, the First President, who was undoubtedly the most
interested party in the proposed plan of developing the magnificent city that
bears his name, was not discouraged. He informed Congress the following week,
in the course of his regular message: “There is prospect, favored by the rate of
actual sales which have already taken place, of ample funds for carrying on the
necessary public buildings. There is every expectation of their due progress.”8
The actual prospect, nevertheless, was a poor one. In the spring of 1792 there
occurred in New York and Philadelphia the first of the many financial panics
with which our country has since been cursed. The speculations of William
Duer, Alexander Macomb and other capitalists in New York; the reign of terror
in France; and the suspension of specie payments by the Bank of England,
“produced general stagnation of money contracts.” So Jefferson wrote to the
District Commissioners. These officials were hard pressed for funds and desired
additional lot auctions to obtain current cash. It was not until a year later,
however, when the cornerstone of the “President’s palace” had been already set,
that the second public sale of lots was attempted. As on the previous occasion,
the sale continued for three days, but with scarcely greater success than the first
offering.
The heaviest and most interested lot purchaser on this occasion was Samuel
Blodget, Jr., one of the many enterprising and ingenious seekers after wealth of
his generation. He was born in Woburn, Mass., in 1755, and served on the staff
of General Washington in the Revolution. Subsequently, he engaged in the East

Indian trade, and made visits to Europe in 1784 and 1790. In March, 1792, he
founded the Tontine Association in Boston, and this proving fairly successful, he
came to Philadelphia and promoted the “Universal Tontine.” As he failed to get
the necessary subscribers, he suggested that the funds already in hand be applied
to the establishment of a general insurance company. As a result of this
suggestion, there was organized in November, 1792, the Insurance Company of
North America, in Philadelphia, the oldest concern of its kind in the Western
Hemisphere. Blodget took a minor part in its organization, though he and his
father were among the first stockholders.
At this time, his chief activities were centered in the Federal City, whither he,
in all probability, went to attend the first sale of lots in 1791. His interest in the
city’s promotion, he stated years afterwards in his pamphlet,9 was stimulated by
the persuasion of “his former commandant, Washington, to purchase property to
the amount of above $100,000 in and adjoining the city, one day to become the
noblest of the universe.”
Blodget soon became the right-hand man of the commissioners of the
Federal City, and for a time was the chief manager of the enterprise. Washington
consented to his appointment as “Superintendent,” though he acknowledged that
he “knew very little of him, . . . and after what has happened shall be cautious
about recommending.”10 The public sale of lots proving unsatisfactory as a
means of obtaining funds to further the construction of public building, Blodget
was despatched to Boston to negotiate a loan based on the unsold city lots as
security. Nothing came of this endeavor. Blodget next suggested that agents be
employed “to pass through the several states to dispose of lots,” but Washington
seemed to object to this, because it appeared “to be hawking the lots about.”11
Still undaunted, Blodget’s gambling propensities were again manifested in
his next suggestion to the commissioners. He proposed a lottery as a means of
raising funds. The principal prize was to be “a grand hotel,” to be erected in the
City at a cost of $50,000. Whether the commissioners officially sanctioned the
idea or not is in dispute, but the lottery was duly advertised January 19, 1793, as
“by the commissioners appointed to prepare the public building, etc., within the
City of Washington,” and signed “Samuel Blodget, agent for the affairs of the
city.” The drawing of prizes was scheduled to take place in the fall of 1793,
about the date of the next sale of lots. Before the date arrived, however, some
mix-up occurred, and the commissioners, fearing the city’s funds might be put in
jeopardy, repudiated the lottery transaction and placed the entire responsibility

for it on Blodget and his associates.12
This led to Blodget’s financial ruin. He was required to convey by deed to
trustees all his property in the Federal District, as well as his stock of 7,160
shares (par value $10) in the Insurance Company of North America, to secure
payment of the lottery prizes, and to protect the commissioners from damage
suits in consequence of the lottery.
Unabashed by this outcome, he proposed still another lottery known as
“Federal Lottery No. 2,” to which he also endeavored to give an official
character, but which was likewise repudiated. His “former commandant,”
General Washington, was seriously irritated by the audacity of the “City Agent,”
as Blodget styled himself, in trying to put over a second lottery scheme after the
failure of the first. “I was at a loss,” he wrote Thomas Johnson, on January 23,
1794, “how to account for a conduct so distant from any of the ideas I had
entertained of the duties of a Superintendent, but it appears evidently enough
now, that speculation has been his primary object from the beginning.”13
But Blodget persisted, and announced that the drawings of the lottery would
commence December 22, 1794. The principal prize was to be a house to cost
$30,000. The total amount to be raised was $400,000. If a surplus resulted after
paying all prizes, it was to constitute a fund to be used for the proposed national
university in the city, which was one of the promoter’s pet ideas.
Blodget pledged all his Washington lots to secure the prizes. As neither the
hotel—the prize of the first lottery—nor the buildings constituting the principal
prize of the second were ever completed, the successful ticket holders obtained
judgments against him, and he was “cleaned out” entirely of his Federal City
property. He was also dismissed as “Superintendent.” He continued to reside in
Washington, however, where he wrote the first book that was printed there,14
and, as already noted, also prepared in later years a statistical and economic
treatise on the United States. He was imprisoned for debt in 1802, but on being
given “the liberty to walk out of prison (within the bounds of the District), for
the preservation of his health” under a bond of $10,000, he failed to return,
though he soon reappeared in Washington and busied himself in promoting a
“national university.” He died in comparative poverty on April 11, 1814, at
Philadelphia, “and no stone marks the grave of the founder of Washington
City.”15
The failure and repudiation of Blodget’s schemes, and the inability to sell
“lots” at retail as a means of raising funds to erect public buildings, brought into

the Federal City the greatest land-grabbing triumvirate that ever operated in
America. James Greenleaf, then a young man of but twenty-seven, had just
returned from Holland, where, with the coöperation of Dutch bankers, he had
engineered some profitable deals in American debts. He accounted himself
wealthy and was looking about for new and speculative ventures. In some
unknown manner, he was attracted to the Federal City as a field of operations. It
is quite probable that Washington, the President, suggested it to him. Or perhaps,
he, hearing of the financial straits of the District Commissioners, had offered to
negotiate for them a loan from Dutch bankers. Whatever may have been the real
reason, he came to the District Commissioners in August, 1793, armed with a
letter of introduction from the President. In this letter, Washington wrote: “This
gentleman has it in contemplation to make certain proposals to you for building
a number of houses in the Federal City, provided he can have lots upon such
terms and conditions as may correspond with his interest in the undertaking,
while it tends, at the same time, to promote the object of the City . . .”
As to Greenleaf’s financial ability to execute his plans, the President would
give no advice. “He has been represented to me as a gentleman of large property
and having the command of much money in this country and in Europe. But I
can say nothing on this head from my own knowledge.” Yet, he added, “I have
reason to believe that if you can find it consistent with your duty to the public to
attract Mr. Greenleaf to the Federal City, he will be a valuable acquisition.”16
The immediate result of Greenleaf’s visit was an offer by him to purchase
three thousand lots at $66.50 per lot, to be paid for in seven annual installments.
On these lots, during the period of the installments, he was to erect an average of
ten houses annually, according to the required specifications. He agreed to make
no sales prior to January 1, 1796, unless on every third lot sold a house should be
erected within four years. But what was more important to the commissioners,
he offered further to make them a loan of $2,200 each month at 6 per cent, until
the public buildings were completed.
The President was undoubtedly pleased with Greenleaf’s bargain with the
District Commissioners. “You will learn from Mr. Greenleaf,” he wrote Tobias
Lear, his secretary, “that he has dipped deeply in the concerns of the Federal City
—I think he has done so on very advantageous terms for himself, and I am
pleased with it notwithstanding on public ground; as it may give facility to the
operation at that place, at the same time that it is embarking him and his friends
in a measure which although [it] could not well fail under any circumstances that
are likely to happen, may considerably be promoted by men of Spirit with large

Capitals.”17
Greenleaf undoubtedly had Robert Morris’ backing in this project. He, in
fact, had already become an associate of Morris and Nicholson in their land
speculations, and he was regarded as a valuable acquisition, since he led these
two land jobbers to believe that his banking relations in Amsterdam, where he
had been recently appointed American consul, would serve them as a means of
obtaining loans or disposing of their properties. Morris and Nicholson,
accordingly, became partners in Greenleaf’s wholesale purchase of Washington
lots, each taking a one-third interest. But neither assumed responsibility for
Greenleaf’s proffered loan to the District Commissioners.
Greenleaf’s first proposition was soon altered by a revised agreement. The
number of lots purchased was six thousand instead of three thousand. The
average price was raised from $66.50 to $80.00. In the second contract,
Greenleaf openly associated with himself, as principals, both Morris and
Nicholson. There was naturally no objection to this, as these two men were then
reputed to be the richest capitalists and “high financiers,, in the country.
The terms accepted by the speculating syndicate were rather stiff. They were
required to expend large sums for building within a seven-year period. This
handicapped them in reselling because the same obligation to build was imposed
on those who purchased from them. Morris, who was for “land jobbing” rather
than “land holding,” did not, at the time, take the conditions seriously. “Nobody
can suppose,” he wrote the President on September 25, 1795, “that Mr.
Nicholson or myself entered into these engagements with an expectation of
holding the property. It was from the beginning and it is now our intention to sell
them when it can be done to our satisfaction and I believe the interest of the City
will be more certainly promoted by interesting a number of individuals, than by
any one or two men continuing to hold a large number of lots.”18
Selling, however, was not easy, and meeting installment payments or
providing building costs was still more difficult. Yet, the three capitalists went
ahead with their purchases. They bought also additional lots from the private
owners. From Daniel Carroll and Notley Young, two of the former landowners in
the District, they purchased nearly seven hundred additional lots. Washington
and the commissioners were highly pleased with all this since considering “the
uncertainty of settled times and embarrassed commerce,,, they were happy to
have the assistance of “Mr. Morris’ capital, influence and activity.”
Altogether, the syndicate purchased 7,235 lots in the Federal District. In view

of their heavy commitments in land purchases elsewhere, and the prevailing
disturbed financial condition of both Europe and America, they had bitten off
more than they could chew. They sought in vain for financial aid in Europe.
Greenleaf attempted to get a loan in Holland, offering to pledge the city lots as
security. A negotiation through Messrs. Daniel Crommelin & Sons, Amsterdam
bankers, was engineered by Sylvanus Bourne, then American vice-consul at
Amsterdam, but the subscriptions fell considerably below the required amounts.
The fact that Greenleaf and his associates lacked a clear title to the pledged
property (since title was not to pass until payment was made in full) was ignored
by him, but he put up as additional collateral such amount of 6 or 3 per cent
United States bonds, “as with the interest to accrue thereon will be sufficient to
pay the annual interest of this loan until the final discharge of the same.” This
collateral made the proposition apparently sound.19
Before the Dutch loan negotiations were assured, however, Morris and
Nicholson, in their dire need of funds, began issuing and circulating drafts on
Dutch bankers. The volume and amount of their bills increased enormously.
“Had their success been uncurbed, they would have appreciably drained the
money supply of the Dutch. The mere acceptance by the Dutch bankers of the
management of a popular loan in the lots was made by the syndicate a sufficient
warrant to draw.”20 These Dutch transactions not only got Morris into
difficulties a few years later, but gave the District Commissioners considerable
trouble in straightening out their deals with the syndicate.
No attempt appears to have been made by Morris, Nicholson and Greenleaf
to unload their Federal City “lots” in England, though, as we have already seen,
they tried at this time to sell there the wild lands which they had transferred to
the North American Land Company.21 George Washington, however, may have
had in view possible British purchasers of the Federal City lots, for his private
secretary, Tobias Lear, undoubtedly with the President’s encouragement,
published in New York, in 1793, and in London, in 1794, the first book ever
written regarding the City of Washington. It was entitled Observations on the
River Potomac, the Country Adjacent, and the City of Washington, and its pages
furnished pleasing prospects and alluring commercial industrial possibilities of
the proposed seat of government and its surrounding territory. As the originator
of the “Potomac Company,” which was to make the Potomac River the principal
highway of commerce between the western back country and the seaboard,
Washington had a double interest in promoting the progress of the Federal City.

Others also had the notion that the seat of the federal government would be
the nation’s chief commercial and industrial center. Writing of the proposed plan
to open a passage “from the Ohio to the Potomac,” Isaac Weld, the Englishman,
who visited the new Federal City, in 1795, wrote:
Considering the vastness of the territory, which is thus opened to the federal
city, by means of a water communication; considering also that it is capable from
the fertility of its soil, of maintaining three times the number of inhabitants that
are to be found at present in all the United States; . . . there is good foundation
for thinking that the federal city, as soon as navigation is perfected, will increase
most rapidly in population, and that at a future day . . . it will become the grand
emporium of the West, and rival in magnitude and splendor the cities of the old
world.22
Though this may have sounded fanciful to jealous and incredulous
Englishmen of the time, there was at least one British capitalist who was
attracted by its allurements. He was Thomas Law, wealthy and aristocratic East
Indian trader, who, in 1794, decided to take up residence in America. While
sojourning at Philadelphia, he learned, in a conversation with the President, of
the speculative prospects of the new national capital. Greenleaf then met him.
The result was that Law bought a number of lots from Greenleaf’s syndicate, and
with his two sons moved to the nascent city on the Potomac.
The remarkable feature of Law’s purchase is that he paid Greenleaf an
average of $266 per lot for five hundred lots, which Greenleaf had, but a little
over a year previous, bought for $80 per lot. Law selected his lots south and east
of the site of the Capitol, and along the banks of the river, called the Eastern
Branch. It was then believed that this section would become the city’s chief
commercial center. It turned out otherwise, however. The sections in which
Law’s properties were located developed more slowly than those in the
neighborhood of the President’s “residence.” In fact, until about three decades
ago, the lots south of the Capitol were covered largely by negro shacks and
decaying and dilapidated warehouses.
Thomas Law’s real estate transactions in the new national capital were
second only in magnitude to those of Morris, Greenleaf and Nicholson. Unlike
these men, he continued solvent in spite of his financial disappointments, and he
kept up his faith in the future value of his real estate. Writing to Greenleaf, on
January 8, 1795, he stated enthusiastically, “You may say that I had rather sell
my horses or books or anything rather than part with a foot at present of

Washington City.”23 He succeeded in escaping from the effects of the
subsequent failure of Morris, Greenleaf and Nicholson, to meet their instalment
payments to the District Commissioners, by having received, at his own
insistence, a clear title to the real estate that he purchased. For a number of years
he lived as a prominent, respected and public spirited citizen of Washington City,
though his real estate ventures caused him serious loss of his fortune. In 1796, he
married Elizabeth Parke Curtis, granddaughter of Mrs. George Washington. This
brought him into close association with General Washington, while the latter was
in retirement at Mount Vernon. But the marriage was not a happy one. A
separation ensued in 1802.
Aside from the resale of lots to Thomas Law and a few others, Greenleaf’s
syndicate, which had agreed to furnish funds to the District Commissioners
through instalment payments, soon found it impossible to sell their holdings and
thereby raise the necessary funds. Nevertheless, they started in with considerable
zest to erect the required buildings, and in 1796 constructed a whole city block,
which was called the “Twenty Buildings.” This row of brick buildings, which
was dedicated with much ceremony by the personal presence of Robert Morris,
was never actually inhabited, and as late as 1824 was described as “a fallen and
dilapidated ruin.”
When their funds were exhausted, the speculating triumvirate petitioned for
relief from their contracts. As they could not sell lots because they had not the
deeds, the commissioners decided to offset their cash payments by conveyances.
In this way, they received title to about 1,000 lots, or about one-seventh of their
total purchases. In the meantime, rival interests among the real estate operators
in the city were causing a serious situation. Instead of concentrating building and
improvements in one section, each erected structures wherever it suited his own
interest. “Each began in his own quarter, with the hope of drawing thither the
new-comers,” remarked La Rochefoucauld, in the diary of his travels. “Each
vaunted of the advantages of that side of the city where his property lay and
depreciated others. The public papers were no longer filled with the excellences
of the Federal City, but with those of one or other of its quarters.” The effect was
a few scattered buildings, “most of them built for speculation and remained
empty,” in a territory of seventy square miles.
La Rochefoucauld lays part of the blame for this haphazard planning to the
District Commissioners. “The commissioners were not altogether clear of this
venal contest,” he remarked. “Two of them possessed lots near George-Town;
and if that had not been the case, their habits and prejudices relative to the city

would have determined their opinion as to the advantage of beginning to build in
one quarter or another, and would not have permitted them to remain indifferent
spectators of the emulation of the several proprietors . . . Each proprietor
supported with arguments the interests of the quarter where the mass of his
property lay, but he built with great caution, and with constant fear of some of
the opposite interests prevailing.”
AN EARLY VIEW OF WASHINGTON
(Reproduced from an old engraving in the Library of Congress)

THOMAS LAW, AN ENGLISHMAN WHO BOUGHT REAL ESTATE IN THE FEDERAL CITY
(Reproduced from Clark’s Greenleaf and Law in the Federal City)
“Were the houses that have been built,” notes Isaac Weld, another
contemporary commentator, “situated in one place all together, they would make
a very respectable appearance, but scattered about as they are, a spectator can
scarcely perceive anything like a town.” He states further:
Excepting the streets and avenues, and a small part of the ground adjoining
the public buildings, the whole place is covered with trees. To be under the
necessity of going through a deep wood for one or two miles, perhaps, in order
to see a next door neighbor, and in the same city, is a curious, and, I believe, a
novel circumstance.24
Tom Moore, the Irish poet, who visited Washington in 1804, about eight
years after Weld, expressed the same sentiment in verse:
This embryo capitol, where fancy sees 

Squares in morasses, obelisks in trees 
Which second-sighted seers, ev’n now, adorn 
With shrines unbuilt and heroes yet unborn, 
Though naught but woods and Jefferson they see 
Where streets should run and sages ought to be.
More than thirty-five years later, Charles Dickens, another critical and
skeptical Englishman, whose proneness to exaggeration should be duly
discounted in all he has written about America, gave a similar description of
Washington:
It is sometimes called the City of Magnificent Distances, but it might with
greater propriety be termed the City of Magnificent Intentions; for it is only on
taking a birds-eye view of it from the top of the Capitol that one can at all
comprehend the vast designs of its projector, an aspiring Frenchman. Spacious
avenues, that begin in nothing, and lead nowhere; streets, mile-long, that only
want houses, roads and inhabitants; and ornaments of great thoroughfares, which
only lack great thoroughfares to ornament—are its leading features. One might
fancy the season over, and most of the houses gone out of town for ever with
their masters. To the admirers of cities, it is a Barmecide Feast; a pleasant field
for the imagination to rove in; a monument to a deceased project with not even a
legible inscription to record its departed greatness. . . . Such as it is, it is likely to
remain.25
Dickens was undoubtedly a popular novelist and a pleasing satirist in his day—
but judging from the above remark, he was a poor prophet.
Notwithstanding the disappointment of the projectors, the progress of the
building of the Federal City in its early days was being heralded at home and
abroad. La Rochefoucauld ascribes this to the speculators: “The building of a
house for the President, and a place for the sittings of Congress,” he wrote,
“excited, in the purchasers of lots, the hope of a new influx of speculations. The
public papers were filled with exaggerated praises of the new city; in a word,
with all the artifices which trading people in every part of the world are
accustomed to employ in the disposal of their wares, and which are perfectly
known, and amply practiced in this new world.”
George Washington was seriously concerned about the progress of the city of
his name. From the day of its inception until near to the day of his death, he had
its progress at heart, and it appears to have given him more worry than most

other of the troublesome affairs of the state. He also had faith in it as a field of
pecuniary speculation, and is known to have advised others to invest their
fortunes in it. He, himself, bought some lots. A printed deed, signed by the three
District Commissioners, shows that he purchased on April 23, 1794, “lot No. 4
in square 21 of the City of Washington, for £200 Maryland currency,” and that
the fee was conveyed on October 3, 1798. Other lots owned by him were in
square 632 (on the west side of North Capitol Street between B and C streets).
On these lots, Washington constructed residences, which remained standing until
1908, when they were torn down to increase the area of the Capitol grounds.
The final outcome of Morris, Greenleaf and Nicholson’s speculations in
Washington real estate and other land deals was, as already stated, disastrous to
them. Their failure also almost wrecked the plans for a national capital—since
their defaults put the District Commissioners into a serious financial muddle.
These officials were confronted with the necessity of suspending building
operations. On May 15, 1795, about a year and a half after Greenleaf made his
first wholesale purchase from them, the commissioners notified him that unless
the payments due them were made, they would take legal steps to enforce the
obligations. But Greenleaf’s position was then almost hopeless. He was at odds
with his partners. These blamed him for their unfortunate town-lots venture. He
had contracted, Morris stated to Washington, “with his hand and seal to provide
us with money, to carry through the operations which, at his instance, we were
tempted to undertake, but the French invasion at Holland put it out of his power
to fulfill his engagements.”26
Greenleaf’s retort was an offer to sell out to his partners. A bargain was
struck between them. Morris and Nicholson paid Greenleaf for his share in their
joint properties with their personal notes. Their bankruptcy soon followed, so the
notes were uncollected. Thus, the controversy did not end. Greenleaf also soon
became a bankrupt. He continued years thereafter to claim an interest in the
Washington lots of Morris and Nicholson, as well as in the assets of the North
American Land Company.
A controversy of rancorous bitterness was carried on in newspapers between
John Nicholson on one hand and James Greenleaf on the other. Robert Morris
took no direct part in it. In fact, he did not like this method of airing their
differences, and wished for a “settlement with Mr. Greenleaf in the Counting
House and not in the Public Prints.” But he was bitter toward Greenleaf to the
end. When endeavoring within prison walls to straighten out his affairs, he
penned his memorandum on Greenleaf, thus:

James Greenleaf. This is an unsettled account; and I suppose, ever will be.
Here commenced that ruin which has killed poor Nicholson, and brought me to
the necessity of giving an account of my affairs. But I will forbear to say more,
lest I shall not know where or when to stop.
All three of the partners were fellow prisoners in the Prune Street Prison. Morris’
sojourn there was the longest. He was not released until August 26, 1801.
The struggle of Robert Morris and John Nicholson to keep out of a debtors’
prison marks one of the most tragic scenes in American financial annals. Kept
within their homes for over a year by their creditors, whom they called “the
cormorants” and who, armed with writs of attachment, camped in their gardens
and on their doorsteps, and watched their every move, the partners maintained a
communication with one another through the secret exchange of notes. Humor
and pathos, rancor and regret, hope and despair, were commingled in them. “We
must work like men to clear away these accursed encumbrances to satisfy the
cormorants,” Morris wrote encouragingly from “The Hills,” his country place on
the Schuylkill, on October 25, 1797. And again, in a despairing spirit, he informs
Nicholson, “two hundred thousand acres of my land in North Carolina, which
cost me $27,000 are sold for a year’s taxes. By heaven, there is no bearing of
these things. I believe I shall go mad . . . God help us, for men will not. We are
abandoned by all but those who want to get from us all we yet hold.”
Finally, in January, 1798, when Morris was preparing for his somber march
to Prune Street Prison—that “hotel with the grated doors”—he informed
Nicholson mournfully that “Confidence has furled her banners, which no longer
wave over the heads of M. and N.”
Morris went to. prison, February 16, 1798. Nicholson, despite the fact that
Morris taunted him for being “a great and sometimes a good lawyer,” soon
joined him. Nicholson, as already pointed out, died within a year.27 Morris
remained slightly more than three and a half years. Sixty-eight years old, and
broken in spirit, he made no attempt to recoup his fortunes. Gouverneur Morris
obtained from the Holland Company an annuity of $1,500 annually for Mrs.
Morris for release of her dower rights in the Genesee lands, and this constituted
his chief support in his last years. Gouverneur noted in his diary in 1803 that his
old-time friend, Robert, visited him at Morrisania, his New York estate, “lean,
low-spirited and as poor as a commission of bankruptcy can make a man.”
“But,” he also notes, referring to the annuity, “I sent him home fat, sleek and in
good spirits and possessed of the means of living comfortably for the rest of his

days.” Within three years thereafter, he died.
When Greenleaf, Morris and Nicholson failed to meet their obligations on
their Washington real estate, the commissioners of the Federal District decided
to resell “as many of the lots sold to the syndicate as may be necessary” to make
good the unpaid installment, especially “when they reflect that 95,000 pounds
have been raised and actually received from sales of city lots by them [i.e., the
syndicate] while they profess to be unable to pay their annual installment of only
$68,500.” The commissioners did not force sales of the lots, however, and they
even succeeded in receiving a portion of the installment due from the syndicate.
Yet it was only after December, 1796, when the State of Maryland lent the
commissioners $100,000 “in United States 6% stock” that they were able to
proceed with the building plans, and put the district into shape for the
“residence” of the national government in 1800.
James Greenleaf, though adjudged a bankrupt after the collapse of his
Washington speculations, continued for a while to maintain a residence in the
city, and became the “trustee” of the syndicate’s creditors. From this occupation
he managed to get a small income for many years. He resided a few years in
Allentown, Pa., the home of his second wife, Ann Penn Allen, though he
credited himself to Philadelphia. While in Allentown, he took an active part in
its affairs, but made frequent visits to his old battleground in the District of
Columbia, where he defended vigorously the rights of creditors of the syndicate
to their property claims in the Federal City. At some time before 1831, he again
took up his permanent residence in Washington, then a thriving political center,
and spent the remainder of his days as a retired gentleman of taste, though of
very limited means. He died September 20, 1843, obscure and alone.
The failure of James Greenleaf, Robert Morris, John Nicholson, Samuel
Blodget, Jr., and Thomas Law—the most conspicuous figures in the “Federal
City” speculation—to be profitably rewarded for their ventures, was not due to
fantastic visions of stupendous growth in land values, or even to lack of
foresight. They merely ignored the inherent and difficult problems of town
building. As pointed out by the Duke de La Rochefoucauld, one of the keenest of
observers of early American society: “He . . . who is engaged in the
establishment of a new city, can rarely confine to himself the conduct of the
enterprise. If he is not counteracted in the whole of his views, he is sure to be so
in the greater part of them. The proper inhabitants that he receives on his estate
are of no advantage to him. They are even burthen-some, as they occupy the
space he wishes to fill with others, whose wealth may advance his fortune.

Benevolence is banished from his system, by the necessary calculations of his
interest. If those calculations induce him to expend sums for buildings, it is to
erect taverns, shops, to open billiard tables, and to create lotteries; in a word, to
furnish the means of dissipation and pleasure. . . . It is such objects as these that
draw crowds of inhabitants to cities; and without them, cities will never be
extensive.”28
And thus it was with the Federal City, America’s first “boom town.”
1 See Travels Through the United States of North America in the Years 1795, 1796 and 1707, by the
Duke de La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt. Translated by H. Neuman, London, 1799, Vol. III, p. 622.
2 The Journal of William Maclay (1927 Edition), p. 131.
3 Wilhelmus Bogart Bryan, A History of the National Capital, pp. 38, 39.
4The Diaries of George Washington, Vol. IV, p. 154.
5Ibid.
6 Bryan, op. cit., p. 134.
7 Bryan, op. cit., p. 162.
8 The Writings of George Washington, edited by Ford, Vol. 12, p. 81.
9 Economica, a Statistical Manual for the United States, published in 1813.
10 Washington’s Writings, Vol. 12, p. 212.
11 Ibid., p. 214.
12 Bryan, op. cit., pp. 205–208.
13 Washington’s Writings, Vol. 12, p. 407.
14 The title of the work is Thoughts on the Increasing Wealth and National Economy of the United
States of America.
15 A History of the Insurance Company of North America, p. 109. Blodget’s heirs sued to recover his
Washington real estate, and the “descendants of the third generation” are reported to have been successful.
16 Bryan, A History of the National Capital, Vol. I, p. 215.
17 Washington’s Writings, Vol. 12, p. 329.
18 Allen C. Clark, Greenleaf and Lam in the Federal City, p. 114.
19 Clark, op. cit., p. 86.
20 Ibid., p. 89.
21 See Chapter II, p. 50.
22 Travels Through the States of North America, Etc., by Isaac Weld, Jr.
23 Clark, op. cit., p. 101.
24 Weld, Travels, etc., Fourth Edition, p. 286.
25 American Notes.
26 Bryan, op. cit., p. 257.

27 See Chapter II, p. 37.
28 Travels Through the United States of North America in the Years 1795, 1796 and 1797, Vol. III, p.
648.

CHAPTER VIII
FILLING UP THE “OLD NORTHWEST”
WHEN the year 1800 ushered in the new century, land speculation in America
was at low ebb. The wild land mania had subsided, and those who participated in
it, if not already bankrupt, were compelled to hold their acquisitions or proceed
slowly to dispose of their tracts at retail. The tendency was toward speculations
on a more moderate scale.
This move was fostered by the national land policy. Congress, after the
disappointments of the Ohio grants, provided for the sales of western public
lands in small allotments, instead of in large tracts. Through the suggestion of
William Henry Harrison, son-in-law of John Cleves Symmes, Congress in 1800
passed a law reducing the minimum area of tracts allotted to single purchases
from 640 acres to 320 acres.1 Harrison was the Congressional delegate from
Ohio, and his residence in that unsettled region brought home to him the
difficulties of the pioneers in endeavoring to pay for large tracts. He urged the
sale of the public lands in alternate half and quarter sections on an instalment
payment basis.
The adoption of this policy gave a new impetus to western migration. It
discouraged the engrossment of large areas by fixing the price of public land at
$2.00 per acre regardless of the quantity purchased. Payments could be made in
instalments covering a period of four years.
To facilitate sales to all comers, land offices were established at accessible
places in districts where surveys had been made and the unappropriated lands
made available for settlement. Accordingly, land offices were established at
Cincinnati, Chillicothe, Marietta and Steubenville, to serve the Ohio country.
Whenever a new tract was surveyed and opened up for settlement, a public
auction of sections and half sections was held for a period of three weeks.
Thereafter the unsold portions could be obtained at the minimum government
price.

The lure of fertile sections in the new “ranges” drew actual settlers to the
West. Of course, the private land companies and individual speculators
continued to offer their lands, but to meet the competition of the government
land offices, and still make a profit on their sales, they had to offer more liberal
terms of credit or some other special inducement to attract purchasers. The
prospect of fancy profits in private land deals was thus considerably reduced. It
was only through townsite building and the construction of internal
improvements that the interest in land speculation could be maintained.
Yet, the old “land grabbers,” who still held large areas of unsold wild lands,
endeavored to keep up a speculative interest both at home and abroad.
Gouverneur Morris, that prince of land agents, was kept on the job. In 1806 he
published a small pamphlet, in the form of a series of letters entitled Notes on the
United States of America,2 which was manifestly for the purpose of attracting
land purchasers from abroad. “Judicious speculations in land,” he wrote, “have
yielded more in the last ten years than in the twenty preceding on the antecedent
forty.” And, he added, “It is reasonable to believe that they will continue to be
advantageous.”
In answering the question whether the best speculation is in acquiring large
rather than small tracts, he states emphatically that “experience favors the
purchase of large tracts at a moderate price.”
Of course, Morris was biased in his opinion. He was still selling the northern
New York lands and other large areas acquired by wealthy speculators during the
wild land mania. “He who purchases a small tract of choice land, must pay a
large price, but, [he admits] he has the moral certainty of a speedy sale. He who
purchases a large tract unexplored, pays less, but much of it may be bad, and the
sales will not speedily be completed.” In large tracts, however, “there is much
less to be apprehended from the mistakes or misrepresentations of surveyors, and
frequently the proportion of good land is so great that if made to bear the whole
price, it will be as cheap as a small tract leaving the inferior quality a clear profit.
Moreover, when the best lands are sold and in cultivation, those which adjoin
them find as good, and sometimes, a better market”3
Gouverneur Morris, as a wealthy New York landlord and as a “wild land”
speculator, was qualified to give advice. We have already shown how he put over
sales to Madame de Staël, David Parish, Le Ray de Chaumont, and other
distinguished foreigners. To these, and to other purchasers, he advised the
disposition of their lands at retail to settlers, though the wholesale method was

the easiest, if not the most profitable mode of disposal.
He also discussed the advantages and risks of making improvements on
lands to attract settlers. “The landholder,” he said, “who gives a salary to his
agent, is certain of nothing but the expense. He will generally be pestered with
costly projects of roads, mills, and villages which seldom answer any good
purpose.” He advocated, therefore, a commission basis of payment to agents.
But he also suggested that purchasers of large tracts may profit by “settling in
the center of their domain,” and developing it for the purpose of gradual
disposal. Judge William Cooper at Cooperstown, N. Y., and the Wadsworths in
the Genesee country had done this with success.
Undoubtedly, Gouverneur Morris was a man of eminent shrewdness and
foresight, and his writings indicate him to have been one of the keenest minds
that the United States has ever produced. It was he who first proposed the
construction of the Erie Canal, and it was he who was largely responsible for the
land development activities which assisted in the rapid settlement of the
unoccupied areas of northern New York.
But he was, nevertheless, visionary, and somewhat mistaken in holding that
speculators would be attracted to the more settled eastern sections of the United
States in preference to the undeveloped West. The tide of emigration surged over
the Alleghanies, and though settlers gradually filled in the vacant lands in the
western portions of New York and Pennsylvania, the chief attraction was the
Ohio and the upper Mississippi valleys. This section has since become known as
“the Old Northwest.”
This westward movement, in the early nineteenth century, was in large part
induced by land speculation, though the opportunities of buying large tracts for
speedy resale at a profit had almost vanished. Speculation, therefore, had to take
a different course.
What was commonly called “town jobbing” in these early days became the
new form of land grabbing. Choice sites for communities became the land
speculator’s dream. Whenever a government land office opened up a new district
for settlement, business men, surveyors, lawyers, politicians, territorial officers
and others scrutinized the maps in the hope of discovering the possibilities of a
favorable town site. When individuals decided that a certain section or half
section was a desirable location for a “town,” they sought to preëmpt it. If they
learned that others were after the same site and would offer competitive bids,
they would endeavor to buy them off. Bribery and corruption became rife.
“Town jobbing” became a common practice.

The important beginnings of town jobbing west of the Alleghanies can be
traced to the large Ohio grants. All three of the principal “companies,” i.e., the
Ohio Associates, the Symmes Purchase, and the Connecticut Land Company,
laid out towns. The Ohio Associates founded Marietta; Symmes selected the site
for the city of Cincinnati; the Connecticut speculators laid out the “village” of
Cleveland. All these towns were divided into squares and lots. The central part
of the town plot was composed of the “in-lots” and the surrounding sections
were designated “out-lots.” Both classes of lots were generally offered for sale
simultaneously.
From such beginnings originated the “townsite mania.” It has continued with
little interruption ever since. When Symmes thought he had done a good job
with Cincinnati, he encouraged Jonathan Dayton, Governor Arthur St. Clair, and
General James Wilkinson, in 1796, to select a site (which he believed was within
the bounds of his grant) for the town of Dayton. “The in-lots of the new town
called Dayton,” Symmes wrote, on January 20, 1796, to Jonathan Dayton, “are
selling in Cincinnati at ten dollars per lot.” Then, referring to Dayton’s election
to the speakership of the House of Representatives, he added, “I hope you will
find ‘honor’s easy chair’ both agreeable and profitable, for $12 a day is very
pretty.” Thus a lot in a new town was worth almost as much as the Speaker’s
daily pay, and since in the same year a favorably located lot in Cincinnati (which
was then but partly built) sold for $150, the new “in-lots” in the proposed town
appeared cheap. “Out-lots” naturally sold for less, but as the town boomers
generally owned the neighboring land, the success of the town project meant
also an enhancement of the agricultural lands for sale by the same owners.
It would be tiresome to relate the tales of the numerous cities, towns, ports,
and emporiums which were planned and fostered in the unsettled western
country. Many were started, continued for a brief space of time, and then
disappeared. Others thrived, and became great centers of population. But the
number of those that survived and progressed, compared with the total number
projected, is very small.
Some towns were the outgrowth of colonizing efforts. In a number of
instances whole groups moved from a New England community to a new
location in the Ohio country. The Licking Land Company, formed in 1804 by
citizens of Granville, Mass., was but one of the many ventures of this kind. They
bought a part of a tract in Ohio which was reserved for holders of military
warrants. They acquired these warrants from the original holders. They then
moved as a single caravan across Pennsylvania into the Ohio Valley and took

possession of their purchase in 1805. Two years later they formed Granville
township, and laid out in the middle the town of Granville, “with 100 acre farms
around it.”4
Other towns as in the case of Cleveland, Chillicothe and Cincinnati, were the
result of careful and deliberate site selection and town planning. Most frequently,
however, the aim was town-lot selling, and nothing else. “Gain! Gain! Gain!”
exclaimed Morris Birkbeck, the Illinois pioneer, while journeying through the
Northwest in 1817. “Gain is the beginning, the middle, and the end, the alpha
and omega of the founders of American towns, who, after all, are bad
calculators, when they omit the important element of salubrity in their choice of
situations.”5 He noted that wherever there was a small cluster of houses, a town
was laid out by some one who named it after himself, and who sold lots at
auction:
On any spot where a few settlers cluster together . . . some enterprising
proprietor finds in his selection what he deems a good site for a town: he has it
surveyed and laid out in lots, which he sells, or offers for sale by auction. . . .
The new town then assumes the name of its founder:—a store-keeper builds a
little framed store, and sends for a few cases of goods; and then a tavern starts up
. . . as the boarding-house of the weary traveller; soon follows a blacksmith; a
schoolmaster, who is also a minister of religion becomes an important accession
to this rising community. Thus the town proceeds, if it becomes the metropolis of
the neighborhood. Hundreds of these speculations may have failed but hundreds
prosper; and thus trade begins and thrives around these lucky spots.6
The founding of Toledo, Ohio, on Lake Erie, may be taken as a typical
example of early Ohio town jobbing. Located at the mouth of a sluggish stream,
the Maumee River, it was originally purchased from the government in February,
1817, by two groups of speculators from Cincinnati, each of which began laying
off lots on different sides of the river. One group, because of some unknown
association, named their side “Toledo” the other “town” was called “Port
Lawrence.” These two rivals began selling lots at about the same time. In order
to avoid competition, they soon combined as the “Port Lawrence Company.”
They attracted few purchasers, however, and failing to make the final payment to
the government, the land was forfeited. In 1821, however, the surviving
promoters succeeded in making an arrangement with the land office, whereby
they received back a part of their original purchase (i.e., the “Toledo” side). They

again advertised their “town lots.” This time the venture was more successful,
and Toledo remained on the map. It did not begin to thrive, however, until the
boom days prior to the Panic of 1837. The town of “Port Lawrence” on the
opposite side of the river, was also revived—and the lots, which had been
neglected for almost twenty years, were again put up for sale.7
An English traveler, by the name of Joseph Biggs, whose diary was
discovered a few years ago, thus describes the process of town jobbing in the
Old Northwest:
A speculator makes out a plan of a city with its streets, square and avenues,
quays and wharves, public buildings and monuments. The streets are lotted, the
houses numbered, and the squares called after Franklin or Washington. The city
itself has some fine name, perhaps Troy or Antioch. This is engraved and
forthwith advertised and hung up in as many steamboats and hotels as the
speculator’s interest may command. All this time the city is a mere vision. Its
very site is on the fork of some river in the far West, 500 miles beyond
civilization, probably under water or surrounded by dense forests and impassable
swamps. Emigrants have been repeatably defrauded out of their money by
transactions so extremely gross as hardly to be credited.
It must not be thought, because of the prevalence of town jobbing in this
period, that agricultural or wild land speculation was totally absent. There was
plenty of it. It did not, however, have the “wholesale” character of the post-
Revolutionary land deals; nor did it involve as many persons of social and
political prominence. At this period, certain large tracts of western land were set
aside as soldiers’ bounties. By buying up the military land warrants, individual
speculators could acquire large areas, and some capitalists took advantage of this
land-grabbing opportunity.
An outstanding figure in early Ohio land speculation was General Duncan
McArthur, an early governor of the state. McArthur was born in Dutchess
County, N. Y., in 1772, but when still a boy moved to western Pennsylvania. He
later became an Indian fighter and surveyor in Ohio, and assisted General
Nathaniel Massie, in 1796, in laying out the town of Chillicothe—one of the
most successful town-jobbing ventures in early Ohio. While still occupying a log
cabin in Chillicothe, he commenced surveying and locating lands in the Virginia
Military Reserve. He soon acquired a reputation for land jobbing superior to any
in this business. Through accumulation of Virginia military warrants, he began to

reap the advantage of personal knowledge of the most accessible and fertile
sections. Fortune favored his land speculations. Though he was confronted with
numerous lawsuits regarding his titles, he in time became by far the largest land
holder in the Scioto Valley.
Politics and war also appealed to him. He volunteered in the War of 1812 and
joined General Hull in his defense of Detroit. He learned of Hull’s surrender of
the post on his return from a reconnoitering expedition, and before becoming a
prisoner of war, “tore off his epaulets, and broke his sword” in indignation. He
was paroled and returned to Ohio. He later became a major-general of the militia
and the successor of General William Henry Harrison to the command of the
American forces in the Northwest Territory.
McArthur continued his land acquisitions after the war with all the adroitness
and dexterity with which he could take advantage of the defects in the locations
and surveys of other land speculators. In these successful land deals he took as
much pride as an ambitious general in outmaneuvering his adversary on the field
of battle. His land manipulations were evidently emulated by others in his home
town. “My landlord at Chillicothe,” noted William Faux, an English traveler in
Ohio in 1818, “states he recently bought seventy-five acres of good land in Ohio,
at the small price of 75 cents per acre. It was at a forced sale, and the land has
been privately resold at three dollars an acre.” “The General,” he added in
speaking of McArthur, “looks dirty and butcher-like—very unlike a soldier in
appearance, seemingly half-savage, and dressed as a backwoodsman.” Perhaps
this appearance was due to the contempt in which land jobbers in Ohio were then
held. “Land here gives a man no importance,” Faux remarks. “Storekeepers and
clerks rank much above farmers, who are never seen in genteel parties.”8
General McArthur’s lands were largely in the section of the Virginia Military
Reserve, in which there had been a mix-up in the surveys. Two surveys of this
area had been made, each of which fixed different boundary lines, leaving a
vacant area between. In this vacant section, McArthur bought about 14,000 acres
from settlers who had originally located there under Virginia warrants. His titles
to these lands were contested, but the United States Supreme Court, in 1829,
gave him a favorable decision.
These “shady” land deals gained for the general a host of political enemies.
Yet he succeeded in 1824 in getting into Congress and was elected Governor of
Ohio in 1830. McArthur’s own brother-in-law and biographer notes in referring
to the general’s land speculations, “his conduct is not worthy of imitation and
though he acquired great wealth, it brought to him more vexations and enemies

than all other acts of his life.” It may have been by way of Divine retribution,
that the roof of a building fell on him, causing his death in 1839. He died rich in
land, but detested and scorned, for “notwithstanding that he was liberal in
feeding the hungry and clothing the naked, he was admitted to be a close and
severe dealer.”9
Chillicothe, McArthur’s home town, together with Cincinnati, and
Lexington, Ky., were the chief centers of land speculation in the Old Northwest
during the first three decades after 1800. In this section, the unoccupied public
lands were rapidly filling up. The New Englanders were settling along the
borders of Lake Erie; Virginians and Pennsylvanians were taking up the southern
areas; and foreign immigrants were preëmpting half sections or buying from
speculators throughout the whole region.
As in former years, both speculators and settlers conducted their operations
on a credit basis. Farms and town lots were sold “on liberal terms,” and “wild
cat” banks were organized to afford loans. The Second Bank of the United
States, which was chartered in 1816, did a large business in granting loans
secured by mortgages on land. At one time it had under pledge almost all the
area of Cincinnati. In 1823, defaulted real estate loans in that city alone
exceeded two million and a half dollars. When interest was regularly paid, the
debtors were not disturbed. When the arrears accumulated, the mortgage was
foreclosed and the property sold, only to be repurchased by the bank.
All this brought on bitter political opposition to Nicholas Biddle’s “money
monopoly” and finally defeated the request for a renewal of the bank’s charter.
Voicing the western sentiment against the bank, “Old Bullion” Thomas Hart
Benton, in the United States Senate, exclaimed: “I know towns, yea, cities . . .
where this bank already appears as an engrossing proprietor . . . All the
flourishing cities of the West are mortgaged to this money power. They may be
devoured by it at any moment. They are in the jaws of the monster! A lump of
butter in the mouth of a dog! One gulp, one swallow, and all is gone.”10
Individual capitalists, as well as the banks, prospered by the pecuniary needs
of real estate debtors. Foremost among those who became rich by buying up the
holdings of distressed speculators was Nicholas Longworth, grandfather of the
late Speaker of the House of Representatives. Coming from Newark, N. J., to
Cincinnati in the wake of Symmes’ settlers, Longworth took up the practice of
law. From the beginning of his business career, he displayed confidence in the
future of his adopted city. He bought up every piece of land and every town lot

that his cash permitted. He even accepted land in payment of legal fees.
On one occasion (so the story runs) he defended a man accused of horse
stealing. His client had no cash, but offered, in payment for legal services, two
second-hand copper stills which were in the possession of a friend. Longworth
learned that the friend had a lot of several acres near the city, and proposed that
this be given him in lieu of the copper kettles. The substitution was gladly made.
On this transaction alone, Longworth is reported to have made a fortune, for in
1856 the “kettle land” was estimated to be worth two million dollars.
Longworth’s other property in and near Cincinnati and in the region
extending from Hamilton to Sandusky was worth still more. When he died in
1863, he was reputed to be the richest real estate owner in the United States,
with the possible exception of William B. Astor, of New York City.

AN ILLUSTRATION OF EARLY WESTERN TOWN JOBBING, TAKEN FROM WILLIAM
WINTERBOTTOM’S, An Historical and Geographical and Philosophical View of the United States of
America, LONDON, 1795. THE PLACE DOES NOT EXIST TODAY

A CONTEMPORARY PORTRAIT OF NICHOLAS LONGWORTH EMBELLISHED WITH HIS
FAVORITE FRUIT AND BEVERAGE

THE BANKS OF THE OHIO. MR. LONGWORTH’S VINEYARDS
The original Nicholas Longworth had two hobbies: land grabbing and vine
growing. He devoted much of his time to grape and strawberry culture. His
vineyard on the Ohio River was a showplace for travelers. He worked zealously
to encourage the manufacture of wine in the Ohio Valley, and in this he then had
government encouragement. Bounties of public land were offered to those who
would cultivate the vine and the olive. Persons skilled in the manufacture of
Rhenish and Moselle wines were imported from Europe and given responsible
positions in Longworth’s wineries. His addresses and papers on grape growing
and horticulture were widely read and much appreciated. To him may be
ascribed the inspiration of the hymn in praise of “American Catawba”:
Ohio’s green hill-tops
Glow bright in the sun,
And yield us more treasure
Than Rhine or Garonne.
They give us Catawba,
The pure and the true,
As radiant as sunlight,
As soft as the dew.
In the course of a few decades following the first settlements, the Ohio and

Kentucky waste lands were rapidly converted into farms. So land jobbing moved
westward into the Indiana and Illinois country. Here was a different type of soil
and topography: the prairie. Strange to relate in these times, “grass lands” were
not looked upon favorably by the early American cultivators. Any ground which
could not grow trees was regarded as of little value, and was passed over even by
those who selected home sites east of the Alleghanies.
This prejudice had to be overcome. It was a handicap to western land
jobbing. However, when it was proven that bountiful corn and wheat crops could
be raised on the Illinois lands without the difficult preliminary work of clearing
and grubbing; and when sleek cattle thrived by feeding on the native grasses, the
ancient prejudice departed. New settlers began to move into the fertile western
plains beyond the Mississippi and Illinois rivers.
It will be recalled by the reader that just prior to the Revolution, the Indiana
and Illinois lands were “preëmpted” by a group of politicians and Indian traders
through spectacular purchases from the supposed Indian owners. Largely to
offset opposing claims to the territory, Virginia, during the Revolutionary War,
sought possession of the region and sent George Rogers Clark to drive out both
the Indians and the English. In 1780, the Virginia authorities established a court
at Vincennes (then a well-established French settlement) which assumed the
right of granting lands freely to every applicant whom they approved.
The members of the court naturally were kind to themselves. “An
arrangement was made,” notes William Henry Harrison, Governor of Indiana
Territory in 1802, “by which the whole country, to which the Indian title was
supposed to be extinguished, was divided between the members of the court.”
Most of them, however, abandoned the land in a few years, because they could
find no purchasers. When settlement in the territory began, however, after 1800,
the claims of these “grantees” were bought up by speculators who infested the
western country. These resold to others in different parts of the United States.
“The price at which the land is sold,” wrote Governor Harrison to James
Madison, “enables anybody to become a purchaser; one thousand acres being
frequently given for an indifferent horse or a rifle gun.”
Many ignorant persons were induced to buy these fraudulent titles, and a
number began to settle upon the land. “I should not be surprised,” wrote
Harrison, “to see five hundred families settling under these titles the ensuing
Spring.” He feared that upon learning of their invalid titles, the settlers would
petition Congress to confirm their ownership. “The extent of these speculations
was unknown to me until lately,” the governor stated. “I am now informed that a

number of persons are in the habit of repairing to this place [Vincennes] where
they purchase two or three thousand acres of this claim, for which they get a
deed properly authenticated and recorded, and then disperse themselves over the
United States to cheat the ignorant and credulous. To check this practice, I have
forbidden the recorder and prothonotary of this county from recording or
authenticating any of these papers.”11
. . . . .
Though William Henry Harrison, hero of Tippecanoe, railed against the
unprincipled land jobbers that “infested” his Indiana territory, he, himself,
participated in one of the questionable and corrupt speculations in the Old
Northwest. When George Rogers Clark, and his Virginians, took possession of
the Illinois country and drove out the British, he found French colonies
established along the Kaskaskia River. These simple-minded French pioneers
feared the Americans because of both their pillaging and their Protestantism.
Some fled the country and settled in Louisiana. Others who remained were
sought to be appeased by grants of land. Thus, in Vincennes, each head of a
family was given 400 acres, drawn by lot. After the Ordinance of 1787, many
again became frightened, as they were told they would be required to change
their religion—and left their settlements.
As might be expected, they sold their land titles for almost anything. Their
claims were eagerly bought up by both resident and non-resident land grabbers.
Among those who bought these titles were William Henry Harrison, the first
secretary, and General Arthur St. Clair, the first governor of the Northwest
Territory. Neither, however, went into this business of land grabbing on a large
scale.
But Harrison’s name appears several times, in the lists of those who
presented claims to the Frenchmen’s lands in Kaskaskia.12 St. Clair personally
presented no claims, but it is clearly evident that his son, John Murray St. Clair,
was closely associated with one John Edgar, merchant of Illinois, who garnered
more land claims in this region than any other individual. St. Clair, as governor
of the territory, passed upon the validity of these claims, and he seems to have
approved a vast number held by John Edgar and, jointly, by Edgar and his son.
John Edgar settled in Kaskaskia in 1784. He was a native of Ireland, and
brought with him to the Illinois country a stock of merchandise, useful to the
pioneer inhabitants. He soon built up an extensive trade, established a flour mill,
and entered local politics. He was also appointed a “Major General of Militia” as

well as a “judge” in the Northwest Territory. He became very friendly with
Governor Arthur St. Clair, whom he occasionally entertained in his sumptuous
backwoods palace.
In the St. Clair Papers, published in 1883, there is a letter written by Edgar
to Governor St. Clair, which indicates their close association. On April 11, 1801,
after congratulating the governor on his reappointment “in spite of the
opposition of your enemies,” he wrote, “I must now take the liberty of refreshing
your memory concerning the deeds for the three surveys which I sent you last
Spring, for which I now begin to feel myself anxious.” And, in a more familiar
vein, he added: “Present if you please, Mrs. Edgar’s and my compliments to
Mrs. Dill, Mrs. Vance and the rest of the family.”13
St. Clair brought upon himself severe criticism because, among other things,
of his approval of several Kaskaskia claims. He was rebuked by Washington for
his actions, and finally was removed by Jefferson in November, 1802. His
confirmation of a grant of 30,000 acres to John Edgar and his son was
subsequently annulled on the ground that it was made after St. Clair had
authority to act as a land commissioner. St. Clair’s son, however, remained in
Illinois, but the general returned to western Pennsylvania after his dismissal,
where he died in 1818, a poor and broken-down old man. He acquired no wealth
because of his political position in the Old Northwest; though, when surrounded
by ravenous land jobbers in this back country, he undoubtedly was under great
temptation to join in their schemes. But he seems to have passed up the
opportunity.
Next to Edgar, to whom were confirmed 49,200 acres, the largest jobbers in
the Kaskaskia claims were William Morrison and Nicholas Jarrot. Jarrot was a
jobber of no political importance, but Morrison, like Edgar, was prominent in
early Illinois politics. He was a native of Pennsylvania, who emigrated to
Kaskaskia in 1790. He also was a leading merchant in the Illinois country, and
operated stores in several of the settlements, and became a large land holder.
Like Edgar, he advocated the establishment of slavery in Illinois, probably in the
belief that this institution would enhance the value of his lands. He died in 1837.
The determination of the Kaskaskia claims gave Congress and the
government land officials an almost endless amount of trouble. The matter was
under consideration for many years. It was brought out in the proceedings that
several of the leading land grabbers had employed false and corrupt witnesses in
support of their claims. Thus, John Edgar was accused of forging deeds and of
buying forged deeds. François Vigo, William and Robert Morrison, Nicholas

Jarrot, and Robert Reynolds also presented claims which were considered
fraudulent and invalid. Vigo was a lieutenant of George Rogers Clark’s in the
winning of the Northwest, and for many years he and his heirs prosecuted a
claim before Congress for compensation for military supplies and loss of his
property in the French settlements.
A goodly number of the claims presented by the Kaskaskia jobbers was
rejected. However, out of a total of 2,294 claims presented, 1,171 or about one-
half were confirmed. But it was not until about 1820 that the clearing up of old
land titles in the Kaskaskia district ceased to take up the time of Congress and
the land officials.
. . . . .
The rapid growth of the Old Northwest and the consequent rise in real estate
values there did not fail to attract British speculators. Of course, during the
Napoleonic Wars, the Britishers could spare very little capital to send abroad.
They found better use for it as subsidies to their allies in the conflict with the
Continental conqueror.
Conditions were different after 1815. The London banking house of Baring
kept up close business relations with American firms. The Barings, however,
appear to have avoided commitments in American lands. But they acted as
agents and advisers of Englishmen, who desired profit and riches from rising
American land values.
How much capital was invested in this period by British speculators in our
soil may never be known. No one has even tried to estimate it, but there is much
evidence indicating that British speculative interest in American growth and
prosperity was greatly aroused in this period and that agents were employed by
British capitalists to acquire both agricultural lands and urban real estate in the
United States.
The interest of the British was stimulated by the letters and publications of
Morris Birkbeck, a distinguished British immigrant, who proposed the
establishment of English farm colonies in America. Despairing of improvement
in the condition of English tenant farmers, Birkbeck came to America with his
son in 1817. Before sailing, he issued a prospectus or “proposals for the
establishment of a colony of English,” in which he stated that he intended to
acquire one or more entire townships of government land. These lands he
proposed “to offer on terms proportionately favorable to a number of our

countrymen.”
Arriving at Norfolk, in May, 1817, Birkbeck almost immediately began a
journey westward via Washington and Richmond. He was unable to buy a tract
in the Ohio country, because of the prevailing high land prices, and because, as
he noted, “the best locations were already taken up.” Good Ohio lands were then
selling at $20 to $30 per acre, representing a tenfold increase in twenty years.
Birkbeck proceeded into Indiana and Illinois. He described this region in his
Notes on a Journey in America, published in both London and Dublin in 1818.
This was followed shortly by his Letters from Illinois, issued in London and in
Philadelphia. These publications attracted considerable attention both in Great
Britain and in the United States.
In these publications Birkbeck described the methods of purchase and
settlement of western public lands and the prevalent speculation in town sites.
“Land Jobbers traverse this fine country,” he wrote back home, “like a pestilent
blight. Whenever they see the promise of a thriving settlement from a cluster of
entries being made in any neighborhood, they purchase large tracts of the best
land and lock it up in real mortmain, for it is death to all improvement.”
“One of the greatest calamities,” he exclaims, “to which a young colony is
liable, is this investment of the property of nonresidents, who speculate on their
prosperity, whilst they are doing all they can to impede it. . . . This holding back
from cultivation of millions of acres, tends to scatter the population of these new
countries; increasing the difficulties of the settlers manifold. . . . The western
States are suffering greatly from this evil.”14
Birkbeck had, as a partner and companion, George Flower, a wealthy and
well-known English writer on rural economics. Flower arrived in America a year
in advance of Birkbeck, and was advised by Thomas Jefferson to settle in
Virginia. He went west, however, with Birkbeck, and each took up 1,500 acres of
government lands at “Big Prairie” in Edwards County, Ill., just south of
Vincennes. They paid more than they intended to, and blamed the high price on
“the invasion of speculators” into the region. Flower, in his History of the
English Settlement in America, thus described their attitude toward the
speculator:
Having expended all the money we could then command, by securing but
little more than half the land we intended for our own families, we were fearful,
as the point of our settlement was designated, that speculators might buy the
lands immediately around those we purchased, and thus defeat our object in

preserving lands at the Government price to those we hoped to induce to come
from Great Britain.
Immediately following the selection of the site for their colony, the two
partners sent alluring letters home, advertising the virtues of the soil, the
topography and the climate. These letters were given wide publicity in the
British press, and threatened to cause a rush of English farmers to the Illinois
country. “No man, since Columbus,” remarked William Faux in 1819, “has done
so much toward peopling America as Mr. Birkbeck, whose publications, and the
authority of whose name had effects truly prodigious; and if all could have
settled in Illinois whom he had tempted to cross the Atlantic . . . it had now been
the most populous state in the Union.”15
And here are some of the allurements pointed out by Birkbeck in his Letters
from Illinois, which “tempted” so many British to cross the Atlantic:
I am so well satisfied with the election [of the site] we have made, that I have
not for a moment felt a disposition to recede; and much as I should lament that
our English friends should stop short of us, some amends even for that would be
made by the higher order of settlers, whom similar motives bring constantly into
our very tract. Society we shall not want, I believe; and with the fear of that want
every other fear has vanished. The comforts and luxuries of life we shall obtain
with ease and in abundance; pomp and state will follow quickly.
A few months later, he wrote:
As to the comforts and accommodations of life, we have our books, our
music, our agreeable and kind neighbors, good food and clothing, and before
two years are ended we expect to have as good and well furnished a house as we
left. It is astonishing how small are the privations we are subject to. . . .
I own here a far better estate than I rented in England, and am already more
attached to the soil. Here, every citizen, whether by birthright or adoption, is part
of the government, indentified with it, not virtually, but in fact. . . . I love this
government. . . . I am becoming a patriot in my old age; thus a new virtue will
spring up in my bosom.
He was enthusiastic about America as a field of investment. “The power of
capital here,” he wrote, “is great almost beyond calculation; the difficulty seems
to be in the choice of objects out of the various ways of doubling and redoubling
it, which present themselves to the enterprising. . . . We have no rent, tithes, or

poor rates and scarcely any taxes. . . . For about half the capital that is required
for the mere cultivation of our worn-out soils in England, a man may establish
himself as a proprietor here, with every comfort belonging to a plain and
reasonable mode of living.” And finally, in an appeal to the British
gourmandizing impulse, he wrote: “We are now feasting on wild turkeys. We
have not sat down to dinner for the last month, I believe, without a fine roast
turkey. They weigh about twelve pounds, and are sold five for a dollar.”
William Cobbett, the radical British politician, who resided in the United
States in 1818, and made a short visit to Birkbeck’s colony, issued a public
statement that Birkbeck’s account of the fertility and salubrity of Illinois was
overdrawn.16 Birkbeck made a scathing reply, showing up Cobbett’s ignorance.
He accused Cobbett of “lending his active aid to eastern land speculators, who
wish to see Illinois in ruin and utterly discarded.”
These controversies whetted the curiosity of the English. Several
investigators left for America to verify the situation. Among these were William
Faux, “an English farmer,” Adlard Welby and Henry Bradshaw Fearon, all of
whom published accounts of Birkbeck’s settlement.17
Faux admits that his account was written “to show men and things as they
are . . . and to discourage British emigration.” To quote from his preface:
When I saw thousands of my countrymen hurrying thither, as though they
fled for life, and from the city of destruction, I became very anxious to know the
real nature of their prospects. . . . I may truly say, that throughout the whole of
this enterprise, I have) been in a high degree influenced by a sense of patriotic
duty. The same sentiment impels me to the completion of my task, in the hope
that the truth, so long perverted and concealed, may contribute to destroy the
illusions of transatlantic speculation.
While on his way to Illinois, Faux gathered here and there discouraging
accounts of Birkbeck’s venture from persons who professed to have been there.
One informer even accused Mr. Birkbeck and his family of eating “the
rattlesnake, the flesh of which is fine, sweet and white as an eel.” That Faux was
credulous of these wild stories is indicated in his note: “By the papers, today, I
see that Miss Courtney, the daughter of an emigrant in Mr. Birkbeck’s
settlement, was killed in a few hours by the bite of a huge spider.”18 But when
he finally arrived at Birkbeck’s settlement, he did not find conditions as bad as
had been painted to him, and he speaks highly of some of its aspects. His

descriptions, however, did not encourage British emigration to Illinois.
Both Birkbeck and Flower were pestered by letters from land speculators in
England and in eastern United States. “As early as 1817,” wrote Flower in his
memoirs, “I was solicited to purchase land from persons living in Eastern cities
—I was reluctant to do so, though regretting to disappoint some friends.”
MORRIS BIRKBECK
Neither of the two Illinois colonizers prospered. Because of rivalry in a love
affair, which resulted in Flower marrying a young lady who had accompanied
them to the West, the partners separated. Birkbeck’s colony became known as
“Albion.” At first it had fair prospect of success under his guidance. He became
interested in politics, took up the fight against introducing slavery into Illinois,
and in 1822 became Secretary of Illinois. He had endeavored to acquire the
preëmption right to 40,000 additional acres, and petitioned Congress for a grant,
but the Illinois representative in Congress politely informed him that it would be
refused because of “the fear of speculation.” His colony in the end was not
successful, and after his death in 1825 it began to disintegrate. Even his sons

deserted the place and settled elsewhere.
George Flower likewise met with financial reverses in his colonization
schemes. His settlement called “Wanborough” has disappeared altogether.
Flower, having wasted his resources in the experiment, took refuge in Robert
Owen’s colony at New Harmony, in 1849, whither he removed “with household
furniture, some plate, and $250 in cash to begin life anew.” He died January 15,
1862.19
. . . . .
While in the opening years of the nineteenth century, land grabbers and
townsite jobbers were operating in the western country, the eastern capitalists
were not idle in reaping the benefits of rising land values in cities and towns. It
was in this period that John Jacob Astor, Nicholas Emmerich, Henry Brevoort,
Stephen Whitney, Peter Goelet and a host of other “old merchants of New York”
were accumulating fortunes in urban real estate. Their example was followed by
Jacob Ridgeway and Stephen Girard in Philadelphia. These men were
merchants, shippers and bankers. They did not make a business of their real
estate transactions. It was merely a means of placing their surplus funds acquired
in the course of trade. They bought largely for cash, and they rarely mortgaged
their properties. They left their estates free and clear to their descendants, and
these, through long term leases, which freed them from taxes, obtained incomes
affording lives of luxury.
John Jacob Astor, it is true, entered upon one or two speculative schemes. He
bought up the claims to the confiscated lands of departed Loyalists. Chief among
these were the claims of Roger and Mary Morris, whose ancestors owned an
estate comprising 51,100 acres, or nearly one-third of the area of Putnam
County, N. Y. Astor is said to have paid the heirs $100,000 for their rights. The
confiscated land had been divided into more than seven hundred farms, on which
3,500 people were settled. Astor threatened suit to oust them. This created
consternation among the settlers. Most of them had obtained their titles from the
state. It was the state’s duty to defend them.
The New York Legislature appointed a commission to treat with Astor. They
had to acknowledge the legality of his claim, and asked for a redemption price.
Astor at first named $667,000, one-half of the estimated market value. This was
considered extortionate and no settlement of the dispute was made.
Astor did not press the case, but the owners of the land were kept in a state of

suspense and clamored for a settlement. Their titles were questionable. They
could not mortgage or sell their lands. They hesitated to make improvements
thereon. Finally, after ten years of bickering, the legislature passed a law
providing for a settlement. Astor was to bring five separate suits, and if the
United States Supreme Court decided three in his favor, he was to be paid
$450,000, subject to a deduction of $200,000, should the court hold that the
value of buildings and other improvements placed upon the land by title holders
under the state could not be claimed by the contestant.
Astor accepted the offer. The state employed Daniel Webster and Martin Van
Buren to plead its cause. Astor’s attorneys were Emmet & Ogden, the leading
law firm then in New York, though it is suspected that Aaron Burr acted secretly
as his counsel. Astor won the necessary three cases, and in 1830 there was issued
to him, in lieu of cash, $500,000 in New York State bonds. As more than twenty
years elapsed between Astor’s payment of $100,000 and his award, his actual
profit, allowing for interest accumulations at 6 per cent, and attorneys’ fees, was
probably less than 100%—in fact, less than the profit on his urban real estate
during the same period.
But Astor did not buy real estate for a profit on “turnover.” He bought to
hold indefinitely, for income, and his descendants still live from the rentals of
scores of lots and plots, obtained at bargain prices by their ingenious and
farseeing progenitor. Land-poor individuals, institutions and estates found him a
willing purchaser of vacant and non-income producing properties, provided he
thought they were cheap. He bought numerous lots from the Trinity Corporation
—the largest landowner in early New York. He bought from distressed traders
and merchants, and from defaulting mortgagors, and when the crash of 1837
came he still had cash to buy at ridiculously low prices.
Nor did he care to sell, until he obtained a price with which he could make a
better investment. And he did not spend money on building and improving
property, unless he could reap the immediate reward of such expenditure.
Occasionally he asked for and received grants of city land, and though political
corruption or graft may have been at the bottom of some of these transactions, he
generally rewarded, the community by undergoing the expense of cutting streets,
draining or filling in the donated plots or the surrounding areas.
America, in the first two decades of the nineteenth century, recovered from
the collapse of the visionary schemes of wholesale land grabbing, which marked
the post-Revolutionary period. It was in these decades that the European

immigration and the western movement, which the earlier speculators had
prematurely expected, began to take place. This “filling-in” process was mainly
fostered by native speculative enterprise, rather than the leadership of wealthy
and politically prominent promoters. A keen observer of American institutions in
this period, Michael Chevalier, a Frenchman who visited the United States in
1834, aptly remarked that “inasmuch as speculation in the United States created
utilities, it was beneficial.” “Here,” he says, “one lives a hundred fold more than
elsewhere. All is circulation, motion, and boiling agitation. Experiment follows
experiment, enterprise succeeds to enterprise. Riches and poverty follow on each
other’s traces, and each in turn occupies the place of the other.”
1 Payson Jackson Treat, The National Land System, p. 94. In 1804 the minimum acreage that could be
purchased was reduced to 160 acres, i.e., a quarter section.
2 Philadelphia, 1806, 48 pp.
3 Ibid., p. 37,
4 Hubert Howe Bancroft, Retrospection, p. 77. See also The Old Northwest Genealogical Quarterly,
Vol. 8, p. 241.
5 Morris Birkbeck, Notes of A Journey in America, (Dublin Edition, 1818), p. 71.
6 Ibid., p. 105.
7 See Clark Waggoner, History of Toledo, Ohio, pp. 370–372.
8 William Faux, Memorial Days in America, pp. 183–193.
9 John McDonald, Biographical Sketches of General Nathaniel Massie, General Duncan McArthur, etc.
This book was written in 1838, one year before McArthur’s death.
10 Ralph C. H. Catterall, The Second Bank of the United States, p. 67.
11 American State Papers, “Public Lands,” Vol. I, p. 123.
12 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 125 et seq.
13 William Henry Smith, The St. Clair Papers, Vol. II, p, 533.
14 Letters from Illinois, by Morris Birkbeck (Philadelphia, 1818), pp. 81, 82.
15 William Faux, Memorial Days in America, p. 298.
16 See “Letters to Morris Birkbeck, Esq.,” in Cobbett’s A Year’s Residence in the United States of
America, Third Edition, 1822.
17 William Faux, Memorial Days in America; and Tour of the United States to ascertain the condition
and probable prospect of British Emigrants, 18120;’ Adlard Welby, Visit to North America and the English
Settlements in Illinois, with a Winter Residence in Philadelphia, London, 1821; Henry Bradshaw Fearon,
Sketches of America, etc., with remarks on Mr. Birkbeck’s Notes and Letters, London, 1818.
18 Op. cit, p. 138.
19 History of the English Settlement in Edwards County, by George Flower, Chicago Historical Society
Collections, Vol. I.

CHAPTER IX
LOUISIANA “SPANISH GRANTS” AND THEIR
“ANTEDATERS”
ON JANUARY 29, 1804, less than a year after France ceded Louisiana to the
United States, Thomas Jefferson wrote to Dr. Joseph Priestley:
“I very early saw that Louisiana was indeed a speck in our horizon, which was to
burst in a tornado.”
Jefferson undoubtedly did not mean a tornado of land claimants, land jobbers
and land-grant thieves, but he could, with truth, have as well made this remark.
The vast, boundless region—which scarce a half century before had engendered
dreams of fabulous wealth creation on the part of John Law and the other
promoters of the Mississippi Bubble—had hardly been taken over by the new
American republic, when hosts of schemers and “get-rich-quick” adventurers
began to present their “claims” to a large part, if not practically all of the
territory.
Under the terms of the treaty of cession, the United States agreed to
incorporate the ceded territory into the Union as soon as possible and to accord
to the inhabitants “all the rights, advantages and immunities of citizens,—and in
the meantime, they shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of
their liberty, property and the religion they profess.”
This clause meant that all land titles, land grants and other rights given by
the Spanish and French administrators must receive recognition in so far as they
did not conflict with the principles of the Federal Constitution.
Just as soon as the Louisiana Purchase became known, land speculators in
the region began to get exceedingly busy. They sought out and bought up all
sorts of questionable titles, grants and conveyances, and when they could not
find enough of them, they manufactured them. “No sooner was it known that the
province of Louisiana was sold to the United States,” wrote Moses Austin, a

resident of Upper Louisiana, to Albert Gallatin, “a general and fraudulent sale of
lands took place. . . . Concessions for any quantity of land were duly granted,
bearing date of 1799 or further back, if the claimants demanded.—The number
of acres granted was governed by the sum paid. It is not necessary to say to what
extent the speculation was carried on.”1
And Rufus Easton, a Connecticut Yankee, who was one of the many
Easterners who settled in St. Louis within a year after Louisiana was acquired,
wrote to Jefferson in a similar vein: “About the latter end of June 1803,
information arrived in this country of its cession to the United States when
instructions were given to the various agents of the governor . . . that grants and
concessions be dated back to the year 1799, which was the general antedate . . .
and that surveys thereof would be made of any tract from fifty to fifty thousand
acres to any person upon payment of one hundred dollars for five hundred acres,
and so great was the thirst for speculation, when money could not be obtained,
horses and other property were received for payment.”2
Because the Spanish governors had been desirous of attracting settlers to the
Upper Louisiana territory, the local officials had granted free land under liberal
“head rights” and “colonizing contracts.” This policy was not continued under
the brief régime of the French, with the result that the dates of the fraudulent
grants were set back to the Spanish period, i.e., before 1800. So freely were the
Spanish grants given that some local officials were in the habit of attaching their
signatures to the certificates before the amount and location of the land was
noted thereon. Naturally, these sheets got abroad and began to command a price
among the so-called “antedaters.” These “antedaters” were mostly Americans
some of whom had emigrated into Missouri and “squatted” on land without
receiving an actual grant or conveyance from Spanish officials.
The frequency of these land grants bearing date of the closing year of the
Spanish régime in Louisiana was soon recognized as strong evidence of
corruption and fraud. As early as February 29, 1804, President Jefferson
informed Congress that “Attempts are now making to defraud the United
States.” He estimated that two hundred thousand acres of land, “including all the
best [lead] mines, have been surveyed to various individuals in the course of a
few weeks past . . . All the official papers, relative to these lands, bear the
signature of M………., the predecessor of the present Lieutenant Governor.” “To
understand the nature of this fraudulent transaction,” the President added, “it will
be necessary to state the mode of acquiring titles. The settler applies to the

commandant by way of petition, and prays a grant of certain lands described by
him. At the bottom, on the back of the same petition, the commandant accedes to
the prayer, and directs the surveyor to run out the lands prayed for. This petition
and order entitle actual settlers to grants on application to the proper officer at
New Orleans . . . Under these circumstances, they seem to have an equitable
claim to their lands and really expect a confirmation of them by the United
States.”
The “M……” mentioned in Jefferson’s report undoubtedly refers to
Lieutenant-Governor Zenon Trudeau, who was Spanish Commandant of Upper
Louisiana in 1799, and who was living at New Orleans at the time of the
Louisiana Purchase. He was induced, through bribes of speculators, to sign
numerous blank sheets of paper. On these sheets the petitions for lands and the
orders for surveys were later inserted by the speculators. In this way, the best
lead and iron mines in Missouri are said to have been “granted” during the
period when the Louisiana territory was being transferred to the United States.
Old land cessions were also resurrected and the deeds altered by erasing
names. Moreover, Carlos Delassus, the last of the “commandants” of Upper
Louisiana is reported to have made large grants to members of his family and to
his friends. These grantees thus became the largest land holders in the region
now constituting Missouri.

JOHN JACOB ASTOR
(From a painting by Chappel)

AARON BURR
(Reproduced from an engraving in the Smithsonian Institution)
Congress in 1805, upon learning of the frauds, appointed commissioners to
determine the validity of Louisiana land titles. And what a difficult job they had!
They required every holder of real estate obtained under Spanish and French
dominion, ranging from village lots to princely domains, to prove ownership of
their properties. The work extended over a period of thirty years. Corruption and
fraud, threats and violence, suits and countersuits, characterized the proceedings
throughout. At times, the land commissioners suffered bodily attacks, and the
lawless spirit and greed for land made it necessary for them to carry arms for
their personal protection.
The land grant controversies entered prominently into local politics in
Missouri. The fiery Thomas H. Benton, grandson of Thomas Hart, notorious
Yazoo and Tennessee land grabber, was appointed United States Senator from
Missouri in 1820 largely because he favored liberal grants to claimants. Other
politicians took the opposite view. Among these was John B. C. Lucas, Benton’s
opponent, appointed by Jefferson a member of the Louisiana Land Claims

Commission. Lucas’ attitude of persistent opposition to the speculators fastened
upon him the hatred and ill will of many of the influential politicians; but he
persisted in his policy, notwithstanding it led to his defeat by Benton in the
senatorial contest in 1820.
While the government commissioners were hearing and deciding land
claims, the “Spanish grants” were being hawked about among speculators.
Eastern capitalists, as well as speculators on the spot, bought them up. Familiar
names appear among the lists of those whose claims were denied or granted.
Daniel Boone, who moved from Kentucky into Louisiana territory in 1798, and
became a commandant of a district under the Spanish, claimed and was granted
1,000 arpents (about 850 acres) by Congress in 1813, though he had not
cultivated or improved the land as required in the original concession. Moses
Austin, who settled in Upper Louisiana in 1797, and began mining lead at Mine-
a-Burton, near St. Genevieve, Mo., was finally refused title to his “square
league” of land on the ground that the grant was not made and completed prior
to October 1, 1800. Rufus Easton, a judge and politician, who had early
informed Jefferson of the “antedaters,” also had a number of claims, which were
denied confirmation. Easton’s ire, on one occasion, was so aroused by the
opposition to him of one of the land commissioners, that he made a personal
attack on him “with a bludgeon,” for which he was sentenced to fourteen days in
jail. William Russell, a large jobber in the Spanish grants, submitted as many as
309 claims in the space of a few years, but of these only 23 were approved. John
Smith T., a notorious land thief, also presented a number of claims to both small
and large plots, most of which were rejected. And so the cases ran, the decisions
creating both political and financial animosities, in the old Upper Louisiana
country.
General James Wilkinson’s name, curiously, is not conspicuous among the
Spanish land grant claimants. Wilkinson, we have already seen, had been
concerned in western land deals. His integrity has been a mooted question
among historians—and the fact that he was in command of American troops in
Louisiana, and, together with Governor Wm. C. C. Claiborne, received the
surrender of the province from the French Government, would have given him
the opportunity of engrossing lands. Yet, as pointed out by his great-grandson,
“one of the strongest proofs of the integrity of Wilkinson is the fact that the eight
volumes of American State Papers, which contain all the Spanish land grants,
and include hundreds of American settlers, do not show one grant in Wilkinson’s
favor . . . Wilkinson never got enough land from the Spaniards to serve him as a

grave.”3
Yet, as admitted by the ardent defender of his ancestor, one entry among the
Spanish land grant claims in Louisiana shows that General James Wilkinson
bought on May 12, 1816, from Moreau, the original grantee, Dauphin Island at
the mouth of Mobile Bay. The American commissioners, on the application of
Wilkinson’s heirs, refused to confirm the grant because he “was not allowed to
hold land under Spain, not being a Spanish subject.”
The ousting of squatters was a most difficult task for the national
government. Many Americans, prior to the Louisiana cession, had emigrated
into the Spanish domains and had taken up lands merely on the verbal
permission of the Spanish officials. These settlers, because of willingness to live
under Spanish laws, were called “Hidalgos” by the Ohio people. They could
furnish no evidence of title, and when ordered to remove, frequently caused
disturbances. The cry of “squatter sovereignty” arose. Politicians sought offices
by favoring this principle. Thus, John Scott, who in 1816 presented himself as a
candidate for Congressional Delegate from Missouri,—and got the job,—boldly
stated in his platform: “Neither justice or policy requires that the people of this
territory should be removed from land which they have ameliorated by their
labour, and defended by their bravery, before any opportunity of buying was
afforded them; and indeed, before they have received the pay which the
government owes them for defending even the country itself against our savage
enemies.”4
Some of the Spanish grant cases were fought through the courts for many
years. The litigation of Antoine Soulard for land granted him in Missouri
covered a period of almost half a century. Soulard was a former officer in the
French navy, who settled in Upper Louisiana and became a surveyor. He was
recommended by the last French Governor, Carlos Delassus, to the American
authorities, as one who could furnish the most reliable information regarding
titles to Spanish grants, including those in New Madrid, the last post in
Louisiana where free grants were made. Soulard and his two sons were granted
more than 5,000 arpents (4,200 acres) in various parts of Upper Louisiana, by
Delassus. In addition, he received a grant of 59 arpents in and near the city of St.
Louis. This latter grant became extremely valuable after the American
occupation. It was assigned to E. H. McCabe, who prosecuted the claim. Though
in the opinion of the land commissioners the claim was valid, the United States
Court finally rejected it in 1830. In the meantime the land had been sold by the

United States, but in 1856 the heirs of McCabe petitioned Congress for other
lands to offset their claim—and Congress finally reported favorably upon the
petition.
Another and more extended claim was that known as the “Clarmorgan
Grant.” Jacques Clarmorgan, a native of Guadalupe, was a merchant, fur trader,
explorer, and land speculator in the Upper Louisiana territory during the Spanish
regime. As a reward for “exploration services as far as the Pacific Ocean,” he
petitioned, on March 1, 1797, for a tract of land “on the west side of the
Mississippi River, at a distance of a few leagues above the mouth of the Missouri
River and bounded by Charmette (Dardenne) Creek and the Copper River, with
suitable water frontage, and extending toward the west until the ‘inland hills’ are
reached.” The total acreage was estimated at 500,000 arpents (425,000 acres)
and today would comprise a large part of Arkansas, just below New Madrid. The
petition, it was claimed, was granted July 3, 1797, by Baron de Carondelet,
Governor-General of Louisiana. In addition, Clarmorgan acquired other
immense tracts in the same region along the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. The
total acreage of his lands was estimated at about one million arpents. Land
speculation, however, was not his only business. He was the promoter of the
Missouri Fur Company in St. Louis, which traded extensively with the Indians.
After the American occupation, he became a judge in the Louisiana territory. But
his fur company proving unsuccessful, he left St. Louis after a few years and
settled in Mexico. His land claims were then assigned to others “as his legal
representatives.”
For many years, these “legal representatives,” “trustees” and “assigns,” as
they variously called themselves, sought confirmation of Clarmorgan’s grants,
stressing particularly the claim for the 500,000 arpents near the mouth of the
Missouri River. Congress appears to have paid little heed to the repeated
petitions for recognition of the claim, though the settlement of the region was
retarded for a time because of its existence. The land was finally surveyed and
opened to public entry and, because of its desirability, was soon taken up by
settlers.
The federal commissioners again and again considered the question of the
validity of the Clarmorgan grants. In their final report made August 25, 1835,
they stated that “the great importance of this claim has induced the
commissioners to make a consideration of every fact connected with it.” And
they concluded that this grant to Clarmorgan was never validated by the officers
of the Spanish Government, and was abandoned by the claimant himself soon

after it was obtained. Moreover, when the Surveyor-General of the United States
made his surveys in the territory, he was not notified of the claim. “These
circumstances induced the board to believe that the claimant abandoned his
claim with the knowledge of the officers, to seek remuneration otherwise; or has
been guilty of the neglect of his privileges under the grant. . . . The board,
therefore, could not recommend this claim for confirmation.” Despite this
rejection, speculation in the claim continued.
A peculiar interest is attached to the proceedings with reference to the
Clarmorgan Claim, because of the participation of Daniel Webster. In spite of the
repeated refusals of Congress to confirm the grant and the final adverse decision
of the Board of Land Commissioners, there was formed in 1837 the “Clarmorgan
Land Association” to take over the title. Like other land-grabbing concerns, the
association was not incorporated, but it had a president and board of directors
composed of prominent individuals. William A. Bradley was president, the
“Hon.” D. Webster, Senator, and the “Hon.” S. L. Southard, formerly governor
of New Jersey, were directors. The “association” took over title to the claim from
John Glenn and Charles M. Thurston, Baltimore capitalists, who purchased it
from Pierre Chouteau. It issued 536 “shares,” each share representing 1,000
arpents (850 acres).
The “Hon.” D. Webster gave the “association” a favorable legal opinion of
the validity of the Clarmorgan grant. Moreover, the deed of trust under which the
title was held by the “association” was acknowledged before Chief Justice Taney
of the United States Supreme Court. All this was published in two pamphlets
entitled Papers relating to the Clarmorgan Grant and The Clarmorgan Grant.
The shares of the “association” were not conspicuously offered for sale at a
fixed price. In small type on the bottom of the title page of each pamphlet, there
is the bare statement:
The interest in this tract is divided into 536 parts, each part, therefore, will
represent the interest of 1000 arpents and a fraction,
and further;
For opinion of the present and prospective value, see paper “A” and “B,” the
first by Dr. Linn, Senator from Missouri, and the other by Mr. Harrison,
Representative.
In this modest way, shares in land companies were then advertised. To have
boldly solicited purchasers would have condemned the proposition as a

speculative land-jobbing scheme.
Success seems not to have attended the efforts of the Clarmorgan Land
Association. Congress, however, continued to receive petitions to compensate
the “heirs” and “assignees.” Thus, in 1848, Henry Clarmorgan, “one of the legal
representatives of James E. Clarmorgan” petitioned Congress. As late as 1851
another petition was received, and a Senate Committee upheld the right to
compensation and “reported a bill.”5 But there is no record that a bill was passed
for a settlement of the claim, nor was the matter ever carried into the courts.
Another “Spanish grant” which was destined for many years to fill the annals
of Congress, was known as the “De Bastrop Claim.” It is of considerable
historical interest not only because of the persistency of its prosecution through
several decades, but because it furnished the pretext of Aaron Burr’s “western
expedition,” and also because it finally came into the possession of Stephen
Girard, who philanthropically willed the land jointly to the cities of New Orleans
and Philadelphia.
Philip Henry Neri, Baron de Bastrop, was one of the most picturesque and
commanding figures associated with the early history of the Louisiana territory,
and with Texas as well. He was a man of kindly, winning and magnetic
personality, an adventurer who sought to undertake great things, but who met
with misfortunes throughout his career. Although a native of Holland, he entered
the service of Frederick the Great, becoming a member of his famous body-
guard of giants. Frederick ennobled him with the title, “Baron de Bastrop,” but
Napoleon confiscated his property in 1795 and compelled him to flee to
America. For a time he resided in Virginia, where he carried on trading with
Europe, and where he claimed to have acquired a large landed estate at Harrison,
W. Va. For some reason, possibly because of failure to pay his debts or because
of passing out worthless bills of exchange, he took refuge in Louisiana. Here he
became friendly with the Spanish governor, Carondelet, with whom he made a
contract in June, 1797, for a grant of about 850,000 acres, on the Wichita River.
Bastrop agreed to settle five hundred families on his grant. Before the
families were settled, however, or before Bastrop had time to carry out his plans,
the execution of the contract was suspended by the Spanish Government. He,
therefore, never received a patent, though he had succeeded in mortgaging a part
of the property to Abraham Morehouse, of Kentucky, whose financial assistance
he had solicited in the deal.
Bastrop moved into Texas soon after the United States took possession of
Louisiana. In consideration of a debt of $350,000 he deeded to Morehouse, on

January 25, 1804, two-thirds of his pretended grant. The remaining third is
reported to have been foreclosed in 1801, under a mortgage given in New
Orleans. Or, perhaps, it was all mortgaged in New Orleans, and then sold by de
Bastrop to Morehouse. The baron’s reputation for honesty in business dealings
was not of the best. Haden Edwards, of Nashville, Tenn., whose Texas deals in
1827 were opposed by Bastrop, accused the baron of having borrowed $400,000
of American merchants by giving fraudulent bills of exchange on Dutch bankers,
and then fleeing to New Orleans. He may have been such a scoundrel, but he has
two American towns still bearing his name—one located in Louisiana and one in
Texas.
Just how Aaron Burr at one time obtained a part—reported as 400,000 acres
—of de Bastrop’s grant, is not entirely clear. It is fairly certain, however, that it
came, either directly or indirectly, from Abraham Morehouse, since the latter,
through his assignees or representatives, remained in “full and complete
possession until 1846, and had even paid taxes thereon.” Colonel Charles Lynch,
of Lexington, who sold the property to Burr, either obtained it from Morehouse
or was acting as Morehouse’s agent.
“I have bought of Col. Lynch 400 M. acres of the tract called Bastrop’s, lying
on the Washita,” Burr wrote a Mr. Latrobe in October 26, 1806. “The excellence
of the soil and climate are established to my satisfaction by the report of
impartial persons. I shall send on forty or fifty men this autumn to clear and
build cabins. These men are to be paid in land, and to be found for one year in
provisions. It is my intention to go there with several of my friends next winter.
If you should incline to partake, and to join us, I will give you 10,000 acres. I
want your society; I want your advice in the establishment about to be made. In
short, you have become necessary to my settlement. As the winter is your
leisure, I reason, if you should incline to go and view the country, you may do it
at my expense.”6
It is quite evident from this letter that Burr had at least intended making a
settlement on the land, even though it may have been a mere pretext, or as a base
for military operations against Mexico, or in order to separate Louisiana from
the Union. Burr was certainly well acquainted with land jobbing and land
development schemes. We have already seen that he was concerned in one way
or another in several of the great New York land purchases. He was a close
friend and political associate of Jonathan Dayton, through whose instrumentality
it is quite likely that he obtained knowledge of the de Bastrop tract. Dayton and
General Wilkinson, we have already noted, were partners in western land deals.

Though some fifty or sixty of Burr’s men started to the Wichita River from
Kentucky, nothing ever came of his purchase. It is quite probable that he made
only the first payment of $5,000, and that, because of defaults in subsequent
payments, the land reverted to the seller. Burr was interested enough, however,
to draw a map of his “tract,” which is now one of the prized possessions of the
New York Public Library.
The connection of Bastrop’s grant with Burr’s conspiracy became generally
known. As illustrative of the humor of the time, a political handbill issued during
Burr’s treason trial stated that “his quid Majesty [meaning Burr] was charged
with the trifling crime of wishing to divide the Union and farm Baron Bastrop’s
grant.” But the public was to hear more and more of the Bastrop grant long after
the excitement of Burr’s treasonable designs subsided. The Louisiana land
commissioners refused to confirm the claim, and the petitions to Congress were
equally unavailing. Finally, the case came to the United States Supreme Court
for decision, and there received a “knock-out” blow.
It came before the highest tribunal in this way: Stephen Girard was requested
by the French bankers, Laffitte & Co., to collect a debt owing to them by one
Carrère of New Orleans. Carrère offered 12,500 arpents of land on the Wichita,
in settlement. This Girard accepted and credited Laffitte & Co. with the amount
of the debt. He was glad to do this as he, in partnership with Robert E. Griffith
and James Lyle, had already secretly bought, in 1822, other tracts in the Bastrop
grant from the trustees of the heirs of Abraham Morehouse. They bought four-
tenths of the whole tract for $21,000. The purchasers divided it into 21 shares of
$1,000 each, Girard taking 10 shares. Girard, however, later increased his
participation, paying 15 to 21 cents per acre, until he had in all 200,370 acres.
The estate he placed under care of Judge Henry Bye, of Monroe, La., under
whose direction Girard spent $42,690 improving 30,000 acres.

LOCATION OF THE DE BASTROP CLAIM, BASED UPON MAP IN THE U. S. LAND OFFICE
Girard thought he was making a safe investment. He wrote Laffitte & Co., on
June 7, 1829, “Congress has not done anything in it [i.e., the grant] nor do I
expect they will do it for some time to come in consequence of the large tracts
which they own themselves in that neighborhood, and are anxious to sell. I own
myself upwards of 180,000 arpents of the aforesaid tract, and have commenced a
settlement thereon, where I have upwards of 30 slaves, besides overseers, and
feel perfectly tranquil as it respects the nature of the title.”7 But all Girard ever
received from his investment of upwards of $100,000 was a few thousand
dollars from cotton and produce grown on the land. At his death he willed one-
third of the tract to New Orleans, and two-thirds to Philadelphia. The city of
Philadelphia brought suit for a confirmation of the grant. The Supreme Court
held that Bastrop had not perfected his title, and denied the validity of the grant.
The city appealed to Congress in 1859, to override the decision of the court, but
no action of this kind was ever taken.
Thus ended the famous de Bastrop Grant. The Maison-Rouge Claim which
was of a similar character and was also comprised in the “Washita” lands
likewise never received recognition.
Another interesting and long-drawn-out claim for lands obtained originally
under Spanish grants also attracted public attention for a long period of years.
This was known as the Myra Clark Gaines Case. It involved, among other

property, valuable real estate within and adjacent to New Orleans.
Daniel Clark was an Irishman who settled in New Orleans in 1784, when a
youth of seventeen. Here he became a Spanish subject, and waxed wealthy in
trade and commerce. He was politically and socially prominent, and, of course,
was rewarded with liberal grants of land. He also bought up the grants of others,
including the worthless Maison Rouge Claim. Among his acquisitions was a
tract now in the parish and city of New Orleans which had been originally
granted to Elisha Winter in 1791. The right to this land was approved by the
Board of Land Commissioners in 1812. The patent was engrossed and made
ready for the President’s signature, but, because of some objection, the Secretary
of the Interior arrested the patent. Clark died soon after the grant was confirmed,
but before its ratification by Congress. Before his death, he conveyed this New
Orleans property together with all his other real estate to Joseph Belle-Chaise,
with the confidential understanding that they were to remain under his control
for the use and benefit of Myra Davis.
But Myra Davis was Clark’s own daughter—the fruit of a secret marriage
with Madame Zubime De Granges. At least, the United States Supreme Court so
decided in several suits brought before it. Her paternity was not discovered until
Myra was a woman. Daniel Webster, her attorney, gave the court convincing
arguments of his client’s rights to the vast estate of the crafty New Orleans
politician, Congressman, and personal friend of Aaron Burr. In 1867, when Myra
Clark Gaines was already an elderly woman, the Supreme Court also confirmed
her legal title to the immense acreage of real estate that had belonged to her
father. Some of this was recovered through suits of ejectment, but much of the
wealth thus obtained by the persistent litigant was swallowed up in court costs
and legal fees.
As already noted, a valuable part of the estate consisted of 700 acres adjacent
to New Orleans. This had been considered as national domain and was
comprised in the grant of 200,000 acres awarded to General Lafayette by
Congress in 1824. Lafayette needed money, and sold the land. Thus, innocent
purchasers came into possession, and when the legal ownership was decided by
the court, the property was worth many millions. It was thus up to Congress and
the city of New Orleans to compensate Myra. This was finally done after Myra
Clark Gaines ended her litigious career in 1885.
The Myra Clark Gaines case is remarkable for the extended period of the
litigation. It began in 1834 and was not settled until almost a half century
thereafter. In delivering an opinion in the case in 1860, United States Supreme

Court Justice Wayne remarked, “When, hereafter some distinguished American
lawyer shall retire from his practice, to write the history of this Country’s
jurisprudence, this case, will be registered by him as the most remarkable in the
records of its courts.”
Still another case involving valuable New Orleans property attracted nation-
wide interest. This was the claim to the New Orleans beach front area by Edward
Livingston, Andrew Jackson’s friend and Secretary of State. Livingston was a
member of the Scotch colonial clan of that name, which for several generations
held, under manorial rights, most of the present Columbia County in New York.
The family had a reputation for land grabbing, though Edward Livingston had
become an attorney and was mayor of New York from 1801 to 1803. Thomas
Jefferson then appointed him United States Attorney for the New York District.
While acting in this capacity, he confessed to a shortage of public funds
entrusted to him, due, as he claimed, to the dishonesty of subordinates during his
illness. This led him to take refuge in New Orleans in February, 1804. The place
then had a reputation as a resort for all those whose integrity had been
questioned. In New Orleans, Livingston became a lawyer, politician and land
jobber. Like Daniel Clark, he was friendly to Burr and became innocently
involved in the latter’s conspiracy. In this way he won the animosity of General
James Wilkinson, then military commander of Louisiana territory,—and,
naturally, Jefferson also became prejudiced against him.
Livingston had accepted, as a fee for legal services, some water front land in
New Orleans. Much of it was the result of tidal action piling up the river silt. In
1808, the United States Government laid claim to this alluviation and ousted
Livingston. To get the case before the country, Livingston sued Jefferson as a
citizen for trespass. Jefferson then personally took part in the controversy. In
1812 he published his pamphlet of 103 pages entitled, The Proceedings of the
Government of the United States in maintaining the Public Right to the Beach of
the Mississippi, etc. In this tract Jefferson took the opportunity to deny the
charge that he was induced to seize the land because of malice toward
Livingston.
The next year Livingston answered Jefferson in an equally vigorous manner.
Livingston’s reply was a pamphlet of three hundred printed pages. Both
documents attracted nation-wide interest among the legal fraternity and were
reprinted in the current law journals. Livingston accused Jefferson of
endeavoring to deprive him of his property, from the sale of which he expected

to discharge his shortage to the government. The controversy went from
Congress to the courts, and then back to Congress, It was not settled until after
Livingston’s death in 1836, when his widow received a large indemnity for the
appropriated lands. In the meantime Jefferson and Livingston became
reconciled. On April 4, 1824, just about one year before his death, Jefferson
wrote Livingston a friendly letter congratulating him because the good people of
New Orleans had restored him again to the “councils of our country,” and
expressing the sentiment that his election to Congress would bring aid “to the
remains of our old school in Congress, in which your early labors had been so
useful.”8
. . . . .
Not all land speculations in the old Orleans country were founded on
disputed Spanish and French grants. In this region, after the American
occupation, town jobbing and land engrossment was as rampant as in the
Northwest Territory. Towns were laid out along the rivers or at crossroads, and
lot auctions were advertised widely by handbills, newspaper announcements and
other means. Speculators also gambled on the probable or possible locations of
state or territorial capitals or on county seats.
Thus, Stephen F. Austin, destined in after years to become the “Founder of
Texas,” took up some land at Little Rock, Ark., in the expectation that the capitol
of the new territory would be located there. Others interested in lands elsewhere
in the territory used their political influence to oppose Austin’s selection. “Were
it not for this man, Russell,” Austin wrote his brother-in-law, in speaking of one
of his opponents, “our unfortunate family might yet be enabled to secure small,
but decent competence, for if his opposition were removed, there would be no
difficulty in getting the seat of the Government moved to Little Rock.”9 Austin’s
speculation in Arkansas failed, but he was soon to take up another and more
elaborate venture in Texas.
Stephen F. Austin and his family, through whom three generations of land
speculators can be traced from Connecticut to Texas, also took part in the short
but exciting “run-up” of what were commonly known as the “New Madrid
Claims.” In December, 1811, the populous settlement of New Madrid, Mo., was
visited by a severe earthquake. It tore up the land and demolished buildings. The
inhabitants fled from the region, and took refuge in the outlying sections.
Though not required to do so by the Constitution or the statutes, Congress in
1815 passed a measure affording relief to the sufferers. The landowners were

permitted to give up their holdings in the affected region and, in return, were
granted certificates entitling them to locate an equal area on government land of
their own choosing.
Thus, the door for wild speculation was opened. Before the earthquake
sufferers actually knew that a law for their relief was passed, a host of
speculators came down from St. Louis and started to buy up their “certificates.”
As the certificates gave a choice of location to the holders, they were eagerly
sought after by town jobbers. The result of the rush was that of a total of 516
certificates finally issued, only 20 remained in the hands of the earthquake
sufferers.
The private papers of the Austin family, then residing at Herculaneum, Mo.,
near St. Louis, furnish some interesting side lights on this speculation. The
Austin family at the time were in financial difficulties. Their bank in St. Louis
crashed and their Spanish “grant” to “Mine-a-Burton” had been rejected by the
Board of Land Commissioners. Stephen Austin was, therefore, on the lookout to
repair the family fortune. In his journal he noted, “I have this day given a power
of attorney to W. M. O’Hara to purchase any amount of Madrid Claims and
locate them for our joint account, and I have received a power from him to lay
out towns and sell lots on the claims we hold jointly.”10
Austin and his partner bought the claims at the rate of from $10 to $12 per
acre, payable during five years. He was so confident of a profit from his
purchases that he once wrote his brother-in-law he was determined to sell all his
flour “and buy Madrid claims with the money, which I will locate on my
improvement in the Long Prairie.” “I advise you,” he wrote again, “to return
[from Alexandria, La.] as quick as possible with all the money you can and buy
Madrid claims.”
Imagine the disappointment to the speculators when William Wirt, United
States Attorney-General, gave an opinion, in 1820, that the persons to whom the
New Madrid warrants were issued had no right to transfer them, and that patents
to the land claimed “must issue to the person who was the owner at the date of
the Relief Act or his heirs.” “The Act,” he stated, “attaches no assignable quality
to the charity, which it disposes. . . . It was not the intention of Congress to make
these charities a subject of speculation. The law was passed to help the poor who
have been rendered indigent by the visitation of God, not to enrich the
speculator.”11
This thunderbolt created consternation among the land jobbers of Missouri.

They made political fodder of it. As late as 1825, the General Assembly of
Missouri, on behalf of the New Madrid speculators, petitioned the “Honorable
Senate and House of Representatives of Congress to take the case of the
claimants—[meaning, of course, the speculators]—under consideration and
grant unto them such relief as justice, expediency and good policy may dictate.”
Concerning the speculation in the certificates, the legislative petition frankly
stated:
These certificates [for public land] have been sold and transferred for a
valuable consideration from one person to another, until they have passed
through the hands of many individuals of the most worthy and respectable class
of our citizens, from the time that they were first issued. They were purchased
with great eagerness (and when lands were high) by the new settlers coming into
this state . . . who have located on them. Should the patents to the land be
withheld, it would be the means of breaking up many families, and cause the
ruin of many of our most worthy and respectable citizens.12
Congress, in its public land policy, has frequently shown sympathy for actual
settlers, but that august body has never had a high regard for or given much
consideration to petitions of land speculators. In the case of the New Madrid
Claims, there was little reason to be sympathetic. An agent of the General Land
Office, writing to his chief from St. Louis, November 22, 1823, expressed the
view that the law for the relief of the earthquake sufferers “has given rise to
more fraud and more downright villany than any law ever passed by the
Congress of the United States, and if the claims are not immediately decided
upon will involve the citizens of Missouri in endless litigation and trouble.”13
It does not appear that many great fortunes were founded on land speculation
in the Middle West during the first decades of the acquisition of the Louisiana
territory. The amount of unoccupied land was too vast. Congressman Adam
Seybert, in his statistical survey of the United States, published in 1816,
estimated that the government’s acreage was then in excess of 400,000,000
acres. Surveys were continuously being made by the General Land Office and
settlement was being opened to lands further and further west of the Mississippi
River.
In New Orleans and St. Louis and other parts of Louisiana and Missouri, it is
true, there were a number of large landowners, some of whom began their

acquisitions during the old French and Spanish régimes. Others acquired their
estates after the American occupation. Notable among these was John
McDonogh, who at the time of his death in 1850 was the largest landowner in
Louisiana. McDonogh was of Scotch-Irish stock. He was born in Baltimore,
December 29, 1779, and upon coming of age he took up his residence in New
Orleans. Here he became a merchant and shipper, but soon his chief occupation
was buying up land. He bought a number of Spanish grants in West Florida,
some of which were rejected on the ground of invalidity while others were
allowed. His real estate in New Orleans alone was valued in 1850 at over
$2,000,000 and in addition he owned a large part of both the cultivated and the
unimproved area of the State of Louisiana.
McDonogh was a queer personality. He was self-centered, industrious,
patriotic, and, though somewhat miserly, liberal in his views. He was peculiarly
shy of women and, therefore, never married. His three objects in life appear to
have been: first, the ownership of real estate; second, the liberation of the slaves,
and last, a system of free public education.
He accomplished the first with great success. He secretly fostered slave
emancipation (though he himself was a slave owner) and supported the work of
the American Colonization Society; and he left almost all his fortune for the
support of public schools in Baltimore and New Orleans. The McDonogh
School, at McDonogh, Md., near Baltimore, is supported through his bequest;
and New Orleans, for almost a century, has used the McDonogh fortune in aid of
public education.

MOSES AUSTIN
(From a portrait in the Jefferson Memorial Library, St. Louis, Missouri)

STEPHEN F. AUSTIN IN 1836
(From a portrait in the Capitol at Austin, Texas)

STEPHEN F. AUSTIN IN HUNTING COSTUME
(Reproduced from Eugene C. Barker’s, The Life of Stephen F. Austin)
McDonogh never really speculated in land. Like John Jacob Astor, he bought
to hold, and it is said of him, that he rarely offered property for sale. Yet he did
little to improve his real estate holdings. He seems to have invested his money
upon the principle that time and the increase of population in Louisiana would
vastly augment the value of his property. Accordingly, at his death the buildings
on his New Orleans property were exceedingly dilapidated. There was,
moreover, in the neighborhood of New Orleans at that time a quantity of land
belonging to his estate that was still covered by the original forest, though it
could have been cut up into building sites and farms and sold at a handsome
profit to him. Vincent Nolte, a German trader, who was conspicuous in New
Orleans business affairs, thus describes McDonogh in his reminiscences:

“McDonogh talked very little, and seldom mixed in general conversation,
especially with ladies, whose society he avoided as much as possible. When he
did open his lips, all that fell from them was the praise of certain lands he had
just purchased, and this theme was inexhaustible. It was not in Louisiana alone
that he carried out his system, but in the neighboring states, and he continued it
for more than forty years.”14
Congress gave Napoleon $15,000,000 for the Louisiana territory. It was a lot
of money in those days. And there were many who doubted that the region was
worth the price. Aside from the districts of New Orleans and St. Louis, and a few
other scattered settlements along the Mississippi River, the whole domain was
then a boundless wilderness infested by savage Indian tribes.
All this was changed within a few years after the American flag was raised in
New Orleans. The onslaught of speculators, lawyers, politicians, pioneers and
adventurers converted much of the barren empire into thriving and progressive
farms and communities. Hardly a decade after the United States came into its
possession, the combined wealth of a few individual newcomers exceeded the
whole purchase price paid by the national government. Much of this was
acquired through prudent urban real estate speculation and town jobbing.
Immigrants from the East, such as John McDonogh, Edward Livingston and
John B. C. Lucas, waxed wealthy in their real estate deals. Lucas alone,
notwithstanding his hatred of the “antedaters” and land thieves, acquired a large
portion of the present city of St. Louis. A tract of land here which he originally
purchased for about $700 was in a few decades worth several millions. Like
Astor, Longworth and McDonogh, he did not sell but left his estate intact for his
heirs. These founded the private banking house of Lucas & Co. for many years
one of the leading concerns of its kind in the Middle West.
1 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 117.
2 Quoted in Louis Houck, History of Missouri, Vol. III, p. 36.
3 Louisiana Historical Quarterly, Vol. I, No. 2, pp. 104, 105.
4 Austin Papers, Part I, p. 258.
5 Senate Report #354, 32nd Congress, 1st Session.
6 Wandell and Minnigerode, Aaron Burr, Vol. II, pp. 87, 88.
7 John B. McMaster, The Life and Times of Stephen Girard, Vol. II, p. 409.
8 Jefferson’s Works, edited by H. A. Washington, Vol. VII, p. 342.

9 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 359.
10 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 337.
11 American State Papers, “Public Lands,” Vol. III, p. 494.
12 Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 155.
13 Ibid., p. 47.
14 Vincent Nolte, Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres, p. 86.

CHAPTER X
THE TEXAS FEVER
IT WAS mentioned in the previous chapter that the Austin family, which had
resided for several decades in Missouri, became impoverished. Their mining
property at Mine-a-Burton was taken away; their investment in bank shares was
unfortunate, and their land speculations, including the New Madrid fiasco, were
failures. Things became so bad that the father, Moses Austin, wrote his son-in-
law on April 21, 1821, that he was “without a dollar to get his shirt washed.”
In this situation, the old pioneer, who had trekked from Connecticut to
western Virginia, and then into Spanish Upper Louisiana, again sought a new
field to repair his fortunes. He was disgusted with the American régime. It had
taken away his grant and otherwise treated him unfairly. “As I am ruined in this
country” [i.e., United States], he wrote his son, “I found nothing I could do
would bring back my property again, and to remain in a country, where I had
enjoyed wealth, in a state of poverty, I could not submit to.”
Off to a new country again! Hearing that the old Spanish system of granting
land to colonizers or empresarios was still in vogue in Texas, where Spain
continued to rule, he set out in October, 1820, for the southwest wilderness “with
a gray horse, a mule, a slave boy, and fifty dollars in cash.” On December 23,
1820, he arrived in Bexar, then the capital of the Mexican province of Texas and
there presented his petition for a land grant. He received little encouragement,
however, and was about to return dejected, when he happened to meet an old
Louisiana acquaintance, none other than Baron de Bastrop, who, to escape his
American creditors, had fled to the Spanish domains. De Bastrop, though poor,
was politically powerful in the province, and he intervened in Austin’s behalf.
The petition was then received and approved, but it was necessary to await its
confirmation by the Spanish governor. In the meantime, Austin set out on his
return journey, and after much suffering and privation, reached home on March
23, 1821. He died shortly thereafter.

Stephen F. Austin, his eldest son, was then in New Orleans, looking for a
means of livelihood. When he heard of the death of his father, and learned that
the grant had been confirmed by the Spanish authorities, he decided to carry out
the colonization scheme. The grant was for a tract of two hundred thousand acres
on the Colorado River, about two hundred miles from Natchitoches, the
American western border town. Three hundred families were to be settled on the
grant, after which the unappropriated land was to go to the empresario as a
premium. It was this premium land, together with the “commissions” charged
settlers, that was the bait Austin sought.
But he was without funds. He needed financial backing. It came in the form
of a partnership with Joseph H. Hawkins, who had befriended him in New
Orleans. With money furnished by Hawkins for a half-interest in the venture,
Austin bought and fitted out a small vessel and engaged a number of emigrants
to sail to Texas.
In the meantime, he was advertising his proposed colony. Notices of it
appeared in the newspapers of the Mississippi Valley, and aroused great interest.
The news of the venture spread south, east and north. Applications from
emigrants began to pour in. These came from Maryland, Virginia, Tennessee and
more distant places. A large number came from the neighborhood of the Austin’s
old home. Stephen Austin and his brother-in-law advertised the project in the
neighborhood, and as times were then hard in the lead mining districts of
Missouri, many residents were eager to join. His old mother wrote him
encouragingly that “the Texas fever was raging,” and expressed a desire to join
him “in Texas.”
Before leaving to take up residence among his colonists, Austin issued an
open letter describing the plan and purpose of the project. The colonists were to
be given land in accordance with the size of their families and the number of
their slaves, if any. They must settle on the land and make improvements thereon
within a year. Colonists were also expected to provide themselves with arms,
materials and stores. Each was to pay $12.50 per hundred acres, payable in
instalments, in return for which his land was to be surveyed and his colonization
papers drawn up.
It was this “commission fee” which brought criticism upon the project as a
land-jobbing scheme. The public did not know then about the “premium lands,”
but there was considerable suspicion that there was a lure of this character to
induce the promoters to carry out the venture. Moreover, it was generally known
that one of the reasons why the Mexicans desired settlers in the wilds of Texas

was to keep off the Comanches and other savage tribes which threatened the
country. The Comanches were the arch enemies of the Spaniards, but were
favorably inclined towards Americans. Yet, the settlers had to be continually
prepared against Indian attacks, and occasionally were in Indian fights. Probably
some of them liked this excitement.
Austin, from time to. time, during the early period of colonization, issued
public statements denying the speculation motive. In a public address to his
colonists issued June 5, 1824, he vigorously defended himself against
profiteering:
It has been objected . . . that I am making an immense fortune . . . a great
Speculation out of the Settlers. Let us examine carefully this subject by the
application of Arithmetical calculation to it, and see what appears to be the
result. The Surveying Averaging One League with Another, and taking the bends
of the Rivers and Oblong Leagues, will cost about $70 per League, which for
300 would be $21,000.—The Taxes, due to the Government . . . is $165.4 cash
on each league, which for 300 (is) $49,600.4 making together $70,660.4 to
which I made myself personally responsible . . . To raise this sum, I should have
had claims on the settlers for $555 per League, which for 300 would have made
$166,500 payable in property at a distant period and in small instalments, and
that property received for double or treble what it would actually bring in Cash.1
In another publication issued from San Felipe de Austin, the seat of his
colony, in 1829, he again refuted the accusation of profiteering. “It is very
evident,” he wrote, “that mere speculation was not the object, as some have
stated, for little would be left, at best, after paying the expense of surveying, the
office fees, the commissioner’s fees, the stamp paper, and defraying the
necessary expense. . . . The object, therefore, must have been the general good of
all, and not the private speculation of one individual.”2 Regarding the fee of
$12.50 per hundred acres, he “considered that he was justly entitled to a
remuneration for his labor and expense,” and he ran the risk of “not saving
something for himself, out of said funds.” His father also had spent much time
and money in the enterprise, “besides privations.”
However, as Austin noted incidentally, the contracts of the colonists to pay
the fee for their lands were rarely carried out, so he had to depend on the
“premium lands,” under the general colonization law of Mexico, to cover his
costs.
Yet, in spite of these protestations, there is evidence that Austin originally

undertook his colonization project as a speculative land venture. It was the
“premium lands” allowed the empresario under the Mexican colonization law
that he looked for as a profitable reward. In giving instructions to his surveyor in
1823, when the required 300 families had not yet arrived, Austin asked the favor
that he “select some good places for me, say about six or eight league tracts. . . .
It will be a real service to me if you can do this, and mark them, and let it be
known that they are reserved . . . also to find the best place for a town . . . it will
be valuable at some future day . . . also, I want a good situation on some creek
where there is a body of good land suitable for a stock farm . . . also some good
mill seats, if it can be had.” And then, by way of justification for these
preëmptions, he adds, “It is no more than just that I should have a pick as well as
others. . . . I have too much public business to attend to, to do anything for
myself and must call on friends to aid me.”3
Austin’s partner, Joseph H. Hawkins, who financed the first colony, certainly
had a profit-making view of the venture. Because of financial troubles coming a
short time after he had advanced funds to Austin (estimated by his heirs at about
$30,000), he was eager to cash in. On February 22, 1822, he wrote Austin,
“After your 300 families are introduced, would it not be well to raise the price of
your land? Perhaps my own necessities have led to this view. I am bent down
almost to the ground. Of the $7,000 advanced for the Providence [a vessel], I
have not one cent return. . . . If I could obtain through your efforts the means to
pay my debts, I would join you immediately and spend my life plowing the soil.”
And by way of encouragement to Austin, he added: “You and your colony excite
more interest than the assembled sages of the Nations.”4
Austin’s many difficulties at colonizing prevented him from raising cash to
meet the needs of his impoverished patron and partner. The latter died in 1824,
and his widow, and children, moved to Kentucky to “accept charity of her
sister.” Moreover, before Austin could settle his colony, Mexico threw off the
Spanish yoke and he had to go to Mexico City, at Hawkins’ expense, to get a
new confirmation of his grant. He remained there many months, and made or
renewed the acquaintance of General James Wilkinson who, like himself, was in
Mexico City for the purpose of obtaining a domain in Texas. A number of other
American and foreign land jobbers, under the guise of promoting colonization
schemes, also were present or had agents in the Mexican capital. One of these
was General Arthur G. Wavell, an Englishman who had been a general in the
Chilean War of Independence, and who became an officer of the same rank in

the Mexican forces. At this time, however, he was seeking land. He became very
friendly with the young empresario, Stephen F. Austin, and entered into an
agreement with him to share equally all lands granted to either, with the
exception of the grant which Austin already held jointly with Hawkins.
Thus, Austin had in view more Texas lands. Wavell set out for England to
form a company to obtain the necessary capital. While at sea, his vessel was
waylaid by pirates. This delayed matters somewhat, but on his arrival in London
he took up the proposition with several capitalists without success. He could do
nothing because Austin had no fee title to lands, so the effort to get British
financial assistance failed.
When Austin returned to his colony from Mexico City in 1823, he became
somewhat discouraged regarding the profitable outcome of his venture. His
colony was a success. Indeed, a howling success, one might say, because the
noise of it echoed far and wide and attracted land jobbers to Texas. He even took
up a second grant on much the same terms as the first. But he was becoming
disgusted because of the intrigues and manipulations of other scheming
empresarios and gave more attention to Texas politics than to profit. On
December 17, 1824, he wrote his sister in Missouri: “My lot is cast in the
wilderness, but I am content. . . . I am fast losing the desire I once had to make a
fortune.”5
In another letter, written about six months later, he expressed the same
sentiments: “My labors, although arduous, and in every way perplexing, will not
yield me anything for some years, and then not the fortune which some have
supposed. . . . I shall benefit others much more than myself in the proposition . . .
but, thank heaven, I am not avaricious.” And still later (December 12, 1825), he
wrote prophetically: “The enterprise I undertook is better calculated to enrich
those who come after me than to benefit myself.”
Stephen F. Austin’s younger brother, James Brown Austin, who was his
associate, was even more eager for fortune. In 1827, when there were rumors
that Mexico would sell Texas to the United States, he wrote his sister,
enthusiastically: “Should this take place (which, in my opinion, will sooner or
later) we would not take less than a half million dollars for our interest in this
country.”
Yet neither realized much in the way of pecuniary gain from the bothersome
colonizing labors in founding the State of Texas. Though Stephen lived to see
the wilderness, which he inhabited and did so much to populate, develop into an
independent republic, he died in 1836 (at the age of 43), a disappointed and

almost heartbroken hero. He was never able to pay his indebtedness to the heirs
of his friend and patron, Joseph H. Hawkins, though he made strenuous efforts to
do so—and offered them a full one-half division of his “premium lands.” In this
he was fulfilling the terms of his contract inasmuch as Hawkins was a joint
partner in his first colonization enterprise. His own estate was never of great
value. On October 6, 1834, he wrote his brother-in-law from a Mexican prison,
where he had been incarcerated on a charge of sedition: “It has been hinted to me
more than once that a sum of money, say $50,000, would stop my enemies and
set me at liberty. All I have on earth would not bring me that sum, nor the half of
it in cash, but it is reported here that I have many millions in the banks of the
United States.”6
In his distress, he ordered the sale of all his land, and the settlement of all his
business. “Do what you can to save my property,” he wrote. “Every honest and
good man in Texas will assist you in so doing.”
In his last years, when land grabbing became a pestilence in Texas, Austin
was greatly embittered against the speculators. His own secretary, Samuel M.
Williams, he thought, betrayed him by entering into gigantic land deals. His
defeat as the first president of Texas by Sam Houston is ascribed to the suspicion
that “Williams would use him to protect the speculators.” Yet Austin himself was
chiefly responsible for “booming” Texas. He lighted up the flames, and the
conflagration spread beyond his powers to control it. It was he who was
responsible for “the Texas fever,” which his mother informed him was raging in
his old neighborhood in Missouri and which spread gradually through almost
every section of the United States.
From 1820 to 1840, the Texas wilderness was the lure of land-hungry,
adventurous Americans. From the swamps of Florida and Louisiana to the hills
of Kentucky and Ohio, the sign “G.T.T.” (gone to Texas) could be found on
many cabin doors. Some went to find new homes. But many went to get land
grants, and to form Texas land companies. English translations of the Mexican
colonization laws were published and freely distributed throughout the United
States in order to awaken public interest. Pamphlets descriptive of Austin’s
colony and the favorable features of Texas lands were published in Baltimore,
Philadelphia, New York and elsewhere. “Shares” in Texas land associations, and
“Texas land scrip,” were offered to speculators in all parts of the country.
One of the earliest Texas land “companies” was organized in Nashville,
Tenn., about 1821. This became known as the “Texas Association.” Among its

original stockholders were Sam Houston, Ira Ingram, John M. Robinson,
Sterling C. Robertson and a host of other Nashville business and professional
men, some of whom later became prominent as Texans. On March 2, 1822, the
Texas Association addressed to the new national government of Mexico a
petition for a grant of land to settle a colony in Texas. It is quite probable that the
news of Austin’s venture led them into the speculation. Two of their members—
Robert Leftwich and Andrew Erwin—were sent to Mexico to plead the cause of
the “association” for a grant. They arrived about the time that Austin was in the
Mexican capital seeking a confirmation of his colonization contract. Erwin soon
returned to take his seat in the Tennessee Legislature, but Leftwich continued to
urge his grant before the Mexican officials. He received the aid and
encouragement of Austin because the region selected by Leftwich was just west
of his own colony, and therefore offered a buffer to the fierce Tahucano, Waco
and Comanche tribes of Indians. Austin himself may have selected the site. The
Leftwich grant and three others were confirmed by the Mexican authorities.

THE PRINCIPAL TEXAS GRANTS BASED ON MAP PUBLISHED IN 1836
The members of the Texas Association were overjoyed. The seventy-four
shareholders forthwith divided each share into eight parts, making 592 shares in
all and distributed them among their particular friends in certificates, intending
that each certificate should entitle a man to a league square of land. These
certificates shortly rose in value “about 100 pr. ct. advance.”7
A Dr. Felix Robertson, one of Nashville’s “most worthy citizens,” was
engaged “to go out as agent and take with him a large connexion and many
respectable friends.” Robertson explored the grant, but returned the next year to
Tennessee without accomplishing anything. Another agent, Benjamin F. Foster,
was then sent “with three or four other young men” to begin a settlement, but
they also returned.
By this time the Texas Association had spent $22,000 in the process of
obtaining and endeavoring to settle their grant, and the shareholders were

becoming much disheartened. Their “Texas scrip” fell to almost nothing in
value. A new agent, Hosea H. League, who had been associated with Austin’s
colony, was then appointed. As the Texas Association’s grant had been made
directly to Leftwich, it was necessary for League to get a confirmation from the
Mexican authorities for its reassignment. Austin agreed to take up this task. In
addition to getting a reaffirmation, he had the grant enlarged to a point north of
the present city of Waco. But still settlers did not come to the colony. As the time
for settlement was limited, the whole affair was in danger of lapsing. League
wrote anxiously to his “directors” to send on emigrants, but one of them replied
that “the Texas fever seems to have died.” “I have circulated your letters and
endeavored to procure a meeting,” he wrote, “but could not succeed.
Notwithstanding the apparent apathy, they [the directors] value highly their
stock, and yet hope to realize fortunes from it, they know not how.”
League became discouraged, joined Austin’s colony, and turned over his
agency of the Texas Association to Sterling C. Robertson. In the meantime, the
Mexican authorities, becoming alarmed at the disaffection of the growing hordes
of Anglo-Saxon colonists, issued an order prohibiting entrance into Texas
without a passport, and forbidding new settlers, except those coming to colonies
already established. This put a damper on the Texas Association’s grant. Settlers
that they had sent out from Nashville had to be placed in Austin’s colony.
Austin was then accused of enticing settlers away from the Texas
Association’s lands. The outcome of the controversy was that Austin, in
partnership with his secretary and associate, Samuel M. Williams, took over the
rival association’s rights. This was done, not by an assignment to Austin, but by
a new contract with the Texas authorities by which Austin and his associates
agreed to bring in colonists, and to receive “premium lands” as a reward. It is
quite evident that the members of the Texas Association of Nashville had no
intention of settling the land, either with their own families or with others, and
consequently did nothing towards colonizing, but instead sold out their shares to
speculators.
A companion colony to Austin’s, and one with which he cooperated in
harmony, was that of Green De Witt, like himself a Missourian. De Witt received
his grant in 1825 for the purpose of settling four hundred families on the
Guadalupe River, about seventy miles from Austin’s location. It was, according
to Austin, “a fine country, well watered, and very healthful.”
Austin frequently gave advice and encouragement to De Witt and assisted
him in getting settlers. He was very desirous of having other colonies around

him, both as means of greater protection against the Indians and as a basis for
creating higher land values. Moreover, the more Americans in Texas, the less
mystery there would be regarding the situation of his own project. “I have seen
some distressing tales told about us in some of the newspapers in the U. S.,” he
wrote his sister, October 28, 1825, “particularly in the Arkansas Gazette. That
paper has always evinced most deadly hatred towards the settlement of this
colony and its barking editor catches from every dirty buckskin scoundrel that
has been driven from this country for his villainous acts . . . something to insert
in his invaluable repository of truth and information to prevent any one from
emigrating to this colony.”
While Austin, De Witt and other honest empresarios were gradually filling
eastern Texas with actual settlers, a gigantic Texas land speculation was set on
foot in the United States. This took the name of the “Galveston Bay and Texas
Land Company.” It was organized in New York on October 16, 1830, to exploit
the so-called “contracts” of Lorenzo de Zavala, Joseph Vehlein and David G.
Burnett to settle colonists on land in southern Texas.
The region comprised the Galveston Bay district—a most desirable site—
which Stephen F. Austin had endeavored in vain to obtain from the Mexican
Government as early as 1824. The three grants were contiguous, but were made
separately in 1824, 1828 and 1829. The contractors pooled their interests, and
with the aid of some large New York and Boston capitalists, formed an
association to take over their rights. Three members of the company, Anthony
Day and George Curtis, of New York, and William H. Sumner, of Boston, were
appointed trustees of the shareholders, to promote the fulfillment of the contracts
and to obtain the approval of the Mexican Government.
The Board of Directors of the “company” comprised some of the leading
figures of the period in New York’s financial circles. Chief among these was
Lynde Catlin, president of the Merchants Bank. Catlin, at this time, was thick
with the Joseph brothers, brokers, who were reputed to be representatives of the
Rothschilds. The Josephs, as we shall see in the following chapter, became
involved in Samuel Swartwout’s speculations. Swartwout was a favorite of
President Jackson, who appointed him Collector of the Port of New York. He
thus had plenty of money at his command—and in the end never accounted for
over a million of government funds. It was probably through Swartwout that the
Josephs assisted in financing Texas land deals along with many local New York
real estate developments.
Though Samuel Swartwout’s name does not appear among the directors of

the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company, he was undoubtedly interested in it
in some way. His family had started trading in Texas, and carried on a shipping
business between New York and Texas ports, and are reported to have
“established a cotton plantation there.”8 His interest in Texas affairs continued
until the financial crash of 1837, and he was one of the subscribers, along with J.
L. and S. Josephs & Co., to the Texas Republic loan floated in New York in
1836. The loan was not a success, so Swartwout wrote Austin: “Nothing but
lands will satisfy the lenders, and that at a low rate. I will not advise your
government but I will repeat to you what I said to you and Wharton here . . . let
your lands pay the expenses of the war, if you sell them only at five cents an
acre.”9
Another politician, who at this time became interested in Texas land gambles
and who was identified with the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company, was
General John T. Mason of Michigan. Mason, a prominent attorney, became an
agent as well as a large “scrip holder” of the association. He was sent to Mexico
City as a lobbyist to obtain the consent of the government to the transfer of the
grants from the original “contractors.” The petition he presented made some rash
promises. The “company” agreed to settle twelve hundred families before
January 1, 1838. They had already made expenditures of $125,000 in the
enterprise, and would do more, but they must have encouragement. The Mexican
Government must allow settlers to come, and the settlers should be given title to
lands.
All this fell flat. Nothing was then done by the company to take possession
of the grants beyond sending out fifty-seven “emigrants,” to prepare temporary
quarters and to raise food for the European settlers they expected to bring over.
Even these were not allowed to make a landing.
But, in the meantime, the promoters issued stock to themselves, and sold
“Texas scrip” broadcast. In a pamphlet of more than seventy pages that they
issued, it was subtly hinted that there was some uncertainty as to whether the
“contractors” had the right to assign their grants, and that there was a Mexican
law forbidding the admittance of American settlers.10 These handicaps,
however, were only temporary. They expected shortly to get a complete
affirmation of the enterprise. But what of the hindrances! “Facilities of
emigration to Texas, from the Atlantic States and Europe, deserve consideration.
. . . The emigrant takes a passage at a trifling expense in some vessel bound for
Texas. He is landed at Galveston. By means of navigable rivers, he can ascend

with his family and effects in a keel or small boat to the very spot he has selected
for his future residence.” And as to excellence of climate and soil, why, Texas is
incomparable!
Another pamphlet, issued about a year later, stated:
It is now the last of December, and our country is buried in ice and snow. A
deep gloom is settled on the countenance of the poor, as well as on the face of
Nature. General distress pervades our city . . . It is a consoling reflection that we
are not bound to endure the rigors of a northern winter: that God, in mercy, has
created more genial climates where there is neither snow or ice, where Nature,
clad in her gayest livery always looks cheerful, and where the earth produces
gratuitously for herds and flocks, and everything that can draw substance from
its bosom. Such a country is Texas.11
With these perorations, they offered “Texas scrip” to speculators and settlers.
Its price ranged from 5 to 10 cents an acre. It carried a “claim” to land, but gave
no title to ownership. It was not even a preëmption right, except that in the event
that applications from emigrants exceeded the number desired, the “contractors”
then would select settlers from those among the scrip holders who desired to
emigrate. But the scrip purchasers never had any idea of emigrating to Texas and
becoming Mexican citizens. Nor did they wish to become backwoodsmen. They
bought merely because of the raging Texas fever, and hoped to resell at a profit.
As a writer in the North American Review, July, 1836, remarked: “Such is the
cupidity and blindness, that anything that looks fair on paper, passes without
scrutiny, for a land title in Texas.”
Stephen Austin’s cousins in New York kept him informed of the great Texas
land gamble. On December 16, 1830, John P. Austin wrote him: “You will see
from the enclosed that a company has been formed here to colonize the grant of
Zavala, Vehlein and Burnett. . . . From what I can learn, it is the most extensive
land company that was ever known in this or any other country, probably
extending its interests throughout the United States; and its Board of Directors is
composed of the most respectable and influential men among us, with the
President of one of our banks at its head.”12
And again, on March 15, 1831, Henry Austin wrote him: “The Galveston
Bay Land Company is running wild in their operations. Selling land by hundreds
of thousands of acres at five cents an acre. Sending out steam machinery for
mills, boats, etc. I fear they will do much harm by calling attention of the

Government too much to that quarter.”13
The promoters of the Galveston Bay project endeavored to get Austin’s
cooperation, but he kept his hands clear of it. He would not use his influence
with the Mexican Government to permit a settlement. Without his help, however,
they continued to enlist the support of powerful agencies in Mexico. Mason
resigned as lobbyist of the company in 1834, when he received on his own
account, “an eleven league grant.” Another was appointed in his place. Finally,
in 1834, when the Mexican Government was in a turmoil, the company sent out
a local agent, Jacob de Cordova, to Galveston, who began the sale of “scrip” on
the spot, and who located the emigrants. These emigrants, however, were
certainly not the eager “scrip” holders who rushed to buy Texas lands at 5 cents
per acre. When the Panic of 1837 burst over the Galveston Bay and Texas Land
Company, Lynde Catlin its president, was dead, the Josephs bankrupt. and
Samuel Swartwout had absconded.
Though Stephen F. Austin did not openly oppose the deals of the Galveston
Bay and Texas Land Company, he expressed the opinion that such land
speculations were injurious to Texas. In a statement to the Texan Senate,
December 5, 1836, he remarked: “It is well known that nothing but injury to this
country has resulted from the companies who have had colonization contracts in
Texas. They have uniformly made it a matter of illegal speculation by selling
‘land scrip’ and deceiving the ignorant and credulous in foreign countries. The
credit of Texas and all faith in any of our land titles has been destroyed in the
United States by such proceedings, and immigration has been retarded rather
than promoted by them.”14
The grant of the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company did not take in
Galveston Island, on which the present city and port are located. A place of
rattlesnakes, and a resort of pirates in the old days, the island remained vacant
until 1836, when the Texas Legislature sold the eastern part of it to Colonel
Michel B. Menard, an Indian trader residing at Nacogdoches, Texas, for $50,000.
Menard then bought the remaining section from Juan M. Seguin, who had
received it as a “grant” in 1832. The whole was then sold to the “Galveston City
Company,” an unincorporated association, of which Menard and associates took
a two-thirds interest, and Robert Triplet the remaining third. The stock,
comprising 1,000 shares, was then offered to the public at $1,500 per share, 10
per cent down and the residue in six, twelve and eighteen months in equal
instalments.

The first public sale of town lots was made in 1838, although a few lots had
been previously disposed of. Lots continued to be offered, and holders of shares
of the association could surrender their certificates for lots at face value. The
company was incorporated in 1841, and continued to have lots for sale until the
end of the last century. As a town-jobbing scheme it was orderly and fair—
coming, as it did, immediately after the boom period preceding the crisis of
1837.
The rapid colonization by American and foreign emigrants of Texas under
the empresario or contract system, whereby, in return for settling an area, the
contractor was given a part of the land as a “commission,” was destined to bring
about the loss of the province to Mexico. Like the Virginian colonists of old, the
American-Texans became dissatisfied with “Mexican tyranny,” when this
tyranny attempted to change the system of land settlement As already noted, the
Mexican Government, in 1830, wishing to put a curb on the heavy influx of
undesirable non-Catholic immigrants, issued an order forbidding entrance of
settlers into Texas, except when destined for colonies whose loyalty had been
tested. This was treated by many as a “scrap of paper,” much like the British
proclamation of 1763 against western settlement.
Austin used his political influence to have the restriction law repealed.
Following the repeal, the Texas authorities were more liberal than ever in
distributing lands, and a whole host of land grabbers entered the province. The
old empresario system was abandoned, and direct sale to speculators substituted.
Thus, in 1830, James Bowie (whose name is immortalized by a weapon) went to
Saltillo, the capital of the province, and returned with fifteen or sixteen “eleven
league grants” which he purchased from Mexican citizens. General John T.
Mason, Bowie’s associate after he resigned as lobbyist for the Galveston Bay
and Texas Land Company, proposed a “foreign” millionaire company to
purchase twenty million acres on the eastern frontier for a mere pittance. He
failed in this large proposition, but he did receive a grant of one hundred leagues
—a principality in itself. Samuel M. Williams, Stephen F. Austin’s confidential
secretary, despite the disapproval of his chief, came in for splendid donations of
land, receiving, in association with others, as much as four hundred leagues.
Other similar grants were made to both Mexicans and Americans. The object of
the sale of vast areas by the Texas authorities—then largely Anglo-Saxon—was
for the purpose of replenishing the impoverished treasury of the province.
Naturally, this reckless policy in disposing of the soil aroused local
indignation. The American settlers revolted. Austin was with them, for he

became the bitter enemy of land grabbing. He broke with Samuel W. Williams,
because the latter became actively concerned in land grabbing. “Speculation and
honesty cannot contend in Texas,” he wrote Williams, when reprimanding the
latter for his gigantic land steals.
“General” Sam Houston was brought in from across the border to lead the
revolting Texans to victory. Houston, who, as already noted, was one of the
original members of the Texas Association, had deserted Nashville soon after the
formation of the company and had taken up life among the Indians along the
Texas border. He knew the frontier man’s desire for free land, so when he was
invited to Texas as military leader of the revolution, he promised all recruits
liberal land grants. But he, like Austin, also detested the land jobbers, and among
his first official acts after the liberation of Texas was the annulment of a number
of the large grants or so-called purchases of Texas lands that had aroused the ire
of the hardy Texas backwoodsmen.15
But the Texas fever continued even after independence. The financial interest
of the American people in the soil of Texas, whether real or fictitious, was
widely diffused, extending from Boston to New Orleans. It could not fail to
create a sympathy and a bias for the new republic. Land grabbers continued to
rush to Texas. Though many of the fraudulent grants were annulled after Texan
independence was achieved, and land speculators were generally detested, the
need of state funds and the desire for settlers caused a liberal sale of its large
domain by the public authorities. Samuel Swartwout, so states Philip Hone in his
diary, “had taken government money and engaged in wild speculations in Texas
lands.” As already noted, Swartwout had advised Stephen Austin that if a Texas
loan was to succeed in New York, it must have Texas land “at a very low rate per
acre as a reward to lenders.” Texas, indeed, had then millions and millions of
acres of unsettled lands, but in the dark days following the Panic of 1837,
speculation was dormant, and the vast acres remained untouched. Mr. Louis
Sterne, of Philadelphia, who, as a youth went to live in Texas in 1853, noted the
cheapness of land at that time. “A large portion of the money which I earned,” he
writes, “I invested in land in Texas. I bought 40,000 acres, which cost me ten
cents an acre. When the title was made out, the parties from whom I bought the
land, on discovering that I was still a minor, declined to complete the title or
refund the money.” And he adds, mournfully, “The city of Fort Worth is now
located on the site.”16
The Government of Texas, subsequent to the separation from Mexico,

continued to offer “premium lands” to colonizers, though on a more restricted
scale than formerly. One of the grants made in 1844, under a contract of
colonization, was a tract of 6,098 square miles, or 3,902,720 acres, on the Upper
Trinity River, in the present Navarro County. This became known as the “Mercer
Colony,” the contract having been undertaken by General Charles Fenton
Mercer, of Virginia. The contract was signed by “President” Sam Houston, just
one day before he vetoed the bill passed by the Texas Congress repealing the
colonization law under which the grant was made.
Mercer incorporated “the Texas Association” to take over the grant. This
concern spent considerable money in surveys and in advertising. The contract
with Texas required him to settle 500 families during the years 1845 to 1850
inclusive. Each family was to receive 640 acres, and for each family Mercer’s
association was to receive “ten premium sections.” General Mercer made some
attempt at European colonization. He organized the “German Emigration
Company” for this purpose, but did not succeed in settling the grant within the
required time. He subsequently sold out his interest to George Hancock, of
Kentucky.
Hancock died in 1875, and his executors sued Texas for the “premium
lands,” claiming that more than the required number of settlers had been brought
in. It was stated that 1256 families were settled under the terms of Mercer’s
contract and that the land commissioner of the state of Texas had issued patents
for lands to these emigrants. The plea was denied by the United States courts
and, incidentally, a judge remarked: “General Mercer, I know to be above
suspicion, but he was a speculator, and unfortunately, for the interest of
humanity, gentlemen of his order and class think it all laudable and right to make
all they can out of governments.”
Another large Texas land grant put over by “President” Sam Houston during
the interval of Texas independence was made to W. S. Peters and associates in
1842. Peters, who had the support and assistance of General Mercer, likewise
organized a land company—the Texas Emigration and Land Company—but with
even less success in carrying out the terms of his contract. In fact, Peters’ grant
was rescinded by the Texas legislature in 1844, though Sam Houston tried to
block the measure by his veto. The avenger of the Alamo was not altogether free
from land grabbing influence.
After the “Texas fever” subsided, many other immense and valuable tracts
could be bought there almost for a song. Today, individuals and corporations
own vast domains. As cattle ranges or as goat farms, as cotton fields or oil pools,

these lands have gained or lost value, creating at times millionaires and at times
paupers. But none who ever entered Texas for fame and fortune has done so
much for the Lone Star State, and has been rewarded so meagerly as the
empresario, Stephen F. Austin, the Founder of Texas.
1 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 820.
2 See Laws, Orders and Contract on Colonization 1821–1829, p. 7.
3 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 690.
4 Ibid., p. 476.
5 The Austin Papers, Part I, p. 992.
6 Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. XI, p. 123.
7 The Austin Papers, Part II, p. 1186
8 Dyer, Early History of Galveston, p. 14.
9 Austin Papers, Vol. III, p. 342.
10 Address to the Reader of the Documents relating to the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company,
etc., New York, January, 1831, pp. 4-7.
11 Constitutions, etc., of the Galveston Bay and Teẋas Land Company, p. 45.
12 The Austin Papers, Part III, p. 556.
13 Ibid., p. 615.
14 Eugene C. Barker, The Life of Stephen F. Austin, p. 373.
15 See Texas Historical Association Quarterly Magazine, Vol. X, pp. 76-95.
16 L. Sterne, Seventy Years of an Active Life.

CHAPTER XI
GENERATING THE PANIC OF 1837
IN Niles Register, that renowned weekly compendium of American political and
economic information during the first half of the nineteenth century, there
appeared in the issue of May 9, 1835, the following headlines:
SPECULATION! SPECULATION!! SPECULATION!!!
We offer a selection of articles as to what is going on in the
way of speculation. Verily, the people are mad.
Then follows this excerpt from the Baltimore Advocate:
All the world is going mad after timber land, Canton stock, South Cove
Company, and like speculations, which are taking the place of the lottery mania
that used to possess the community. One gentleman, the other day, pocketed his
$20,000 by selling out Canton [land] Company shares, and this, with the stories
of sudden riches made by speculations in the timber lands of Maine, is making
industrious people neglect their steady business.
Another excerpt deals with stock speculation in New York. It “became so
extravagant that the Board of Brokers’ room was not large enough for their
accommodations. 
Some 
one 
suggested 
that 
there 
were 
excellent
accommodations in the lunatic asylum.”
Whether in land or in securities, the mania was having a tremendous sweep.
It carried away all classes—workers, farmers, bankers and statesmen. Michael
Chevalier, the French economist who visited America in 1834, was amazed by it.
He compared it to Law’s Mississippi Bubble. “Everybody is speculating,” he
wrote, “and everything has become an object of speculation. The most daring

enterprises find encouragement; all projects find subscribers. From Maine to the
Red River, the whole country is an immense rue Quincampoix. Thus far, every
one has made money, as is always the case when speculation is in the ascendant.
. . . The American, essentially practical in his views, will never speculate in
tulips, even in New York, although the inhabitants have Dutch blood in their
veins. The principal objects of speculation are those subjects which chiefly
occupy the calculating minds of the Americans, that is to say, cotton, land, city
and town lots, banks and railroads.”1
Lands, city and town lots, indeed, took up a large share of the speculative
ventures. It comprised the public domain, timber lands, suburban developments,
city real estate and town-site jobbing.
. . . . .
As already noted, the national government had instituted a land policy which
discouraged the sale of large tracts to speculators. Lands were sold through local
land offices in small plots at public auction, or privately to settlers. The price
was fixed, first at $2.00 per acre and later at $1.25 per acre. This system,
combined with the steady offering of immense quantities of the public domain,
checked for a time the purchase of public lands for resale at a profit. It was only
when new “ranges” were surveyed and opened for settlement that speculators
were offered opportunity of gainful purchases of favorable sites. But all sections
in new ranges must first be offered at public auction, so that competitive bidding
sometimes drove up the price of choice sites to a high level.
It was this competitive system of disposing of the national domain, during
the first three decades after 1800 that placed a damper on speculation in public
lands. In fact, “jobbing” in uncultivated lands was not a lucrative business. Many
purchasers found it advantageous or necessary to forfeit their first payments and
return their acquisitions to the government.
Moreover, the national land business became a national burden. As Andrew
Jackson pointed out to Congress in December, 1833: “From the origin of the
land system down to the 30th September, 1832, the amount expended [on the
public lands] . . . has been about $49,701,280, and the amount received from
sales, deducting payment on accounts of roads, etc., about $38,386,624. The
revenue arising from the public lands, therefore, has not been sufficient to meet
the general charges on the Treasury, which have grown out of them, by about
$11,314,656.”2
But when, in the early thirties, the speculative fever raged throughout the

country, and government lands, as well as other property, could be purchased
with “rag money,” created by “wildcat banks,” then “the land office business”
began in earnest. The auctions were attended by veritable mobs. They were
scenes of great excitement. Premiums were paid for choice places near the
auctioneers, and bribery and corruption in the process of receiving and
registering bids were common.
The irregularities in bidding at public land auctions were numerous, and
space does not permit details. A common form of fraud was a secret agreement
among the bidders to withhold offers for a selected section. Another was to bid
up choice sites to abnormally high figures to scare away competitors. The effect
of this, wrote an official investigator, in 1834, “would be to enable one man to
monopolize the entire sales, and bid off the lands at whatever price he might put
down competition; of course, the people attending the sales will have dispersed
in a few days after the sales have been closed. They have no idea but that all
things in regard to the transaction are fair. A short time after the sales, the person
thus purchasing by agreement, forfeits the land; the whole affair is cancelled; the
receipts destroyed, and the land becomes subject to entry in the usual manner,
and this being known only to a few privileged individuals, of course they can
then enter the land at the minimum price.”3
Another kind of public land fraud and corruption was in relation to
preëmption claims. Certificates entitling certain individuals, such as soldiers,
settlers and Indians, to the preëmption or selection of lands in a location were
commonly called “floats,” because anyone claiming land under a preëmption
right was said to have a “floating” claim to it. Such claimants, of course, were
required to be bona fide cultivators and occupiers under the PreëMption Act of
1834. Many individuals taking up land with “floats,” however, were merely
“fake” settlers, and soon sold out to speculators. Whole towns were planned or
built up on these “floats.” In 1836, Benjamin F. Linton, the United States District
Attorney of Western Louisiana, reported that there was in his district one
“notorious speculator in floats” whom, however, he does not name. But we may
surmise that it might have been John McDonogh, whose land acquisitions in this
section have already been referred to.
Because of the great excitement attending the national land office sales
during the speculation fever just prior to the 1837 financial panic, “doing a land
office business” became a common expression for great commercial activity and
merchandising success. The tremendous increase in the public land sales
indicates the extent of the virulent speculation fever. In 1825, receipts from

public land sales amounted to but $1,216,090. They rose to $2,329,356 in 1830,
then continued as follows:
YEARS
ACRES SOLD
RECEIPTS
1831
2,777,857
$3,557,024
1832
2,462,342
3,115,376
1833
3,856,227
4,972,285
1834
4,658,219
6,099,981
1835
12,564,479
15,999,804
1836
20,074,871
25,167,833
1837
5,601,103
7,007,523
Thus, the big bulge occurred in 1835 and 1836. President Jackson noted it
anxiously. He appeared not pleased with the heavy receipts from land sales, for
he and his cabinet soon realized that the land was paid for in “rag money,” i.e., in
bank notes that were in many cases irredeemable and worthless. Accordingly, he
issued on July 11, 1836, his celebrated “Specie Circular.” It simply ordered that
the land offices should accept only gold or silver or “land scrip” (i.e., soldiers’
warrants) in payment for public lands.
What a foolish idea, protested the land grabbers! Pay with specie? Who has
specie? Not even the banks kept it in their tills. Surely, those who wished to
speculate in government lands could not pay in specie, when there was none
circulating in the country.
Thus, the excitement of speculation in public lands abated. The land sales
fell off. The land offices were deserted. When the crash came in the ensuing
year, the Treasury found that instead of “cash” for lands already sold, the “old
cat” was returned to its doorstep. Millions of acres reverted to the government
because of default in required payments. Congress, by a large majority, passed a
bill annulling the “Specie Circular,” but Jackson was firm in his “hard cash”
policy. He permitted Congress to adjourn without signing the bill.
Daniel Webster took a keen interest in public land speculation both for
political and for personal reasons. As a true statesman, he traced its cause and
effect. The government itself was partly responsible, he said, because it did not
raise the price of its lands when everything else was going up in price. But, in his
estimation, land speculation is not necessarily an evil. With characteristic
oratory, he told the Senate, May 31, 1836:
In everything else, prices have run up; but here [i.e., public land], price is

chained down by statute. Goods, products of all kinds, and indeed all other lands
may rise, and many of them have risen, some twenty-five and some forty and
fifty per cent; but government lands remain at $1.25 per acre; and vast portions
of this land are equal, in natural fertility, to any part of the globe . . . The
government land, therefore, at the present prices, and at the present moment, is
the cheapest safe object of investment. The sagacity of capital has found this out,
and it grasps the opportunity. Purchase, it is true, has gone ahead of emigration;
but emigration follows it, in near pursuit, and spreads its thousands and its tens
of thousands close on the heels of the surveyor and the land-hunter . . . Nor are
we to overlook, in this survey of the causes of the increase in the sales of public
lands, the effects, almost magically, of the great and beneficent agent of
prosperity, wealth and power, internal improvement.4
The optimism of the Senator from Massachusetts was not without personal
bias. That he was concerned in western land deals is not so well known as his
other personal affairs, for his biographers have passed over it, possibly as a
“shady,” if not a purely private matter. He was accused by Senator Hayne of
South Carolina, and other southern statesmen of seeking to hinder the westward
movement for the sake of maintaining eastern political influence, and his
“Reply” to this brought forth the greatest bit of oratory and the soundest
exposition of the Federal Union that ever echoed through the halls of the Capitol.
Webster did not oppose the rapid development of the West, even though it
brought land speculation and fraud in its wake. He saw in it a fertile field for
Yankee investment, and pointed out that with railroads, canals and other public
improvements, they, in the East, “could almost see the smoke of the settlers’
cabins.”
Webster’s western land purchases were in Illinois and Wisconsin. In
partnership with Caleb Cushing, a Massachusetts attorney and politician, who
furnished the funds, he acquired from John S. Haight, a tract of 600 acres near
Rock Island, Ill., “on the branches of the Rock River, which (he thought) was the
choice spot in that country.” Haight had bought it at a government land auction,
but was unable to pay for it in cash, following the announcement of the “Specie
Circular.” It was valued at five dollars an acre, which Webster informed Cushing
was “probably not too high.” “I have not the least doubt that the investment will
prove an advantageous one,” he wrote enthusiastically. Yet, after holding it until
1850, he could not sell at a profit, and offered it to Cushing in settlement of a
debt. Cushing did not accept at once, and in the meantime, the land was sold to

cover a tax bill of $300. The purchaser then offered the right to redeem it for
$400, but Cushing, after investigation, found that it was not worth the price.
Such were the fleeting and changeable land values in those days.
Webster’s investment in public lands is reported to have been as much as
$60,000, but this is doubtful. Webster probably never had that much money. He
certainly did not have the $3,000 cash to meet the bill of exchange which Haight
drew on him for the purchase price, and requested that Cushing advance the
amount. However, had the land been held, its value would more than cover this
sum, as the property is now a part of the town site of Rock Island.5
Henry Clay, like Webster, feared no evil from land grabbing. In defending
the national land policy in the Senate in 1832, he pointed out that “To supply the
constantly increasing demand [for land], the policy has been highly liberal. . . .
Large tracts, far surpassing the demands of purchasers, in every climate and
situation, are brought into the market at moderate prices. . . . For $50 any poor
man may purchase forty acres of first rate land.”6
“Yet,” he exclaimed, in referring to the land speculators, “a friend of mine . .
. bought in Illinois last fall about two thousand acres of refuse land at the
minimum price, for which he has lately refused $6.00 per acre. An officer of this
body [the Senate] now in my eye purchased a small tract of 160 acres at second
or third hand, entered a few years ago, and which is now estimated at $1,950. It
is a business—a very profitable business, at which fortunes are made in the new
States, to purchase these refuse lands, and, without improving them, to sell at
large advances.”7
Aside from the speculation in public lands, which was killed by the “Specie
Circular” (much to the satisfaction of Andrew Jackson, who wanted, as Webster
remarked to Cushing, “to keep money out of the Treasury”), there was a rampant
rage for all sorts of landed property in all parts of the country. Perhaps there is no
better description of the mania of the time than that given by Michael Chevalier:
The amateurs in the land at the north dispute with each other the acquisition
of the valuable timberlands of that region; at the southern extremity, the
Mississippi swamps and the Alabama and the Red River cotton lands are the
subject of competition, and in the West, the corn fields and pastures of Illinois
and Michigan. The unparalleled growth of some new towns has turned the heads
of the nation, and there is a general rush upon all points advantageously situated;
as if, before ten years, three or four Londons, as many Parises, and a dozen

Liverpools were about to display their streets and edifices . . . In New York,
building lots have been sold sufficient for a population of two million souls, and
at New Orleans, for at least a million. Pestilential marshes and nakéd precipices
of rock have been bought and sold for this purpose. In Louisiana, the quagmires,
the bottomless haunts of alligators, the lakes and cypress-swamps, with ten feet
of water or slime, and in the North, the bed of the Hudson, with 20, 30 or 50 feet
of water, have found numerous purchasers.8
Though there may be some exaggeration in all this, there can be no doubt
that in the five years just prior to the 1837 panic, the fever of land speculation
was the most virulent the United States has ever experienced. As Chevalier
noted, it was not confined to any class of real estate. Wild lands, swamp lands,
improved agricultural lands, town lots and city real estate were all included.
. . . . .
One of the conspicuous fields of speculation at this time was in Maine timber
lands. Reference has already been made to the post-Revolutionary gamble in
Maine lands.9 Massachusetts owned this territory, and because of its
impoverishment during the War for Independence, was desirous of realizing cash
for it. Accordingly, the Maine lands were put on the market, in competition with
the western New York domain and the Ohio lands. “Eastern Lands for Sale,” was
placarded throughout the state. Notwithstanding the sales efforts, however, less
than 5,000,000 of the 17,000,000 acres of unoccupied lands in the “Maine
District” were disposed of up to 1821. Considerable portions, moreover, were
donated for charitable and educational purposes. Altogether, Massachusetts
received only about $800,000 net for its sales.
When Maine was incorporated into the Union as a separate state in 1819, an
arrangement was made with Massachusetts whereby the unappropriated areas
were to be gradually sold, and the net proceeds divided on a “fifty-fifty” basis
between the two commonwealths. But the property was regarded as of such
doubtful value that Massachusetts made a proposal to sell her share for
$150,000, payable in 40 years at 5 per cent. Maine accepted, but the Upper
House of the Old Colony failed to ratify the agreement.
It will be recalled that one of the large speculative purchases in the Maine
district was made jointly by General Henry Knox and William Duer.10 Knox,
who had become President Washington’s first Secretary of War, wished to
conceal his land-jobbing activities, and he feared the exposure that would result

because of his inability to make the required payments. He therefore gladly
dumped the tract on William Bingham of Philadelphia, and it thus became
known as “Bingham’s Million Acres.”
Bingham died in 1806, and his estate was divided among his five sons-in-
law. These desired hard cash rather than wild acres burdened with annual tax
assessments, so they appointed agents to settle the lands. Actual settlements
were required before patents could be granted. The agents were selected from
both political parties, in order to get “extensions” of the period in which settlers
were to be placed on the land, as well as other favors from the State of
Massachusetts. One of these agents was the well-known statesman, General
Harrison Gray Otis. With all his skill and political influence, General Otis could
not settle enough land to pay the taxes. Otis’ successor, General William King,
experienced so much worry from the estate that he was driven to insanity and
was placed under a guardian. After spending the cash of the “heirs” in building
roads and making other improvements, the agents, one after another, gave up
their jobs.11
By using methods bordering on bribery the heirs of Bingham finally obtained
a patent for the land from Massachusetts. They then proceeded to offer both the
timber and the lands for sale. In September, 1828, whole “townships” were
offered at auction, at a minimum price of 75 cents an acre. This move started the
wild speculation in Maine timber lands. Some townships were bought at the
minimum price one day, and resold at an advance of 25 per cent the next.
Purchasers flocked from Boston and elsewhere to bid for townships. Rumors
were spread that there would be a shortage of timber. Maine woodlands, with
their fine growth of merchantable timber, would, therefore, become extremely
valuable.
“The wildest speculation that ever prevailed in any part of the United
States,” says Hugh McCulloch, a native son of Maine, “was in the timber lands
of Maine. In 1832, or about that time, it became known to the people of
Massachusetts that a good deal of money was being made by a few investors in
Maine timber lands. . . . These lands were offered for sale . . . at very low prices,
and those who bought early and judiciously did make what were considered
large fortunes. . . . The desire became so strong, and the excitement so great, that
a courier line was established between Boston and Bangor, by which orders to
buy, and subsequently to sell, were rapidly transmitted, and for months little was
talked about but Maine lands. Brokers offices were opened in Bangor, which
were crowded from morning till night, and frequently far into the night, by

buyers and sellers. Not one in fifty knew anything about the lands he was
buying, nor did he care to know so long as he could sell at a profit. . . . The same
lands were sold over and over again until lands which had been bought for a few
cents were sold for half as many dollars. As is always the case when speculation
is rampant, and inexperienced men become speculators, dishonesty was in the
ascendant. . . . It happened, strangely enough, that the largest losers in the Maine
land speculation were prudent men, who kept aloof from it until it had reached
its highest point, and the tide was ready to turn.”12
The tide did turn, and thousands of speculators were defrauded or ruined.
The craze spread beyond the limits of New England. An issue of the Baltimore
Advocate, in May, 1835, stated that “The timber lands are all the go in this
market, and even the worthy Catholic Bishop, it is understood, is dipping in,
having purchased a whole township which he is selling to the Irish to make a
Catholic State somewhere in the woods of Maine.”13
Fraud and corruption accompanied the excitement. Tracts were sold that did
not exist. “In the interest of large holders, maps were prepared, on which lands
were represented as lying upon water courses which were scores of miles away
from them.” Notes were given and endorsed without the least expectation of
making payment. In one of the lawsuits arising out of these Maine land
transactions, the defendants denied the validity of a debt on the ground that
“eastern land speculation in general was so tainted with fraud, deception,
cheating, lying and swindling, that the very term had become proverbial for
these vices.” And on this ground the jury failed to return a verdict.14
One of the Boston capitalists caught in the trap of the Maine speculation was
Josiah Perham, the original promoter of the Northern Pacific Railroad. Perham
thought he had amassed a fortune in the speculation, but he held on to his
purchases until the crash came. Then he lost all. With characteristic optimism,
that later developed his ideas for promoting transcontinental transportation
through free land grants, he set about to regain wealth and pay off his creditors.
This he did in time, through his profits as a Boston wool merchant. And in this
way he acquired the confidence and support of those who joined in his railroad
enterprises.15
. . . . .
While New Englanders were running wildly after Maine timber lands, they
were equally concerned in the western land fever. As in previous boom periods,
a vast number of land companies were organized to foster speculation. One of

the boldest enterprises of this nature was the “American Land Company.” This
was organized in 1835 by prominent New York capitalists, though it included in
its management several Bostonians. Among its chief promoters was Charles
Butler, of Geneva, N. Y. It will be recalled that Butler originated the plan
whereby the western New York farmers who purchased from the Holland Land
Company on credit could obtain deeds to their properties by mortgaging them,
and applying the proceeds to pay up their debts due the land company. He thus
became involved in the land business, and casting his eyes westward to the
boundless unoccupied acres, was lured into the current land gambles.
Butler’s optimism regarding western land opportunities was intensified by a
journey to this region in 1833, “attended with great privations, fatigue, exposure,
and difficulty.” He returned to New York thoroughly infected with the
“Michigan fever.” His interest in the West was to continue long after the
American Land Company faded into nothingness, for in the years following the
Panic of 1837 he, in conjunction with his brother-in-law, William B. Ogden, was
active as a promoter of western railroads and other large enterprises.

DANIEL WEBSTER, WHOSE INTEREST IN WESTERN LANDS WAS BOTH PRIVATE AND
PUBLIC
(From a portrait by J. Ames)

CHICAGO IN 1831
(From an old print)
Butler had associated with him other prominent eastern capitalists. This is
indicated in the list of trustees and directors of the American Land Company.
They included Erastus Corning, wealthy merchant of Albany and one of the
promoters of the Mohawk and Hudson Railroad (the first to furnish a journey on
rails in America), Campbell Bushnell, a prominent attorney, and John B. Jones
and John W. Sullivan of Boston. The largest shareholders, in addition to the
trustees, were William B. Ogden, Herman Le Roy, wealthy New York banker, J.
L. & S. Josephs & Co., the brokers already referred to as interested in Texas land
gambles, and J. D. Beers and Co., another prominent New York brokerage
house. The first annual report of the company lists over 150 shareholders, among
whom was the celebrated American historian, William H. Prescott. He was down
for twenty shares.
The authorized capital of the American Land Company was $1,000,000—
quite a large sum in those days. The shares were $100 par value. About 80 per
cent of this capital was subscribed in less than a year, though the company
received only about $500,000, the unpaid subscriptions being represented by
“accepted drafts from agents for purchase of lands.” The purpose of organization
is stated thus:
The specific object of this Association is the investment and employment of its
capital in the purchase of land situated in the United States, particularly in the
western states and territories.
It seems, however, that the main purpose was the “purchase of cotton lands

in the southwestern states, at or near the Government price,” and that this “was
the leading motive of a large number of subscribers.” Anyhow, about 70 per cent
of the company’s capital was applied to this purpose in the first year. Local
agents were appointed to make purchases, and William B. Ogden (descendant of
the “Jersey Ogdens”), destined to become Chicago’s leading citizen and
capitalist, was appointed “general agent to look after local agents.”
No time was lost in making purchases. In less than a year, the company not
only exhausted its cash capital, but went heavily into debt. It did not buy
outright, but “under contract sales.” Thus, it contracted to buy for $400,000
cotton lands in Mississippi, “lately occupied by the Chickasaw Indians” and title
was to be obtained “directly from the Indians,” but “to be approved by the
President.” They also made a similar purchase for $250,000 of cotton lands in
Arkansas. If the agents resold at a satisfactory price they were to get one-eighth
of the profit, Lands were also purchased in Florida on the St. Johns River at $5
per acre. But the most significant purchases were made in town lots in Chicago,
Toledo and elsewhere.
These additional investments in the northern field were believed to be
equally as safe as those made in the southwest, since “they have been made
through the agency of judicious and prudent men.” The company’s directors
reported that “with the facts which are daily transpiring before our eyes in that
portion of the United States, we have the surest guaranty that good land, well
located, will continue a safe investment. The foreign and domestic emigration to
the west is daily increasing—and in a short time, we shall see as dense a
population covering the northern part of Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, as we now
find in the western part of New York.”16
It is quite evident that the American Land Company did a general land-
jobbing business, so prevalent at this period. Though in its first annual report,
there is the explicit statement that it was not the purpose “to speculate in urban
lands,” it bought and resold to James L. Curtis and Silas M. Stilwell (two heavy
real estate “plungers” and town jobbers of the time), a tract in the “boom town”
of Toledo. It gave $50,000 for this land, payable in one year, and resold it at
$80,000, but payable in ten annual instalments at 7 per cent interest. The profit,
of course, was on paper—as the New Yorkers never completed the required
payments, though “the purchasers were said to be highly responsible.” Yet,
Stilwell, who was prominent in New York politics, had to refuse an offer in 1839
from President William Henry Harrison of a cabinet appointment, because the

loss of his fortune in the 1837 Panic “did not permit him to bear the expense.”17
A similar deal in Chicago real estate was made on the same basis. On an
investment of $18,803 the company made within a few months a paper profit of
$12,837. But they allowed the purchasers five years to complete payments. As
will be shown, hardly a real estate sale on credit in Chicago at this time was
consummated by the purchaser meeting all the required payments.
Probably the most spectacular purchase of the American Land Company was
2,525 acres in Orleans County of New York, for which it paid $22 per acre;
meeting one-half the purchase price in cash. On this, they expected shortly to
make an enormous profit. “The lowest estimate which is put upon it by judicious
men is $35 per acre. . . . The trustees [of the company] have reason to believe
that, after carrying out their plan of improvements, the property will yield a rent
equal at least to the interest on the capital invested, and that within five years it
may be sold at $50 per acre.”18 In five years, however, land and real estate in
New York State were as difficult to sell as snowballs to the Eskimos.
The American Land Company made purchases through appointed local
agents. Under this plan “the investing agent agrees to take entire care and charge
of purchased property until sold.” When sold, the agent is to get a percentage of
the clear net profit; this percentage to be from one-fourth to one-third of the net
gain. “If there are no net profits, then the Agent gets nothing for his services.” Of
course, “the trustees” in common with shareholders assumed the risk of
investment, and “risk [they stated] is inseparable from enterprise.” The company,
moreover, did not propose to hold property. Its aim was to “sell quickly at a fair
profit.”
The foregoing details regarding the American Land Company’s operations
are given largely with a view to showing the methods, aims and principles of the
land-jobbing concerns of the time. Numerous other and smaller companies
operated in the same way. Nor did they all originate on American soil. Several
were owned and financed by British and Scotch capitalists. George Smith, who
later became a multimillionaire—not, however, through land speculation, but by
issuing his “circulating notes”—came from Scotland to Chicago “as a
prospector” in 1834. Greatly impressed with the immense possibilities of gain
the country offered, he organized the “Scottish Illinois Land Investment
Company” and acted as its agent. He also took on other agencies for both land
companies and private bankers. Though he, personally, became a large real
estate owner in Chicago and other sections of Illinois—probably through

purchases made after the debacle in 1837—he was attracted to banking and note
shaving, and during his stay in America until 1857, he waxed extremely wealthy.
He is reported to have returned to Scotland with enough “dollars” to purchase a
kingdom.19 But his Scottish Illinois Land Investment Company appears to have
“gone by the boards.”
. . . . .
Of all the various fields of speculation just previous to the Panic of 1837,
none were more flagrantly exploited than urban real estate and town jobbing.
Due to currency inflation, real estate, of course, rose in value with all other
forms of wealth and immense fortunes were being made in real estate
transactions. This was to be expected in a period of buoyant optimism created by
constantly expanding currency; a craze for public improvements; and a regime
of liberal and cheap credit. But the amazing manner in which the whole explored
territory of the United States was converted into “paper” cities, towns, ports and
suburbs, during the period between 1830 and 1837, is unparalleled in history.
There was hardly a county (East or West, North or South), in which new towns
and new settlements were not laid out.
Speculative furor was most pronounced in the Northwest. Here raged the
“Michigan fever,” as land speculation in this territory was then called. All along
the Ohio, Missouri and Mississippi rivers; all along the Great Lakes from
Buffalo to Superior, and even beyond, were new towns or plans for new towns.
Almost every nook, every bay on Lake Erie and Lake Michigan was taken up for
a town site. Town lots and more town lots! This was the commonest form of
merchandise then in the country. As an English traveler remarked, “towns would
be advertised and trumpeted forth in the moon” if there was a chance of selling
lots.20
Here again, Hugh McCulloch, who in 1833 had removed from New England
to Indiana, offers us a good contemporary description: “Hundreds of tracts,” he
wrote in 1890, “were laid off in town lots where the original forests were still
standing. What took place under my own observation seems now to be too
absurd to be real. On the Maumee River, from its mouth on Lake Erie, there
were for miles a succession of towns; some of them like Maumee City,
Perrysburg, Manhattan, and Toledo were realities, but most of them existed on
paper only. In the spring of 1836, a young man whom I met in Maumee City,
said to me that he had made a great deal of money in a few months buying and
selling lots. “Maumee City,” says he, “lies, as you know, at the foot of the

Rapids; and is destined to be one of the great cities of the West; property is rising
rapidly in value and I am buying and selling every day.”21
When McCulloch asked him, “How did you raise the money to commence
with?” he replied: “Oh, very little money is required in this business. I pay when
I buy, and I require, when I sell a lot, a few dollars to bind the bargain; but nearly
everything is done on credit.”
McCulloch thus describes the system of the wild speculation in Toledo, in
1836, which may be taken as typical:
On my way from New York to Fort Wayne . . . I stopped overnight at a hotel in
Toledo. After dinner, I noticed that there was a gathering of gentlemen in the
parlor, and in the course of the evening, I was waited upon by one whom I knew,
and invited to join it. “Our rule,” he said, “is to admit no one to these meetings
who is not worth $100,000. As you are a banker, you must be worth at least that”
. . . I accepted the invitation. The company consisted of politicians, scholars,
writers and one or two of them, authors of considerable renown, but not one was
there whom I recognized as being engaged in regular business pursuits. It was a
sort of private exchange, at which the members made themselves rich by buying
and selling to each other lands and town lots. There was at times a good deal of
excitement, much like that which is witnessed in the New York Stock Exchange.
When the meeting closed, everyone felt that he was richer than when it opened.
In a few brief months, there was not one of these hundred-thousand-dollar-men
who was worth a hundred thousand cents.22
The greatest “boom town” of this period was Chicago. It was a village in
1833, surrounding a frontier fort. In 1836, it was the fastest growing
“metropolis” in all Christendom.
When the coastwise steamship lines ran special excursions to Florida during
the “boom” in 1925-26 it was regarded as a novel experiment. But there was
nothing new in it! Similar trips by lake steamers were made to Chicago and
Milwaukee in the boom years of 1835 and 1836. Whole boatloads of speculators,
infected with the “Michigan fever,” flocked to the region.
So great was the demand for “lots” that almost all northeastern Illinois was
laid out in towns. Chicago grew in population from 550 inhabitants in 1832 to
over 5,000 in 1836, to say nothing of the perambulating speculators and real
estate vendors. The value of taxable property rose in the same period from
$19,560 to several millions. So utterly reckless had the city grown that the
people “chased every bubble that floated on the speculative atmosphere.” The

more absurd the project, the more madly was it pursued.” The government land
office in the city was besieged from morning till night with eager speculators.
Those who bought anywhere within hundreds of miles, even before seeing the
plot, laid it out into city lots, “in the most approved rectangular position,
emblazoned in glaring colors, and exhibiting the public spirit of the proprietor in
the multitude of their public squares, church lots and school lot reservations.”
The whole Chicago area was infested with strangers, capitalists, clerks and even
greedy clergymen. The hotels, inns and boarding houses also did “a land office
business.”23
The greatest excitement prevailed in 1836, when the Illinois Legislature
ordered the Illinois and Michigan Canal trustees to sell the “canal lots.” These
constituted a part of the land gift of the federal government to foster the
construction of an internal waterway between Lake Michigan and the
Mississippi River. The sale was thought to be a wonderful success. Single lots
brought from $9,000 to $21,400. Aggregate sales from June to September
amounted to $1,359,465, but only $401,042 was received in cash. In nearly
every instance the sales were never completed. In 1837 there was hardly one
important purchaser who did not prefer to forfeit his lots, rather than complete
the payments. After the crash, lots that had sold for more than $1,000 would not
fetch $100 in specie.
The whole Chicago population was in the real estate business when the boom
was on. There is a story that a prominent physician was busy selling “town lots,”
when a messenger informed him that a lady urgently required his professional
services. He reluctantly left his office and made the call. He diagnosed the case
hurriedly and made out a prescription, then proceeded to leave.
“Why, doctor,” the lady called after him, “you don’t state here how I shall
take the medicine.”
“Oh,” he called back, over his shoulder, “Canal terms. One-quarter down,
and the balance in one, two and three years.”
He had “town lots” impressed on his brain, and even professional practice
could not erase the usual terms of sale.
All sorts of advertising media and entertainment were employed by the town
jobbers. No better description of this is afforded than that given by Harriet
Martineau, in her delightful account of Society in America:
I never saw a busier place than Chicago was at the time of our arrival [in 1836].
There streets were crowded with land speculators hurrying from one sale to

another. A negro dressed up in scarlet, bearing a scarlet flag and riding a white
horse, with housings of scarlet, announced the times of sale. At every street
corner, where he stopped, the crowd flocked around him; and it seemed as if
some prevalent mania infected the whole people . . . As the gentlemen of our
party walked the streets, storekeepers hailed them from their doors, with offers
of farms and all manner of land-lots, advising them to speculate before the price
of land rose higher. A young lawyer realized $500 per day by merely making out
titles to land.
And the great English lady added prophetically: “Of course, this rapid
money-making is a merely temporary evil. A bursting of the bubble must soon
come. The absurdity is so striking, that the wonder is that the fever should have
attained such height as I witnessed.”24
And the bubble did burst! For it was ridiculous, as Miss Martineau remarked,
that “wild land on the banks of a canal, not even yet marked out, should sell in
Chicago for more than the rich land, well improved in the finest part of the
Valley of the Mohawk.”
When the bubble burst, and ruin was brought to almost every inhabitant and
sojourner, the very mention of “town lots” exasperated the Chicago populace. It
is stated on good authority that at a political meeting in 1837, which was urging
upon the legislature the grant of a city charter to Chicago, one speaker “launched
into the future and predicted that the place would one day have a population of
50,000.” He was howled down with yells of “town lots, town lots,” the audience
suspecting that he had lots to sell them and was’ humbugging the people as to the
town’s future greatness, merely to help along his sales.
Chicago was but an exaggerated replica of what then happened in many
other new western cities. The speculation craze also affected the more settled
eastern regions. It was especially violent in New York City and in Buffalo. Philip
Hone, noted in his diary, on February 23, 1836, that “Twenty lots in the ‘burned
district’ of New York . . . were sold at auction this day . . . at most enormous
prices, greater than they would have brought before the fire in 1835, when
covered with valuable buildings.”
On March 8, he again wrote: “I have this day sold my house in which I live,
No. 255 Broadway . . . for $60,000. . . . I made a large profit, but the rage for
speculation is at present so high that it will prove an excellent purchase.”
Suburban lots in Manhattan and on Long Island rose enormously in value.
“Lots two miles from City Hall,” Hone noted, “are worth $8,000 or $10,000.

Even in the eleventh ward toward the East River, where they sold two or three
years ago for $2,000 or $3,000, they are held now at $4,000 and $5,000.
Everything is in the same proportion. The market is higher now than I have ever
known it.” Yet, about a year later (May 26, 1837), he remarks, facetiously: “Lots
which a year ago were rough edge guineas, and brought any price for fear they
might run away, stand now in the same places and do not look nearly so pleasant
nor so valuable as they did then.”
Mr. Guy H. Salisbury, Buffalo historian, states that by comparing the prices
of lots in that city in 1836, as shown by the Buffalo Land Register, with what the
same property would bring in 1863 (the year he was writing), “our prices at this
time are less than one-half as high as they were then.” The number of Buffalo
real estate transactions during the boom was enormous. “As far as the records
show,” says Mr. Salisbury, “there were some twelve thousand deeds (in 1836)
mostly for city property.” The deeds do not cover contract sales, which were
probably much more numerous. Following the 1837 collapse, lands in and
around Buffalo “were a drug on the market and could hardly be disposed of at
any price. Sales were made mostly for outer lots at from one-tenth to one-
twentieth of the prices they bore in ’36.”25
Even in the secluded inland town of Auburn, N. Y., the craze was severely
felt. William H. Seward, whose home was in Auburn, and who built up a larger
fortune in land deals than in law practice or in politics, wrote on February 8,
1835: “A great rage for speculation in real estate has arisen here. Property has
advanced about 25 per cent, and sells readily. This gives me reputation of
increase of property. Whether I realize it or not will depend upon whether I sell
while the fever is upon us.”26 Yet Seward, in 1835, was modest in his estimate
of the rise in real estate values in his home town, for his son and collaborator
mentions that the next year “houses and village lots advantageously located rose
suddenly to seven times their former values,” and that the town of Auburn was
extended on paper to over four times its previous space.27
Not all the “booming” was in town lots. Suburban developments also
participated in the spectacular speculation of this period. J. L. & S. Joseph & Co.
diversified their activities in land promotions. In addition to fostering deals in
“Texas scrip,” they, together with George A. Ward and other New Yorkers, in
1836, organized the “New Brighton Company.” Its purpose was to develop an
aristocratic suburban community on Staten Island. The proposition soon
perished, however. The banks foreclosed a mortgage of $470,000 on the

property, and it was sold for a song. The Stevens family, famous for engineering
ingenuity, also made efforts to attract population to their lands in Hoboken near
Castle Point, and in addition to spending large sums in improving this Jersey
suburb, and lowering the ferry rates, made offers from time to time, of prizes for
oratory and other contests of skill in order to popularize the resort. The
Swartwouts, famous in New York City political annals, acquired a part of the
Hackensack meadows from the Stevens family, and in imitation of their Dutch
ancestors, made large outlays to reclaim the lands from salt water. “They made
seven and a half miles of embankment. . . . They dug 120 miles of ditches. They
reclaimed 1,300 acres. . . . It was expected that all the vegetables that would ever
be needed in New York could grow upon these fields. They had reason to hope
for success when they saw before them 4,000 acres of garden within sight of
Trinity steeple.”28
They conceived the idea that these swamps could be made into suburban
plots as well as cattle grazing grounds and truck gardens. They organized a dairy
company, and offered shareholders twenty-five gallons of milk a share annually,
in lieu of dividends. They soon discovered, however, that mosquitoes drive away
human beings, that cows can’t swim, and vegetables don’t thrive in salt marshes.
They sought loans from the City of New York and in Holland without success,
and before Samuel Swartwout ended his turbulent political career by abstracting
funds belonging to the national till, the whole project floundered. A portion of
the Swartwout swamps came into possession of the United States. It was held for
a number of years, in the expectation that it would increase in value, but was
finally disposed of.
Some of the suburban developments of this period met with fair success and
still survive. Noteworthy among these is the Canton Company, of Baltimore.
This concern, created in 1828, to develop an industrial and shipping section of
the Monumental City, has attracted speculative interest for more than a century.
Peter Cooper was early concerned in it, and when its success seemed doubtful,
because the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad could not find a suitable means of
propelling cars, the New York capitalist applied his inventive genius to the
construction of the first genuine American locomotive—the Tom Thumb. Later,
the Canton Company had its shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and
in this way old “Uncle” Daniel Drew obtained an influential interest in its
affairs. Its progress has been slow, however, and after a century of plodding, its
property has been finally taken over by the Pennsylvania Railroad at the neat
sum, according to reports, of $13,000,000.

The East Boston Company is another industrial suburban development,
organized in 1835, which has also survived the changing conditions of a century
and still is in existence. Its shareholders had a rocky road to travel, however, in
the years immediately following the panic. In 1835, the shares of the East
Boston Company were quoted at 185. In 1838, the price slumped to 7¾ and later
reached as low as $4 per share.
It is not meant to create the impression that all who were concerned in the
wild real estate and land schemes just prior to the Panic of 1837 met with
misfortune. Many realized large profits, and were started on the road to further
wealth. Charles Butler and William B. Ogden both came out ahead of the game,
though their American Land Company went to pieces. Butler bought a plot in
Chicago from Arthur Bronson (who paid $20,000 for it) for $100,000, and soon
sold a one-third parcel of it in lots for the same amount. He also made other
profitable sales before the crash. Gardner S. Hubbard, in 1834, purchased 80
acres near Chicago at $5,000. He then made it into an “addition” to the town,
went to New York and sold one-half of it, which he had plotted into lots, at
auction, for $80,000. Similar tales of fabulous gain may be told of others, but
compared with the more numerous cases of lost fortunes, these successful
“profiteers” are the exception rather than the rule.29
William B. Ogden, the “general agent,” of the American Land Company, was
not discouraged by the financial collapse which he personally witnessed at
Chicago. At least, he did not abandon the place. Instead, he remained there, and
became the first mayor of the “city” and its most prominent citizen. He
continued to buy land and lots, and became the most progressive and active
railroad promoter in the West. He subsequently was elected president of the
Union Pacific Railroad, and this is the reason why its western terminal in Utah
bears his name. Regarding his successful real estate operations after the 1837
debacle, Ogden’s notebook states: “I purchased in 1845 property [in Chicago]
for $15,000, which twenty years thereafter [in 1865] was worth ten millions of
dollars. In 1844, I purchased for $8,000, what eight years thereafter sold for
three millions of dollars, and these cases could be extended almost
indefinitely.”30
But, of course, all these purchases were made in a period when speculation
had been crushed, and when the pendulum of property values swung an equal
distance in the downward direction. It took almost a decade for the country to
recover from the shock of the 1837 collapse. In the intervening period,

convalescence was slow, and land speculators were so much disheartened that it
required a new generation to prepare the stage for another boom period.
1 Michael Chevalier, Society, Manners and Politics in the United States (1839), p. 305.
2 Messages and Papers of the Presidents, Vol. III, p. 63.
3 American State Papers, Public Lands, Vol. VII, p. 524.
4 The Works of Daniel Webster, Vol. IV, p. 262.
5 See Claude F. Feuss, Caleb Cushing, Vol. I, pp. 230-232, and Vol. II, pp. 85-88.
6 Colton, et al., The Works of Henry Clay, Vol. V, p. 429.
7 Ibid., p. 503. Italics are mine.—A. M. S.
8 Chevalier, op. cit., pp. 305, 306.
9 See Chapter II, p. 39.
10 See Chapter II, p. 39.
11 Maine Historical Society Collections, Vol. VII (1876), p. 359.
12 Hugh McCulloch, Men and Measures of Half a Century, pp. 214-216.
13 Niles Register, May 9, 1835, p. 168.
14 Hunt’s Merchants Magazine, Vol. 2, p. 496.
15 See Chapter XIV, p. 295.
16 The Annual Report of the Trustees of the American Land Company (1836), p. 25.
17 See Appleton’s Cyclopedia of American Biography, Vol. V, p. 690.
18Ibid., p. 22.
19 Huston and Russell, Banking in Illinois, p. 107.
20 William Oliver, Eight Months in Illinois, p. 41.
21 Hugh McCulloch, Addresses, Speeches, and Letters upon Various Subjects, p. 384.
22 Ibid., pp. 384, 385.
23 See Moses and Kirkland, History of Chicago, Vol. I, p. 98.
24 Society in America, Vol. II, pp. 259, 260.
25 Buffalo Historical Society Publications, Vol. IV, pp. 317-336.
26 Autobiography of Frederick W. Seward, Vol. I, p. 251.
27 Ibid., p. 316.
28 Walter Barrett, The Old Merchants of New York (1855), Vol. IV, p. 253.
29 Moses and Kirkland, op. cit., p. 98.
30 William B. Ogden and Early Days in Chicago, by Hon. Isaac N. Arnold, Fergus Historical Series,
No. 17, p. 22.

CHAPTER XII
CALIFORNIA’S GOLDEN LAND GAMBLES
“IN ALL the new states of the Union, land monopolization has gone on at an
alarming rate,” wrote Henry George, California philosopher and economist, in
1870, “but in none of them so fast as in California, and in none of them, perhaps,
are the evil effects so manifest.”1
Henry George, though a native of Philadelphia, spent the golden years of his
life in California. Here he noted growth in land values in the progress of time.
Here he witnessed land grabbing dating back to the Spanish period, and here he
saw the evils—but ignored the benefits—of speculation. The ardent single taxer
undoubtedly absorbed his economic philosophy from the landed property
situation in the Golden State. Had he been reared in the midst of the violent land
speculations of post-Revolutionary times, had he personally witnessed the loss
of great fortunes, the utter collapse of great land schemes, and the fiascos of
town-jobbing just prior to 1837, he might have adopted different views.
California occupies an exceptional situation as an episode in American land
speculation. At the time of its occupation by American forces, the country was
still suffering from the effects of the speculative debauches culminating in the
Panic of 1837. Feverish enterprise was stifled. Moreover, the Pacific Coast was
then too inaccessible to make the region a playground for land booms. There
were places in Texas, Florida, Kansas, Iowa and the great Northwest, which
were nearer home, and to which settlers and immigrants could be attracted as a
bait for the land shark.
But more than all this! Another sort of fever displaced that of land
speculation in California, at the most opportune moment, i.e., when it became a
new and frontier territory. It was the lure of gold—precious gold—actual,
movable merchandise extracted from its soil, that almost obliterated all other
gainful endeavors.
Gold was discovered in California, January 18, 1848. The reports of it

reached the Atlantic States a short time thereafter. The rush of “Forty-Niners”
then took place. “Land grants,” land titles or patents, were not required. Or, if
they were, they were ignored. The ruling passion was to dig out the yellow
metal. “Squatter sovereignty,” which under the national preëmption laws had
already gained much headway in the frontier regions, was merely transferred to
California. Who owned the soil from which gold was sifted or dug mattered
little. The fortune seekers of all classes went there for it, and they insisted on
their rights to take it. Anyone moving to California during the first two decades
after the gold rush with the object of acquiring wealth through the purchase and
sale of lands would have been regarded as insane.
Yet, more fortunes were made in California lands and real estate than in gold
mining. And land grabbing became as prevalent in the Golden State as in the
other new territories of the Federal Union. The old “Spanish grants,” which had
been a disturbing political factor and a serious legal problem in the Louisiana
territory, became here also a source of speculation and legal controversy. The
period was characterized by the same sorts of fraud, villainy and corruption as
have already been described.
It is quite conceivable that, even if gold had not been discovered in
California just after the American conquest, real estate and land speculation
would have flourished in the territory. San Francisco was a scene of town-lot
manipulation as early as 1847. General S. Watts Kearny, American military
commander of California, issued, on March 10, 1847, a proclamation, granting
to the municipality of San Francisco “the right and title of the Government of the
United States, and of the new territory, to the beach and water-lots on the eastern
part of the town.” Within a week thereafter this property was ordered to be sold
and the proceeds used by the town authorities. In that year, also, an important
section of the town was laid out into streets by the public authorities and the
vacant area converted into town lots.
A public sale of these lots took place. Speculators and investors bought
altogether 450 lots at $12 per lot. Each purchaser was required to fence the lot,
and erect a building thereon, within a year. At this time, the chief source of
income of the city authorities was the receipts from the sales of public lots.
Corruption prevailed, and it is reported that the choice sites were secured by
speculators “under the old regulations” or by private agreements with the city
officials.2
The next year (1848), another great public sale of town lots took place.
Values had advanced, but owing to the best selections having already been

engrossed, prices were disappointing. The price of lots ranged from $16 to $50,
averaging about $22.50 each.
At this time, San Francisco was buzzing with the excitement of the gold
discovery. A “boom” was on. The best locations had been snapped up by astute
buyers, and they were demanding high prices on resale. In the meantime,
immigration was rapidly adding to the population. “Squatting” became a general
nuisance, both in the city and in the outlying districts. The “squatters” organized
themselves into associations, and resisted efforts to oust them. In fact,
“squatting” was the popular method of acquiring real estate even in the old
Spanish days, and with “preëmption,” the byword for settlers on the United
States public domain, the newcomers from “the states” set up their tents or
cabins wherever they found a suitable vacant plot and defied those who claimed
title to the property to dispossess them.
But the sale of “city lots” in San Francisco continued with increasing vigor.
Speculation and corruption became intensified. Members of the City Council,
i.e., the “Ayuntamiento,” and other political favorites figured largely as buyers.
Horace Hawes, the recently elected “prefect,” i.e., mayor, protested that the best
city lots were being taken by the speculators and politicians at ridiculously low
prices. On his recommendation, the governor of the territory intervened and
ordered the sales to stop. But the “Ayuntamiento” merely passed a formal
resolution protesting that the governor had no legal right to interfere with the
sale of city property. It then announced another sale of desirable “water lots” on
March 15, 1850.3
Thus, the city for a while was bountifully supplied with revenue, and the
land grabbers had a veritable feast. Among the “city councilors,” who obtained
choice parcels of real estate were Samuel Brannen and J. W. Osborn, business
partners; William H. Davis, Gabriel B. Post, Talbert H. Green, and Rodman
Price. “The names of some of this delectable lot,” remarks a local historian, “are
still perpetuated and honored by the people of San Francisco.”4
The prefect’s protests naturally angered the speculators. Their political
influence, combined with the territorial governor’s own personal interests in the
matter, led to the prefect’s suspension. He was accused of having corruptly
granted land and having accepted fees illegally. But Horace Hawes, even after he
was removed from office, continued to reiterate his accusation of fraud, in which
he implicated the governor. He brought charges for impeachment, but the
legislators threw out his petition. So the corruption in the sale of city lots

proceeded undisturbed. Subsequent sales, however, brought increasing prices. In
December, 1853, the city again offered the “water lots” it had received as a gift
from the military representative of the national government. Some of these were
far out in the bay and were covered with water. The size of individual lots was
cut down one-half, but several brought as high as $16,000. “Four small size
building blocks alone produced the enormous sum of $1,200,000.”5
There were apparently good reasons in this period for the rapid rise in real
estate values in San Francisco, though, of course, speculation carried it beyond
prudent heights. The town was the only good port accessible to the gold regions.
It became the landing place of thousands of fortune seekers. It was the chief
emporium for an immense back country where real money was being sifted from
the soil by the increasing hordes of prospectors. As a contemporary annalist
noted: “In two years space, the financier doubled his capital, without risk to
himself; and the accumulation went on in geometrical progression. But chiefly it
was the holders of real estate that made the greatest fortunes. The possession of a
small piece of building ground in and about the center of business was a fortune
in itself. Those lucky people who held lots from times before the discovery of
gold, or who shortly afterwards managed to secure them, were suddenly
enriched beyond their most sanguine hopes. The enormous rents paid for the use
of ground and temporary buildings in 1849 made all men covetous of real estate.
By far, the greater part had originally belonged to the city, formerly the so-called
pueblo, or village of Yerba Buena, but the guardians of its interests from the
conquest downwards, liberally helped themselves and their friends to the choice
lots.”6

MAP OF CHICAGO, DATED 1836, SHOWING LOCATION OF THE “CANAL LOTS,” AND TRACTS
BOUGHT AND RESOLD BY CHARLES BUTLER, G. B. HUBBARD, AND ASSOCIATES
(See pp. 248-249)
THE “PROPOSED” NEW BRIGHTON, STATEN ISLAND, DEVELOPMENT
(Reproduced from G. A. Ward’s Description of New Brighton on Staten Island, opposite the City of New

York, 1836)(See pp. 251-252)
Retribution for this real estate mania—induced by the inflation of the gold
rush—was soon to come. Hardly had the lot sale of 1853 ended, when real estate
values collapsed. The market was glutted with the offerings of recent purchasers,
who needed cash to complete their payments. The bottom seemed to have fallen
out. The contemporary annalist thus describes the situation in March 1854:
Looking disinterestedly at the great extent of the ground around the city, still
unbuilt upon, the number of empty stores, the acknowledged overdoing of
commercial business, and, above all, the comparatively slow rate at which, of
late, the population of the State and city is increasing, it appears to be highly
probable that many years will pass before recent high prices will again be
witnessed. Most likely, the present reduced prices for all kinds of real estate, but
more particularly for unimproved lots, will continue for some months to fall
lower. When the population of the State, and by consequence, that of its great
Port, are materially increased, prices of real estate in San Francisco may be
expected to rise far above the present, or even the recent high prices.7
One of the most adventuresome spirits during the early Frisco boom, who
was carried down by the crash, was “Harry” Meiggs. He was a New York lumber
merchant, who came to California in the early gold days—and, incidentally—he
was a relative of the Texas Austins. Soon after arriving in San Francisco, he
started a lumber business at North Beach, a section of San Francisco. He caught
the “land fever,” and started a “development” there. He thought his title to the
property secure, and began to buy and sell lots at one-fourth of the prevailing
prices for lots in the central district. He argued that the city must grow toward
North Beach, and as the water front lots along Yerba Buena Cove had made
millions for those who bought them from the city, there was equally as good
chance that his lots would prove as profitable purchases.
Accordingly Meiggs bought over 2,000 front feet of water lots at North
Beach. Some of these he had no difficulty in selling. He had a pleasing manner,
and a faculty for making friends. They called him “Honest Harry.” Moreover, he
was a member of the City Council. The fever for water front lots, however,
greatly subsided in 1854, and Meiggs found himself loaded down with a large
part of his lots, on which he owed an unpaid balance on the purchase price, as
well as unpaid assessments and taxes. His cash ran out. In order to obtain funds,
he purloined signed city treasury warrants from the City Hall, and offered them
as collateral for loans. Other dishonest acts were ascribed to him. But before his

fraudulent practices were discovered, he had loaded a schooner and at early
dawn, on October 6, 1854, secretly sailed out the bay, never again to return to
California.
He was next heard of in Chile, where he had become a successful building
contractor. But his greatest service to humanity—if it can be called such—was as
virtual dictator of Peru, and as the most enterprising railroad builder in the
western hemisphere. Charles R. Flint, in his interesting Memoirs of an Active
Life, thus describes Meiggs’ remarkable career:
Don Enrique (as Meiggs was known in Peru) was a builder. He made
millions, but it was the adventure and the power that lured him,—“el empresa,”
the undertaking, as he expressed it. As a railroad builder, I should say he was
fully in Hill’s class, and as a financier, in a class in himself. He remained an
American, and although the money he was spending came from Europe, he
bought most of his material for the railroads in the United States.
Meiggs died in 1877, and before his death, it is reported he “made good”
many of his San Francisco forgeries, and paid those to whom he owed money
when he absconded.
James Lick, another California pioneer and real estate magnate, furnished a
good contrast to Meiggs. Instead of going from San Francisco as a bankrupt to
Peru, Lick came to San Francisco from Peru, with considerable capital to invest.
He was of Pennsylvania Dutch stock, and had left Lebanon County, Pa., to seek
a livelihood in the piano business in South America. He arrived in San Francisco
in 1847, and being “unlovable, eccentric, solitary, selfish and avaricious,” soon
made money. He had an abiding faith in the future growth of his adopted city,
and bought its real estate in immense amounts. His first acquisition was the ugly
sand dunes back of the straggly village of Yerba Buena. But his business acumen
kept him from the snares of speculation. He did not buy when prices were high,
but waited until distressed owners were forced to sell. Though no one knew the
extent of his acquisitions, or the prices he paid, it may be assumed that his
largest purchases were made following the collapse of the boom, in 1854. He
held on to his properties. In his real estate deals, he encountered many
resistances over titles, and, it is said, was “often obliged to enforce his rights
against squatters with a leveled pistol.”8
Lick did not confine his investments to city real estate, but purchased large
tracts in the country around San Francisco. He did much to improve the city,
however. He built the Lick House, for a time its largest and finest hotel. He also

built, in the Santa Clara Valley, a “mahogany mill”—for no other purpose, it is
said, than to carry out an oath that some day he would have a finer mill than his
sweetheart’s father, who had refused him a daughter in marriage because of his
poverty. His monumental contribution to humanity, of course, is the Lick
Observatory on Mount Hamilton, under the dome of which he is buried.
“James Lick was not a bad man, as bad men go, nowadays,” remarks Hubert
Howe Bancroft. “He made his money honestly, kept no corruption fund, and left
it decently when he died, left it with regret, not so much from love of it, as
because it troubled him that any one should be benefited by it.”9 His fortune at
his death in 1876 was estimated as seven millions, all of it acquired through
judicious real estate transactions.
Peter Smith was another interesting character in the early “boom” days of
San Francisco. He became land rich, not by buying lots from the city or from
speculators in straitened circumstances, but by accumulating “city scrip.” As in
other boom towns, the corrupt local government of San Francisco went beyond
its financial means in promoting public improvements. It could not meet its
current indebtedness, and its warrants or “scrip” accordingly depreciated in
value. In fact, the city’s treasury was bankrupt in 1851.
Smith bought up large quantities of this “scrip.” He subsequently used it to
obtain, through execution of judgments, the unsold real estate still held by the
city. In these operations, it is suspected that he was assisted by a “political ring”
composed of municipal officials. The city property was sold at ridiculously low
prices to satisfy the judgments. The transactions, popularly known as the “Peter
Smith sales,” naturally created a scandal, which involved a number of San
Francisco’s reputable citizens. Among these was David C. Broderick, United
States Senator from California from 1857 to 1859. He bought, under judgment
executions, sixteen beach-and-water lots, two south beach blocks and one “one-
hundred vara” lot. These purchases and others bought in under the “Peter
Smith” judgments, despite the political opposition and the outcry of “fraud,”
were validated by court decisions after several years of litigation. The
acquisitions included, besides the beach-and-water lots, the public wharves and
the city “underwater” lands not previously disposed of. Today their monetary
value is enormous.10
. . . . .

Land speculation in early California was not confined to city lots and other
real estate in San Francisco. The lure of the large estates obtained under Mexican
grants also was the cause of considerable excitement. As happened previously in
Texas, the Mexican Government and its appointees were exceedingly liberal in
California in giving away parts of the public domain. It is estimated that prior to
the American conquest, there were approximately 800 “grants” to individuals.
These comprised a total of about 8,000,000 acres and embraced more than one-
quarter of the cultivable area of the whole state. What a grand opportunity for
land jobbers to acquire these “grants” from the reputed holders, and to resell at a
profit!
WILLIAM B. OGDEN, FIRST MAYOR OF CHICAGO, AND A LARGE REAL ESTATE PROPRIETOR
THERE

SAN FRANCISCO IN 1848
(From an old print)
Many of these grants were of a conditional nature, and legal titles in most
instances were doubtful. Here again Congress was required to take a hand. The
treaty of Guadaloupe Hidalgo, which ended hostilities between the United States
and Mexico in 1848, provided that in the ceded territories all prior property
rights should be upheld. The problem immediately arose as to how these rights
were to be determined. As in Louisiana, a half century previous, Congress
appointed a commission to investigate land titles. Owners of grants were called
upon to prove their titles. This, many of them could not do. They had received
no deeds or patents. Verbal “gifts” by governors, prefects and other officials had
been quite common.
It was a wonderful harvest for lawyers, speculators and politicians! “The
usual fee for securing to the occupant a title was half the land, while with a bill
of extras he [the attorney] might easily sweep up the other half,” says Hubert
Howe Bancroft, the profuse historian of early California. “He was not much of a
lawyer in those days,” he adds, “who had not a Mexican grant in his pocket, the
title to which his client had paid for,”11
In order to simplify the problem of quieting the titles of “pueblo” and
mission lands, and of Mexican grants, the archives of the villages, towns and
missions were ordered sent to the United States Surveyor-General’s office at San

Francisco, and the land papers retained there. Three hundred bulky volumes
which resulted from this gleaning and collating are an indication of the
enormous task undertaken in validating California land titles. The work extended
over many years, and there are cases still pending. Needless to say, there were
many instances of gross fraud and deceit in the prosecution of the rights of
alleged owners.
It would be exceedingly tiring to attempt to cover even a substantial portion
of the schemes of villainy and speculation that prevailed in the settlement of
titles to California lands. The field became a battleground for lawyers,
adventurers and capitalists. A group of Philadelphia speculators are reported to
have established headquarters in San Francisco for the purpose of gambling in
the Mexican grant claims. Local politicians and financiers also attempted to
increase their wealth by buying rights to grants, or by backing up claimants. The
numerous reports submitted to Congress by the land office officials and the
special commissioners appointed to investigate the claims contain frequent
references to these fraudulent land-grabbing operations.
One of the most notorious of the fraudulent Mexican grants is known as the
“Limantour Claim.” Edwin M. Stanton, who was sent to California as special
counsel of the United States in the land cases, calls it “the most stupendous fraud
ever perpetrated since the beginning of the world.” Limantour, a resident
Mexican, claimed title to about 600,000 acres, part of which covered the present
city of San Francisco. This and other grants, he averred, were given him for aid
furnished the Mexican Government. The claim was at first upheld by the
California land commission, and for this reason Limantour is said to have
collected, during the years 1856 to 1858, about $300,000 from Frisco property
owners to quiet their titles. Many prominent lawyers defended the Limantour
claims, and many opposed them. The United States District Court declared them
all fraudulent, and Limantour fled to Mexico, much to the chagrin of the
property holders who had paid to buy him off.12
The “Santillan Grant” was another conspicuous forgery. This claim was
acquired by a group of land grabbers, styling themselves the “Philadelphia
Association.” They succeeded, “by hook or by crook,” in having the title
confirmed by the California land commission, but in subsequent proceedings the
“grant” was declared a forgery, and the association wasted its funds and the
efforts in prosecuting it.
Santillan’s claim, called the “Mission Dolores Grant” also covered “three
leagues” within San Francisco. It was reputed to have been donated in 1846 to

Santillan, “a poor parish priest on condition of paying the mission debt.” The
claim was finally rejected in 1859, by the United States Supreme Court, as a
preposterous payment for the small sum owed by a mission. The Philadelphia
Association, however, continued to petition Congress to ignore the court’s
decision, and even succeeded in 1878 in getting a favorable report from the
House Committee on private land claims. The next year, however, when a bill
was brought in to compensate the “Trustees of the San Francisco Association of
Philadelphia” for the Santillan grant, it was defeated. There is no evidence that
monetary compensation for the alleged grant was ever made.
A national interest attaches to one of the most widely known of California
land claims. “General” John Sutter, was not a land speculator. Neither did he
crave land for the purpose of gain. He was an “enterpriser”—a man of
indomitable courage and skill in the execution of great undertakings. Until gold
was discovered on his Sacramento property in 1848, he conducted a vast and
prosperous colony, of which he alone was lord and master. But gold on his lands
proved his undoing. The squatters overwhelmed him. In vain did he appeal to
Congress year after year for just compensation. But compensation never was
granted. His descendants are still pressing their claim for something like
$50,000,000 as the rightful award to the enterprising pioneer and colonizer
whose northern California empire was destroyed by the “Curse of Gold.”
Though he was not primarily a land jobber, Sutter did not stand idly by and
merely protest against the gold rush about him. Like others, he sought to exploit
the situation. He organized the Sacramento Town Company, and surveyed a site
into town lots in the autumn of 1848. The sales were rapid and at good prices.
With the receipts, Sutter was enabled to pay off some pressing debts. But in the
excitement of town-jobbing and land sales, he made conveyances of sections to
which his title was doubtful, and as afterwards proven, worthless. Moreover, the
squatters on his land began to resist ejection and organized a revolt. There was
disorder and bloodshed. All this caused an abatement of Sacramento town lot
sales. It caused also a collapse of real estate values and general financial
embarrassment in the new northern California metropolis. Thereafter, Sutter was
too busy defending the validity of his enormous land grants personally to engage
in real estate transactions. The years he spent on the doorsteps of Congress cost
him a vast sum. He died in Washington, on June 17, 1880, a poor, disheartened
man. Justice by state and nation had been denied him.
Sutter’s land in recent years has been the scene of another development
similar to that first attempted by the original grantee. The fertile Feather River

delta in the Sacramento Valley lay fallow for many years after Sutter was forced
out of it. During the rainy season much of it was under water, and useless, but at
other seasons it was covered with a luxuriant plant growth. An idea was
conceived of diking the banks of the stream and thus making possible the
cultivation of the rich surrounding lands. Through irrigation, and a favorable
climate, these lands could be made to produce almost any crop.
The wealthy meat packer and grain plunger, J. Ogden Armour, became
interested in the scheme. The Sutter Basin Company was incorporated in 1913,
with $6,000,000 of capital stock. It also issued, in 1922, $7,500,000 of mortgage
bonds. These bonds were personally endorsed by J. Ogden Armour, who
guaranteed payment of interest and principal. He also expended something like
$17,000,000 on the property. The project was not a success. The interest on the
bonds was defaulted. Armour died bankrupt—and thus the region in California
where gold was discovered was responsible for a second great financial disaster.
Another Mexican grant, for several years in the public eye, and which
attracted the attention of even Wall Street for a while, was known as the
“Mariposa Estate.” When General John C. Fremont “conquered” California in
1847, his small band of American scouts, he was not unmindful of the
opportunities for acquiring vast personal wealth in this region. In his “path-
finding” activities, he was led into a highway, which was destined to hold out
promises—but only promises—of great profits both to himself and to others. In
February, 1847 (only a few months after the surrender of California), he
purchased from the grantee, Alvalardo, for $3,000, a large tract of land,
comprising ten leagues square, on Mariposa Creek, between the Sierra Nevada
Mountains and the Joaquin River. As the land was mountainous, it was not
highly regarded by the Mexicans, but, by a peculiar trick of fortune, it was the
only large grant which was comprised in the region of the gold mines.
Frémont became a California resident and was elected United States Senator
in December, 1851. According to Hubert Howe Bancroft, Fremont “was in a
sense the representative of the Spanish grantees,” and in this capacity he had the
support, in the same Senate chamber, of his father-in-law, Thomas Hart Benton,
of Missouri. Accordingly, as Bancroft points out, “there was a feeling among
Senators that this Benton-Frémont-Jones combination might not be acting from
disinterested motives.”13
At least, Fremont proceeded to fix the boundaries of his ill-defined estate,
swinging “it around in such a manner as to locate the auriferous mountain

regions and the famous Pine Tree and Josephine mines.”14 Others who had been
in quiet possession of these mining claims, protested—but Fremont persisted in
demanding his rights, and succeeded, after some open warfare, in securing
property in which others had invested.
Of course, all this brought political obloquy upon the famous explorer who
was twice a presidential candidate. But it bade fair to make him one of
America’s wealthiest men. His personal resources were not sufficient for the
exploitation of the mines, so he sought financial assistance in Europe. While his
agent, David Hoffman, was in London organizing “mining companies,” out of
his estate, and offering the shares to British investors, Fremont gave Thomas D.
Sargent an option on the whole grant for $1,000,000. Sargent then went to
England and resold at an enormous advance.
In the meantime, however, Hoffman raised a “hue and cry” against the act of
his principal. He published a pamphlet addressed “to the British Public” in
which he asserted that he alone had a power of attorney to sell or lease the
Mariposa property, and that Sargent’s purchasers were likely to have trouble.
Hoffman’s protest was effective. The English refused to take over the grant.
Moreover, legal complications about the grant developed, because the original
conveyance did not specify that the grantee possessed the mining rights. As a
result of all this, Fremont could not raise the money to pay his presidential
campaign debts. At this time, he is reputed to have made the facetious remark:
“When I came to California I was worth nothing—but now I owe two million
dollars.”15 Judgments were obtained by his creditors against him. On September
9, 1859, the sheriff sold his Mariposa Estate. With this sale all the foreign
companies holding leaseholds and mining rights in the property faded into thin
air.
The “investing public,” however, was to hear more of the “Pathfinder’s” land
grabbing venture. Fremont succeeded in obtaining a part interest in the property
from his chief creditor, to whom it was assigned under a sheriff’s deed. With the
assistance of several New York capitalists, he organized the Mariposa Land and
Mining Company, and, inasmuch as the United States Supreme Court had, in
1858, upheld the right to mine the land, it was expected that the new venture
would be profitable. Nothing much ever came of it, however, although, after
repeated “sell outs,” the shares of the company were listed on the New York
Stock Exchange. It did not prove a success.
Frémont lost his financial interest in the Mariposa property shortly after the

organization of his stock company. All he obtained from it was worry, vexation
and public hatred. The old Californians seemed to have shed no tears because of
this. Bancroft, in his reminiscences, in commenting on Fremont and his
“Mariposa mine,” remarked that “when he was in Paris the man would have
been sent to the Bastile as a royal fraud if pre-adventure that edifice had not been
closed for repairs.”16
During a half century following the American conquest of California, the
United States Supreme Court’s records were cluttered with the Mexican land
grant claims. The foremost legal authorities in the country were employed in
these cases. Some are still unsettled and every now and then Congress and the
courts are called upon to decide on disputed titles or to unravel the frauds
growing out of “original Mexican grants.” In most cases, of course, the grantees
or their heirs are not concerned in the controversies. As pointed out by Bancroft,
“the estates have passed for the most part into the hands of speculators, who
were shrewd enough or rich enough to keep them.” “Land monopoly in
California,” he further remarks, “is due less to the original extent of the Mexican
grants than to the iniquitous methods adopted by our government; and as to the
fraudulent claims it is believed that the worst ones were concocted, or at least
mainly fortified with supports of forgery and perjury, after the commission and
the courts were fairly at work, and after the concocters learned by experience
what supports were likely to prove effective.”17
Moreover, the Mexican grants were not profitable propositions to those who
were successful in defending them. “Very few of the old Californians,
notwithstanding the principalities in the shape of lands, were enriched by them.
As an illustration, it may be stated that though over 326,000 acres were
confirmed to the De La Guerra family, they were miserably poor, and so were
the brothers Pio and Andre Pico, to whom 532,000 acres were confirmed.”18
Yet, California, according to Henry George and later investigators, has more
large landed estates than any other state in the Union. From statistics furnished
by the California Tax Commission in 1916, it appears that 310 landed proprietors
owned over four million acres, “capable of intensive cultivation and of
supporting a dense population.” “One firm owns nearly a million acres; one
railroad 500,000 acres. In Kern County four companies own over 1,000,000
acres or more than half the land held in private ownership. The Kern County
Land Company alone owns 356,000 acres. In Mercer County, Miller and Lux
own 250,000 acres. The evil of such ownership is each year becoming more

apparent. We have at one end of the social scale a few rich men who as a rule do
not live on their estates, and at the other end either a body of shifting laborers or
farm tenantry.”19
A number of the large California estates were acquired by wealthy
capitalists, neither for speculative nor for development purposes, but largely for
the glory of being great landed proprietors. Thus, Jerome O’Neil, James Irvine,
William Randolph Hearst, E. L. Doheny, and several other millionaires acquired
large single tracts. More often than otherwise, these “parks” are a financial
burden. The lands, unless underlaid with oil or precious metals, cannot be made
productive. Taxes and interest eat heavily into income from other sources. Rich
Americans, as a whole, are not content to become “land poor.” Occasionally, a
ranch, a vineyard or an orchard is held as a pleasure ground or place or retreat,
but this, as a rule, is expensive sport—and our millionaires, like the English, pay
heavily for their sports and pastimes.
. . . . .
The story of jobbing in Mexican grants would not be complete without some
reference to the land deals in California’s twin-sister state, New Mexico. The
grants in New Mexico, like those in California, generally covered large areas of
vacant lands, and the boundaries were indifferently described. The grantees also,
as a rule, claimed a larger acreage than the patents called for. The conveyances,
moreover, were made much earlier than those west of the Sierras.
Following the cession of the Mexican territory to the United States,
American speculators stepped in and acquired the most important claims. Thus,
the Armendaris Grant of 4,000 acres lying on the west bank of the Rio Grande,
in which the town of San Marcial is located, was deeded to Hugh N. Smith, and
Thomas Biggs, Santa Fé traders, largely for aid in defending its validity. The
property was subsequently sold to the San Marcial Land and Improvement
Company. The title to the Canada de Cochiti Grant which dated back to 1728,
was acquired by James G. and Joel P. Whitney, and the Sandoval Grant in
Valencia County, was also bought by Joel P. Whitney, who conveyed a half
interest in it to Franklin H. Story. The valuable Oritz Mine grant, comprising
about 70,000 acres, was also conveyed to Americans, and was finally acquired in
1864, through Charles E. Sherman, by the New Mexico Mining Company.20

MAP OF SAN FRANCISCO ABOUT 1851
(The lots lying outside the black line, known as “the water lots,” were the chief objects of speculation)

JOHN AUGUSTUS SUTTER, ON WHOSE ESTATE GOLD WAS DISCOVERED
The titles to these and other New Mexican land claims were as troublesome
to settle as those in California. Congress, however, did not take up the problem
until a decade or more after the California mess was attended to. The courts,
moreover, were slow in adjusting New Mexico claims, and as late as 1890 there
were still 107 claims pending, covering 8,704,785 acres. It was not until 1904
that most of these were settled.
Here, also, the lawyers found the land claim business highly lucrative. One,
who became exceedingly wealthy, was Stephen B. Elkins, in later life a West
Virginia millionaire, cabinet officer and United States Senator. Elkins went to
New Mexico in 1863. He learned the Spanish language, entered politics, was
then sent to the state legislature and later to Congress. His chief occupation in

New Mexico, however, was in defending the titles to lands granted under the
Mexican régime—and incidentally, he acquired a substantial financial interest in
them.
George W. Julian, who in 1868 was appointed United States Surveyor-
General of New Mexico, in a speech at Indianapolis on September 14, 1892, thus
characterized the land dealings of Elkins:
Elkins’ dealings were mainly in Spanish grants, which he bought for a small
price. Elkins became a member of the land ring of the territory, and largely
through his influence, the survey of these grants was made to contain hundreds
of thousands of acres that did not belong to them. He thus became a great land
holder, for through the manipulation of committees in Congress, grants thus
illegally surveyed were confirmed with their fictitious titles. . . . By such
methods as these, more than 10,000,000 acres of public domain in New Mexico
became the spoil of land grabbers.21
As in the case of California, excessive claims were the rule rather than the
exception in New Mexico. Although under the Mexican regime the maximum
acreage granted to an individual was eleven leagues (about 50,000 acres),
several claims embraced a much larger area. The Las Vegas grant comprised a
million acre tract, and the so-called “Maxwell Grant” almost two million acres,
i.e., about 3,000 square miles.
The Maxwell Grant was one of the most notorious of the New Mexico land
claims, and in this Elkins “made himself particularly conspicuous as the hero.”
Lucien Benjamin Maxwell, a native of Kaskaskia, Ill., and one of the most
striking early figures along the Rocky Mountain frontier, acquired it in 1864,
from Carlos Beaubien and Guadelupe Miranda, the original grantees. It was
adjacent to the Red River in northern New Mexico and contained almost the
whole of the present Colfax County. In extent, it would make three states the size
of Rhode Island. Here Maxwell, while living in barbaric splendor, attempted to
found an American barony, but his principal business was raising sheep.
He probably would have continued as America’s greatest sheep herder, had it
not been for the discovery of gold on his domain. This gave him plenty of
excitement. By disposition a gambler, he forthwith invested large sums in
developing placer mining. The results were negative. Like Sutter in California,
he was met by an army of squatters and free-lance miners, who refused to be
ousted except by force. In order to save a remnant of his fortune, he sold his
grant to an English syndicate for $1,250,000—one-half of which sum was paid

to his sales agents.
The syndicate formed the Maxwell Land Grant and Railroad Company and
tried to unload its obligations on the public. It did succeed in selling bonds to
Dutch investors, who were undoubtedly influenced by the fact that the “Hon.”
Stephen B. Elkins was president of the company. All this was done before the
validity of the grant was fully established. In the meantime, the finances of the
company went from bad to worse, and by 1875 it was bankrupt. Its lands were
sold for unpaid taxes, and its personal property disposed of at sheriff’s sale to
satisfy creditors.
After the Maxwell Land Grant failure, Stephen B. Elkins left for West
Virginia, where he married the daughter of its wealthiest citizen and statesman,
Senator Henry Gassaway Davis, and where he also became a United States
Senator. Maxwell’s subsequent career was less fortunate. He invested a large part
of the proceeds from the sale of his land in the bonds of the Texas and Pacific
Railroad. Through subsequent bankruptcy of the railroad, the bonds became
almost worthless. He also essayed banking, and organized the First National
Bank of Santa Fé. As its first president, he pictured himself on its notes with a
cigar in his mouth. He died in comparative poverty, July 25, 1875. Sheep raising
on his New Mexico property would have been more profitable to him and more
beneficial to the country than the exploitation of its gold mines.
Another notorious New Mexico land claim which became a securities
gamble, and which was, in 1895, adjudged a criminal forgery, was the so-called
“Peralta-Reavis Grant.” This fraudulent scheme to obtain title to about 1,300,000
acres under a supposed gift from the King of Spain dating back to 1748, was
concocted by James Addison Reavis, a St. Louis real estate dealer. Reavis, in
1871, met George M. Willing, Jr., who represented himself as the proprietor of
an immense tract of land on the borders of New Mexico and Arizona, that he had
purchased from the heirs of Don Miguel de Peralta. Reavis visited the location
with Willing, and while at the latter’s home, it is charged, stole a deed to the
property made out in blank and signed by Willing. Armed with this document,
he proceeded, in 1883, to seek the validation of his land claim under the Act of
Congress of July 22, 1854. In the meantime, he married a squaw, who, he
claimed, was the direct heir and descendant of the original grantee. He then
assumed the name of Addison Peralta-Reavis.
While awaiting the results of his petition, he proceeded to sell “releases” to
the numerous “squatters” who had settled on the lands. He also organized a
mining company, called the “Casa Grande Land and Improvement Company,”

which he incorporated under the laws of three states. For these three
corporations he received $65,000. In addition, the Southern Pacific Railway
Company paid him $50,000 for right of way through his mythical grant and the
Silver King Mining Company paid him $25,000 for a release of title to their
mining property. He received similar revenue from other sources, based on his
supposed ownership of the land, and in this way waxed rich and financially
influential He is said to have had the backing of the wealthy promoters of the
Southern Pacific Railroad, among whom was Collis P. Huntington.
But retribution was to come. In 1889 both the grant and the conveyances
were declared by the Surveyor-General to be forgeries. Reavis, however, did not
give up the fight. About 1890 he entered suit in the United States Court of
Claims for $10,000,000 on account of injury he had suffered through the illegal
disposition of his grant. He went to great expense and exercised great ingenuity
in collecting documents in Spain and in Mexico to support his case, and
presented numerous supposed transcripts to the court at Santa Fé. Discrepancies
in these soon became apparent, however, with the result that Reavis was
convicted for criminal forgery, spent two years in prison, and lost all his
property. After his release, he settled in California, where, it is reported, his
ingenuity as a litigant was further enhanced by the study of law.
Regarding the Reavis case, the United States Attorney, who opposed the
claim, comments: “In all the annals of crime there is no parallel. This monstrous
edifice of forgery, perjury and subornation was the work of one man. No plan
was ever more ingeniously devised; none ever carried out with greater patience,
industry, skill or effrontery.”22
1 Henry George, Our Land Policy, National and State, p. 13.
2 Frank Soulé, John H. Gihon, and James Nisbet, The Annals of San Francisco (1855), pp. 180-184.
Also Theodore H. Hittell, A History of California, Vol. III, p. 116.
3 John P. Young, San Francisco, A History of the Pacific Coast Metropolis, Vol. I, pp. 186, 187.
4Ibid.
5 Soulé, op. cit., p. 182. See also Hittell, History of California, Vol. III, pp. 390, 391.
6 Soulé, op. cit., pp. 498, 499.
7 Ibid., p. 520.
8 Pennsylvania German Magazine, Vol. 6, p. 155.
9 Hubert Howe Bancroft, Retrospection, p. 457.
10 Young, op. cit., p. 192. See also Hittell, History of California, Vol. III, p. 400.
11 Retrospection, p. 309.

12 Hubert Howe Bancroft, Works, Vol. 23, p. 554. See also article “Limantour,” by J. S. Hittell,
Overland Monthly, February, 1869.
13 Ibid., p. 538.
14 Theodore H. Hittell, History of California, Vol. III, p. 133.
15 See Samuel Bowles, Our New West, p. 425.
16 Bancroft, Retrospection, p. 234.
17 Bancroft, Works, Vol. 23, p. 578.
18 Theodore H. Hittell, History of California, Vol. II, p. 753.
19 Report of the Commission on Land Colonization and Rural Credits of the State of California, 1916,
p. 7.
20 See “History of New Mexico, Its Resources and People” (1907), Vol. I, pp. 170-178.
21 Ibid., p. 186.
22 See Land of Sunshine, Los Angeles, February and March, 1898. Also, History of New Mexico
(Pacific States Publishing Co.), pp. 210-220.

CHAPTER XIII
RAILROAD LAND JOBBERY
THE peerless co-author of The Gilded Age, Mark Twain, was from Missouri. But
he knew Yankee characteristics as well as those of his southern neighbors, and
his description of Squire Hawkins’, of Obedstown, great faith in his “Tennessee
lands” was no more genuine than his characterization of Mr. Bigler’s, the eastern
contractor’s ideas of railroad promotion:
Mr. Bigler’s plan this time, about which he talked loudly . . . was the building of
the Tunkhannock, Rattlesnake and Youngwomenstown railroad, which would
not only be a great highway to the west, but would open to the market
inexhaustible coal-fields and untold millions of lumber. The plan of operations
was very simple.
“We’ll buy the lands” explained he, “on long time, backed by the notes of
good men; and then mortgage them for money enough to get the road well on.
Then get the towns on the line to issue their bonds for stock . . . We can then sell
the rest of the stock on the prospect of the business of the road, . . . and also sell
the lands at a big advance, on the strength of the road.”1
Note that Mr. Bigler’s mind was on the rising real estate values. “On the
strength of the road,” he argued, “there would be a big advance.” Land
speculation was the lure of the railroad promoters. Land speculation and railroad
construction went hand in hand.
When Congress, in 1833, gave Illinois the right to apply to railroad
construction the national land that had been granted to it for the Illinois and
Michigan Canal, it started something. Little was it realized then that this act was
the beginning of land-jobbery promotion on a tremendous scale, and that, though
resulting in economic benefit to the nation, it would carry in its wake
speculation, town-site jobbing, political corruption and downright fraud.
During the fever of violent speculation which characterized the period of

rapid western settlement from about 1820 to 1837, it was frequently suggested,
and even importuned, that internal improvements be fostered by free gifts of
public land. There was a craze for canals and turnpikes, for bridges and
railroads. The land jobbers wanted these to enhance the value of their properties.
The promoters of the improvements wanted land to reap the profit which they
felt might not result from the public utilities they were creating. Land was the
bait. Land was the quarry.
The use of the public lands to promote economic development was broadly
advocated. No political party was strongly opposed to it, and no geographical
section complained against it. As early as 1828, Daniel Webster, staunch “Old
State” New Englander, advocated it. In a speech at Faneuil Hall, he said:
In most of the new States of the West, the United States are yet the
proprietors of vast bodies of land. Through some of these States and through
some of these same public lands, the local authorities have prepared to carry
expensive canals for the general benefit of the country. Some of these
undertakings have been attended with great expense, and have subjected the
States . . . to large debts and heavy taxation. The lands of the United States,
being exempted from all taxation, of course, bear no part of this burden. Looking
at the United States, therefore, as a great landed proprietor, essentially benefited
by these improvements, I have felt no difficulty in voting for appropriation of
parts of these lands, as a reasonable contribution by the United States to these
general objects.2
And with this reasoning, Webster and other statesmen of the time began to
distribute, in modest quantities, parts of the national heritage of free land. River
improvements, wagon roads, and canals received cessions of the public domain.
Railroads came later, but the railroad rage soon took precedence over the
canal craze. As already noted, real estate development and land booming went
hand-in-hand with railroad construction. Rail highways were promoted in many
cases, not with the main idea of profiting from their operation, but to increase
town and rural land values. Large landowners were, therefore, concerned in early
railroad projects. Soon after the organization of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
in 1825, a group of capitalists, some of whom were among its promoters, formed
the Canton Company in Baltimore. They acquired a large tract of land near the
city. They expected the value to increase greatly because of its access to both the
railroad and the harbor. Although the Canton Company and the railroad
company remained separate corporations for over a century, their interests

coincided. As already noted, the Canton Company’s property only recently came
under the control of the Pennsylvania Railroad, but not without the serious
protest of the latter’s rival—the Baltimore and Ohio.
The right to own real estate was regarded as a special advantage by the early
railroads. The original prospectus of the “Mt. Carmel and New Albany
Railroad,” of Indiana, in 1838, takes note of this: “Were the company to
purchase a million acres of the lands adjacent to the work, the increase alone in
the price of the lands so purchased would, before the work is half completed, pay
for the entire construction of the work. The bare location of the route would
triple the price of every acre of land within two miles of it. All that is wanted is
capital to invest in lands, and go on with the work for a short time without being
compelled to make sale of them.”3
In the same belief, individuals and corporations eagerly granted rights of way
over their properties to railroads so as to enhance the value of the portions
retained. Donations of land, both public and private, to transportation companies,
as a speculation aid, thus became an established policy. Overbuilding of railroad
facilities was the logical result.
Although Congress had previously granted lands to corporations and
individuals for the purpose of creating and maintaining public utilities of various
kinds, the first substantial grant for a railroad enterprise was not made until 1850
when the Illinois Central Railroad was organized. As early as 1836, however,
Congress was petitioned for a land grant for the same enterprise.4 A similar
measure was advocated by Senator Sidney Breese in 1844. He desired to secure
to the proposed “Great Western Railroad of Illinois” the right of preëmption of
public land along its lines. This meant that the railroad would pay the
government price for the land, if it was acquired, but, of course, the lands would
only be paid for as they were sold at an advance above the government price.
Hence, it is quite evident that early railroad building, even in the new and
unsettled areas, was closely interlaced with land speculation.
Congress had already made a gift of public land to Illinois in 1828, in aid of
the proposed construction of a canal between Chicago and the Illinois River, in
order to create a “Great Lakes to Gulf” waterway. The fever of speculation that
was engendered by this project was described in a previous chapter. Before the
canal was even marked out, lands, supposedly adjacent to it, rose to high values.
William B. Ogden, who went to Chicago in the interests of the American Land
Company, wrote on May 3, 1836, that he purchased nearly two thousand acres

along the proposed canal, at $5 per acre. “It is considered a good investment at
$10,” he stated, “for it would not only be on the Canal, but near the flourishing
town of Joliet.” In Chicago, of course, the “canal lots” brought ridiculously high
prices. But most of the sales were canceled because of default in payments
following the crash in May, 1837.
As the canal was slow in building, and costly, and as railroads were
demonstrating their superiority over other means of transportation, Illinois
sought to apply the canal land grant to railroad construction. The panic, however,
had caused a bankrupt state treasury. Even with land donations, there were
insufficient public funds for internal improvements. Moreover, land was then a
“drug” on the market. Accordingly, although Congress consented to the
diversion from canal to railroad purposes in 1833, the grant was not used.
JOHN C. FRÉMONT

ROBERT RANTOUL, JR., WHO OBTAINED THE LAND GRANT FOR THE ILLINOIS CENTRAL
RAILROAD
(From an engraving by Sartain)
In the meantime, Darius B. Holbrook, a town jobber, was eager for the
success of his “Cairo City and Canal Company.” This concern grew out of a
town-site speculation started by Baltimore capitalists, as far back as 1818, in
Illinois, at the confluence of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. The project
lingered in obscurity for several years because the “town” was seasonally under
water. The Cairo City and Canal Company, however, endeavored to offset this
inconvenience by constructing “dikes, canals, levees and embankments.”
When Holbrook could not make a “go” of his town-jobbing venture, he
conceived the idea of making the place a railroad terminal. In 1835, he promoted
the “Illinois Central Railroad Company,” an Illinois corporation, and it was this
company which petitioned Congress for a land grant, but without success. This

did not discourage Holbrook. About 1840, he obtained a new Illinois charter for
a railroad and again sought Congressional assistance. His petition was opposed
by Stephen Douglas, then Senator from Illinois, on the ground that Holbrook’s
railroad was “a stupendous private speculation to enable the Cairo Company to
sell their chartered privileges in England.”
Douglas then offered a substitute plan. Instead of granting land for railroad
purposes to Holbrook’s company, he proposed a grant directly to the State of
Illinois, to be used in aid of private railroad construction. In the meantime, the
crafty Holbrook induced the Illinois Legislature to pass an act, ceding to his
proposed railroad all lands that might be granted the state by Congress. When
Douglas learned of this trick, his ire was greatly stirred. He threatened to
withdraw his bill for a land grant. To appease him, Holbrook was induced to
release the state from the privilege given his company. Douglas regarded
Holbrook and his associates as merely land grabbers and town jobbers, and he
wished lands conveyed to an out-and-out railroad proposition.
Douglas’ land grant bill was enacted by Congress, September 20, 1850. It did
not convey a definite acreage. It granted an alternate section of land, extending
six miles on each side of a railroad to be built as part of a line between Mobile
and Chicago. As each alternate section was a square mile, speculators could not
obtain directly from the railroad company large contiguous tracts. Moreover, if
the railroad’s lands rose in value, the government’s sections would rise
proportionately. Thus, the government would participate equally with the
railroad in the profits resulting from land ownership. This system—designed
primarily to block monopolization of land along the railroad—was continued in
all subsequent railroad land grants.
But who would build and own the railroad that was to get all that land?
Surely, not the people of Illinois. They lacked the funds. This situation was
undoubtedly well known to eastern capitalists, and particularly to the New
England Congressmen who voted for the land donation. And they were not long
in taking advantage of it! Daniel Webster was not a capitalist, but he had an eye
for business and his legal services were in demand by the moneyed interests.
Webster had a colleague in Congress, with whom he was friendly, even though
they adhered to opposite political parties. This man was Robert Rantoul, Jr., a
strong supporter of internal improvements. He was an able lawyer, a good
business man, but not a successful politician. As a Democrat, he supported free
trade and “state’s rights,” and accordingly was not in political harmony with
Webster. Yet, it is stated on pretty good authority that Webster, almost

immediately after Douglas’ land grant bill was passed, advised Rantoul to go to
Illinois in the interests of a group of capitalists and seek the railroad charter, and
in this way get the conveyance of the land. In fact, it is said that Rantoul drew up
the charter under Webster’s supervision.
Rantoul went West, and arrived in Springfield, Ill., just in time to forestall
the efforts of a young lawyer and politician—Abraham Lincoln by name—to
obtain the railroad charter and the land for a group of western capitalists. Lincoln
confirmed this in 1863 to Rantoul’s son, while the latter was on a visit to the
White House; and remarked with characteristic jocularity and a slap on his
visitor’s knee: “Your father beat me, your father beat me.”5
Rantoul obtained, without much difficulty, a charter for the Illinois Central
Railroad on February 10, 1851. As stated in the Senate in 1870 by Senator James
Warren Nye: “He spread out to the Legislature of Illinois the boundless
advantages that would accrue from affording aid to this great enterprise. He laid
that upon the altar of his country for its benefit, and the nation also was induced
to extend its aid.”6
Of course, it required some “extravagant figures” and an attractive bait in the
form of participation in the railroad’s revenue to induce the legislature to turn
over the liberal land grant to a private corporation. But Rantoul was equal to the
task. The newspapers of the time caricatured his figures for their extravagance;
but he returned East with his grant. Prominent New York and Boston capitalists
became his associates. These included Robert Schuyler, George Griswold,
Gouverneur Morris, son of our, old land agent, William H. Aspinwall, Jonathan
Sturgis, George W. Ludlow, Henry Grinnell, and John F. A. Sanford, of New
York, and David A. Neal and Franklin Haven, of Boston.
Rantoul was also a member of the first board of directors of the Illinois
Central Railroad Company, but death took him on August 7, 1852, when the
actual work of construction had barely begun. Just before his death he wrote
enthusiastically regarding the “value of the public lands of Illinois.” His
sentiments were disclosed in a published letter to Robert Schuyler, the first
president of the Illinois Central Railroad,—a letter, of course, designed to attract
investors to the company’s securities:
“It is plain,” he said, “that all the land within fifteen miles of the Central
Railroad is intrinsically worth, from its power of production, not only as much,
but on average twice as high as that which we have assumed to be the selling
price of Ohio lands. Such an average would be realized if the supply of such

lands were not much greater than the demand for cultivation. It becomes then
necessary to inquire how long will the supply exceed the demand, not for
speculation, because that is too precarious and unsteady for our consideration,
but the demand for actual cultivation?”7
The enthusiastic promoter had his answer to this question. The demand
would soon increase beyond the supply should the population of Illinois increase
only as fast as that which actually took place between 1840 and 1850. The
railroad, moreover, would bring a larger number of settlers. Hence, it was a safe
prediction that the Illinois Central lands would, in ten years, rise to from $10 to
$12 an acre.
He was not wrong. In scarcely ten years thereafter, the Illinois Central
Railroad publicly announced that it had 1,100,000 acres, or less than one-half of
its original grant, for sale, in forty-acre lots and upwards, at prices ranging from
$5 to $25 per acre, whereas the national domain was offered at $1.25 per acre,
with not many takers. Certain tracts immediately adjoining stations, or “for other
causes” especially valuable, were offered at higher prices on the familiar “canal
terms,” i.e., one-fourth cash and the balance in three annual instalments, with
interest. The ordinary tracts were sold on smaller cash payments, amounting
usually to but one year’s interest on the purchase price. The balance could be
paid in six annual instalments, secured by notes, with interest at 6 per cent.
There was, moreover, the general requirement—usually disregarded—that one-
half of each plot purchased be fenced and placed under cultivation.
It can be readily assumed that the speculative interest early created in the
Illinois Central Railroad was based upon its land grant. An English capitalist,
reporting on the company in 1856, wrote: “This is not a railroad company, it is a
land company.”8 Anthony Trollope, the English novelist, who visited America
during the Civil War, made a similar remark. “Railroad companies,” he wrote,
“were in fact companies combined for the purchase of land. They purchased
land, looking to increase the value of it fivefold by the opening of the railroad. . .
. It is in this way that the thousands of miles of railroads in America have been
opened.”9
The main activity of the Illinois Central Railroad promoters in this early
period was to sell the lands. They advertised them extensively in alluring
pamphlets both at home and abroad. Moreover, the company’s credit was based
chiefly upon its land holdings. It mortgaged its land (though, of course, it had
legal title only to such sections along which its lines were already constructed)

and issued bonds secured by this mortgage. A large part of the land profits was
expected to come from the sale of town lots in places of its own creation. A
station was established every ten miles, and the surrounding plots divided into
lots which were offered at various prices according to location. Town jobbing
and railroad building thus went along hand in hand.
Altogether, the Illinois Central Railroad Company received about 2,600,000
acres. In less than twenty years after obtaining the grant, all except about
450,000 acres had been sold. Congress was told in 1870 that the company “was
holding its lands for advance in prices, instead of offering them to settlers.” It
was then offering them at the exorbitant prices of $25 and $30 per acre.
Naturally, the building of the Illinois Central and its liberal land grant stirred
up a fever of land speculation in its territory. The alternate sections retained by
the government were eagerly bought up by speculators. Young Grenville M.
Dodge, afterwards builder of the Union Pacific, who went to Illinois as a
surveyor, wrote back enthusiastically to his father: “I can double any amount of
money you’ve got in six months. . . . To start with, buy a couple of Mexican
[War] land warrants, send them out, and I’ll locate them in places where land is
selling at this minute for $2.50 an acre. The warrants for a quarter section each,
can be bought back east for about a dollar. Now this is no gun game, but the
truth. Don’t tell anybody about it, but go to work.” And, referring to his father’s
meager means of a livelihood, he added: “This will pay better than all the post
offices and book stores in the kingdom.”10
The records of the national land office in Illinois show heavy sales along the
lines of the railroad to large and influential speculators at the fixed minimum
price of $2.50 per acre or a little above it. Stephen A. Douglas, John Wentworth,
John S. Wright and other prominent names appear among the purchasers. Not
only did politicians and land boosters buy land in the neighborhood of the
company’s lines, but they sought to influence the location of the route. Jesse
Fell, of Bloomington, Ill., a large western land jobber, was instrumental in
getting the Illinois Central to Clinton, Decatur, Bloomington and other towns in
which he held real estate. All this fostered political “wire pulling” and
corruption.
The land grant to the Illinois Central led to a host of similar projects.
Congress was swamped with petitions. Every town-site promoter or landed
nabob put in applications. The western Congressmen, in whose states were vast
stretches of public domain, were kept busy backing up the claims of their

constituencies for federal aid in railroad promotion. In these activities,
corruption, bribery, log-rolling, and other questionable political practices
flourished.
Horace Greeley, whose slogan “Go West, Young Men,” placed him among
the friends of the pioneer settlers, could see no need of “hiring or bribing
capitalists to construct railroads.” He advocated limited land “ownership” as an
antidote to land speculation, and he even hinted his approbation of “squatter’s
rights.” “The mischiefs already entailed on the industry and business of the
country by land speculation,” he wrote in his paper, the New York Tribune, “are
incalculable. . . . Only those who have seen much, reflected much, have any full
idea of them. Wheresover, upon a natural harbor, a bay, a head of navigation, or
a water fall, a village begins or promises to spring up, there, the speculator or his
agent are early on hand, and pounces upon the unoccupied land within a circuit
of a mile or two. This he holds back for a price treble to sixty-fold that he paid
for it.”11 By releasing capital tied up in vast tracts of unproductive land held by
speculators, there would be money enough, Greeley thought, to construct
railroads without the aid of land grants.
Greeley made a tour of the West in 1847, and while there, discovered the
heavy traffic in military land warrants. The warrants were bought up in great
wads, in both the East and the West, and the owners converted them into large
tracts of vacant land of their own selection. They needed settlers to make the
lands valuable, but settlers now followed railroads and canals instead of going
ahead of them. Hence, the numerous railroad projects. Maps in emigrant guides
to the western states, published in this period, show veritable net works of
“projected railroads,” most of which were never even surveyed. All the
“projectors,” however, had in mind possible land grants as a means of putting
their plans over. “By stimulating the building of roads, where they are not
wanted, and where the leading cause for building them is the gift of public lands,
we shall throw such discredit (when the breakdown comes) on our western
roads, that the building of useful roads will be retarded or indefinitely
postponed.” Thus, wrote John Murray Forbes to Charles Sumner, February 14,
1853. Forbes was then engaged in the construction of the Rock Island Railroad
entirely with private capital, and, of course, was opposed to the encouragement
given to rival lines with land grants.12
Sober-minded statesmen realized that railroad operation in the sparsely
settled areas of the Great West was not a profitable business proposition. It was

different from the transportation situation in the East. Here population centers
were already sufficiently large and prosperous to furnish traffic immediately. But
in the new states, still in the process of pushing back the Indians and in preparing
the soil for human sustenance, rail traffic must be developed. This requires a
comparatively long period. Under the circumstances, the prospects of dividends
on capital invested in western railroads were remote.
It was, therefore, not from choice but rather from necessity that the railroads
were proffered lands amounting in extent, in some cases, to empires or
principalities as a reward or a bait for their construction. On the whole,
prospective profits of operating railroads in most sections of the country had
little influence in inducing capital investment in these enterprises. The
opportunities for making money in land speculation, in town-site projects, in
construction contracts and numerous other schemes were more generally the lure
than operating legitimate transportation facilities. In some cases, as, for instance,
in the Illinois Central, the proprietors of the railroad could have donated the
entire original cost of construction, and still have realized a capital gain from
their land sales. The Illinois Central is reported to have cleared about
$25,000,000 from the disposal of its domain. Its success, however, is
exceptional. The largest and most richly endowed land grant railroads were
financial failures. The Union Pacific and Northern Pacific are outstanding
examples. The land-grabbing activities connected with these gigantic ventures
will be next considered.
. . . . .
The first plan of a transcontinental railroad, to be supported by a land grant,
was proposed by Asa Whitney as early as 1843, and was considered seriously by
Congress and the nation at large continuously for more than a decade. But the
bickering of sectional interests as to the most desirable route prevented Congress
from taking positive action to promote the enterprise. It was not until the
secession of the Southern States that the opportunity was afforded to agree upon
a proposed route. But even prior to the Civil War, land speculators gambled on
the anticipated route. Prospectors went West to search out probable terminals
and town sites along the line. Others kept their ears to the doors of Congress to
get the earliest news of the location of the lines. Congressmen themselves
became financially interested in what was likely to happen.
One of the shrewd Yankee engineers who had an eye out for the “most

feasible route” was Grenville M. Dodge. Dodge, a native of Danvers, Mass.,
“went West” in 1851 to get work in railroad construction. While engaged on the
Chicago and Rock Island line, he took up a “preëmption” claim to government
land on the banks of the Elkhorn River, in Iowa, twenty-five miles east of
Omaha. He also staked out claims in the same vicinity for his father and brother.
These soon came out to put up their log cabins and make a pretense of plowing
the virgin prairie soil. In this way they could claim the land as “homesteaders”
and pay the government price for it. Their chief interest, however, was to hold
for a rise in value, in the expectation of the Pacific Railroad passing through
their properties.
Dodge was encouraged in his selection by Frederick Lander, an old friend
and fellow engineer who had been appointed by Jefferson Davis, then Secretary
of War, to make one of the seven or more surveys for a most feasible
transcontinental route. He was in charge of the Puget Sound-Missouri River
location. While on his return, he stopped at Dodge’s log cabin settlement on the
Elkhorn. “The Pacific Railroad is bound to be built through this valley,” he
assured Dodge, “and if it doesn’t run through your claim, I’ll be badly
mistaken.”
GEORGE FRANCIS TRAIN

(From a photograph taken about the time he was promoting the “Credit Foncier of America”)
LAYING THE TRACK OF THE PACIFIC RAILROAD. FROM BOWLES’ Our New West
“I’ve already figured that it will,” Dodge replied. “How else could it go from
the Missouri River if built this far north?”13
The South’s secession caused an adoption of a northern route for the Pacific
Railroad, though in order to connect with the Central Pacific of California,
which had been incorporated in June, 1861, the Puget Sound terminus was
abandoned. The eastern end was to be “on the hundredth meridian of longitude
west from Greenwich, between the south margin of the Republican River, and
the north margin of the Valley of the Platte River, at a point to be fixed by the
President of the United States.” The railroad was to have free right of way over
government domain and, in addition, was to be given ten miles on each side in
alternate sections. All this made an aggregate acreage of about 12,000,000 acres
—a vast inland empire, the like of which had never been known before to be
held in single private ownership.
But this was not all. The government was to furnish a construction loan in 6
per cent, thirty-year bonds, at the rate of $16,000 per mile of road through the
prairies, $48,000 over the Rockies and $32,000 per mile between the Rockies
and the Sierras, not to exceed, however, a total of $50,000,000.

Of course, there was opposition and cries of land grabbing. But these protests
were unheeded, and the landless Atlantic States joined with the “land-poor”
West in favoring the project. “I give no grudging vote in giving away either
money or land,” exclaimed the Massachusetts Senator, Henry Wilson. “I would
sink $100,000,000 to build the road and do it most cheerfully, and think I had
done a great thing for my country. What are $75,000,000 or a $100,000,000 in
opening a railroad across regions of this Continent, that shall connect the people
of the Atlantic and the Pacific, and bind us together? . . . Nothing! As to the
lands, I don’t begrudge them.”
Wilson was right! Why begrudge them the land? Twelve million acres was
an ocean of territory that would require several decades to fill. It was offered at
$2 to $10 per acre, and sold in forty-acre tracts and upward, with liberal terms of
credit. But sales were exceedingly slow. A vast influx of population would have
been required to have settled them during the period of construction. Moreover,
the Homestead Act of 1862 made it possible to acquire government lands free of
cost, and this competition was a serious handicap to the railroad company in
disposing of its vast domain.
But it was not the vast stretches of vacant wild lands that attracted
speculators. Mere acreage is not what the railroad promoters most desired. It was
the favored town sites, the terminals and the way-stations that were the chief
objects of pecuniary exploitation. Town jobbing and town-site planning began
even before the work of actual railroad construction was under way.
One of the “nosy” schemers, who sought to exploit the choice lands and
town sites, was the sophisticated and idiosyncratic celebrity, George Francis
Train. He was a typical New England trader and adventurer. After having
accumulated a fortune in the shipping business, and in trading in Australia
during the gold rush there, he returned to America with great capitalistic ideas.
He took a hand at railroad promotion, and represented Queen Maria Christina of
Spain in furnishing capital for the construction of the Atlantic and Great Western
Railway, extending from western New York to Cincinnati. When Congress
passed the Pacific Railroad Bill in 1862, he took the first active steps to form a
construction company. Having become fascinated, while residing in France, with
the adventuresome financial methods of the brothers Emile and Isaac Perrère, he
hit upon the idea of organizing finance companies similar to their two concerns:
the “Crédit Mobilier” and the “Crédit Foncier.” He proceeded to organize
companies with the same names. The “Crédit Mobilier of America” was to
construct the railroad, and the “Crédit Foncier of America” was to capture and

exploit the choice real estate along the lines.
It is George Francis Train, therefore, who is responsible for one of the most
notorious names in American financial history—the Crédit Mobilier. The very
term now smacks of corruption and scandal.
The enterprising Train sought the coöperation of capitalists, politicians and
statesmen in the promotion of his finance companies, designed to reap the profits
from the creation of a transcontinental link to the Pacific Coast. He first tried
Boston, with indifferent success, putting up $150,000 of his own funds. This, he
said, was “the pint of water that started the great wheel of the machinery.” “I had
offered,” he continues, “an interest in the road to old and well-established
merchants of New York and other cities—the Grays, the Goodhues, the
Aspinwalls, the Howlands, the Grinnells, the Marshalls, and Davis Brooks &
Company; and even to some of the new men, like Henry Clews—agreeing to put
them in on the ground floor . . . But they were afraid. It was too big. Only two of
them, William H. Macy and William H. Guion would take any stock.”14
James A. Garfield was one of the politicians whom Train endeavored to have
assist him in the promotion of the “Crédit Foncier.” In the course of Garfield’s
testimony at one of the Congressional hearings relating to the Crédit Mobilier
scandal,—which, as is generally well known, involved prominent Congressmen,
—he testified:
George Francis Train called upon me in 1866 and said he was organizing a
company to be known as the Crédit Mobilier of America, to be founded on the
model of the Crédit Mobilier of France; That the object of the company was to
purchase lands and build houses along the line of the Pacific Railroad at points
where cities and villages were likely to spring up; that he had no doubt money
thus would double or treble itself each year; that subscriptions were limited to
$1,000 each, and he wished me to subscribe.15
Garfield probably confused Train’s Crédit Foncier of America with the
Crédit Mobilier. It was the Crédit Froncier and not the Crédit Mobilier that was
to deal in town lots.
Train did not take a prominent part in the activities of the Crédit Mobilier—
the construction company which undertook to build for the Union Pacific
Railroad Company. His lack of resources and his eccentricities handicapped him.
He did, however, take active steps to reap the benefits of the railroad’s location.
As he himself expressed it: “I looked upon it [i.e., the railroad] only as the
launching of a hundred other projects, which, if I had been able to carry them to

completion, would have transformed the West in a few years, and anticipated its
present state of wealth by more than a full generation. One of my plans was the
creation of a chain of great towns across the Continent, connecting Boston with
San Francisco by a magnificent highway of cities . . . Most of these plans were
defeated by a financial panic; by the lack of coöperation on the part of the very
people who were interested in their success. Some of them succeeded, however,
and I was able to accomplish a great deal of work that has gone into the winning
and making of the West.”16
Surmising that Omaha, Neb., would be the eastern terminus of the Pacific
railroad, he straightway engrossed a large part of its real estate. He is said to
have personally acquired about five hundred acres in Omaha “which cost him
only one hundred and seventy-five dollars an acre,—a most promising
investment.”17 He also built a magnificent hotel there—the Cozzens Hotel—
which, he said, “was more written about than almost any other hostelry ever
built in the United States.”
What became of Train’s real estate speculations in Omaha is something of a
mystery. He does not mention it in his memoirs—written after he had been
adjudged insane—and certainly they could not have brought him great wealth,
because he died comparatively poor. In fact, during the last years of his life, he
was a resident of a workingman’s hotel in New York, and his only associates in
this period were “children in parks and streets.”
Little also is known of Train’s city building company, the Crédit Foncier of
America, which was to develop towns along the railroad. This concern was
incorporated under a special act of the Nebraska Legislature, and was publicly
advertised as organized in connection with the Union Pacific Railroad to “own
cities along the line.” A printed prospectus, issued by John J. Cisco and Co., who
were, for a while, the bankers of the Union Pacific Railroad, indicates that this
organization made an attempt to “boom” the town of Columbus, Neb.

JAY COOKE

MAP OF LOCATION OF THE NORTHERN PACIFIC LAND GRANT, “BANANA BELT,” WHICH
INSPIRED J. PROCTOR KNOTT’S FAMOUS SPEECH
Rings Indicate 100, 200, etc., Miles from Duluth
(From Oberholtzer’s Jay Cooke, Financier of the Civil War) (See pp. 304-305)
This prospectus contains some extravagant language.
“OMAHA ALREADY AN ACKNOWLEDGED FACT—COLUMBUS THE
NEXT IMPORTANT CITY,” ran the headlines.
Other captions were: “A fifty dollar lot may prove a $5000 investment.”
‘‘Paris to Pekin in thirty days.” “Two Ocean Ferry Boats and a Continental
Railway.” “Passengers for China this way!” “Money is cheap—Our national
credit sound. The nation prosperous.” “The Rocky Mountain excursion of
statesmen and capitalists pronounce the Pacific Railroad a great fact.” “The
Crédit Mobilier a national realty, the Crédit Foncier (owning cities along the
line) an American institution.”
And by way of showing the high standing of the Crédit Foncier of America,
it is remarked that “Most of the directors and subscribers of the Crédit Mobilier
are shareholders of the Crédit Foncier of America.”

Like many similar town-lot “booster circulars” issued before and since the
creation of the Crédit Foncier, there was an accompanying sketch map showing
the important geographical position of Columbus, Neb. It was “the natural point
for an important station.” It was “surrounded by the finest agricultural lands in
the world.” Moreover, “the Crédit Mobilier owns lands near the city; and some
of the leading Generals and Statesmen are also property owners round about.”
And by way of further inducement to make a town-lot investment in
Columbus, it was pointed out that others have made fortunes by similar
purchases:
Would you make money easy? Find, then, the site of a city and buy the farm it is
to be built on! How many regret the non-purchase of that lot in New York; that
block in Buffalo; that acre in Chicago, that quarter section in Omaha. Once these
city properties could be bought for a song. Astor and Girard made their fortunes
that way. The Crédit Foncier by owning the principal towns along the Pacific
line to California, enriches its shareholders while distributing its profits by
selling alternate lots at a nominal price to the public.
The authorship of the foregoing fantastic circular is not stated, but in view of
the fact that George Francis Train, a few years after its publication, was legally
adjudged insane, it may be assumed that it was written by him.
The Crédit Foncier of America, despite the enthusiasm and benevolence of
its projector, undoubtedly had a short and unsuccessful career. Columbus, Neb.,
did not become “an important station” on the Union Pacific. Neither was it ever
considered as the capital of the state. True, it is still on the map. But, after fifty
years in which there have been opportunities to exploit its geographical and
economic advantages, its population is less than 7,000, and its growth has been
slow and uncertain. In the meantime, George Francis Train, its promoter and
original “booster,” has passed into the realm of celestial silence. The fire of his
enthusiasm and the ring of his masterly oratory ceased thirty years before his
demise. While living as a hermit at a Mills Hotel, at $3 per week rental, he saw
the West grow up, and boasted that his predictions of the marvelous effect of the
building of the transcontinental rail link had come true. He died in 1903.
Omaha, the chief center of Train’s operation, likewise failed to realize the
vast gains he anticipated. He and his associates did not make money from their
speculations in its vicinity. This may have been due to a change of location of
the eastern terminus of the Union Pacific from Omaha to Council Bluffs, on the
other side of the Missouri River. According to General Dodge, this change was
made because of “the aim of Congress and the intention of Lincoln.” The

martyred President, incidentally, owned a piece of land hard by the established
terminus on the eastern side of the Missouri, and the critics of his railroad policy
made capital of this. But if Lincoln selected Council Bluffs as the starting point
of the Pacific Railroad merely to gain wealth from the rise in the value of his real
estate there, the decision to follow his plan came rather late, for the new
terminus was not selected by the directors of the railroad until ten years after his
assassination.
Though the Crédit Foncier of America soon petered out as a money-making
proposition, town-site jobbing along the lines of the Union Pacific persisted.
Hardly a location in any way suitable as a station or a junction point that did not
develop into a “mushroom city” because of the activity of land speculators.18 As
soon as the location of the railroad line was determined, “a town would be
plotted, streets laid out and named for the heroes of the Civil War, and lots put
on sale.” The same may be said of the places along the Central Pacific in
California, which, like the Union Pacific Railroad, received a similar grant of
land in aid of construction. The Southern Pacific also came in for a handsome
land bounty, and its promoters became deeply concerned in town-site and
terminal land jobbing.19 And so with the Northern Pacific, the story of which
will be told in the next chapter.
From a financial viewpoint, the land subsidies of the first transcontinental
railroads did not accomplish the results expected by the promoters. The lands
had no value until the roads were completed, and, even after completion, the
process of disposal was exceedingly slow and costly. Direct financial aid,
through cash loans, was much more serviceable as a means of successful
promotion, and even with this form of assistance the profitableness of the
railroad enterprises only became established many years after the lines were
completed and in full operation. Nevertheless, land was the lure for undertaking
the construction by private interests, and it was the bait that led many capitalists
to subscribe to the project.
1 The Gilded Age, a Tale of Today, by Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner (Harper & Brothers), pp.
167, 168. The italics are mine.—A. M. S.
2 The Works of Daniel Webster, Vol. I, p. 169.
3 F. A. Cleveland and F. W. Powell, Railroad Promotion and Capitalization in the United States, p. 199.
4 See American State Papers, Public Lands, Vol. VIII, p. 593.
5 William K. Ackerman, Historical Sketch of the Illinois Central Railroad, P. 29.

6 Congressional Globe, April 7, 1870, p. 2480.
7 Letter on the Value of the Public Lands of Illinois, by Robert Rantoul, Jr., Boston, 1851.
8 Wm. K. Ackerman, Early Illinois Railroads, p. 75.
9 Anthony Trollope, North America, Vol. I, p. 143.
10 J. R. Perkins, Trails, Rails and War, the Life of General G. M. Dodge, p. 13.
11 New York Weekly Tribune, July 17, 1847.
12 See Henry G. Pearson, An American Railroad Builder, p. 189.
13 See J. R. Perkins, Trails, Rails and War, The Life of General G. M. Dodge p.30
14 George Francis Train, My Life in Many States and in Foreign Lands, p. 287.
15 J. B. Crawford, The Crédit Mobilier of America, p. 134.
16 Train, op. cit., pp. 293, 294.
17 See Albert D. Richardson, Beyond the Mississippi, p. 565.
18 See Building of the Pacific Railroad, by Edwin L. Sabin.
19 See Stuart Daggett, Chapters on the History of the Southern Pacific.

CHAPTER XIV
JAY COOKE’S “BANANA BELT”
WHEN Jay Cooke, “financier of the Civil War,” in 1869 consented to furnish
capital to rescue the Northern Pacific Railroad from the pangs of infantile
weakness, he made the following stipulation:
A Company shall be organized for the purpose of purchasing lands,
improvement of town sites, or other purposes, and the same shall be divided in
the same proportion; that is, the original interests shall have one-half, and Jay
Cooke & Company shall have one-half.
Thus, Jay Cooke, foremost private banker in America, looked upon the great
enterprise to which he lent his fame and fortune, as a land gamble. More than
this! He was led into the disastrous undertaking (for him) chiefly through his
large personal investments in real estate in and about the frontier town of Duluth
—“the Zenith City of the Unsalted Seas.”
Having participated, as a shareholder, in the Philadelphia and Erie Land
Company, a land improvement company owning property in towns along the line
of the Philadelphia and Erie Railroad; and having invested with success in large
tracts of real estate in Ohio and other states, Jay Cooke turned to the barren
northwestern region at the head of the Great Lakes as a favorable field for
fabulous wealth. He soon became one of the largest landowners in northern
Minnesota. He took a share in the promotion and construction of the Lake
Superior and Mississippi Railroad Company and, in this connection, he and his
associates organized the Western Land Association, “to exploit Duluth and other
town sites and land privileges of the proposed railroad from St. Paul to Lake
Superior.” Thus, in various ways, the great financier became pecuniarily
interested in the much “blessed state of Minnesota.”1
Jay Cooke had no part in the original plan and promotion of the Northern
Pacific Railroad. This was the work of Josiah Perham, a Boston wool merchant

who, on July 2, 1864, obtained the charter from Congress. This charter granted,
in addition to free right of way, the alternate sections of public land ten miles on
both sides of the tracks “to aid in the construction of a railroad and telegraph line
from Lake Superior to Puget Sound on the Pacific Coast by the northern route.”
Perham, whose speculations in Maine timber lands have been spoken of,
associated with himself in the venture a number of prominent persons. Among
these were Senator Samuel S. Fessenden, of Maine, William Sears, George
Opdyke, Chauncey Vibbard, General John C. Frémont, William B. Ogden,
Leonard Sweet, J. Edgar Thomson, and Henry D. Cooke, brother of Jay Cooke.
They had the statutory assurance of the government that patents to the
contiguous land would be issued as each twenty-five miles was constructed, and
that the even numbered sections, retained by the United States, would not be
sold at less than $2.50 per acre. Altogether, the total grant was to be about
47,000,000 
acres—an 
astronomical 
acreage, 
almost 
beyond 
human
comprehension.
This free donation of a domain larger than all New England attracted little
public attention, and passed without much opposition. “It was a faulty measure,”
wrote John Sherman afterwards, “making excessive grants of public lands. . . . It
was an act of incorporation, with broad and general powers, carelessly defined,
and with scarcely any safeguards to protect the government in its lavish grants of
land. Some few amendments were made, but mostly in the interest of the
corporation, and the bill, finally, passed the Senate without any vote by yeas and
nays.”2
Perham did not delay initiating the project. He incorporated a company
commonly known as “Josiah Perham’s Peoples’ Pacific Railroad.” Stock
subscription books were opened in Boston and Portland, Me., almost
immediately, and 20,000 shares were subscribed by November, 1864.
Subscribers made a payment of only $10 per share on each $100 face value, and
nothing like the $100,000,000 or more required for construction could be
obtained. There was a time limit placed on the period of construction by
Congress, and Perham was forced to petition repeatedly for its extension.
Congress was liberal in this matter, but active construction had to be put off
because of lack of capital.
Perham sought the financial aid of Jay Cooke as early as 1865, but the
financier was then too busy with dealings in government bond issues to become
interested. Sir Morton Peto, an English promoter, who lost millions for British
capitalists in American railroad promotions, was also solicited, and it was

believed for a while that he would finance the Northern Pacific Railroad. But
European capital was timid about ventures in America then, and the collapse of
Peto’s Atlantic and Great Western resulted in still greater caution.
In the meantime, Jay Cooke became interested in the Lake Superior and
Mississippi Railroad, which was to extend 140 miles from St. Paul in a northerly
direction to Duluth, and thus connect Lake Superior with the Mississippi River.
This railroad also had a Congressional grant of about 1,500,000 acres, nearly all
of which was heavily timbered with pine, cedar and oak. Cooke became
connected with this project following a trip to Duluth, during which he inspected
the proposed route of the railroad. Directly and through agents, he bought large
areas in this section jointly for himself and his partner, William G. Moorehead.
He chose tracts covered with pine trees which, it was anticipated, would yield
timber for the saw mills and be a valuable product for eastern lumber markets.
While personally investigating his prospective purchases, he traveled for days in
the woods, sprained his ankle, and “wore his feet out,” but incidentally obtained,
in addition to the pineries, several parcels of good farming land near Duluth.
This site, he said, must “become an important point as a terminus of the road.”
Though he admitted that Duluth “may not equal Chicago, there must be a large
town there within a few years after the road shall be in operation.”3
Duluth, at this time, contained six or seven frame houses, a school and a land
office. Superior, Wis., on the south side of the Bay, an older settlement, also
presented a desolate and dilapidated appearance. John C. Breckinridge, of
Kentucky, had attempted to found a resort of Southerners there after the repeal of
the Missouri Compromise in 1854, believing that “it would become a watering
place where they could be free to take their slaves with them, deserting Saratoga,
Newport, and other northern resorts where such an accompaniment as a slave
was not permitted.” The project failed and, until Jay Cooke again set the works
going, Superior was merely a name on the map.
Cooke undoubtedly knew that his large land purchases in and around Duluth
would bring no return unless the place had rail connections with the interior. He,
therefore, assumed the task of financing the Lake Superior and Mississippi
Railroad. This was difficult, as the Civil War had absorbed home capital, and the
impending rupture between Bismark and Napoleon III discouraged European
bankers from placing investments in American securities. However, he had faith
in the Minnesota country. He continued to instruct his agent at Duluth to buy lots
in this “city,” where prices were already advancing and where land, which a few
years before was considered worthless, was then selling at $600 per acre.

Altogether, Cooke and Moorehead became the owners of about 40,000 acres in
and around Duluth. Rice Harper, his agent, in May, 1869, wrote him
encouragingly: “Men are coming every day, some to purchase city lots, some to
work on the railroad, and some mechanics to build the city. Every available place
is filled with new shanties and houses are going up.”4
He also received encouragement in his land speculation from other sources.
General George B. Sargent, who had been a government surveyor in the
Northwest, and who, in 1869, abandoned his brokerage business in New York, to
engage in land jobbing in Duluth, wrote to him, after his arrival there: “I give it
to you as my firm conviction that the terminus of your road on Lake Superior
will attain a larger growth in five years than any city . . . , in twenty. With this
belief I go there to build up a general land business . . . and to assist all in my
power in every way in building up a city.”5
Sargent offered his services in handling Cooke’s Duluth real estate, which
were accepted. The result was an agreement between them to carry on joint
operations for a period of five years. This contract was soon to have a significant
bearing on the relationship of Jay Cooke & Company with the Northern Pacific
Railroad.
As already noted, one of the projects growing out of Jay Cooke’s connection
with the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad was the “Western Land
Association of Minnesota.” The purpose of this company was similar to George
Francis Train’s Crédit Foncier of America. It sought to exploit Duluth and the
town sites and land privileges along the right of way of a projected railroad. The
first published report of the Western Land Association was made in 1871. The
company had received cash of $200,000 for its shares. Its receipts consisted of
$97,321 for real estate sold and $21,166 in interest on deferred payments, and it
paid out $182,390 for real estate purchases. But the most important item
mentioned in the report is the stock interest acquired in the company by the
Northern Pacific Railroad. In return for an agreement of the Northern Pacific to
fix its eastern terminus at Duluth and to connect with the Lake Superior and
Mississippi Railroad, the Western Land Association sold 2,000 shares of its
stock for $120,000 to the “Lake Superior and Puget Sound Company,” the real
estate subsidiary of the Northern Pacific.
A still more interesting item in this first report is the announcement that its
shares were sold at a tremendous premium. “The Management congratulates
itself on having seen its stock sold at a premium of 750%,” and “also upon the

fact that the property that cost $102,270 in cash, is now, after deducting sales
made, estimated by our agent, to have a cash value of $1,500,000.” This vast
increase in wealth could readily be passed on to the promoters, as in 1870, the
Minnesota Legislature enacted a law permitting the company to partition its land
holdings among the shareholders. The president of the company, Mr. Samuel M.
Felton, recommended that such apportionment be made. For, he said, “the
company will soon be attacked by the Press and in the Courts as a monopoly,
and being the creature of the law, may be subject to continual and expensive
annoyance.” Moreover, “the Western Land Association has now accomplished,
as a holder of a large number of town lots, the object for which it was organized,
. . . and kept out of the hands of unprogressive speculators the property they
would otherwise have held to the detriment of all large plans of improvement.”
The shareholders followed the advice of their president. Accordingly, Jay
Cooke, the Northern Pacific Company and a few other “insiders” received their
ratable proportion of approximately 13,416 town lots, located mostly in Duluth.
These lots, together with Cooke’s other investments in Duluth and vicinity, were
to stand him in good stead. He held on to them, and their sale was one of the
chief means by which he succeeded in rehabilitating his fortune after the failure
of his firm in 1873. Based upon the original cost to him, the profits from this
Duluth real estate were enormous.
When Cooke, largely because of his engrossment of lands in Minnesota,
became the banker for the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad, the next
logical step was to acquire an interest in the Northern Pacific Railroad. This was
a big proposition. But in May, 1869, he “had practically determined to take hold
of it.” His partners, however, insisted on expert advice in the matter. A group of
engineers and bankers was engaged to make a trip covering the whole route. The
country through which they were to pass was so wild and barren that a military
escort was provided. The region was described by General Sherman “as bad as
God ever made or anybody can scare up this side of Africa.” After many
difficulties, during which several of the exploring party deserted or were sent
home, the remaining members returned. The engineers gave favorable reports.
“The immense landed property of the company as a body in connection with
valuable town sites and water powers will ultimately be worth more than the
entire cost of the railroad,” wrote Cooke’s engineer, Mr. Milnor W. Roberts.
Henry Cooke, Jay Cooke’s brother, insisted that “if successful, the financing of
the Northern Pacific would be the grandest achievement of our lives.”
So Jay Cooke & Company, the leading banking house in America, became

identified with the Northern Pacific. It employed all its influence to favor and
forward the enterprise. Cooke personally was put in almost complete control, as
the original stockholders, including Josiah Perham, sold out their interests to
him. He began to offer publicly the Northern Pacific Railroad bonds, secured by
mortgage on the prospective vast land grant. He used the same forceful methods
that he had employed during the Civil War in selling United States bonds. He
advertised extensively. He organized touring parties to go over the route. He
published and widely distributed pamphlets describing in alluring and seductive
language the wealth and possibilities of the great region to be traversed by the
railroad. These pamphlets were embellished by a map of the proposed railroad
route, set off by a wide border representing the donated lands. The picture
extended from a point at Duluth to a point on Puget Sound. It resembled in shape
a banana. The Northern Pacific thus became known popularly as “Jay Cooke’s
Banana Belt”
But the banker did not act alone in the venture. He formed a “pool” to which
he invited a selected group. The “pool” was to subscribe $5,600,000, of which
$5,000,000 was represented by mortgage bonds and $600,000 by capital stock.
This amount was to be divided into twelve parts, to correspond with Jay Cooke
& Company’s twelve “interests” in the railroad company. Each part, therefore,
represented $416,666.67 in bonds and $50,000 in stock. But the parts could be
divided and subdivided to suit the various subscribers. Each subscriber was
assigned a proportionate interest in the capital stock of the railroad company.
This, to the amount of $40,000,000, was to be distributed as the construction
work proceeded, each of the twelve “interests” ultimately to obtain $3,333,000
of capital stock.
The capital stock was really not the most important or alluring bonus to
“pool” participants. Each member was to have, in addition, a share in the land
company, to be organized in connection with the railroad, “to own and improve
town sites, etc.” Interest in this land concern was divided into twenty-four parts,
“Jay Cooke & Company receiving twelve parts.” This half interest owned by the
banking house was thrown into the “pool”; the remainder went directly to the
Northern Pacific Railroad Company. The land company was capitalized at
$2,400,000, and the “pool” and the railroad company jointly were to supply the
capital as needed. The land company was duly incorporated as the “Lake
Superior and Puget Sound Company.” As already shown, its first acquisition was
the shares of Cooke’s Western Land Association of Minnesota, thus assuring the
fixing of the railroad’s eastern terminus at Duluth.

Needless to say, the most prominent men of the country participated in the
“pool.” Politicians, financiers, clergymen and leading journalists were invited to
become subscribers and participants. These hailed from all parts of the country.
There were, among others: Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, novelist and nerve specialist;
Hugh McCulloch, capitalist and cabinet officer; Thomas A. Scott, railroad
president and real estate magnate; and Schuyler Colfax, Vice-President and
Crédit Mobilier scandal victim.
Chief Justice Chase at first refused to participate because, as he remarked,
“though the prospect of future profit is very inviting, it is rather too remote for
one who does not expect to live longer than I do.” The Chief Justice, of course,
was very friendly with Cooke, whose services he had employed in raising
national loans; and when Cooke offered to supply the cash required for the
proffered subscription, he finally accepted “with thanks.” Then, by way of
encouragement to Cooke, he wrote while on a visit to Duluth: “Hurrah for the
Northern Pacific. I wish I was able to take four times as much as has been
assigned me. This is your greatest work. The world will be astonished by it.”
The land grant was the bait that attracted many of the subscribers, and this
fact was kept in mind by the locating engineers. John Gregory Smith, Governor
of Vermont, who assumed the direction of construction work, wrote to Cooke on
January 21, 1870, that “everything possible is being done to get the work
started.” Cooke then suggested to him that the locating engineers “should be
accompanied by land prospectors.”6 There was difficulty, however, in following
out the instruction because the snow in the woods “was too deep to make a
thorough exploration of the country on each side of the line”; nevertheless, a few
men who were accustomed to traveling on snowshoes, were employed as land
prospectors to accompany the engineers.
There was great rejoicing among the real estate operators in Duluth. Jay
Cooke’s control of the Northern Pacific assured to them the eastern terminus of
the line. But Chicago, and Superior, Wis., as well as other towns in Wisconsin
and Minnesota, were not satisfied, and entered their political protests. Sectional
jealousy, as well as town rivalry and town jobbing, was a serious handicap to the
Northern transcontinental railroad in obtaining national financial aid for the
project.
Moreover, strong opposition to the town-jobbing schemes developed in
Congress. James Harlan, of Iowa, on April 7, 1870, exclaimed in the Senate
chamber: “Is it not enough that you give them a vast quantity of public lands to
be sold for agricultural purposes? Must they be permitted to monopolize all the

town sites across half a continent in addition? It is quite doubtful to my mind
whether the right even to locate their depots is a proper thing to be entrusted to
these companies. . . . Companies not infrequently have located their depots in the
new states just far enough away from a town to ruin the existing town in order to
secure enhanced value to their lots that they sell at the new location.” To this
argument, Senator Stewart, of Nevada, rightfully answered that if the selection
of town sites and depots were taken away from the railroad promoters “there
would not be enough money realized from the whole land grant to locate their
stations upon.”7
In spite of Cooke’s efforts to create a speculation fever, the countless acres of
waste lands with occasional prospective town sites were not a lure to the general
public as they had been to the Northern Pacific promoters. Jay Cooke &
Company met with ill success, despite strenuous efforts to sell the railroad
company’s mortgage bonds. The efforts abroad were even more discouraging.
The Franco-Prussian War made capital scarce in Europe, and there was none to
spare for a gigantic speculative project overseas. The great banking house of
Rothschilds in London refused a participation in the proposition because it
involved a management as well as a financing problem to them. Hugh
McCulloch, on resigning from the secretaryship of the Treasury, was sent by Jay
Cooke to London to open a branch of his banking house there, in the effort to
dispose of “Northern Pacific 7.30 Per Cents.” He established the firm of “Jay
Cooke, McCulloch & Co.,” but success was lacking, and the London house
barely escaped failure along with the other Cooke banking concerns.
Thwarted at home and abroad in the endeavor to finance the land-burdened
transcontinental railroad, Jay Cooke & Company finally succumbed on
September 18, 1873. Not long thereafter, the Northern Pacific was also in
bankruptcy. But in the three years that Jay Cooke was the authority controlling
the destinies of the railroad, steps had been taken to exploit the increase in land
values and the favorable town-site locations along the proposed route. This was
done through the independent land holding concern, the Lake Superior and Puget
Sound Company, one-half interest in which, as already noted, was acquired by
Jay Cooke and his associates in the “pool.” The land company, under agreement
with the railroad company, was entitled to purchase such lands within the
Northern Pacific grant as it might apply for. As Cooke stated, in a letter dated
September 12, 1872, to Thomas H. Canfield, president of the Lake Superior and
Puget Sound Company, “I have always understood that the Puget Sound
Company had purchased in their names, or had the refusal of properties at all

points likely to be chosen by the Northern Pacific as its terminus.”
When the desired lands were not within the railroad’s grant, but came within
the “even section” retained by the government, the land company found it
expedient at times to use dummy entrymen fraudulently to acquire the property.
This was occasionally done to keep off “the roughs who had earlier infested the
lines of the Union Pacific.”
In 1873 difference arose between the land company and the railroad
company, “and the cleavage was so great that Mr. Cooke took steps to oust Mr.
Canfield from the presidency of the land company.” This led almost to the
disruption of the land company, but it remained intact even during the Northern
Pacific receivership. Shortly before the reorganization of the railroad in 1875, its
share capital was acquired by the successor corporation by payment of $721,630
in the defaulted bonds of the old bankrupt company.
Thus, the land company became a direct subsidiary of the railroad company,
and the interests of the two were then combined. Previously, the railroad
company had only a 50 per cent participation in the real or prospective profits of
the land company. Jay Cooke and his associates could claim the other 50 per
cent. As the operations of the land company had barely begun when the railroad
receivership halted construction activities, there was little opportunity for profit
of any kind. It is definitely known that Jay Cooke and his associates never drew
any dividends from this source.
The affairs of the land company were finally wound up in 1891. Its
remaining lands and lots in Puget Sound were turned over to a local real estate
concern for $72,000. Its other properties had been sold from time to time, and
the proceeds invested in the securities of the railroad company. The final
distribution of assets revealed little gain from the enterprise. On the whole, Jay
Cooke’s idea of engrossing favorable land sites did not work out any more
successfully than George Francis Train’s Crédit Foncier in connection with the
Union Pacific. Cooke’s personal investments in Duluth real estate, made prior to
his connection with the Northern Pacific, however, “panned out” well. This real
estate was gradually sold by him after the failure of his banking house, as a
means of liquidating its indebtedness.
A query here naturally arises: What became of the vast Congressional grant
to the Northern Pacific? And this is an interesting story:
Jay Cooke & Company, in their efforts to dispose of the Northern Pacific
lands, drew much advertising material from the magnificent land grant. The
fertility, climate and resources of the lands were painted in such glowing colors

as to bring forth public ridicule. Even Dr. Ellis Paxson Oberholtzer—Jay
Cooke’s eulogistic biographer—felt the urge to point this out. “The people,” he
wrote, “were so full of isothermal lines, comparative latitudes, and glowing facts
about climates, crops and distances from New York, Liverpool and Shanghai, of
new cities set in concentric circles upon the map of the American Northwest,
that they were ready to enjoy the satire of J. Proctor Knott. He held a seat in
Congress from Kentucky, and rose, on January 27, 1871, during the debate on
the St. Croix land bill, setting the House and the whole country in a roar of
laughter by a speech which was remembered for many a day.”8
Congressman Knott was well versed in English literature, for he applied to
the “Banana Belt” Lord Byron’s poem, adapted from Goethe, in which the
romantic Orient is depicted:
Know ye the land of the cedar and vine,
Where the flowers ever blossom, and the beams ever shine,
Where the light wings of Zephyr oppressed with perfume
Wax faint o’er the gardens of Gul in her bloom.
Where the citron and olive are fairest of fruit
And the voice of the nightingale never is mute;
Where the tints of the earth and the hues of the sky
In color though varied, in beauty may vie?
Duluth was the butt of Congressman Knott’s derision. It was a name, he said,
“for which his soul panted for years as a hart panteth for the water brooks.” But
where was the place? “It is situated,” he exclaimed, “somewhere near the
western part of Lake Superior, but there is no dot or other mark indicating its
location. I am unable to say whether it is confined to any particular spot, or
whether it is just running around loose. . . . I cannot really tell whether it is one
of those ethereal creations of intellectual frostwork, more intangible than the
rose tinted clouds of a summer sunset; one of those airy exhalations of the
speculators’ brain, which I am told are ever flitting in the form of towns and
cities along the lines of railroads with government subsidies” (Laughter).
Yet he was led to believe that wherever Duluth may be “the symmetry and
perfection of our planetary system would be incomplete without it.” “I see it
represented on this map,” he exclaimed, in exhibiting a chart of the “Banana
Belt,” “that Duluth is situated exactly half way between the latitudes of Paris and
Venice, so that gentlemen who have inhaled the exhilarating airs of one, or

basked in the golden sunlight of the other, may see at a glance that Duluth must
be a place of untold delights, a terrestrial paradise, fanned by the balmy zephyrs
of an eternal Spring, clothed in the gorgeous sheen of ever-blooming flowers,
and vocal with the silver melody of the choice songsters” (Laughter).9
Newspaper editors reprinted these remarks with zest, much to the
embarrassment of Cooke and other Northern Pacific “boosters.” The difficulties
of these gentlemen multiplied on an increasing scale. Despite their efforts to sell
land, little was actually disposed of. Owners of the Northern Pacific 7.30 per
cent bonds were given the right to convert at any time their holdings into the
land of the company for $2.50 per acre, at 110 per cent of face value. But few
took advantage of this proposition until after the financial collapse. Jay Cooke
then publicly advised bondholders to make the exchange as a way out of a bad
situation. He had more faith in the future value of the lands than in the
profitableness of the railroad.
Several large holders of Northern Pacific bonds, feeling that it was better to
own waste lands than a doubtful equity in a partially constructed railroad, the
completion of which was problematical, engrossed large tracts in the Red River
Valley, N. D. Here the virgin soil was in condition for cultivation, without the
expense of clearing. It was demonstrated by homesteaders that wheat could be
advantageously grown in this section. Hence, the bondholders became the
owners of the “bonanza farms.”
Some of these farms had acreages in excess of ten miles square. William
Dalrymple was the pioneer “bonanza farm” manager. During the years 1876 to
1879, he reported yields of more than 20 bushels of wheat per acre. A
homesteader, in 1874, rode into Fargo with 1,600 bushels of wheat raised on 40
acres. In this period, wheat prices were high, and net profits were made by
Dalrymple of from $10 to $12 per acre. The cost of the land exchanged for
bonds, even at their original offering price, was less than $2.00 per acre. At the
depreciated value of the bonds, during the railroad receivership, the cost of the
land was about 50 cents an acre.
General George W. Cass, B. P. Cheney, and several other officials and large
investors in Northern Pacific before 1873, exchanged their bonds for Red River
lands. With additional sections purchased from homesteaders, they became the
lords of the “bonanza farms.” They employed managers to work them, and in a
short time recovered the losses on their original investment. Corporations also
engrossed the lands by buying up the bonds, so wheat-growing became a real
business in Northern Pacific territory. The American and Sharon Land Company,

the Baldwin Corporation and other concerns consolidated large tracts and
worked them as a unit.
DULUTH, THE “ZENITH CITY OF THE UNSALTED SEAS,” IN 1871
(From Oberholtzer’s Jay Cooke, Financier of the Civil War)
HARVESTING ON A BONANZA FARM
(From Thayer’s Marvels of the New West)

Reports of the enormous profits obtained from the soil in the region attracted
speculators as well as farmers. As a result, lands that had been bought from
homesteaders and from disgruntled Northern Pacific bondholders at from 50
cents to $3 per acre, were selling in the nineties at from $40 to $60 per acre.
Gradually it became profitable to divide up large tracts for sale to individual
farmers. In this way most of the “bonanza farms,” which flourished from 1875 to
1900, have disappeared. Large ranches in the same area also have been broken
up. A few still remain, and are held for “sport” purposes, but experience has
demonstrated that small acreages give better satisfaction to the owners, both
politically and economically.
THE CIRCLE MARKS THE LOCATION OF THE “BONANZA FARMS”
Notwithstanding the beneficial effects of the policy of the Northern Pacific
promoters in converting their defaulted bonds into cultivated areas, there was
considerable contemporary complaint against the “bonanza farms.” William
Godwin Moody, a radical writer of the time, thus stated his objections in the
Atlantic Monthly, of January, 1880:
The owners of these large tracts have bonanzas, yielding great profits, not
one dollar of which is expended in beautifying and permanently improving their
vast estates, beyond that necessary for the care of stock and tools, nor in
sustaining population. Their homes, their pleasures, their family ties are not upon
the farms. Their wealth is flaunted in the gaieties and dissipations or expended in
building and developing some distant city or country. But the owner and

cultivator of the small farm in the neighborhood, upon which he has planted his
rooftree, and around which are gathered all his hopes and ambitions, finds it
impossible to pay his taxes, clothe and educate, or find any comfort for his wife
and little ones. The case of the small farmer is steadily going from bad to worse.
The two cannot exist together; the small farmer cannot compete with his gigantic
neighbor under present conditions. He will inevitably be swallowed up. It is at
best but a question of time.10
What a false prophecy—so far as the “bonanza farms” are concerned!
Millionaires do not run large farms for profit or engage in the risky business of
agricultural production, especially when they can sell the land for many times
the sum they have paid for it.
When the Northern Pacific Railway was reorganized in 1875, it reacquired
the magnificent grant which had been conditionally conveyed to its predecessor.
The machinery of land colonization, which had been interrupted by the failure of
Jay Cooke & Company, and the subsequent Panic of 1873, was again put in
motion. The energetic land-selling campaigns which had been inaugurated by
Cooke’s agents at home and abroad were intensified. A rush of population into
the region followed. Lands in Minnesota and Dakota rose rapidly in value. The
railroad sold land not only to settlers, but also to speculators. In numerous
instances, accordingly, the condition requiring purchasers to cultivate a certain
proportion of the land was omitted from the sales contract or was disregarded.
The Weyerhaeusers bought immense tracts to preserve for timbering. They thus
became the lumber kings of America.
Others bought tracts with a view to holding for later developing, or for town-
jobbing purposes. The eagerness of the railroad company to realize cash for its
patented lands in order to prosecute the construction work as far as Puget Sound
led it into making sales to speculators who, while retarding immigration and
settlement, became later serious competitors to the company in disposing of its
lands at advanced prices.
In the summer of 1881, control of the Northern Pacific passed to Henry
Villard, former German newspaper correspondent and agent of German banking
interests. Villard was already in charge of extensive railroad operations in the
Pacific Northwest, particularly in the Puget Sound area. In connection with these
activities, he had launched upon several town-jobbing schemes. The Northern
Pacific, as early as 1873, fixed upon Tacoma as its western terminus, and
organized the Tacoma Land Company to do the town jobbing. This was one of

the assets sought by Villard. Moreover, Villard, through his European
connections, was a strong force in attracting foreign emigrants to the Northern
Pacific lands, and while in charge of the company, he continued with increased
vigor to dispose of the lands. Colonization projects were carried out on a scale
not previously attempted. Land agents were employed in almost every country in
Europe, and, with the cooperation of the transatlantic steamship companies,
“assisted immigration” became so manifest as to lead to serious political
opposition on both sides of the Atlantic. The extent of the colonization activities
may be surmised from the statement in the Northern Pacific’s annual report to
stockholders, in 1882, that it employed 831 active local land agents in the United
States and Europe.
Another means of rapidly disposing of Northern Pacific lands after the
reorganization in 1875, was the creation by the railroad company of a preferred
stock, exchangeable at par value for the company’s lands. This was an attractive
bait to speculators. The stock could be purchased at a depreciated value, making
the cost of the land at from $1.00 to $1.25 per acre. If the lands rose in value
above the minimum price of $2.50 per acre, at which price the company was
selling directly to the public, the preferred shareholders could thus realize a
profit in making the exchange, since they were entitled to land at the minimum
price for their stock. The continuous resale of lands obtained in this way by
speculators created a serious competition against direct sales by the company,
until the entire preferred stock issue was redeemed. Thus, land gambling
followed the Northern Pacific throughout most of its history.
The vigorous land disposal policy was fruitful in its results. It was reported
to the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1917 that the gross receipts from
land sales by the Northern Pacific had amounted to $136,118,533, and there was
a large acreage still retained. The total cost of originally constructing the road
was estimated at $70,000,000.11 Accordingly, the prophecy of Mr. Milnor
Roberts, Jay Cooke’s engineer, was correct: “The immense landed property of
the company will be ultimately worth more than the entire cost of construction.”
But this is stating it mildly! The receipts reported by the company from its
land sales constitute only a part—and probably a minor part—of its gains from
its donated domain. The land and “improvement” companies, created as
subsidiaries of the railroad and owned by it, also made vast profits, which
trickled into the coffers of the company or its stockholders. These subsidiary
companies, consisting of coal, mining and other enterprises, have constituted the
mysterious “hidden assets” of the Northern Pacific Railway Company, by means

of which its shares were boosted by stock manipulators.
The Northwestern Improvement Company has been an important land-
holding subsidiary of the Northern Pacific. What business this company has been
actually engaged in, or what it owns, has been largely withheld from the public.
Its operations, however, have been profitable. In 1908 it declared a dividend
from accumulated surplus directly to the stockholders of the Northern Pacific
Railroad equal to 11.26 per cent on the capital stock of that company. In recent
years it has paid at times as much as $5,000,000 a year into the railroad
company’s treasury, and the Northern Pacific still owns the Northwestern
Improvement Company, so that more may be expected.
Certainly, Jay Cooke was not very wrong, after all, in his belief that, given
free lands and engrossed town sites, the construction of the Northern Pacific
would be a good business proposition. Though faith in this belief led to his
financial ruin within three years after backing it, he lived to see his expectations
realized. The remarkable growth of Duluth—his pet “Zenith City of the Unsalted
Seas”—materialized when it was linked by rails with the Pacific Northwest. It
then became an emporium of a vast inland empire. As previously told, this
permitted Cooke to convert his real estate there into the cash which, in time,
restored him to solvency. And the citizens of Duluth have acknowledged a debt
of gratitude to its prime promoter, who was chiefly responsible for its
remarkable growth, by erecting a suitable statue to him within its limits. Thus,
future generations may gaze on the kindly countenance of the great financier
whose bold and progressive spirit, in combination with human cupidity, helped
to put down civil strife and to build up a united nation from coast to coast.
1 Ellis Paxson Oberholtzer, Jay Cooke, Financier of the Civil War, Vol. II, p. III.
2 Forty Years in the House, Senate and Cabinet, Vol. I, p. 325.
3 Oberholtzer, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 105.
4 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 109.
5 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 110.
6 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 167.
7 Congressional Globe, “Senate,” April 7, 1870, p. 2491.
8 Oberholtzer, op. cit, Vol. II, p. 308.
9 Congressional Globe, Appendix, January 27, 1871, pp. 66–68.
10 William Godwin Moody, Land and Labor, p. 58.
11 “See Hearings before the Joint Congressional Committee on the Investigation of the Northern
Pacific Land Grants (March 18, 1925), p. 2020.

CHAPTER XV
“MAIN STREETS” AND “BROADWAYS”
THAT caustic commentator and caricaturist of American characteristics, Charles
Dickens, when he visited the United States in 1842 could not have failed to
notice the prevalence of town jobbing and “city building.” Picturing himself as
Martin Chuzzlewit, he is told, soon after landing, by Major Pawkins, “a most
distinguished genius for swindling, who could start a bank, or negotiate a loan or
form of land-jobbing company, (entailing ruin, pestilence, and death on hundreds
of families) with any gifted creature of the Union”:
“You have come to visit our country, sir, at a season of great commercial
depression,”
to which the journalist, Mr. Jefferson Brick, added:
“at a period of unprecedented stagnation.”
This was then undoubtedly true, and it is also true, as Dickens pointed out,
that in America, if “individual citizens, to a man, are to be believed, it always is
depressed, and always is stagnated, and always is at an alarming crisis, and never
was otherwise.”
Certainly, at the period whereof Dickens describes the adventures of the
naïve Martin Chuzzlewit in the Land of Liberty, many individual citizens of the
type of Major Pawkins could have looked back just a few years earlier, when
they accounted themselves millionaires and land magnates. But Americans, in
their business affairs; in their chase after the dollar; in their extravagant greed,
which Dickens and other of his traveling compatriots have caricatured to the
pleasure and satisfaction of their own countrymen, always look ahead. Things
will get better! Prosperity is coming! The country will grow! Lands will rise in
value! Buy now, and take advantage of low prices in the present depression, and
get rich in the approaching days of prosperity!
Such was the feeling when the disastrous collapse of 1837 had run its course.

Land jobbing and town-site booming were stifled, but they were not dead. Land
speculation still remained as an American business, and though full recovery did
not come until after a decade, it began to be manifested after only a few years of
almost complete cessation.
That Martin Chuzzlewit should be made a victim of American optimism and
faith in the rapid growth and development of an expanding territory is not a mere
fictional concept of a successful satirist. Chuzzlewit invested in New Eden,—a
boom “city,” mind you, not a town or a colony, as was wont to be the practice in
the earlier period of land speculation. Eden was a city project. This surprised the
credulous Martin:
“Why, I had no idea it was a city,” he exclaimed, glancing at the map on the
wall.
“Oh, it’s a city,” [answered the agent].
A flourishing city, too! [remarks Dickens, in his own language] An
architectural city! There were [on the map] banks, churches, cathedrals, market
places, factories, hotels, stores, mansions, wharves; an exchange, a theatre,
public buildings of all kinds down to the office of the Eden Stinger, a daily
journal,—all faithfully depicted in the view before them.
All this, of course, was put down for literary effect. But the hyperboles
connected with real estate developments have persisted down to the present. And
there is no necessary intention of fraud or deceit on the part of the many city
boosters, past and present, who start out with great ideas of what they can
accomplish in placing on the map a new metropolis, bearing usually their own
names or those of old-world centers, and having their “Main Streets” and
“Broadways.”
Ambitious capitalists, imbued with optimism, have not only innocently
plotted great emporiums on shallow creeks, rocky bays or country crossroads,
but they have projected canals, railways, waterworks and other “internal
improvements” in the fond belief that their ideas of future growth and prosperity
were correct. “Internal improvements” were political bywords in the early days
of the Republic. Though the phrase is rarely used in these modern times, projects
of a similar nature, to be accomplished with public or private funds, are
constantly on the American calendar. “Although,” as Jefferson Brick remarked,
“unprecedented stagnation exists,” yet the speculative and adventuresome genius
in American character always plans great and fantastic things.

. . . . .
Following the recuperative period produced as an aftermath of the ’37 Panic,
the Middle Southwest, now comprising Kansas, Oklahoma and Nebraska, took
up the old mania with the old-time vigor. This territory had been neglected prior
to 1850, for several reasons. Its settlement had been delayed because of the
slavery controversy. Northerners would not go there because of their dislike for
the institution. Southerners were not attracted because cotton did not thrive on its
alluvial soil. They were not grain growers. The adherents of both parties were
deterred by the presence of the large Indian tribes. These occupants kept the
government from making the land available for settlers. But the rush began when
the Indians were forced out and the section opened up for settlement. Then, the
free-staters strove against the pro-slavery party for ascendancy in the disputed
region. There followed a perfect mania for town sites among the first settlers.
“All wanted to get rich in town speculations,” wrote H. Miles Moore,
himself a city promoter in this region, “and every chap who had squatted upon a
decent quarter section near a creek or a crossroad, turned it into a town site, and
if he could only succeed in roping in a half dozen other fools, who had a little
money or were like himself, town-crazy, they had a company formed, the town
surveyed and laid off into blocks, lots, streets, alleys, public squares, etc., and
several hundred lithographic maps struck off; and their pockets full of town
shares of this great city in embryo,—they were happy.” And he adds:
Of houses and improvements in the town,—that important part of the necessary
and future success and prosperity of the town—never entered their heads, or if it
did, they only reasoned that the suckers and gudgeons who bought their shares
and lots, could build if they wanted to. These schemes generally lasted from
three to six months, sometimes a little longer, depending somewhat upon how
successful the proprietors had been in disposing of shares and lots to “greenies”
from the other States.1
Albert D. Richardson, in his once famous book, Beyond the Mississippi, gave
a similar description of the city building mania in Kansas about 1857:
When Themistocles at a feast was asked to play upon a musical instrument, he
replied, “I cannot fiddle, but I know how to make a small town a great city!”
Every Kansan thought himself a Themistocles . . . The genie of real estate
speculation touched them with his wand . . . Young men, who never before

owned fifty dollars at once, a few weeks after reaching Kansas, possessed full
pockets, with town shares by the score.
On paper all these towns were magnificent. Their superbly lithographed
maps adorned the walls of every place of resort. The stranger studying one of
these fancied that New Babylon was surpassed only by its namesake of old. Its
great parks, opera houses, churches, universities, railway depots and steamboat
landing made New York and St. Louis insignificant in comparison. But if the
newcomer had the unusual wisdom to visit the prophetic city before purchasing
lots, he learned the difference between fact and fancy . . . In most cases he would
find one or two rough cabins, with perhaps a tent and an Indian canoe in the
river.2
It was under conditions such as are described by these contemporary
observers that Leavenworth, Topeka, Lawrence and other towns or “cities” in
Kansas were started. Leavenworth was laid out by the Leavenworth Association,
a group of land jobbers who, in 1854, pooled their squatter claims. They
surveyed and laid out the city, and then sold off the lots. By December 6, 1856,
they had completed the sale and closed out the town-jobbing business. Like
other similar town-site plans, they erected public buildings and set aside lots for
educational and religious purposes.
In a similar way, Topeka, which later became the capital of Kansas, was
founded in 1854. This city was partially the result of the efforts of the Emigrant
Aid Society of Boston to flood Kansas with “free-staters.” The society made it
generally known that its purpose was not to foster land speculation. As Amos
Lawrence, one of its philanthropic founders, remarked, “It did not propose to
stand between the squatter and the government.” But the “settlers” sent there
through its financial assistance, soon contracted the land and town-jobbing fever.

(From Richardson’s Beyond the Mississippi)
THE CITY OF NEW BABYLON ON PAPER
The actual founder of Topeka was Cyrus K. Holliday, who came from
Pennsylvania to Kansas in 1854 with $20,000, and began to speculate in town
lots. He was later the promoter of the Santa Fé Railroad. He purchased a tract
near Tecumseh, Kan., and secured it by a Wyandotte “float.” This was a
government warrant authorizing a Wyandotte Indian or his assigns to locate on a
piece of unoccupied land wherever he might select it. He then formed the
Topeka Town Association, and became its first president. “The selection of the
site,” according to Holliday’s own story, “was not an accident; it offered every
advantage of a town site. Here was a great river, plenty of water, and above all,
two great trails of the continent, Fort Leavenworth and St. Joe to Santa Fé, and
Independence to California, crossed at this point.”

(From Richardson’s Beyond the Mississippi)
THE CITY OF NEW BABYLON IN FACT
Holliday had high ideas of city development. The shareholders of the Topeka
Association provided that lots were to be sold only with the condition that
“ornamental trees were to be planted in front, and that no liquor was to be sold
on the premises.” They were especially liberal in donating ground for
educational and religious purposes. The Emigrant Aid Society obtained large
holdings in the city as a reward for its colonizing efforts. Such colonization
afforded prospective lot purchasers to the city promoters.
A road to California from the city was planned, and a charter was drawn up
for a railroad line from the place to St. Joseph, Mo. This was the forerunner of
the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé system. Moreover, Holliday, through his
political influence with the free-staters, succeeded, in 1859, in establishing the
territorial capital at Topeka. All this was done or planned in the short space of
five years. Such was, and still is, the intense Yankee energy, when incited both
by anti-slavery sentiments and by the lure of land speculation.
. . . . .
City building thus became the standard form of real estate speculation in the
middle of the nineteenth century. The nation was becoming mature. It began to
clothe itself in an industrial garb. Agriculture was no longer the predominent
occupation of its citizens. It was displaced by the use of mechanical power, the
invention of machinery, the extraction of raw materials, the building of great
factories, the construction of vast transportation systems, and by constantly
broadening markets. All this required coöperation of large human aggregates,

and a concentration of population within narrow limits. Vacant land speculation
had gradually declined. City planning has taken its place. Martin Chuzzlewit,
English architect, may have been deluded in the prospect of finding professional
work in Eden in the early eighteen-forties, but he could have had many
opportunities since that time, for “city builders” had much use for his services.
City building found its most fertile field in the Far West. A great deal of it
was associated with railroad construction. Chicago, Milwaukee, Duluth, Omaha,
Council Bluffs, Tacoma, Seattle, Spokane and a host of pioneer settlements took
on a genuine urban aspect after railroad communication was acquired. Some had
their periods of rapid advance culminating in a boom. Others expanded and
developed gradually. Several have declined. Some are still in the ascendant—and
still others await the rod of the real estate promoter and speculator to give them a
conspicuous place on the map.
Following the rail movement westward, the “city builders” wended their way
through the plains and deserts to the Rocky Mountains, and then beyond.
Population centers in the Dakotas, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Wyoming,
Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona and all the “Great West” received at their births
the title of “cities.” When, through cuts in the mountain passes, the iron bands
were carried beyond the Rockies and the Sierras, the city builders moved along
with them. They reached the neighborhood of the Pacific Coast in the early
eighties. The work of these “boomers” in and around Los Angeles may be taken
as typical.
As early as 1868, the former “pueblo” of Los Angeles, in Southern
California,—once the seat of a Spanish mission,—gave financial assistance
towards the construction of the Los Angeles and San Pedro Railroad. When,
shortly thereafter, the Southern Pacific was planning a railroad from San
Francisco by a southerly route to the East, the citizens of Los Angeles were
desirous of having this line pass through their town. The place, moreover, was a
port and could be made a Pacific outlet for this new transcontinental venture. At
this time, however, its total population was less than 6,000. The promoters of the
Southern Pacific demanded a large payment for the privilege of bringing their
tracks to the place. Collis P. Huntington, the company’s promoter, insisted that
the railroad be given 5 per cent of the assessed valuation of all Los Angeles
County. To this proposition the citizens agreed. They passed over to the Southern
Pacific $200,000 in stock of the Los Angeles and San Pedro Railroad, and about
$377,000 in cash, acquired by an issue of the municipality’s 7 per cent bonds. In
addition, the city of Los Angeles donated 60 acres of ground for a depot. These

donations amounted to more than $100 for each inhabitant of the place, but they
were satisfied. The groundwork was laid for a real estate boom.
Then the Panic of 1873 came and caused a delay. Although the Southern
Pacific was completed to Los Angeles before 1882, and the city had started “to
grow” in consequence, it was not until five years thereafter that a veritable
“boom” took place. In the meantime, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé
Railroad had stretched rival tracks across the Sierras and had also reached Los
Angeles. A railroad war ensued. Tickets were sold from the Missouri River to
the Pacific Coast from $1 to $15. The town jobbers thus found it convenient to
transfer their operations from the Middle West to the Pacific Coast.
If these “developers” had any honest scruples in their dealings prior to their
arrival in California, they certainly lost them before they crossed the Rockies.
They mapped out new mushroom cities all over Los Angeles County. Within
three months no less than thirteen town sites were plotted along the rails of the
Santa Fé, in Los Angeles and San Bernardino counties in California—a distance
of 136 miles. At the same time, almost as many new ones were marked off on
the line of the Southern Pacific. The boundaries of each new “city” almost
overlapped those of its neighbors. The wooden street markers and lot pegs gave
the appearance of a battlefield cemetery. Lots were offered in large quantities
and just as eagerly bought, both on the spot and at other places.
The founding of the “city” of Azusa may be taken as typical. When the day
was fixed for the first sale of the lots in this place, anxious buyers waited before
the office of the real estate company all through the preceding night. The
advance places in line were sold by those holding them at prices ranging from
$300 to $1,000. The sale, of course, was a complete success to the promoters.
But today the “City of Azusa,” Cal., is a mere hamlet. “Like most others of these
phantom cities, it soon faded almost from view.” In many cases, within two
years the white stakes that marked off the boulevards and avenues “have been
buried by the plowshare or gnawed away by the teeth of time.”3
The county recorde’s office of Los Angeles furnishes evidence of the extent
of the boom. Its files of subdivisions and resubdivisions of tracts and blocks, in
addition to the cities and towns, for the single year of 1887, fill twenty large map
books. In that year real estate transactions, as recorded by deeds in Los Angeles
alone, approximated $100,000,000. This, however, does not tell half the story,
since the bulk of the sales were merely contracts or options to buy. As is usual in
land speculations, liberal terms of payment were granted, and when the collapse
occurred in 1888, thousands of contracts were defaulted, and thus do not appear

on the records of real estate transactions. Land which sold at $100 per acre in
1886, changed hands at $1,500 an acre the following year. City lots, .which in
1886 brought $500, sold for $5,000 in 1887, and fell back again to the old price
at the end of the following year. Between January 1, 1887, and July 1, 1889,
sixty new towns and cities, covering about 80,000 acres, were laid out in Los
Angeles County, and these at the end of the boom period had an aggregate
population of less than 3,500.4
This Los Angeles boom, like so many others before and since, was carried
on by professional town jobbers. It was not a native product. At this time,
immigration into the region consisted of a few souls, but many “real estate
operators.” These, taking advantage of the tourist travel to Southern California
induced by cheap railroad rates, advertised the section far and wide as a
favorable health resort and a coming commercial emporium. Alluring
lithographed posters were displayed in Los Angeles and other places, and “land
offices” were set up not only in the new “cities,” but in distant towns. Charles
Dickens’ description of the Eden City office, in which Martin Chuzzlewit made
his unfortunate real estate investment, is an ungarnished prototype of those
which have been set up from that day to this. The furnishings of the offices may
have been improved and the agents may have become more polished in behavior,
but the purpose and the methods have always been the same.
And to show that Dickens’ “Eden City,” back in the forties, was not so much
an exaggerated fictitious conception as patriotic Americans, who took offense at
the English novelist’s characterizations, have maintained, one merely has to refer
to the operations of Simon Homberg, the most unprincipled speculator in the Los
Angeles boom of 1887. Homberg bought from the government two separate
quarter sections of land bordering on the Mojave Desert. One of these he
correctly named “Border City,” the other he called “Manchester.”5 Without
going to the expense of having either site surveyed into lots and staked off, he
plotted it in squares and blocks. He then offered the lots in various eastern cities
whose inhabitants were ignorant of their barren nature, and sold about 4,000 of
them. He had the deeds already printed, so that all that was necessary was the
insertion of names, and the consideration. The lots cost Homberg about 10 cents
each, but he sold them for as much as $250. “Border City” has disappeared from
the map of California, and “Manchester” is today so small as to be almost
unknown.
T. S. Van Dyke, the southern California author, seems to deride the idea that

the Los Angeles boom of the eighties was “analogous to any South Sea Bubble,
or oil or mining stock swindle.” In his fanciful account of the speculation, he
states: “The actors in this great game were not ignorant or poor people, and from
end to end there was scarcely anything in it that could be called a swindle. With
a few exceptions, the principal victims were men of means. Most of them, and
certainly the most reckless of them, were men who in some branch of business
had been successful . . . All had the amplest time to revise their judgments and
investigate the conditions . . . Some of the silliest of the lot were men who,
during the first three-fourths of the excitement kept carefully out of it, and did
nothing but sneer at the folly of those who were in it”6
Of course, Los Angeles County is marked out by nature to be a wonderful
country, and in the years subsequent to its first great boom it has taken its place
in the sun. In fact, the county today is one large aggregation of cities and towns.
But its rapid growth, though accompanied by real estate boosting and town
jobbing, has been placed on a firm foundation. Tourist tales, moving picture
progress and petroleum projects, together with a magnificent port development,
have combined to make it the most populous portion of the Golden State. Unlike
Florida, neither epidemics nor hurricanes have yet marred its marvelous rise in
real estate values.
. . . . .
But the growth and grandeur of Los Angeles as a Pacific port, fostered by
real estate booms, may be matched to some extent by the rival cities located on
Puget Sound. As San Francisco has looked with jealous eyes on the
preponderant material advance of the once inconspicuous “pueblo”, six hundred
miles to the south, so Tacoma, the original terminus and Pacific gateway of that
stupendous railroad undertaking, the Northern Pacific, now looks upon Seattle,
its neighbor, twenty-four miles up the Sound. These two constantly “boosted”
ports have watched each other like opposing prize fighters in the ring. Real
estate operators and “land companies” were largely responsible for this.
The Northern Pacific promoters, we have seen, were on the lookout for
profits from town-site speculation. When Tacoma was selected as the western
end of the transcontinental rail line, the Tacoma Land Company was forthwith
organized and acquired 3,000 acres of tide lands in the town, and 13,000 acres of
additional neighboring lands. Like the Lake Superior and Puget Sound
Company, which engrossed valuable properties in Duluth, one-half of the capital

stock of the Tacoma Land Company was retained by the Northern Pacific
promoters and one-half taken by the railroad corporation. Town booming was
begun by the company long before the rails reached the shores of Puget Sound.
A magnificent hotel was built and the lots offered for sale.
MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT SELECTS HIS LOT IN THE THRIVING CITY OF EDEN

THE THRIVING CITY OF EDEN “IN FACT”
“PHIZ,” THE DICKENS ILLUSTRATOR, DEPICTS AMERICAN TOWN JOBBING

MAKING MORE LAND IN FLORIDA TO MEET THE DEMAND OF SPECULATORS

THE DAVIS ISLAND COUNTRY CLUB BUILT ON LAND THAT A YEAR PREVIOUS WAS UNDER
WATER
There were no wild efforts, however, to dispose of the company’s holdings.
It pursued a conservative policy in its sales to newcomers, avoiding a strong
semblance of excited town jobbing. Its operations were handicapped by the slow
construction progress of the Northern Pacific. Before the lines of this railroad
were extended to the coast, a rail connection was already made with the
Columbia River, by which, with water navigation, the interior country could be
reached. The slow growth of the city, and the gradual advance of its rival,
Seattle, which became the terminus of Jim Hill’s Great Northern Railroad, did
not permit highly profitable real estate transactions.
Finally, in 1899, the Tacoma Land Company underwent a reorganization. It
sold its water front lots to the Northern Pacific Railroad Company, but retained
its real estate in and about Tacoma to the value of about $1,500,000. This
property has been largely closed out, and the Tacoma Land Company is now
inoperative.
While the original town-site concern was thus gradually going out of
business, the City of Tacoma was in a stagnant situation. It was adversely
affected by the business depression following 1893. The title to nearly all the

real estate in the city had passed, under foreclosure proceedings, to eastern
mortgagees. Its population dwindled. In the meantime, Seattle, its rival, was
being pushed into a boom. The Great Northern came there in 1892, and Henry
Villard—who had taken the Northern Pacific in tow in 1881—extended a branch
line to the place. So Seattle had two rail lines to play against each other. Its real
estate mongers could say to the Northern Pacific, “If you make improvements in
Tacoma, we will give business to the Great Northern”; and to the Great
Northern, “If you build to Tacoma, we will favor the Northern Pacific.”
Thus, Seattle and Tacoma became deadly rivals. The opposing real estate
boosters carried on a continuous warfare. Both had their Chambers of
Commerce, and their “Booster Clubs,” and both had developers of
“subdivisions” and “suburbs.” Large sums were expended in advertising.
Industries were enticed to locate within the city limits of each. Their lots were
widely offered on easy terms to all comers.
A boom for both cities came with the gold rush to Alaska in 1897. Their
respective populations increased after that, and along with it the number of real
estate agents. Visitors and prospective lot purchasers were urged to invest in
Seattle, because that was the “Chicago of the Pacific”; and, if they chanced to
cross over to Tacoma, why, there was the place to get rich with “lots” because
(as the conspicuous sign over the town’s harbor indicated) “you could just watch
Tacoma grow.” They certainly did some business, too, those real estators. Sales
doubled, tripled and quadrupled during the years 1905, 1906 and 1907. Then
came the financial panic. The “whooping up” of the cities continued, but sales of
lots were at a standstill.
Lyman C. Smith, Syracuse, N. Y., typewriter manufacturer, was one of the
eastern capitalists who was attracted to Seattle real estate soon after the Klondike
gold discovery in 1897. Henry Whitcomb, an envelope manufacturer of
Worcester, Mass., was another. Whitcomb is said to have invested $113,000 in
city lots in Seattle. He soon sold at a handsome profit, then increased his
investments and again sold off much of his holdings. He built a large office
building in the city as a token of his interest in the locality.
Smith would not be outdone by Whitcomb. With the advice of his son, Burns
Lyman Smith, he erected the tallest office structure outside of New York City—a
sort of replica of the Wool-worth Building in the nation’s metropolis. It stands
now like a central tombstone in a soldiers’ cemetery—and looks as much out of
place as a bay tree in a cabbage patch. But it is a lasting memorial of the great
wealth which may be acquired in quiet and cautious real estate dealings in a

boom town.
. . . . .
Not all the important speculative schemes of city building can be covered in
this survey. Time and space would hardly suffice for that. Neither would it be
worth while to list and describe fully the many land booms that have been,
throughout almost a century, a common occurrence in American social and
industrial evolution. A citation of a few of the conspicuous speculations of this
nature will be given by way of illustration rather than attempt to cover the whole
field.
One of the most interesting, if not the most successful, of “city building”
ventures in recent times is that of Newport News, Va. The development of this
important southern seaport and industrial center is largely the work of Collis P.
Huntington, California pioneer millionaire and railroad builder. Huntington, after
the successful completion of his western railroad ventures, came East and
acquired control of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad Company. In order to
obtain a satisfactory tidewater terminus for his railroad, he conceived the idea of
building a port in Hampton Roads, Va., at a site having a harbor sufficiently deep
to accommodate large ocean steamers. The place selected was given the name of
“Newport News.” It is reported that prior to the Civil War, Huntington, while
traveling through Virginia, chanced to visit the site and at once realized its
possibilities. A company, incorporated as the “Old Dominion Land Company,”
was organized in 1880 to acquire the site. A boom was started. Not only was the
terminus of the Chesapeake and Ohio fixed at the place, but Huntington
constructed one of the largest drydocks and shipbuilding plants on the Atlantic
seaboard.
All this sounds unromantic, but the Sierra poet, Joaquin Miller, immortalized
it in pleasing verse:
NEWPORT NEWS
The huge sea monster, the “Merrimac,”
The mad sea monster, the “Monitor,”
You may sweep the sea, peer forward and back,
But never a sign or a sound of war.
A vulture or two in the heavens blue,
A sweet town building, a boatsman call,

The far sea song of a pleasure crew
The sound of hammers. And that is all.
And where are the monsters that tore this main?
And where are the monsters that shook this shore?
The sea grew mad! And the shore shot flame!
The mad sea monsters they are no more.
The palm, and the pine, and the sea sands brown,
The far sea-songs of the pleasure crews;
The air like balm in the building town—
And that is a picture of Newport News.
The Old Dominion Land Company continued to operate Newport News until
1895, when a city charter was obtained from the State of Virginia. The president
of the company, in referring to the change of municipal status, remarked in his
annual report that, in the interests of the company, the charter was “reasonable as
to its nature, care having been taken to avoid the imposing of extreme taxation or
other burdens.” At that time the company still owned 156 lots in the city, and a
thirty-acre farm. In addition, it owned the Newport News Lighting and Water
Company. Most of the company’s lots had been sold on deferred payments, so
with high taxes they were likely to revert to the company; but with a city charter,
the expenses previously incurred by the land company in keeping the streets of
the town in order would be borne by the taxpayers.
The Old Dominion Land Company, regarded in the light of present-day high
capitalization, would be considered a puny affair. In 1896 its total capitalization
was but $1,962,736. The cost of its real estate was put down at $1,585,289, and
its buildings, including its hotel, cost but $1,118,564. Its other investments
hardly exceeded $500,000. Profits, moreover, were not large. Only recently has
it practically wound up its affairs. In 1930 the assessed valuation of taxable
property in the city of Newport News was about $35,000,000. Thus, real estate
values there have increased marvelously.
Elaborate suburban development is probably the most conspicuous phase of
real estate speculation in recent times. And there has been enough of it, too! So
much, in fact, that no one investigator can reasonably attempt to cover the whole
story. Every large city is encrusted with its “grand subdivisions” and “suburban
developments.” Some have been successful. Some have fared indifferently. But
many have failed.

As a rule, these suburban developments have been the work of a single
capitalist, or of a small group of promoters. Occasionally, they have been a
means of stock speculation. The “Ocean View Land Improvement Company” of
Staten Island, incorporated in New York in the early seventies, is an instance of a
combination of land and stock speculation. Its capital was only $120,000, but
each of the 1,200 shares represented one lot of land. In order to attract
purchasers of the shares, a lottery scheme was devised. “As soon as the stock is
all taken,” the pamphlet advertising the plan announced, “a distribution will be
made among the stockholders by lot of the property of the company in a manner
described by its laws. Immediately upon conclusion of such distribution, the
stockholders, upon surrendering their certificates of stock, will be entitled to
receive a warranty deed of the lot or lots to which they are entitled.” The prize
lot to be drawn in the lottery comprised the “late owner’s homestead.” The “late
owner” agreed to pay $20,000 in cash to the person drawing it, or to lease it until
May, 1872, at $1,500 per year. Thus, as stated in the pamphlet, “The temptation
to speculate is very great,” and in order to encourage those inclined towards
speculation, an offer of free transportation to the location was made.
This, of course, is but one case, selected largely by way of illustration. There
have been thousands similar to it, and the “prize lot” or “free lot” to the lucky
ticket holder has been used as a bait innumerable times. Auctioning off city and
suburban lots, accompanied by brass bands, oratorical and athletic contests,
theatrical performances and the like, have been common occurrences in modern
real estate operations. The appetite for town-lot speculation, like religious
revivals and political propaganda, must be sharpened by sweetmeats and
garnishments, or it is likely to vanish.
One of the largest real estate corporations in America, in recent times, which
fostered elaborate suburban development schemes, was the American Real
Estate Company. This concern was organized in 1888, with the insignificant
capital of $100,000. Operating under this small capitalization, held by the
“insiders,” it gradually unloaded on the public millions of dollars of its “real
estate bonds” and “certificates.”
The American Real Estate Company adopted the so-called “thrift scheme” of
obtaining funds, i.e., selling its bonds on instalment payments. In this way, the
investing public bore practically the whole risk of its operations. It never built up
reserves to cover contingencies or possible losses. In 1913, at the height of its
prosperity, its total surplus was but $2,147,789; its capital (including $1,000,000
of 7 per cent preferred stock sold to “bondholders and clients”) was $1,100,000

and its bonded indebtedness $13,660,900. In addition to this indebtedness, all its
real estate was mortgaged. At this time, against total assets consisting of real
estate and improvements carried at about $26,000,000, its total indebtedness was
almost $25,000,000. Its cash resources were generally below $1,000,000.
All went well with the company until 1914, when real estate values in and
around New York began to slump. Without reserves and with large
“developments” under way in Yonkers, in the Bronx, and in Queens, the concern
was forced into bankruptcy in 1917. Soon after taking charge of the company’s
affairs, the receivers discovered underhanded transactions inuring to the benefit
of the officers, and suits for recovery were instituted against them.
Notwithstanding efforts at reorganization to preserve the equities of the
bondholders, the affairs of the company underwent complete liquidation, a
matter requiring more than a decade. Its security holders, of course, fared badly.
Although the American Real Estate Company’s securities were sold
throughout the country, it confined its real estate operations to New York and
vicinity. Its most ambitious undertaking was a development in the city of
Yonkers known as “Park Hill on the Hudson.” A carefully edited pamphlet,
undoubtedly written by a “literary expert,” revealed the beauties and allurements
of this splendid suburb. In bold letters on the first page, the reader is informed:
Without romance or exaggeration we have set forth herewith as simply and as
briefly as possible some of the essential features of the “Suburb Beautiful.” No
words can adequately describe its charm. Our only hope is that the story which
word and picture herein present may attract you to see and know it for yourself.
Yet, “word and picture” did not bring desired results. When the company
failed, it still held more than 1,300 lots in Yonkers. In addition, it had purchased
a tract comprising almost 3,000 lots in Astoria, on Long Island, opposite New
York—few of which were sold. It also owned office buildings, apartment houses
and vacant lots in New York City, all heavily mortgaged, and all acquired with
funds received through high pressure salesmanship from “innocent investors.”
No record of modern suburban real estate speculation in the United States
would be complete without the story of the Van Sweringens’ masterful creation
of Shaker Heights, situated on a plateau just east of Cleveland, Ohio. It is said
that, as poor newspaper boys, Oris P. and Mantis J. Van Sweringen were
accustomed to tramp over the pasture country overlooking the busy city of
Cleveland, where a Shaker community was once established. When “Oris P.,”
the elder of the two, reached the age of twenty-one, he became a free-lance real

estate speculator, and took in his younger brother as a partner. They obtained
control of a 1,500-acre tract on Shaker Heights which a syndicate of Buffalo
capitalists had tried in vain for eighteen years to sell. They innovated the idea of
reselling parts of this property in small blocks, with a guarantee to repurchase at
a slightly higher price, if buyers were dissatisfied. Thus, the buyers helped to
finance their deal. Through cash received from the sale of additional options and
contracts, they expanded their holdings until they finally obtained the whole
acreage of Shaker Heights.
They carried out vast development operations. They built broad boulevards;
they laid out elaborate golf links; excavated lakes, and donated spacious plots for
parks and playgrounds. All this was regarded as visionary by the old-fashioned
real estate dealers of Cleveland. But the method of wholesaling lots by the Van
Sweringens on a guaranteed repurchase basis seemed to work well. It accelerated
sales and gave them funds to carry out further purchases, and as their customers
soon resold at a profit, they again came back for more “blocks.”
But the Van Sweringens lacked one important real estate factor to make their
project a complete success. They needed cheap and rapid transportation to the
heart of Cleveland. The city street railways would not extend their lines to
Shaker Heights. The traffic from this suburb did not warrant the expense. The
Van Sweringens, however, got the transportation facilities. They offered to
donate the right of way through the section and to pay interest for a limited
period on the cost of construction.
The offer was accepted. The railway construction was expensive, because
grade crossings were eliminated, and excellent physical equipment installed, but
it gave the residents high speed express transportation and attracted many
working in Cleveland to make their homes on Shaker Heights.
As a suburban real estate development, the Van Sweringen venture is the
outstanding success of its kind. In 1900 the land was appraised at $240,000. In
1924 it was valued, without buildings, at $30,000,000. Its projectors became
nationally famous. They were greatly encouraged. They extended their real
estate operations into the city of Cleveland. Here they encountered some
competition. The Nickel Plate Railroad, in contemplation of the construction of a
terminal, was buying up land in their neighborhood. And Cleveland needed a
Union passenger station.
This gave the Van Sweringens an idea. Because the Interstate Commerce
Commission had ordered the New York Central to part with the ownership of the
Nickel Plate, the railroad could be bought. They offered to buy it. The bid was

accepted, and partly with their own capital, and partly with borrowed funds, they
graduated from real estate developers to railroad magnates. But they continued
to buy up Cleveland real estate and construct magnificent buildings. What is
more, they continued, on a still larger scale, to buy up and develop railroads. All
this was well and good. Their names became bywords for successful railroad
combinations. Wall Street gave them assistance and “Van Sweringen babies”
were jerked up to high price levels among railroad shares. Moreover, their own
securities, by means of which they financed their manifold railroad acquisitions,
were eagerly absorbed by investors and speculators.
Then the 1929 crash came! It drastically shrunk the value of their real estate
and their railroad shares.
The final outcome is still in the lap of the gods!
1 H. Miles Moore, Early History of Leavenworth, p. 60.
2 Beyond the Mississippi, p. 58. See the cuts showing New Babylon as planned and New Babylon as it
really was on the following pages.
3 J. M. Guinn, History of California, and an extended History of Los Angeles, Vol. I, pp. 260, 261.
4Ibid., p. 263.
5Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 262, 263.
6T. S. Van Dyke, Millionaires of a Day: The Inside History of the Great Southern California Boom, pp.
2-3.

CHAPTER XVI
FLORIDA—THE LATEST PHASE
THE semi-tropical, semi-submerged State of Florida has ever been an inspirer of
fantastic dreams. Ponce de León believed that he would find there the Fountain
of Youth. Others who came after him believed that there the rainbow ends, and
that merely to stake off a part of its soil would give them access to the fabulous
pot of gold. Youth, health, wealth, and freedom from inheritance taxes have been
the lures to the sunshine and everglades of this Riviera of America.
Yet, American speculators heard little of Florida until the Spanish king, in
1819, was induced to pass over to the control of the United States this half-
sunken and troublesome peninsula. To him it was as worthless as the Sahara
Desert. And his “governors” in the territory had granted away its soil with much
the same feeling. Millions of acres had been donated under all sorts of pretexts.
These “Spanish grants” were almost as troublesome to the United States
Government as those in Louisiana and California, and the records of Congress
and the courts have been cluttered with the claims to them. Some were upheld,
others were denied. Whether legitimate or not, they attracted the land grabbers.
Some were assigned to “companies” and “associations” and made the basis of
vast land-jobbing enterprises.
One of the largest of the early land claims in Florida was known as the
“Forbes Purchase.” An English firm in St. Augustine, under the name of Panton,
Leslie and Company, in 1806, acquired from the Creek Indians, with the consent
of the Spanish Government, a tract of land east of the Apalachicola River, and
bordering on the Gulf of Mexico, in West Florida. Its area in all comprised about
1,400,000 acres. The Indians had “committed depredations” against the firm, and
by way of compensation deeded them the land. John Forbes, a member of the
firm of Panton, Leslie and Company, succeeded to the claim. It was later
acquired by Robert Mitchel and associates. The United States Supreme Court
confirmed the title in 1835.1 Soon thereafter the successful litigants organized

the “Apalachicola Land Company of Florida,” and founded the town of
Apalachicola. In 1842 a patent to the property was received from the United
States.
In the meantime, both Indians and squatters had settled on the lands. The
latter were driven off by the company, but many settled near by, to start a rival
town and a rival land boom. Apalachicola (I must apologize for the name) was
developed into a “Gulf port,” with streets, wharves and warehouses. Lots in the
city and lands in the interior were offered for sale. Cotton could be grown on
these lands and the Apalachicola River offered favorable means of transport.
Both the lands and the lots were advertised in New York City. Altogether, there
were about 1,800 dwelling lots, 521 business lots, and 43 wharf lots. Sales were
extremely slow, however, and many who bought lots and lands on credit terms
turned them back to the company. Handicaps to the proprietors were numerous.
It was a period of business depression. Occasional storms, moreover, destroyed
property of the company, and the neighboring Seminole Indians were from time
to time on the war path. Finally, in 1845, the company, or its creditors, auctioned
off parcels of its vast property in New York City.
In the meantime, the dispossessed former occupants of the Forbes Purchase
were busy boosting their new city of “St. Joseph.” Unlike the Apalachicola Land
Company, they had the support of local interests. Various Florida banks became
interested in the “Wimico and St. Joseph Land Company.” Ben Charres, a banker
and planter of Tallahassee, became its president. With this financial support, they
built a short railroad, the first in Florida, from Lake Wimico to Apalachicola
Bay. They established the Bank of St. Joseph with $1,000,000 capital; the St.
Joseph Insurance Company was similarly capitalized. Other efforts were made to
make St. Joseph a modern city and ocean port. The place grew in importance, as
indicated by the fact that the first constitutional convention in Florida met there
in 1838.
While all this was going on, lots in the town were being sold and resold.
Local newspapers were issued as “boosting sheets.” A regular advertising
warfare was carried on with the rival town of Apalachicola. The result was that
every newspaper of the period in Florida and the adjacent states was filled with
material relating to the Wimico and St. Joseph Company. The St. Joseph Times
was “the most quoted sheet in Florida.” It had a close “follow-up” in the
Apalachicola Gazette.
Conditions in the “boom town” soon began to resemble those of the recent
Florida episode. Houses were insufficient to accommodate the increasing

population. Rents were extortionate, wages extremely high. Everything might
have continued favorable—but, Fate, then as in recent times, brought about a
complete collapse. A West Indian hurricane swept over St. Joseph in the autumn
of 1840, and almost completely ruined it. In 1841 an epidemic of yellow fever
completed the destruction. The town was abandoned. Some of the inhabitants
took their belongings and emigrated to Texas. “G.T.T.” (Gone to Texas), a
common phrase at the time, as previously noted, was posted on their deserted
homes. The place today is as difficult to discover as the ruin of an Aztec
temple.2
There were other Florida land companies in these early days, but it is not
considered essential to our story to give details regarding them. The
Apalachicola Land Company and its rival, the St. Joseph Company, are briefly
described merely as evidence that “land booming” and “city building” are old
affairs in this region. The Florida real estate promoter in recent years, therefore,
did not engage in a pioneer occupation by taking his business to this state.
Florida lands and lots in Florida towns and cities have been hawked about for
over a century.
Yet, in some respects, the recent glaring episode of land speculation in
Florida is a new phase. True, similar outbursts of speculative fever have occurred
before. But the field of speculation, when confined to a single state, at no
previous period has been conducted with such whole-hearted cooperation by all
other sections of the country. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, from the Great
Lakes to the Gulf, the people were infected with the Florida mania. Land in
Florida—anywhere in Florida—attracted the attention of the whole country, to
the almost complete exclusion of land booms, elsewhere. In this respect, the
recent Florida land gamble is unique.
How did it start? No one can give a completely satisfactory answer. Yet its
origin is not a mystery! For several decades Florida was the nation’s winter
playground. From millionaires down to farmers, all classes of the population
made vacation visits there. The wheat growers of the West found it an opportune
place to pass the idle and dreary months when their lands lay fallow. The
capitalists of the North found it a convenient country in which to escape the
rigors of severe winters, and to relax from business cares. Florida beaches and
Florida camps thus became notable health resorts. The tropical vegetation, and
the semi-tropical climate were alluring. It was something different from the
environment of almost every other part of the nation.

What could be more natural, then, while passing hours of idleness in this
national winter playground, than the purchase of a winter home or a large tract of
land there? One becomes “an easy mark” during vacations, and is apt to spend
more lavishly and purchase more liberally than when at home. Countless Florida
tourists became Florida real estate proprietors. The millionaires bought large
estates; the lesser rich bought town and beach lots.
Interest was thus accumulated in Florida real estate. Those who bought told
others of their purchases. Millionaires would not be outdone by other
millionaires. Rivalry and jealousy led to acquisitions of Florida “estates” and to
the engrossment of large and favorably situated tracts. Moreover, the Florida
waste and unoccupied lands could be bought relatively cheap, compared with
land values in more settled industrial and farming sections. There were immense
stretches of undeveloped coast lands and countless acres of untilled soil that
were continually on the market. Much of this was held in large acreages by
individual owners, and could be readily acquired at wholesale. Florida, in this
respect, was “America’s last frontier.”
Because of these conditions, public attention was centered on Florida real
estate. Just one large, well-advertised “promotion scheme” could set the pot of
speculation boiling.
Another factor leading to the recent outburst of speculation in Florida was
the creation of transportation facilities there. The Florida East Coast Railroad, a
monumental enterprise conceived as a millionaire’s hobby, was completed in
1900. It opened up for settlement a vast area, relatively unoccupied, in the
southern part of the peninsula. As its traffic grew, it enlarged its equipment.
Other railroad lines were constructed on both east and west coasts. In addition,
new and improved highways were cut through. The Everglades were in process
of being drained by state and local appropriations. Steamship lines also aided.
Thus, the frontier character of the territory was changed. As in the western
country, a “boom” followed the creation of transportation and communication
facilities.
The boom was not a sudden outburst. There were rumblings for several
years. Vast schemes of development were set on foot. The draining of the
Everglades, the building of a canal and harbor at Lake Worth, the development
of Palm Beach, the planning of Coral Gables and a hundred other projects gave a
favorable setting. The year 1924 marks the beginning of the rush period. It
followed the first mass invasion of real estate promoters and “developers,”
though many had arrived by means of peaceful penetration for several years

previous. The climax was reached in 1925. In 1926 came the collapse.
Who were the instigators of the fiasco, and who were responsible for its
execution?
The original promoters were all men of mark. There was Henry B. Plant,
who came to Florida as early as 1861, and who built railroads and hotels there.
He founded Plant City, a successful real estate development. Next, there is Henry
M. Flagler, Standard Oil executive, who visited Florida in 1885. The possibilities
of the state as a winter playground were revealed to him. He built at St.
Augustine, the Ponce de León and the Alcazar hotels, dreams of massive
architecture. His creative ambitions broadened. He built the Florida East Coast
Railroad—a marvelous, though foolhardy engineering feat—and adorned its
lines with palatial hotels. He also bought heavily of Florida lands. “Flagler
Street,” the principal thoroughfare in Miami, and the headquarters of the late,
though not lamented, real estate fraternity, is an adequate reminder of this master
builder’s benefactions to the Peninsula State. Then, there is Barron Collier, the
advertising magnate, who developed a whole county that bears his name. This
county was established in 1923 and embraces over 1,200,000 acres. When he
acquired it, the land had never been touched by plowshare or other human tools.
Collier started to make his vast estate a garden spot, building roads, draining
swamps and establishing a town. He invested his millions in these ventures and
persuaded others to do the same by this proof of his faith in them. In speaking of
the great future of Collier County, and its increasing population, he once
remarked, poetically: “The light of the fireflies will be dimmed by the electric
lights in happy homes, and the chirp of the katydids will be chorused by the
laughter of happy children.”
Many others contributed to Florida’s expected greatness. The “Great
Commoner” and perennial presidential candidate, William Jennings Bryan, made
his residence there. Although his limited wealth prevented him from entering
upon great development schemes, his contribution was equally effective, for his
pen and his masterful voice gave extremely valuable aid and encouragement.
Roger W. Babson, stock market forecaster and dispenser of voluminous
statistics, also lent a hand. J. C. Penney, merchant and philanthropist, and John
and Charles Ringling, circus operators, likewise contributed capital and
enterprise, and raised their voices in praise of the Land of the Everglades. Others
of this type, such as T. Coleman DuPont, August Heckscher and Jesse
Livermore, could be mentioned, but it is not necessary to furnish a full list.
When millionaires, statesmen and investment counselors—men of repute,

foresight and discretion—added the weight of their influence to the persuasions
of ordinary professional real estate promoters, then it was no wonder that the
population went mad over the fabulous possibilities of pecuniary gain in the
scrub lands and everglades of the Florida peninsula.
Thus encouraged by the aid of shrewd and enterprising capitalists, and by the
nascent prosperity following in the wake of the post-war depression, the Florida
people vigorously laid out the groundwork of the “boom.” In March, 1925, there
was convened at West Palm Beach a meeting of the representative business men
from all parts of the state. Needless to say, the “real estaters” and “developers”
were there in force. They organized themselves into the Florida Development
Board and committed themselves to spend a million and a half dollars or more, if
necessary, for publicity during the next five years. They began a series of
boosting advertisements, art pamphlets, books and all other devices to attract the
fortune seeker as well as the tourist to the confines of the state. Tourists and
fortune seekers are almost indistinguishable. Tourists have surplus funds,
otherwise they could not travel, and a goodly proportion of those who went to
Florida merely for a holiday came back property owners and local taxpayers.
One could hardly venture outside his hotel room in a Florida resort without
stumbling over a half dozen high pressure real estate salesmen.
The advertising campaign of the Florida Development Board, assisted by the
Florida land and real estate mortgage companies, brought to their aid the
magazines and the press. Articles describing the allurements of the “American
Riviera,” the “Nation’s Winter Playground,” “America’s Winter Paradise,” as
well as the immense agricultural, mineral and industrial resources of Florida,
appeared in the leading literary and business periodicals. They occupied
prominent positions in the Sunday editions and “travel numbers” of the
newspapers. At the height of the excited boom, the Saturday Evening Post, the
most widely read of American popular periodicals, began a Florida series by
Thomas McMorrow and Kenneth Roberts, and continued them at almost regular
intervals throughout the period of the boom.3
Even after the “crash” came, following the hurricane which swept away the
paper fortunes of multitudes, the “boosting” continued. Florida would not only
recover, but a new and greater period of prosperity would be ushered in. “The
suckers will not stop coming,” one could almost read between the lines. “They
have made only a beginning of buying into Florida. Those who lost their
‘binders’ may be discouraged, but there are others. Suckers are born every
minute, and some can still be induced to put their savings in resurrected swamp

lands and wind-swept beaches.”
When the host of real estate promoters, gathered from all parts of the United
States, concentrated in Florida, then the real boom was on. Most of these
mongers were not “to the manor born.” They were like the “carpetbaggers” of
the South in post-Civil War days. They came to fill their pockets, not to make the
country rich. They cared not whom they duped, nor what became of their
projects when once they had unloaded them. The foolish mortals who hung
around their “offices,” and paid for “binders,” “options” and “contracts,” were
merely fish in their nets. Nor were they, in many cases, merely “crooked
dealers.” As already noted, the vast “developments” engineered during the boom
period had the backing of great names in present-day financial circles. There
were among these men many who transferred their activities from stock market
operations or legitimate real estate dealings in settled communities to a field
where they saw opportunities of greater profit. When the collapse came, they
withdrew and resumed their former occupations.
The methods of unloading lots and farms in the Florida gamble do not differ
from those described in the discussion of previous episodes in land speculation
throughout the country’s history. Charles Dickens could have depicted Martin
Chuzzlewit buying a lot in a Florida “development” in 1925, as readily and in
the same language as he did eighty-five years earlier. Of course, every
development in Florida was to be a “city,” and the lots were sold before the
project was even launched. This is well described by Mr. Walter C. Hill, vice-
president of the Retail Credit Company of Atlanta:
Lots were bought from blue prints. They look better that way. Then the buyer
gets the promoter’s vision, can see the splendid curving boulevards, the yacht
basin, the parks lined with leaning cocoanut trees, and flaming hibiscus. The
salesmen can show the expected lines of heavy travel and help select a double
(two-lot) corner for business, or a quiet water-front retreat suitable for a winter
home. To go see the lot—well,—it isn’t done. Often it is not practicable, for
most of the lots are sold “predevelopment.” The boulevards are yet to be laid, the
yacht basin must be pumped out, and the excavated dirt used to raise the
proposed lots above water or bog level. Then they will be staked, the planning
done, and the owner can find his lot.4

Courtesy of the “Miami Herald”
SKYSCRAPERS RISING ON THE MIAMI WATERFRONT IN NOVEMBER, 1925

AN ALLURING AND ARTISTIC FULL-PAGE ADVERTISEMENT OF BOCA RATON
Whenever a new “development” was conceived, the promoters immediately

advertised it in the newspapers and by handbills, giving descriptions of the
location, extent, special features and the approximate prices of the lots.
Reservations were made by depositing 10 per cent of the proposed price, and
these reservations were taken up in the order received, and attended to before the
regular sale of lots was opened. The holder of the reservation was thus permitted
to select from a beautifully drawn plan, on which lots and prices were marked,
the sites he desired. He then got a “binder,” i.e., an option on the selected lot,
which he could resell immediately. This gave him a thrill, for he felt that he was
the owner of Florida real estate—even if actually in a swamp—and he hoped to
transfer his “purchase” at a fabulous profit to an absentee or latecomer. This
quick turnover was frequently a necessity to the “binder-boy” (i.e., the “option
buyer”) because he had not the cash required to make the first payment of one-
fourth the purchase price within thirty days after the “binder” was issued to him.
Speculation in “binders” was a leading occupation in Florida, and those who
indulged in it were popularly termed “binder-boys.”
During the height of the Florida boom, the sales of the new “developments”
were markedly successful. Around Miami, the “subdivisions,” with the
exception of the very large ones like Coral Gables and Boca Raton, were often
sold out on the first day of sale. The money values represented in such sales
amounted, in many cases, to millions. Inside lots, existing on blue prints only,
would sell from $8,000 to $20,000 each, and seashore sites ranged from $20,000
to $75,000. Prices were lower on the inland developments, unless they happened
to be located on the Dixie Highway or some other favorite “trail”—then prices
mounted again to a point approximating the Miami Beach “subdivisions.” When
lots were bought by dealers or local speculators, they were almost immediately
offered for resale in the “real estate offices” of the city. Non-residents eventually
became the lot owners. Possibly a few may still hold them. However, they are
relatively few, since in a great majority of cases the “lot” speculators have
defaulted on their purchase contracts. The “developers” have received back their
properties, but the sheriff in most cases has made the final distribution; or the
municipality or county becomes the ultimate owner through nonpayment of the
taxes levied upon them. Many tracts purchased for hundreds of thousands of
dollars have been released from private ownership because of nonpayment of a
few hundred dollars in back taxes.
An enumeration of all the “developments” in Florida during the years 1924-
26 would cover many pages. These stretched for hundreds of miles both north
and south of Miami. They covered the west coast of the state from the southerly

tip up to and beyond Cedar Keys. And fancy names they had, too! The Spanish
language appears to have been quite an advertising asset to the “developers.”
Pasadena, Santa Monica, Buena Vista, Rio Vista, and other pleasant sounding
appellations, so agreeable to Californians, were adopted, as well as names from
Italy, such as Naples, Venice, Indrio, Riviera, and those of other famous
Mediterranean resorts. Common Spanish terms were even adopted, such as “Los
Gatos” (the Cats) and “Boca Raton” (Rat’s Jaw), hideous in the vernacular but,
of course, high sounding, since the real meaning was unknown to most of the
speculators.
Every important city, town or “development” had its slogan. Miami was
“The Magic City”; Orlando, “The City Beautiful”; Hollywood, “The Golden
Gate of the South”; St. Petersburg, “The Sunshine City”; and Fort Lauderdale,
“The Tropical Wonderland.” Indrio, a development that never “panned out,” was
called “Florida’s Newest and Most Beautiful,” although it is still largely a wind-
swept stretch of sand and scrub. And Hollywood, “Golden Gate of the South,”
leads to nowhere. Coral Gables, the largest of the projected “cities,” was to be
the “Venice of America.” To make the slogan effective, its promoters are said to
have actually imported Venice-built gondolas, and expert gondoliers were
expressly ordered to complete the architectural motif.
One of the means of luring tourists and others into making “investments”
was the free motor-bus trips. It was not necessary to hire taxis or use railroad
trains to travel in Florida. One could have ridden almost over all the state by
merely evincing an interest in real estate. This, of course, is an old “bait,”
employed by the real estate gentry of the nation for many years. Truly, the land
business has long been on a low ethical plane.
As usual in excited periods of speculation, fraud, villainy and deceit
prevailed in the Florida fiasco. The notorious crook, Charles Ponzi, went there to
recoup the loss of his ill-gotten gains from his “get-rich-quick” scheme in
Boston. He organized the “Charpon Land Syndicate” which claimed it had an
option on an undeveloped tract of land “near Jacksonville” (though it was
actually 65 miles from the place). He sought to obtain the capital required for
“this purchase” by selling “unit certificates of indebtedness” at $310 per unit. He
guaranteed a dividend of 200 per cent on each certificate within three months.
His real estate activities, however, were cut short, as he was indicted and, on
April 2, 1926, convicted for violating the trust laws of the State of Florida.
Another fraudulent undertaking was the “Florida Cities Finance Company,”
which promoted “Fulford by the Sea.” Its founder was also apprehended and

jailed, along with a number of other downright swindlers who were trailed
through the efforts of the National Better Business Bureau and the United States
Post Office Department. Both before and after the collapse of the boom, there
were hundreds of arrests, convictions, suits and countersuits growing out of the
frenzied real estate transactions of the period.
All this naturally could not go on without attracting public attention. The
sober-minded element of the nation’s business men looked upon it with
amazement and scorn. Occasional and sporadic warnings were issued, and
attempts were made to stem the tide of wild speculation. The Massachusetts
Savings Bank League, in November, 1925, issued a statement cautioning
depositors not to withdraw money to speculate in Florida real estate. The
Investment Bankers Association set aside a whole session of their annual
convention to consider means of checking the wildcat land gambles. Their
members complained of loss of business due to customers placing funds in
Florida lands and in buying Florida 8 per cent mortgage bonds, advertised with
the slogan “where the security is a certainty.”
To all this the Florida “boosters” naturally objected. When the secretary of
the National Credit Association pointed out the danger of inflated Florida
credits, the Florida Credit Association petitioned for his removal from office.
The Better Business Bureau of New York City, late in 1925, began a thorough
investigation of questionable Florida “developments,” and its revelations were
labeled by the Florida “boosters” as malicious and false propaganda.
Thus, the Florida real estate fraternity did not stand idly by when these
warnings appeared in the press and other publications. They also had their
defenders. By way of outside support there was organized in New York City, in
1925, a Florida defense association, composed of speculators and dealers in
Florida real estate. W. W. Rose, the president of the Florida Real Estate
Association, and his associates were “on deck” whenever a statement or an
address, traducing the practices and motives of his constituency, appeared. They
built up elaborate defenses. A sporadic break in security prices on the New York
Stock Exchange in February and March, 1926, was seized upon by them as an
object lesson. “Isn’t it better,” they pointed out, “for the public to invest in sound
real estate values than in fluctuating and questionable securities?” A loss of four
billion dollars in stock market values occurred in one month! Such a loss, they
pointed out, could never occur in Florida real estate. There, “security was a
certainty.”
Special newspapers and magazines were published, and books were written

and widely distributed, defending the “boom.” Charles Donald Fox, in The Truth
About Florida, published in December, 1925, when the bubble had expanded to
maximum proportions, (as stated by Mr. Meryle Stanley Rukeyser, who wrote
his “introduction”), endeavored to perform “a useful task in making available
ascertainable facts about climate, soil, other natural resources and traffic
conditions.” Yet Mr. Fox boldly stated in his text: “I believe the so-called ‘boom’
will last forever, for there can be no let-up to the development of a state which
offers so much to so many classes of people.”5 And he added: “Let me record
once again. There is no boom in Florida. The state is merely doing in a few years
what it would ordinarily take decades to do. It is doing all this on a permanent
basis. It is building for the future. It is turning the tables on the usual
development procedure—it is speeding up the future and making it the present.”
Of course, Mr. Fox did not take into consideration hurricanes and financial
panics, which retard the future and agonizingly prolong the present.
No less extravagant is the language of another inspired volume, entitled
Florida in the Making, published less than a year later, and written jointly by
Frank Parker Stockbridge, a Florida real estate operator, and John Holliday
Perry, a journalist. In a “Foreword,” John W. Martin, then governor of Florida,
pointed out that the authors have not merely written a book, “they have
performed a public service, the value of which cannot be overestimated,” and he
adds: “No one can read ‘Florida in the Making’ without being convinced that all
which has yet been done in Florida is but a beginning towards what is to come.”
The authors, however, did not, as Charles Donald Fox had done, answer
directly the question: “Will the Florida boom continue?” But they point out some
pertinent facts, as follows:
The question which skeptics are asking everywhere is “When will the
Florida boom collapse?”
Men asked the same question in George Washington’s day about the Ohio
country, when Cincinnati was as young as Miami is today. They doubted in
Lincoln’s time whether Iowa land prices were not too high. Forty years ago one
could hear dire predictions of the imminent collapse of a “boom” town on Lake
Michigan, called Chicago. Only recently similar forecasts were being broadcast
of the ultimate fate of Los Angeles and all southern California.
Florida’s boom differs only in detail from all the other land booms which,
added together, comprise practically all there is of consequence in American
history. Geography and topography are different; principles and methods are

unchanged. The historical test serves, then, as the horoscope to resolve one’s
doubts withal. Nobody who bought and held on in Ohio, in Iowa, in Los Angeles
or Chicago, lost, all made profits. “Shoestring” speculators, investors who lost
faith, lost out on the temporary setbacks which all the historical land booms
have experienced. Many more, those who acted on the time-honored Wall Street
axiom that nobody ever went broke by taking profits, got in and got out on the
successive upward waves, taking out more than they put in. But the solid
backbone of every land development is the settler. Fluctuations in money value
of his land do not affect him, if the land yields him the comfort of the livelihood
he seeks.6
All this is very well! But land speculators do not care to wait a quarter
century or more to bring real values up to the level of the inflated values which
they themselves create in boom times. Fortunes have been lost, not made, by
buying and paying for future values, without taking into consideration the
accumulation of interest, taxes and other expenses that have only Death as a
companion factor of certainty. Manhattan Island may have been worth more than
the twenty-four dollars in merchandise the Dutch paid for it, but the shrewd
Hollanders would never have been willing to look ahead a hundred years or so,
and pay the Indians a price which it might then be worth.
The arguments of the peerless orator, William Jennings Bryan, and the
renowned forecaster, Mr. Roger W. Babson, were not less convincing than those
contained in the writings already mentioned. Mr. Bryan pointed out Florida’s
qualities as an earthly paradise and as a place of high moral and religious
culture. Mr. Babson stressed especially Florida’s wonderful economic
possibilities: “Some feel that Florida is being overdone,” wrote Mr. Babson in
1926, “but, based on the history of other sections of the country, I believe that
the great movement in Florida has only started and that values in many sections
will double, triple, and quadruple during the next eight years.” Accordingly, he,
in company with a host of other commentators, was firmly of the belief that the
marvelous development of Florida in the boom years was “just a preliminary of
the marvelous development that lies before it.”7
Bryan’s boosting talk was hardly less moderate. “The cities in Florida are
friendly rivals,” he wrote in a companion article to Mr. Babson’s, “but they are
united in the determination to make Florida one of the foremost states of the
Union, and they are anxious for the State to be a leader in education and morals
as they are that the State shall lead in material progress.”

Undoubtedly, some instigators of the Florida boom, especially those who
bought and resold early in the proceedings, realized handsome profits. Several
“millionaire winter residents,” who previously had bought estates merely for
their personal enjoyment, later sold to “developers” with fabulous gains. On the
other hand, others who contracted the speculation fever, and endeavored to
undertake developments on their own account, lost heavily. But aside from
individual gains and losses, the boom period was one of great prosperity in
Florida. Its wealth, as measured in current values, increased in a short period of
two years to tremendous proportions. From 1923 to 1926, the state’s population
(possibly, excluding the “immigrant” real estate salesmen) increased from
1,057,400 to 1,290,350, or 22 per cent, and bank deposits from $225,000,000 to
$850,000,000. Assessed valuations rose in proportion, and building operations in
two years quintupled. The transportation facilities were inadequate to handle the
passengers and goods which poured into the state in the excited days of rising
real estate values. The effect was a high cost of living, high rates of wages and
inadequate living quarters.
When these obstructions to material progress were being seriously
encountered, the clouds of recession began to gather on the horizon. The
frenzied activities of the summer and fall of 1925 were carried over into 1926,
but the eagerness of speculators to bid up values began gradually to disappear.
The “developers” and “boosters” endeavored in vain to maintain the speculative
interest in their undertakings. The municipal authorities assisted, and large issues
of public obligations were floated to carry out improvement plans. The
borrowing “cities” were, however, soon unable to meet the interest burden on
this new indebtedness.
These efforts were being strenuously put forth, when the same benign Nature
which made Florida the “Land of Flowers” and “An Earthly Paradise,” reversed
the process. As in years past, on September 19, 1926, a terriffic West Indian
hurricane blew over the southern portion of the peninsula and interrupted the
dreams of “easy money” which the very atmosphere seemed to have engendered
during the preceding three years. The debacle was complete. The hordes of real
estate developers, high pressure salesmen, feature writers and private
“investors,” which had invaded the territory “in Pullmans and Packards,” were
now confronted with desolation and despair. They hastily departed.
The banks were drawn on heavily, and their swollen deposits faded away.
From a high level of $850,000,000 at the end of 1925, deposits in Florida banks
dropped to $550,000,000 at the end of 1926, and reached still lower figures

thereafter. An epidemic of bank failures was the result. Florida real estate
mortgages, with “security a certainty,” were a drug on the market. One
“development” after another lapsed. Instalment payments on lots practically
ceased. The bubble had burst!
There were a few attempts at resurrection. The state authorities even decried
the publication of the extent of the hurricane damage, because of its
discouraging effects on land values. An effort was made to turn away the Red
Cross from its relief work. Newspapers and magazines were told that Florida’s
marvelous progress would continue. A typical statement was contained in the
Wall Street Journal, October 8, 1926. It quoted Mr. Peter O. Knight, of Tampa,
counsel of the Seaboard Air Line Railway, as saying: “The same Florida is still
there with its magnificent resources, its wonderful climate, and its geographical
position. It is the Riviera of America, and always will be, within twenty-four
hours or less, of eighty millions of prosperous people, and the same causes
which developed Florida so rapidly in the last few years, will cause a greater and
more permanent Florida to be developed in the future.”
. . . . .
Among the many magnificent schemes of modern city building, with real
estate speculation as the prime motive, two projects stand out prominently in the
recent Florida boom. These are “Coral Gables” and “Boca Raton.” Both are
remarkable for the magnificence and the tremendous enterprise with which they
were developed. Both have failed in the execution of the original grandiose
conception as outlined by the promoters.
Coral Gables is the older, and was nearer to completion when the collapse
came. It was originated by George Edgar Merrick—a native Floridian, who as a
boy dwelt on a farm not far from Miami. According to an inspired booklet,
beautifully illustrated, and under the authorship of Rex Beach, the novelist
(though it is copyrighted by Merrick himself), “the boy Merrick listened, and as
he grew older, his dream took shape. He built a city. His city is set among pines
and palms, and flaming poincianas, and he called it Coral Gables. It is indeed a
city of coral gables, and of soft tinted coral walls. Upon the fields he used to till,
the stones have blossomed; those ragged stubborn rocks he used to curse, he has
called to bloom into an eternal flower.”
Merrick, in his early development activities, received the financial support of
local interests. His first idea was an exclusive inland suburb. As his plans

developed, and as the oncoming boom caused a rapid growth of Miami,—“like a
tropical weed,”—the project was expanded into a sea-front community, with
forty miles of beach land. It was to be a “modified Mediterranean—a new
Venice, with silent pools, canals and lagoons,” and even more beautiful, since no
lot purchaser was allowed to put up a dwelling or other structure in it that would
destroy the harmony of the general design. And, above all, it was to be a
complete city, with business zones, with workers’ districts, and with favorite
locations for the rich and well-to-do. The “development,” therefore, broke away
from Miami, and received a city charter.
Thus, Coral Gables “was worked out with pencil and ruler,” and nourished
with widespread publicity.8 It became the show-place of Miami. It resembled, in
one aspect, a real estate exchange, and in another, a great county fair.
Entertainments, concerts, lectures, all the old-time “booming” accompaniments,
were resorted to. The “Hon.” William Jennings Bryan was employed to deliver
his masterful orations there almost daily. In these he stressed the high moral and
religious tone of Florida, along with its fine climate and its excellent resources.
It was worth the price of a lot to hear him,—and if the urge to “buy at once”
overtook any of his audience, the high pressure real estate salesman was near to
take advantage of the psychological moment. The old “land office business” was
revived in a new atmosphere. And Florida—“America’s Last Frontier”—was
bursting its seams. To make more room for expansion, the “underwater” acreage
was also offered for sale and settlement, and magnificent islands created out of
the ocean’s depths.
George Merrick and his associates planned to spend “ten years of hard work
and a hundred millions of hard money” to complete the enterprise. Every effort
was made to conceal the commercial aspect by romantic and æsthetic
surroundings. “Gondolas from old Venice had been ordered to this New Venice,”
remarks Rex Beach. A university built in antique mission style was planned.
“Beauty draws more than oxen,” exclaims (on paper) the inspired author. But he
does not say that dollars are drawn in by Beauty.
When the Coral Gables enterprise expanded both in concept and in area, its
promoters organized “Coral Gables Consolidated, Inc.” to take over the
enterprise, with Merrick as its president. This corporation went heavily into debt.
When the fever of speculation began to wane in the spring of 1926, the concern
experienced difficulty in disposing of lots. Then the cruel wind came. It blew
through Coral Gables and swept away hopes and fortunes. The financial
difficulties of Coral Gables Consolidated, Inc. increased. Its officials sold the

street railways, the golf fields, the swimming pools and other attractions to the
city which they had chartered for this purpose, and which the promoters
continued to operate under the guise of “a city commission.” Under its municipal
charter, the city of Coral Gables was given the most liberal power to incur
indebtedness of any similar body politic in the country. Its debt could equal 25
per cent of its assessed valuation. Accordingly, the “city” issued municipal bonds
to pay for the “improvements” it acquired, and in this way supplied the
promoters with cash. But the financial difficulties persisted. The promoters then
threatened to compel the former lot purchasers, by judicial proceedings, to
continue their payments. They preferred to have cash rather than the real estate,
which they, but a short time before, had advertised as an investment of certain
and ever-increasing value.
All this was of little avail. Bankruptcy was the outcome. Altogether,
$150,000,000 is reported to have been expended on Coral Gables in building and
development, about half by the development corporation and about half by
private investors. The money lost by lot purchasers and speculators amounted
probably to larger sums. And to these losses might be added the cash invested by
the unfortunate purchasers of the Coral Gables municipal bonds.
No less magnificent in proposed splendor, in artistic conception, and in high
ideals, was the second of the leading “developments”—“Boca Raton.” An
architect, who had lived in Spanish America as a boy and who was attracted by
the harmonious designs of the rich dwellings there in relation to the tropical
surroundings, established his business in Palm Beach in 1918. He was Addison
Mizner. His plans for fine residences in this luxurious and exclusive pleasure
resort soon gave him a national reputation as an architect. When Coral Gables,
built upon “Mediterranean models,” bid fair to become a successful and
profitable undertaking, the architect and his associates conceived the idea of
establishing a still more elaborate “development” twenty-four miles below Palm
Beach. They organized the “Mizner Development Corporation.” Its directors
comprised names of high social and financial standing. Among them were ex-
United States Senator T. Coleman DuPont, Jesse L. Livermore, capitalist, Hon.
George S. Graham, United States Representative from Pennsylvania, Ward S.
Wickwire, prominent steel manufacturer, and L. A. Bean, vice-president of
Dwight P. Robinson & Co., New York realty operators. “World leaders in
finance, society and arts, establish an international resort on the Florida East
Coast,” reads the headline of the first full-page newspaper display advertisement
of the project. Another stated: “The public has demonstrated its faith in the men

and women back of Boca Raton. Its confidence in the future is assured to Boca
Raton by the social standing and financial solidarity of its sponsors . . . Your
decision to invest now is justified by their investment hitherto. Act now and
every day will justify your decision.”
As to the architecture and beauty of the “development,” why, it was to be
entirely “mizneresque.” “Boca Raton will surpass in exclusiveness any resort on
Florida’s East Coast. But the democracy of Addison Mizner has provided large
and well selected bathing beaches, golf courses, and tennis courts, aviation field,
polo ground and dock rights for the use of all. No existing world resort of wealth
and fashion compares with Boca Raton, and never before has there been offered
such opportunity of financial reward through early participation in a Florida
enterprise.” And so on, until the sad end.
The lots in Boca Raton were offered in May, 1925, when the whole affair
was still on paper. Purchases, the first day, are reported to have amounted to
$2,100,000. In the first fourteen weeks more than $14,000,000 in value was sold,
says a full-page display advertisement. It was not necessary to go to Florida to
buy. Elaborate offices were opened in the principal cities. In Washington, the
Mizner Development Corporation occupied the whole ground floor of a
prominent office building, and its offices remained open day and evening.
The Boca Raton plan proposed the construction of a RitzCarlton Hotel,
costing $6,000,000. Only a small hotel was opened in 1926. There were to be
lagoons and canals, and, as in the case of Coral Gables, gondolas and gondoliers
were to be brought from Venice. Every structure in the development must
conform to the uniform plan of the general architecture. It was not to be “a
crowded commercial center” or “an addition, however worthy, to an already
existing community. It is a cosmopolitan world community.”
Difficulties, however, developed more rapidly than the building operations.
In November, 1925, the Finance Committee of the Mizner Development
Corporation, comprising leading capitalists, resigned. They objected to the
“management.” On January 22, 1926, application was made to put the company
in receivership. This was dismissed by the court, but it was merely a short delay.
The insolvency was admitted soon afterwards. Thus, another “Dream City”
proved to be only a “dream.”
Not all the speculation in the Florida boom was concerned with city
development and beach and underwater lots. Owners of large tracts of hitherto
waste lands took advantage of the opportunity to rid themselves, at tremendous
profits, of their holdings. Everglade lands, which were not worth the tax

payments on them, were eagerly bought up and divided and resold at from $5 to
$100 or more an acre. Schemes were put on foot to encourage rural settlements
in this “last American frontier.” Mr. J. C. Penney laid open to immigrants—who
were expected, however, to come in Pullmans instead of covered wagons—his
“Penney Farms,” located in Clay County, thirty miles from Jacksonville “in the
heart of a rich agricultural district.” His was not an ordinary land settlement
scheme. “I came to believe,” he stated in a public address in 1927, “that under
the same principle [as conducted in his stores] men could be found to take up
tracts of land, and given a certain amount of expert guidance, keep their farms up
to a standard and made to succeed.” He offered plots in 2½, 5 and 20 acres,
cleared and plowed at least once, and placed all under the guidance of the J. C.
Penney-Guvin Institute of Agricultural Science. He also established coöperative
marketing.
Thus, philanthropy, as well as profit, was back of investments in Florida.
Barron G. Collier, and also the retired circus proprietors, the Ringling Brothers,
likewise carried on agricultural land development projects. The growing
population of Florida, the rapid increase in the size of its cities and the
improvement in transportation facilities, it was pointed out, would make Florida
agricultural lands of as great value as those surrounding the large population
centers of the North and West. Needless to say, hundreds of land companies were
born almost overnight to exploit this conception of increasing value of the soil.
Many of these concerns were fraudulent or partially fraudulent in their
operations. They sold everglade and waste lands which are practically worthless
for immediate cultivation. Much of this soil has again become the resourceless
property of the state authorities, since the private owners have been surrendering
them one after another for tax arrearages.
Such is the story of the Florida Boom—the latest phase in a long series of
cycles of land gambling and town jobbing, which has marked American business
annals almost from the time of Columbus to the present day.
1 See Mitchel, et al, vs. United States, 9 Peters 740.
2 See Quarterly of the Florida Historical Society, April and July, 1927.
3 Mr. Roberts’ articles were subsequently published in a book entitled Florida, published by Harper &
Brothers, 1926. It points out the pitfalls as well as the allurements. Mr. McMorrow, however, seems to have
been infected with the “boom fever.”
4 Published by the Retail Credit Company of Atlanta, September, 1925.
5 The Truth About Florida, p. 12.

6 Florida in the Making, p. 286.
7 See “Florida, Old and New,” 1925-1926, p. xix et seq.
8 For a description of the methods of the Publicity Department of Coral Gables, see T. H. Weigall,
Boom in Paradise, especially Chap. IX.

INDEX
Aaron Burr, Wandell and Minnigerode, 80, note; 202
Account of the Lands, etc., An, R. L. Pell, 144
Adams, Herbert B., notes, 7, 8, 14
Adams, Samuel, 27
Addresses, Speeches and Letters upon Various Subjects, Hugh McCulloch, notes, 247, 248
Address to the Reader . . . Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company, 225, note
Adirondack Mountains, 92, 96
Adirondack State Park, N. Y., 26
Advertising, in Florida boom, 339, 350 land speculation, 332, 335
Agriculture, displaced by mechanics, 317
Alabama, 126
Alaska, gold rush to, 324
Albany, N. Y., 27, 243
Albany Gazette, 64
Albemarle, Va., 4
Albion, Ohio, 188
Alexandria, La., 208
Alexandria, Va., 9
Alexandria Bay, N. Y., 90
Alleghany Mountains, 3, 5, 22, 33, 172
Alleghany River, 38
Allen, Ann Penn (Greenleaf), 38, 167
Allen, Ethan, 24
Allentown, Pa., 167
Alvord, C. W., 4, note
American and Sharon Land Company, 307
American Colonization Society, 211
American Gazetteer, Jedidiah Morse, 134
American Geography, The, Jedidiah Morse, 19
American Land Company, 242–245, 253, 278
American Notes, Charles Dickens, 164, note
American Railroad Builder, An, Henry G. Pearson, 285, note
American Real Estate Company, 327
American State Papers, notes, 18, 181, 196, 209, 210, 240, 278
Amsterdam, Holland, 60
Annals of San Francisco, The, Soulé et al., notes, 257, 258, 259
Annapolis, Md., 148
Annual Report of the American Historical Association, notes, 52, 70
Annual Report of the Trustees of the American Land Company, 244
Antwerp Company, 88
Apalachicola, Fla., 332
Apalachicola Gazette, 333
Apalachicola Land Company, 332
Arkansas, 198, 244
Arkansas Gazette, 223

Armendaris Grant, 270
Armour, J. Ogden, 266
Arnold, Isaac N., 254, note
Ashe, Thomas, 110, 118
Aspinwall, William H., 281
Astor, John Jacob, 43, 95, 211
New York lands, 189–190
Astor, William B., 179
Asylum Company, 38
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad, 316, 319
Atlantic Monthly, 308
Auburn, N. Y., 84, 251
Austin, Henry, 226
Austin, James Brown, 218
Austin, Moses, 193, 195, 213–217
Austin, Stephen F., 221–223, 226, 231
empresario in Texas, 213–219
in the New Madrid Claims, 207–210
Austin Papers, The, notes, 193, 197, 207, 208, 215, 216, 217, 218, 221, 224, 226
Autobiography of Frederick W. Seward, 251, note
Avalardo, Señor, 267
Azusa, “city” of, 319
Babson, Roger W., 336, 344
Baldwin Corporation, 307
Baltimore, Md., 210, 211
suburban lot “boom,” 252–253
Texas excitement in, 219
Baltimore Advocate, 232, 241
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, 253, 277
“Banana Belt,” Jay Cooke’s, 294–311
Bancroft, Hubert Howe, 262, 263; notes, 173, 264, 268, 269
Bancroft family, 123
Bangor, Me., 241
Banking in Illinois, Huston and Russell, 246, note
Bank of England, 153
Bank of Hartford, 45, 121
Bank of New York, 39, 40, 43, 45
Bank of the United States (First), 41
Bank of the United States (Second), 177
Baring, Alexander, 39
Baring banking house, 183
Barker, Eugene C., 227, note
Barlow, Joel, 48, 107–110
Barth, Count de, 109
Barton, Benjamin, 73
Bastrop, Philip Henry Neri, Baron de, 200, 214
Batavia, N. Y., 81, 84, 86
Bath, N. Y., 74, 75
Bath Gazette, 74

Bean, L. A., 350
Beard, Charles A., 30, note
Beaubien, Carlos, 272
Beaverland (see Castorland)
Beers and Co., J. D., 243
Belle-Chaise, Joseph, 204
Benton, Caleb, 56
Benton, Thomas H., 195
Benton, Thomas Hart, 178, 195, 267
Berkeley, Lord, 1
Better Business Bureau of New York City, 342
Bexar, Texas, 213
Beyond the Mississippi, Albert D. Richardson, 315
Biddle, Nicholas, 84, 178
Biggs, Joseph, 175
Biggs, Thomas, 270
Big Prairie, Ill., 185
Bingham, William, 39, 46, 70, 240
Bingham’s Million Acres, 39, 240
Binghamton, N. Y., 39
Biographical Sketches, etc., John McDonald, 177
Birkbeck, Morris, 174, 184–188; 185, note
Bishop, Abraham, 138, note
Black River, 87, 88
Bleecker, Leonard, 140
Blodget, Samuel, Jr., 154–156
Blount, William, 135
Boca Raton, Fla., 349–352
“Bonanza” farms, 306–308
Bonaparte, Joseph, 91–93
Bond, Beverly W., Jr., notes, 112, 115
Boom in Paradise, T. H. Weigall, 348 note
Booms, city and town, 313–330
Florida, 331–352
results of, 333
Boone, Daniel, 12, 195
Bordentown, N. J., 92
Boston, 154
in the post-Revolutionary mania, 43, 44
Boston Ten Towns, 55, note
Boudinot, Elias, 111–118
Bourbon “county,” 125
Bourne, Sylvanus, 159
Bowie, James, 228
Bowles, Samuel, 268, note
Boyd, J. P., 23, note
Brace, Jonathan, 121
Bradley, William A., 199
Brannen, Samuel, 258
Breckinridge, John C., 297

Breese, Sidney, 278
Brevoort, Henry, 189
Bridel, Jean Louis Philippe, 80
Broderick, David C., 262
Brooklyn, N. Y., 102
Brown, John, 96–97
Brown, Samuel, 55, note
Brunswick Gazette, 113
Bryan, Wilhelmus Bogert, notes, 150, 151, 152, 155, 157, 165
Bryan, William Jennings, 336, 344, 348
Buffalo, N. Y., 81, 246, 329
town lot “booms,” 250, 251
Buffalo Historical Society Publications, notes, 60, 251
Buffalo Land Register, 251
Building of the Pacific Railroad, Edwin L. Sabin, 293 note
Bullock County, Ga., 144
Burnes, Mr., 150
Burnett, David G., 223, 226
Burr, Aaron, 40, 62, 63
conspiracy, 119, 202, 206
in the Astor-Morris land litigation, 190
in the De Bastrop Claim, 199–202
land deals, 96
land politics in New York, 79–80, 88
western expedition, 200
Bushnell, Campbell, 243
Butler, Charles, 83, 84, 242–243, 253
Bye, Henry, 203
Byrd, William, 13
Byrd family, land activities, 12
Cairo City and Canal Company, 279
Caldwell, John, 121
Caleb Cushing, Claude F. Feuss, 238, note
California, gold rush, 256
land gambles, 255–270
Mexican grants, 263–270
mission lands, 263
pueblo lands, 263
railroad and town building in, 317–322
Spanish grants, 256
California Land Colonization Commission, 270, note
California Tax Commission, 269
Callender, Robert, 17, 20
Calvert, Sir George, 1
Camden, Lord, 19
Campbell, Joseph, 20
Canada, 66
Canada de Cochiti Grant, 270
Canajoharie Indians, 16, note

Canals, 79, 81, 131
inferior to railroads, 278
land grants used for railroads, 276 (see also under individual names)
Canandaigua, N. Y., 45, 52, 55, 58
Canfield, Thomas H., 303
Canton Company, 252, 277
Cape St. Vincent, N. Y., 90
Capitalists, eager for land grants, 281
eastern, 289
in the Florida boom, 337
Carnes, Thomas P., 135
Carondelet, governor of Louisiana, 201
Carrère, M., 203
Carroll, Daniel, 158
Carter family, 12
Carteret, Lord, 1
Cary, Trumbull, 84
Casa Grande Land and Improvement Company, 273
Cass, George W., 306
Castle Point, N. J., 252
Castorland, 87, 88
Catlin, Lynde, 223, 226
Catterall, Ralph C. H., 178, note
Cazenove, Theophile, 60, 66, 77–81
Cazenove & Co., J. Henry, 60
Central Pacific Railroad, 287
Chappell, Absalom H., 144, note
Chapters on the History of the Southern Pacific, Stuart Doggett, 293, note
Charleston, S. C., 125
Charleston, W. Va., 44
Charmette (Dardenne) Creek, 198
Chase, Salmon P., 301
Chassanis, Pierre, 48, 87, 88
Chautauqua County, N. Y., 84, 86
Chenango River, 55, note
Cheney, B. P., 306
Cherokee Indians, 124
land purchases from, 12–14
Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad, 325
Chevalier, Michael, 191, 232, 238–239; 233, note
Chicago, “boom” town, 248–250
financial collapse, 254
real estate deals, 244–246
Chicago and Rock Island Railroad, 286
Chicago Historical Society Collections, 188, note
Chickasaw Indians, 124, 244
Chile, 260
Chillicothe, Ohio, 176, 177
founding, 173
land office, 170

China, trade with, 43
Choctaw Indians, 124
land purchases from, 125
Chouteau, Pierre, 199
Cincinnati, 119, 173, 177, 178
founding, 172, 173
land office, 170
town jobbing, 116
Cisco and Co., John J., 290
City building, a form of speculation, 317–330
suburban development, 326, 329
Civil War, 38, 144
Claiborne, Wm. C. C., 128, note; 196
Clare, N. Y., 91
Clark, Allen C., notes, 37, 145, 158, 159, 161
Clark, Daniel, 204, 206
Clark, George Rogers, 128, 129, 180, 181
Clarmorgan, Henry, 200
Clarmorgan, Jacques, 197, 198
Clarmorgan Grant, 197–200
Clarmorgan Grant, The, 199
Clarmorgan Land Association, 199
Clay, Henry, 238
Cleaveland, Isaac, 121
Cleveland, Ohio, 121
founding, 172, 173
settlement, 123
suburban development, 329
Clinton, De Witt, 83
Clinton, George, 65, 67
Cobbett, William, 187
Colbert, Count de, 142
Colfax, Schuyler, 301
Colfax County, N. M., 272
Collections of the New York Historical Society, 31, note
Collier, Barron G., 336, 351
Colonial period, landed aristocracy in the South, 3
land problems, 1–28
Colonies, conflicting claims, 3, 4 (see also under separate names) Colonization, crown grants, 2, 25
English, 1–2
Colorado River, 214
Colquhoun, Patrick, 59, 74
Colton, Mr., 238, note
Columbia County, N. Y., 206
Columbus, Christopher, 1
Comanche Indians, 215, 221
Compagnie de New York, 87, 89
Compagnie du Scioto, 107–110
Congregational Church, and the Western Reserve, 120
Congress, and the Northwest Territory, 33, 34

California land title investigation, 263
construction loans to railroads, 287
grants to states, 279
in the Louisiana Purchase, 211
Louisiana title investigation, 195
miscellaneous land claims, 140, 183, 202, 206, 207–210, 265, 271
on the Federal City, 147–150
small scale land sales, 117
Congressional Globe, passim
Connecticut, 213
claims in New York State, 54, 69–72
claims in Ohio, 119–123
emigration rage, 122, 123
land grants in Pennsylvania, 23–25
legislative acts, 70–72, 120
overpopulation in Colonial period, 22
western cession, 71
Western Reserve, 45, 71, 119–123
“Connecticut Claims,” 24–25
Connecticut Company, 45
Connecticut Gore Land Company, 69–72
“Connecticut Gore Land Company,” magazine article, 70, note
Connecticut in Transition, R. J. Purcell, 123, note
Connecticut Land Company, 121, 122, 172
Connecticut Quarterly, 44, note
“Connecticut’s Experiment in Expansion, The Susquehannah Company,” J. P. Boyd, 23, note
Connogochaegue River, 150
Constable, James, 43
Constable, William, 40, 42, 46, 59, 64, 68, 87, 107, 142
Constitutions, etc., of the Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company, 225, note
Continental Congress, 41
and the Northwest Territory, 99–102
in Massachusetts-New York controversy, 54–55
Cooke, Henry D., 295, 299
Cooke, Jay, as railroad capitalist, 294–311
control of Northern Pacific, 302
Cooke & Company, Jay, 300–311
Cooke family, 123
Cooper, James, 144
Cooper, James Fenimore, 16
Cooper, Peter, 253
Cooper, William, 16, 49, 51, 88, 171
Cooperstown, N. Y., 16, 171
Copper River, 198
Coral Gables, Fla., 335, 347
Coral Gables Consolidated, Inc., 348
Cordova, Jacob de, 226
Corning, Erastus, 243
Cornwallis, Lord, 29
Correspondence of John Cleves Symmes, The, Beverly W. Bond, Jr., notes, 112, 115

Cox, Zachariah, 131, 135
Coxe, Tench, 48
Craigie, Andrew, 46, 61, 106, 109, 135
Crawford, William, 5
Credit associations, 342
Crédit Foncier, 288–293, 298
Crédit Mobilier, 288–293
Crédit Mobilier in America, J. B. Crawford, 289, note
Creek Indians, 124
Croghan, George, 4, 16, 19
Crommelin & Sons, Daniel, 37
in Washington “boom,” 159
Crossfield, Stephen, 25, 26, 28
Curtis, George, 223
Curtis, James L., 244
Cushing, Caleb, 237
Custis, Elizabeth Parke, 161
Cutler, Manasseh, 49, 101–106, 110, 113
use of land “scrip,” 53
Cyclopaedia of American Biography, 245, note
Dallas, Alexander J., 132
Dalrymple, William, 306
Dartmouth, Lord, 99
Dauphin Island, 196
Davis, Henry Gassaway, 272
Davis, Jefferson, 286
Davis, Joseph Stencliffe, notes, 103, 106, 109
Davis, Myra (see Gaines, Myra Clark)
Davis, William H., 258
Day, Anthony, 223
Dayton, Jonathan, 111–119, 172, 202
in Macomb’s Great Purchase, 66
Dayton, Ohio, 119, 173
Deane, Silas, 29, 31, 35
pre-Revolutionary land interests, 20–22
Deane Papers, The, notes, 31, 35
De Bastrop Claim, 200
Declaration of Independence, 14
De Granges, Madame Zubime, 205
De La Guerra family, 269
Delassus, Carlos, 194, 197
Delaware & Hudson Canal Company, 79
Delaware Companies, 23
Delaware River, 35, 149
Democratic Party, 140
Description of Ohio, Manasseh Cutler, 49
Description . . . of the Genesee Country, etc., Charles Williamson, 75
Detroit, Mich., 40, 176
Devonshire, England, 41

Dewhurst, John, 49
De Witt, Green, 222, 223
Diana township, N. Y., 93
Diaries of George Washington, notes, 128, 132, 151
Dickens, Charles, 163, 321, 338
on city building in America, 312
Dodge, Grenville M., 283, 292
in railroad building, 286
Dodge, William E., 145
Dodge County, Ga., 145
Doheny, E. L., 270
Donaldson, Alfred Lee, notes, 66, 96, 97
Douglas, Stephen A., 279, 283
Drew, Daniel, 253
Duane, James, 26–28
Duanesburg, N. Y., 27
Dublin, Ireland, 42
Duer, John, 42
Duer, William, 39–42, 46, 48, 61, 153
Maine land interests, 240
Ohio land interests, 101–110
“short” sales of land, 107
use of land “scrip,” 53
Duer, William A., 41
Duluth, Minn., 297, 305
Dunmore, John, Earl of, 13, 19, 20
Duponceau, Peter, 92
Du Pont, T. Coleman, 336, 349
Dutchess County, N. Y., 175
Duyckinck, Christopher, 26
Dwight, Theodore, 82, 135; 137, note; 143
Dwight, Timothy, 32, 34
Early History of Galveston, Dyer, 224
Early History of Leavenworth, H. Miles Moore, 315, note
Early Illinois Railroads, William K. Acker man, 282, note
East Boston Company, 253
Eastern Branch, 150
Easton, Rufus, 193–196
East River, 250
Economica, a Statistical Manual for the United States, 154, note
Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States, An, Charles A. Beard, 30, note
Economy township, N. Y., 97
Edgar, John, 181–183
Edwards, Haden, 201
Edwards County, Ill., 185
Eight Months in Illinois, William Oliver, 247, note
Elkins, Stephen B., 271–273
Ellicott, Andrew, 81
Ellicott, Joseph, 81, 83

Emigrant Aid Society of Boston, 316
Emmerich, Nicholas, 189
Emmett & Ogden, 190
Empire State (see New York State)
England, American land peddled in, 48, 57, 79
American colonization, 2
claims in New York, 62, 64, 65
colonial land speculation, 1, 16
in American land “booms,” 246
interest in Old Northwest, 183–188
in the Washington “boom,” 159–161
land grants, 1–3
Erie, Lake, 39, 119, 174, 177, 246
Erie Canal, 81, 171
Erie Company, 122
Erie Railroad, 77
Erie triangle, 39
Erwin, Andrew, 220, 221
Essays in the Earlier . . . Corporations, Joseph S. Davis, notes, 103 106, 109
Estaing, Count d’, 142
Etting, Solomon, 21
Europe, American land peddled in, 21, 35–37, 47–54, 68, 95, 106
immigration from, 190
scarcity of capital, 302
Evans, Paul Demund, notes, 60, 61, 66, 77, 80, 86
Everglades, the, 335, 351
Excess Company, 120
Fairfax, Lord, 5
Falls of the Delaware, 149, 150
Fargo, N. D., 306
Farmers Loan and Trust Company of New York, 86
Farms, developed in Florida, 351
Far West, city building in, 318
Fauchet, Joseph, 51, 143
Faux, William, 176, 185, 187; 177, note
Fearon, Henry Bradshaw, 187
Feather River Valley, 266
Federalist Party, 140
Fell, Jesse, 283
Felton, Samuel M., 298
Fergus Historical Series, 254, note
Fessenden, Samuel S., 295
Feuss, Claude F., 238, note
Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres, Vincent Nolte, 95; 211, note
Financier and Finances of the American Revolution, The, William Graham Sumner, 59, note
Fire Lands, 120
First National Bank of Santa Fé, 273
Flagler, Henry M., 335
Fletcher vs. Peck, 141

Flint, Royal, 106, 107, 117
“Floats,” 316
Florida, 244, 255
“boom” of 1925–26, 248, 331–352
climatic advantages, 331
Connecticut immigration, 22
crash in land values, 337
early land companies, 331–333
hurricane damage, 346
land sale to tourists, 334
list of “developments,” 340
post-hurricane activity, 348
Texas excitement in, 219
Florida, Kenneth Roberts, 337, note
Florida Cities Finance Company, 341
Florida Credit Association, 342
Florida Development Board, 337
Florida East Coast Railroad, 335
Florida Historical Society Quarterly, 333, note
Florida in the Making, Stockbridge and Perry, 343
Florida Real Estate Association, 342
Flower, George, 185–188
Floyd, William, 148
Forbes, John, 332
Forbes, John Murray, 285
Forbes Purchase, 331
Fort Pitt (see Pittsburgh)
Fort Washington (Northwest Territory), 116, 117
Fort Worth, Texas, 230
“Forty-Niners,” 256
Forty Years in the House, Senate and Cabinet, John Sherman, 295, note
Foster, Benjamin F., 221
Fox, Charles Donald, 342, 343
Foxcroft, John, 16, 17
France, American land peddled in, 107
colonial land claims in the West, 2–4
Louisiana cession, 192–194
revolution, 153
speculative colonial attitude, 1
Francis, John, 96
Franco-Prussian War, effect on capital, 302
Franklin, Benjamin, 87
land interests, 15–18
Franklin, William, 15, 16
Franklin, William Temple, 59, 60
“Franklin, State of” (see Tennessee)
Franklin County, Ga., 142
Franklin County, N. Y., 90
Franks, David, 18, 109
Franks family, 20

Frazier, Nalbro, 107
Frederick the Great, 200
Frémont, John C., 266–268, 295
French émigrés, land sales to, 38, 48, 51, 68, 87–94, 109, 143
Frugality township, N. Y., 97
Fulton Chain of Lakes, 96
Gaines, Myra Clark, 204–205
Gallatin, Albert, 132, 193
Gallipolis, Ohio, 109, 110
Galloway, Joseph, 16, 17, 24
Galveston, Texas, 225, 226
Galveston Bay, 223
Galveston Bay and Texas Land Co., 223–228
Galveston City Company, 227
Galveston Island, 227
Garfield, James A., 289
Garfield family, 123
Genesee Company (see New York Genesee Land Company)
Genesee County, N. Y., 48, 81
Genesee River, 57, 74
Genesee Valley, 58
Geneseo, N. Y., “Big Tree,” 57, 62
Wadsworth holdings, 45, 46
Geneva, N. Y., 74, 83, 242
George, Henry, 255, 269
George III, King, 22
Georgetown, D. C., 41, 150, 153
Georgia, 49, 51
cession of Yazoo to United States, 137
Gorham lands in, 45
land frauds, 13, 125
land troubles, 124–146
military tracts, 32
Georgia Company, 133–137
Georgia Mississippi Land Company, 133, 135
Georgia Speculation Unveiled, Abraham Bishop, 138, note
Georgia Yazoo Company, 126
German Emigration Company, 230
German Flats, 54
Germans, as settlers, 5, 27
Germantown, Pa., 150
Gihon, John N., 257, note
Gilded Age, The, Twain and Warner, 275
Girard, Stephen, 95, 189, 200
in the De Bastrop claim, 203
Gist, Christopher, 4
Glenn, John, 199
Goelet, Peter, 189
Gore, Christopher, 107

“Gore, The,” 69
Gorham, Nathaniel, 45, 55–58
Graetz, Bernard, 19
Graetz family, 20
Graham, George S., 349
Granger, Erastus, 44
Granger, Gideon, 44, 46, 58, 83
Granger, Gideon, Jr., 121, 136
Granger, James N., 44
Granville, Mass., 173
Granville, Ohio, 173
Great Kanawha River, 8–10
Great Lakes, 40, 246
Great Lakes to Gulf waterway, 278
Great Western Railroad of Illinois, 278
Greeley, Horace, 284
Green, Talbert H., 258
Greenleaf, James, 37, 38, 40, 96
land interests, 134, 143, 150–156
Greenleaf and Law in the Federal City, Allen C. Clark, notes, 37, 145, 158, 159, 161
Greenleaf’s Point, 38
Griffith, Robert E., 203
Griffith, William, 79
Grinnell, Henry, 281
Griswold, George, 281
Guadaloupe, 197
Guadalupe Hidalgo, treaty of, 263
Guadalupe River, 222
Guide to the Wilderness, William
Cooper, 49
Gunn, James, 133, 136
Hackensack Meadows, 252
Haight, John S., 237
Halsey, Jeremiah, 69
Hamilton, Alexander, 33, 41, 55, 67, 130, 140
and the Bank of New York, 39, 40
avoidance of land mania, 37
in litigations, 71, 88
Kingston petition, 148
Ohio interests, 105
small scale land sales, 117
Hamilton, Andrew, 20
Hamilton, William, 20
Hamilton, Ohio, 179
Hamilton County, N. Y., 25
Hampton, Wade, 130, 134
Hancock, George, 230
Harlan, James, 302
Harlem River, 41

Harmar, Josiah, 112
Harper, Rice, 297
Harper, Robert Goodloe, 21, 31, 49, 70, 135
Harrisburg, Pa., 150
Harrison, Congressman, 200
Harrison, William Henry, 116, 169, 176, 180–181, 245
Harrison, W. Va., 200
Hartford, Conn., 69
in the post-Revolutionary mania, 43, 45
land jobbing center, 34
Hartford Courant, 77
Haskins, Charles Homer, notes, 126, 127, 129, 130, 141
Haven, Franklin, 281
Hawes, Horace, 257, 258
Hawkins, Joseph H., 214, 216–219
Hayes family, 123
Head rights, 2, 142
in Louisiana, 193
Hearings before the Joint Congressional Committee on the Investigation of the Northern Pacific Land
Grants, 310, note
Hearst, William Randolph, 270
Heckscher, August, 336
Henderson, A., 12, note
Henderson, Richard, 12
Henderson, William, 68
Henry, Patrick, 13, 126
land activities, 12
Yazoo interests, 128–130, 138
Herculaneum, Mo., 208
Herkimer, Nicholas, 54
Herreschoff, Charles Frederick, 97
Hill, James J., 323
Hill, Walter C., 338
Hillsborough, Lord, 17
Historical, Geographical . . . United States, An, William Winterbottom, 49
Historical Sketch of Illinois Central Railroad, William K. Ackerman, 280, note
History of California, A, Theodore H. Hittell, notes, 257, 258, 267, 269
History of California, and an extended History of Los Angeles, J. M. Guinn, 320, note
History of Chicago, Moses and Kirk-land, notes, 248, 253
History of Lewis County, N. Y., Franklin B. Hough, notes, 92, 93
History of Missouri, Louis Houck, 193, note
History of New Mexico, 274, note
“History of New Mexico, Its Resources and People,” 271, note
History of the Adirondacks, Alfred Lee Donaldson, notes, 66, 96, 97
History of the English Settlement in America, George Flower, 185
History of the English Settlement in Edwards County, George Flower, 188, note
History of the Insurance Company of North America, A, 156, note
History of the National Capital, A, notes, 150, 151, 152, 155, 157, 165
History of the Pacific Coast Metropolis, A, John P. Young, notes, 258, 262
History of the People of the United States, John Bach McMaster, notes, 110, 136

History of the Public Domain of Georgia, S. G. McLendon, 142, note
History of Toledo, Ohio, Clark Waggoner, 175, note
Hittell, J. S., 263, note
Hittell, Theodore H., notes, 257, 258, 267, 269
Hoboken, N. J., 252
Hoffman, David, 267, 268
Hoffman, Josiah Ogden, 80
Holbrook, Darius B., 279
Holder, John, 125
Holker, John, 107
Holland, 200
French invasion, 165
in New York land deals, 60–62
in the post-Revolutionary mania, 37, 39
in the Washington “boom,” 159
Holland Land Company, 60–63, 73, 242
land development, 77–86
liberality, 82
political animosity against, 84
Holland Land Company, The, Paul Demund Evans, notes, 60, 61, 66, 80, 86
Holland Purchase, 73, 77–81, 123
Hollandshe Land Company (see Holland Land Company)
Holliday, Cyrus K., 316
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 23
Homburg, Simon, 321
Homestead Act of 1862, 288
Homesteading, benefits of, 286
Hone, Philip, 229
Hopkins, Samuel, 70
Hornby, John, 59, 74
Houck, Louis, 193, note
Hough, Franklin B., notes, 92, 93
Houston, Sam, 219, 229, 230
Texas land interests, 220
Hubbard, Gardner S., 253
Hudson, N. Y., 56
Hudson River, 54, 63
Huger, Isaac, 125
Hulbert, Archer B., 104, note
Hull, William, 120, 176
Huntington, Collis P., 274, 325
Illinois, 20, 246
French settlers’ claims, 15
settlement, 170–188
town lot “boom,” 248–250
Illinois and Michigan Canal, 248, 276
Illinois Central Railroad, 278, 285
charter granted to, 280
construction begun, 281

Illinois Company, 109
Illinois Land Company, 18, 19
Illinois River, 18, 180
Imlay, Gilbert, 49, 51
Indiana, 17, 247
settlement, 179–188
Indiana Company, 117
Indiana Land Company, 17–20
Indian Boundary of 1763, 5–7, 10, 12, 228
Indians, 285
forced out of Middle Southwest, 314
land claims, 2–4
land purchased from, 12, 17, 23–26, 54, 59, 62, 67, 121, 125, 244
Industry township, N. Y., 97
Information Concerning . . . America, Peter Stadnitzky, 62
Ingersoll, Jared, 132
Ingles, John, 20
Ingram, Ira, 220
Insurance Company of North America, 154–156
Internal improvements, grants demanded for, 276, 280
Interstate Commerce Commission, 310, 330
Investment Bankers Association, 342
Iowa, 255
Ireland, 40
Irvine, James, 270
Irving, Washington, 123
Jackson, Andrew, 205, 223
on public land sales, 233–235, 238
James II, King, 1–2
James S. Wadsworth of Geneseo, Henry Greenleaf Pearson, 58, note
Jarrot, Nicholas, 182, 183
Jarvis, James, 107
Jarvis, Leonard, 140
Jay Cooke, Financier of the Civil War, Ellis P. Oberholtzer, 295 note
Jay’s Treaty of 1795, 65
Jefferson, Peter, 12
Jefferson, Thomas, 12, 14, 130, 185, 195
in Washington land lottery, 155
land survey plans, 57
on land values, 33
on miscellaneous frauds and sales, 128, 152, 192, 194, 206
Jefferson County, N. Y., 90
Jessup, Ebenezer, 26
Jessup, Joseph, 26
Joaquin River, 267
John Brown’s Tract, 96, 97
Johns Hopkins University, 14
Johns Hopkins University Studies, notes, 7, 8
Johnson, Seth, 107

Johnson, Sir William, 4, 15, 16, 25 (see also Sir William Johnson Papers, The) Jones, John B., 243
Jones, Samuel W., 28, note
Josephine Mine, 267
Josephs & Co., J. L. & S., 243
in Texas land “boom,” 223–226
suburban lot promotions, 251–252
Journal of Economic and Business History, 23, note
Journal of William Maclay, The, 35; notes, 36, 150
Julian, George W., 271
Kansas, 255
land booms, 314
town development in, 315
Kaskaskia, Ill., 181–183, 272
Kaskaskia claims, 181–183
Kaskaskia River, 181
Kearny, S. Watts, 256
Kennebec Purchase, 2
Kennebec River, 2
Kentucky, 12, 13, 112, 127–129, 201, 202
military land warrants in, 32
settlement, 179
Texas excitement in, 219
Kern County, Calif., 269
Kern County Land Company, 269
Killingly, Conn., 101
King, William, 240
King’s Mountain, 13
Kingston, N. Y., 144, 147
Klondike, gold discovery in, 324
Knight, Peter O., 346
Knott, J. Proctor, 305
Knox, Henry, 39, 46, 64, 240
La Farge, John, 93
Lafayette, Marquis de, 205
Laffitte & Co., 203
Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad, 294, 296
Lake Superior and Puget Sound Company, 298, 301, 303, 322
Land developing, 73–98, 218–219, 277
“bonanza” farms, 306
Lander, Frederick, 286
Land grants, English, 1–3
extent of, 283, 287
French, in Louisiana, 192, 195
in California, 255–270
in New Mexico, 270–274
in Ohio, 100
Mexican (see Mexican grants)
Spanish (see Spanish grants) to canals, 249, 278

to private corporation, 281
to railroads (see Railroad land grants)
Virginian, 3–5, 8
Land investments, 210–211
Land jobbing, 11–28, 32–53, 65–71
in Louisiana, 195–212
on international scale, 276
railroad, 275–293
Land of Sunshine, Los Angeles, 274, note
Land prices, 26, 29, 33, 54, 56, 65, 66, 88, 94, 102, 117, 119, 120, 133, 144, 152, 157, 158, 166, 176, 180,
208, 215, 225, 233, 236–240, 244, 249, 257
Land “scrip,” 53, 71
Mississippi, 136
Texas, 220, 224–227, 252
Land speculation, canal lots, 278
for railroad terminals, 279
in Florida, 331–352
timber lands, 295
La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, Due de, 30, 91, 137, 147, 162–164, 168
Las Vegas Grant, 272
Latrobe, Mr., 201
Law, John, 16, 136, 192, 233
Law, Thomas, 160–162, 167
Lawrence, Effingham, 26
Laws, Orders and Contract on Colonization 1821–1829, 216, note
League, Hosea H., 221–222
Lear, Tobias, 157, 160
Lebanon County, Pa., 261
Lee, Henry Carter, 32
land fraud charged, 44
Lee, Robert E., 32, 44
Lee family, 5
land activities, 12
Leftwich, Robert, 220, 221
Legend of Sleepy Hollow, The, Washington Irving, 123
L’Enfant, Pierre Charles de, 151, 152
Le pour et le contre, etc., J. L. P. Bridel, 80
Le Ray, James, 87–94
land developer, 87–92
Le Ray, Vincent, 92
Le Ray de Chaumont, Donatien, 48, 87, 93, 171
Le Ray de Chaumont, James Donatien (see Le Ray, James)
Le Raysville, N. Y., 90
Le Roy, Herman, 243
Le Roy, Jacob, 86
Letter on the Value of the Public Lands of Illinois, Robert Rantoul, Jr., 281, note
Letters from Illinois, Morris Birkbeck, 184, 186; 185, note
Leval, Madame de, 109
Levi, Levi Andrew, 17
Levi family, 20

Lewis County, N. Y., 90
Lexington, Ky., 177
Lezay-Marnesia, Marquis de, 109
Lick, James, 261–262
Licking Land Company, 173
Lick Observatory, 261
Life and Times of Stephen Girard, John Bach McMaster, 203, note
Life of Robert Morris, Ellis P. Oberholtzer, 142, note
Life of Stephen F. Austin, The, Eugene C. Barker, 227, note
Life of Timothy Pickering, Pickering, notes, 30, 53
Limantour, Senor, 264
“Limantour,” J. S. Hittell, 263, note
Limantour Claim, 264
Lincoln, Abraham, lawyer for Western capitalists, 280
Linn, Dr., 200
Linton, Benjamin F., 235
Little Miami River, 112, 113
Livermore, Jesse L., 336, 349
Livingston, Edward, 205–207, 212
Livingston, John, 56, 120
Livingston, Peter Van B., 26
Livingston, Philip, 26, 96
Livingston, Robert, 26, 28
Livingston, Walter, 102
Livingston Manor, N. Y., 26, 28
Loderston, R., 59
London Company, 1
Long Island, suburban lot “booms,” 250
Longworth, Nicholas, 178–179
Los Angeles, Calif., land boom in and
around, 318–322
Los Angeles and San Pedro Railroad, 318
Louis XVI, King, 87
Louisiana, 119, 181
Spanish grants, 192–212
squatters in, 196
Texas excitement in, 219
under Spain, 124–129
Louisiana Historical Quarterly, 196
Louisiana Purchase, 192–194
Louis Philippe, King, 93
Louisville, Ky., 4
Low, Nichols, 40
Loyal Company, 3, 4, 13
Lucas, John B. C., 195, 212
Lucas & Co., 212
Ludlow, George W., 281
Ludlow, Israel, 119
Luzerne County, Pa., 24
Lydius, John Henry, 23

Lyle, James, 203
Lynch, Charles, 201
Lyon, Caleb, 93
McArthur, Duncan, 175–177
McCabe, E. H., 197
McCormick, Cyrus H., 18, note
McCormick, Daniel, 43, 66
McCulloch, Hugh, 301, 302
McDonald, John, 177, note
McDonogh, John, 210–211, 235
McDonogh, Md., 211
McDonogh School, 211
McGillivray, Alexander, 125
McKean, Thomas, 38, 39
McLendon, S. G., 142, note
McMaster, John Bach, notes, 110, 136, 203
McMorrow, Thomas, 337
McVickar, James, 43
Machinery, invention, 318
Maclay, William, 149, 150
on Robert Morris, 35–36
Macomb, Alexander, 26, 61, 64, 107, 109, 153
Great Purchase, 40, 43, 65–68
Ohio interests, 105
Macomb, Alexander (younger), 41
Macomb’s Dam, N. Y., 41
Macomb’s Great Purchase, 26, 43, 48, 65–68, 87, 95
Madison, James, 140, 152, 180
Mad River, 119
Maine, 27, 46, 109
“Bingham’s Million Acres,” 39
Massachusetts land sales in, 2
timber land speculation, 295
Maine Historical Society Collections, notes, 2, 240
Maison Rouge Claim, 203, 204
Malartie, Viscount de, 109
Manasseh Cutler, Cutler, 103, note
Manhattan, Ind., 247
Manhattan Island, suburban lot “booms,” 250
Mansfield, Lord, 19
Marietta, Ohio, 104
founding, 172
land office, 170
Mariposa Creek, 267
Mariposa Estate, 266–268
Mariposa Land and Mining Company, 268
Marshall, John, 32, 44, 141
Martha’s Vineyard, Mass., 101
Martin, John W., 343

Martineau, Harriet, 249, 250
Maryland, 20
and the Federal City, 148
emigrants to Texas, 214
Maryland Journal, 152
Maryland Journal and Baltimore Advertiser, 9
Mason, John T., 224, 226, 228
Mason family, 12
Massachusetts, 62
claims in New York, 45, 54, 63, 70
colonial land sales, 2
in the post-Revolutionary mania, 45
land sales, 74
Massachusetts Savings Bank League, 342
Massie, Nathaniel, 176
Maumee City, Ohio, 247
Maumee River, 247
Maxwell, Lucien Benjamin, 272–274
Maxwell Grant, 272–273
Maxwell Land Grant and Railroad Company, 272
Maysville, N. Y., 84
Meiggs, “Harry,” 260, 261
Memoir of James Duane, Samuel W. Jones, 28, note
Memorial Days in America, etc., William Faux, notes, 177, 185, 187, 188
Memorial of the United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, 18, note
Men and Measures of Half a Century, 241
Menard, Michel B., 227
Mercer, Charles Fenton, 230
Mercer Colony, 230
Mercer County, Calif., 269
Merchants Bank, 223
Mero, Estéban, 129
Merrick, George, 348
Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 240, note
Mexican grants, in California, 263–270
in New Mexico, 270–274
Mexico, 198
land grants in California, 263–270
land grants in New Mexico, 270–274
revolt from Spain, 217
sale of Texas rumored, 218
Texas settlement restrictions, 222, 224–228
Mexico, Gulf of, 125, 131
Mexico City, 119, 217, 218, 224
Miami Purchase, 110–119
Miami River, 112, 113, 115, 119
Michigan, 45, 243, 246, 248
Michigan, Lake, 246, 249
Middle Southwest land development, 314
Military land warrants, 31–33, 173

speculation in, 284
Miller, Joaquin, 325
Miller and Lux ranch, 269
Milligan, James, 20
Millionaires of a Day: The Inside Story of the Great Southern California Land Boom, T. S. Van Dyke, 322,
note
Milwaukee, Wise, “boom” town, 248
Mine-a-Burton, Mo., 195, 208, 213
Minnesota, Jay Cooke’s interest in, 294
Minshall, Thomas, 20
Miranda, Guadelupe, 272
Miscellanies of Georgia, Absalom H. Chappell, 144, note
Mission Dolores Grant, 265
Mississippi, 126, 244
Mississippi, Claiborne, 128, note
Mississippi Bubble, 16, 136, 192, 233
Mississippi Company, 5
Mississippi River, 12, 18, 117, 124–126, 131, 180, 198, 211, 246
Mississippi Valley, 214
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, notes, 12, 219
Mississippi Valley in British Politics, The, C. W. Alvord, 4, note
Missouri, 210–213
emigrants to Texas, 214
land grant frauds, 193–196
squatter claims, 197
Missouri Fur Company, 198
Missouri River, 198, 246
Mitchel, Robert, 332
Mitchell, S. Weir, 301
Mizner, Addison, 349
Mizner Development Corporation, 350
Mobile Bay, 196
Mobile River, 131
Mohawk and Hudson Railroad, 243
Mohawk River, 25, 54
Mohawk Valley, 11, 27, 54
Monongahela River, 10
Monroe, La., 203
Montgomery County, Ga., 142, 144
Moody, William Godwin, 308
Moore, H. Miles, 314
Moore, Thomas, 163
Moorehead, William G., 296
Moreau, M., 196
Morehouse, Abraham, 201, 203
Morgan, George, 117
Morgan, John, 121
Morris, Gouverneur, 40, 166, 281
districts interested in, 64, 66, 142
early land deals, 42

general land agent, 87–95
land agent in Ohio, 170–171
land sales in France, 48, 68
New York land deals, 59
Morris, Mary, 190
Morris, Robert, 107
Fauchet’s opinion of, 51
in the post-Revolutionary wild land mania, 34–37
land jobbing, 11, 47, 48
land peddling in Europe, 57, 58, 74
military land warrant trading, 32
New York land gambling, 42, 58–63
pre-Revolutionary land interests, 20–22
public office, 41
sections interested in, 56, 64, 130, 132, 134, 141–149, 158–168
use of land “scrip,” 53
Morris, Robert, Jr., 60–62, 144
New York land sales in Holland, 61
Morris, Mrs. Robert, 166
Morris, Roger, 189
Morris, Thomas, 58, 62, 63
Morrisania, 42, 166
Morrison, Robert, 183
Morrison, William, 182, 183
Morristown, N. J., 111
Morrisville, 35, 149
Morse, Jedidiah, 19, 134
Morton, Perez, 136
Moultrie, Alexander, 125
Mt. Carmel and New Albany Railroad, 277
Mount Hamilton, 261
Mount Vernon, 8, 9, 161
Murray, John, 20
Murray, William, 18–20
Muscle Shoals, Ala., 131
Muskingum Valley, 113
My Life in Many States and in Foreign Lands, George Francis Train, 289, note
Myra Clark Gaines Case, 204
Nacogdoches, Texas, 227
Napoleon I, Emperor, 200, 211
Nashville, Tenn., 131, 201, 229
Texas excitement in, 220
Natchez, Miss., 126, 131
Natchitoches, La., 214
National Land System, The, Payson Jackson Treat, notes, 57, 106, 169
Navarro County, Texas, 230
Neal, David A., 281
Nebraska, land booms, 314
terminal speculation in, 290

Necker, Jacques, 42, 48, 91, 93
Neville, Presley, 11
New Amsterdam (see Buffalo and New York State)
Newark, N. J., 178
New Babylon, Kansas, 316
New Brighton Company, 252
New England, in the post-Revolutionary mania, 39–46
land grabbing, 22–25
New England Mississippi Land Company, 135
New Hampshire, conflict with New York, 26–28
New Harmony, 188
New Jersey, 15, 111, 116
English grants in, 1
New Jersey Journal, 115
New London, Conn., 120
New Madrid, Mo., 197, 198, 207, 209, 213
New Mexico, cession to United States, 270
Mexican grants, 270
Spanish grants, 273
New Mexico Mining Co., 271
New Orleans, La., 127, 131, 194, 203–212
New Orleans beach front claim, 205–207
Newport News, Va., 325
Newspapers, to boom lands, 333
New Travels in America, Brissot de Warville, 49
New York Assembly Journal, 83
New York City, 60, 149
land jobbing center, 34
real estate values in, 328
Texas excitement in, 220
town lot “booms,” 250, 251
New York Genesee Land Company, 56
New York Life Insurance and Trust Company, 83
New York Public Library, 202
New York State, 1, 147
at end of Revolutionary War, 54
British claims in, 64, 65
conflict with New Hampshire, 26–28
Connecticut claims in, 22, 54, 69–72
crown lands acquired, 63
early land “retailing,” 73–98
early land “wholesaling,” 54–72
“Gore” conflict, 69–71
in the post-Revolutionary mania, 39–43
land sales, 64–66
Massachusetts claims in, 45, 54–56, 63, 70
military tracts, 32
on Macomb’s Great Purchase, 67
pre-Revolutionary land activity, 25–28
settlement, 172

town lot “boom,” 188–191
New York Stock Exchange, 140, 253, 268, 342
New York Weekly Tribune, 284, note
Niagara River, 55, 62
Nicholas, Wilson Cary, 32, 44
Nicholson, John, 77
in Washington “boom,” 158–168
land interests, 36–38
military land warrant trading, 32
Pine Barrens interests, 142–145
use of land “scrip,” 53
Nicholson family, 12
Nickel Plate Railroad, 330
Niles Register, 232; 241, note
Nisbet, James, 257, note
Noailles, Duc de, 51
Nolte, Herman, 211
Nolte, Vincent, 94; 211, note
Norfolk, Va., 184
North America, Anthony Trollope, 282, note
North American Land Company, 38, 47–50, 135, 143–145, 160, 165
North American Review, 225
North Beach, San Francisco, 260
North Carolina, 12
Northern Pacific Railroad, 242, 298, 322
bond issues, 300, 307
disposing of land, 309
popular title of, 300
promotion of, 295
story of land grant, 304
Northwest, railroad operations in, 309
Northwestern Improvement Company, 310
Northwest Territory, 17, 99–123, 128, 181, 207
(see also Ohio)
Notes and Observations, etc., George Sibbald, 144
Notes of a Journey in America, Morris Birkbeck, 174, 184
Notes on the United States of America, Gouverneur Morris, 170; 171, note
Nova Scotia, Connecticut immigration, 22
Nye, James Warren, 281
Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxton, 295; notes, 142, 304
Observation on the River Potomac, etc., Tobias Lear, 160
Observations on . . . American Landed Property, John Dewhurst, 49
Ocean View Land Improvement Company, 326
O’Fallon, James, 127–129
Ogden, Abraham, 40
Ogden, David, 40
Ogden, Samuel, 40, 59, 64, 65
Ogden, Thomas Ludlow, 40
Ogden, William, 40

Ogden, William B., 243, 253, 278, 295
Ogden, Utah, 254
Ogden Purchase, 64
Ogdensburg, N. Y., 40, 65, 94
Oglethorpe, James Edward, 1, 141
O’Hara, W. M., 208
Ohio, Connecticut claims in, 119–123
Connecticut Western Reserve, 45, 71, 119–123
Indian warfare in, 62, 105
land sales and land grants, 99–123
military land warrants in, 32
settlement, 99–123, 169–179
swindle of French in, 48
Texas excitement in, 219
Virginia Military Reserve, 176, 177 (see also Northwest Territory) Ohio Associates, 113, 172
Ohio Company (1748), 3–7
Ohio Company (1787), 33
Ohio Company of Associates, 101–107, 110
Ohio River, 4, 7, 8, 15, 18, 118, 246
Great Bend, 9
wine industry, 179
Oklahoma, land booms, 314
Old Dominion Land Company, 326
Old Forge, N. Y., 97
Old Merchants of New York, The, 252, note
Old Military Tract, 56
Old Northwest, British speculators in, 183–188
French colonies, 181
origin of settlers, 177
settlement, 169–191
Old Northwest Genealogical Quarterly, 173, note
Oliver, William, 247, note
One Hundred Years of the Hartford Bank, P. H. Woodward, 123, note
O’Neil, Jerome, 270
Ontario, Lake, 26, 55, 75, 77, 87
Opdyke, George, 295
Ordinance of 1784, 99
Ordinance of 1785, 99
Ordinance of 1787, 33, 99, 101
Oritz Mine grant, 271
Orleans County, N. Y., 245
Osborn, J. W., 258
Osgood, Samuel, 102
Oswegatchie, N. Y., 65
Otis, Harrison Gray, 240
Otto, Jacob S., 83
Our Land Policy, National and State, 255
Our New West, Samuel Bowles, 268, note
Overland Monthly, 264, note
Owego River, 55, note

Owen, Robert, 188
Pacific Coast, city building on, 318
Pacific Railroad, plans for first, 286
route of, 287
Paine, Thomas, 51
Palatinate, 5
Palm Beach, Fla., 335
Panic of 1837, 226, 229, 232–254, 255, 278, 314, 319
Panton, Leslie and Company, 331
Papers Relating to the Clarmorgan Grant, 199
Paris, France, 90
Parish, David, 94–95, 171
Parish, George, 95
Parish, John, 94
Parishville, N. Y., 95
Parker, Joseph, 117
Parkinson, Richard, 49–51
Pearson, Henry Greenleaf, 58, note
Pejebsco Company, 2
Pell, R. L., 144
Penets Square, N. Y., 93
Penn, Governor, 23
Penn, William, 1
Penney, J. C., 336, 351
Pennsylvania, 29
Connecticut immigration, 22
debt payment in land, 36
Dutch land interests in, 77
Franklin’s agency in England, 15
“Gore” conflict, 69–71
land gambling in, 35–39
military land warrants, 32
settlement, 172
squatting, 24
troop mutiny, 148
troubles with Connecticut, 23–25
Pennsylvania German Magazine, 261, note
Pennsylvania Magazine of History, 18, note
Pennsylvania Population Company, 38, 77, 79
Pennsylvania Railroad, 253, 277
Peralta, Don Miguel de, 273
Peralta-Reavis, Addison (see Reavis, James Addison)
Peralta-Reavis Grant, 273–274
Perham, Josiah, 242, 295, 300
Perkins, James, 140
Perrère, Emile, 288
Perrère, Isaac, 288
Perry, John Holliday, 343
Perrysburg, Ohio, 247

Perseverance township, N. Y., 97
Peru, 260, 261
Petersburg, Va., 44
Peto, Sir Morton, 296
Pharoux, M., 88
Phelps, Oliver, 44, 45, 52–58, 120, 135
Phelps and Gorham Purchase, 55, 70, 74
Phelps, Dodge & Company, 145
Philadelphia, 16, 20, 60, 148, 150, 154
Cazenove’s headquarters, 61
center of military land warrant trading, 32
land jobbing center, 34, 37–39
Texas excitement in, 219
town lot “boom,” 189
Philadelphia American Advertiser, 51
Philadelphia and Erie Land Company, 294
Philadelphia Association, 264–265
Philanthropy, in land development, 351
Pickering, Timothy, 24, 30, 46, 53
military land warrant trading, 32
Pico, Andree, 269
Pico, Pio, 269
Piedmont section, 3
Pierrepont, Hezekiah B., 43
Pine Barrens, 49–52, 132, 141–146
Pine Tree Mine, 267
Pioneer Settlement of the “Phelps and Gorham’s Purchase” O. Turner, 75, note
Pittsburgh, Pa., 7, 10, 20
Pittsburgh Pike, 123
Plant, Henry B., 335
Plain Facts . . . Indiana, Samuel Wharton, 18
Plattsburg, N. Y., 41
Plymouth Company, 1
Pomeroy, Josiah, 66
Ponce de León, Juan, 331
Ponzi, Charles, 341
Pools, railroad, 300–305
Port Lawrence, Ohio, 174, 175
Port Lawrence Company, 174
Post, Gabriel B., 258
Post-Revolutionary period, wild land mania, 29–53
Potomac Company, 11, 160
Potomac River, 10, 148, 150
Eastern Branch, 38
Preëmption Act of 1834, 235
Premium lands, 213–231
“Pre-Revolutionary Revolt in the Old Southwest, A,” A. Henderson, 12, note
Prescott, William H., 243
Preston, John, 44
Price, Rodman H., 258

Priest, William, 30, 52
Priestley, Dr., 51, 192
Prime, Nathaniel, 135, 140
Princeton, N. J., 148
Proceedings of the Government, etc., Thomas Jefferson, 206
Proprietors of East Jersey, 1
Proprietors of the Kennebec Purchase, 2
Proprietors of West Jersey, 1
Providence, R. I., 96
Providence (ship), 217
Prune Street Prison, Philadelphia, 37, 38, 39, 63, 165
Publications of the Colonial Society of Massachusetts, 27, note
Public land, demands for, 276
grants distributed, 276
Pulteney, Sir William, 59, 60, 74, 76
Pulteney Association, 74
Pulteney Purchase, 74–77, 79
“Pulteney Purchase, The,” Paul D. Evans, 77, note
Purcell, R. J., 123, note
Putnam, Rufus, 46, 101, 104
Putnam County, N. Y., 189
Quarterly Journal of the New York State Historical Association, 77, note
Railroad land grants, 38, 242, 276
extent of, 285
first, 278
sale in lots, 282
Railroad Promotion and Capitalization in the United States, Cleveland and Powell, 277, note
Railroads, 77
bond issues, 287
construction, 318
early operation not profitable, 285
eastern capitalists in, 280
extent of land jobbing, 275–293
land companies as subsidiaries of, 304
land speculation by promoters, 375
main activity of early, 282
mergers, 330
plan for first transcontinental, 286
rage for building, 277
right to own real estate, 277
rights of way, 277
terminal land speculation, 279, 290
transcontinental, 316
(see also under separate headings)
Rambouillet, France, 90
Randolph, John, 46, 136, 140
Rantoul, Robert, Jr., 280
Real estate corporations, 327, 337, 342

Reavis, James Addison, 273–274
Records and Proceedings of the Ohio Company, The, Archer B. Hulbert, 104, note
Redfield, Herman, 86
Red River (New Mexico), 272
Red River Valley, N. D., 306
Redstone, Pa., 9
Remsen, William, 40
Renée, M., architect, 94
Report, California Land Colonization Commission, 270, note
Retail Credit Company of Atlanta, 338
Retrospection, Hubert Howe Bancroft, notes, 173, 262, 263, 268
Revolutionary War, 11–13, 17–19, 25, 26, 29–53, 54, 97, 111, 154
Reynolds, Robert, 183
Rhode Island, 272
Richardson, Albert D., 315
Richmond, Va., 195
Ridgeway, Jacob, 189
Ringling, Charles, 336, 351
Ringling, John, 336, 351
Rio Grande River, 270
Roanoke, Va., 136, 140
Roberts, Kenneth, 337
Roberts, Milnor W., 299, 310
Robertson, Felix, 221
Robertson, Sterling C., 220, 222
Robinson, John M., 220
Robinson & Co., Dwight P., 350
Rochester, N. Y., 45, 57
Rock Island, Ill., 237, 238
Rocky Mountains, 272
Roosevelt, Theodore, 127, note; 146
Rose, W. W., 342
Ross, Alexander, 20
Ross, David, 129
Rossie, N. Y., 95
Rukeyser, Meryle Stanley, 343
Russell, William, 196
Sackett, Nathaniel, 100–101
Sacramento, Calif., town lot “boom,” 265
Sacramento Town Company, 265
Sacramento Valley, 266
St. Augustine, Fla., 335
St. Clair, Arthur, 119, 122, 172, 181, 182
St. Clair, John Murray, 181
St. Clair Papers, William Henry Smith, 182, note
St. Genevieve, Mo., 195
St. Johns River, 244
St. Joseph Insurance Company, 333
St. Joseph Times, 333

St. Lawrence County, N. Y., 90, 91
St. Lawrence River, 40, 59, 64, 90
St. Leger, Major, 54
St. Louis, Mo., 193, 197, 207, 210, 212
fur business in, 198
Salem, Mass., 46, 53
Salisbury, Guy H., 251
Saltillo, Texas, 228
Sandoval Grant, 270
Sandusky, Ohio, 179
San Felipe de Austin, 216
Sanford, John F. A., 281
San Francisco, Calif., Limantour Claim, 264
squatter nuisance, 257, 261
water lots, 256–260, 262
San Marcial, N. M., 270
San Marcial Land and Improvement Company, 270
Santa Clara Valley, 261
Santa Fé, N. M., 270, 273, 274
Santillan, priest, 264–265
Santillan Grant, 264–265
Saratoga, Battle of, 54
Saratoga and Sackett’s Harbor Railroad, 26
Sargent, George B., 297
Sargent, John, 16
Sargent, Thomas D., 267, 268
Sargent, Winthrop, 106, 113
Saturday Evening Post, 337
Savannah, Ga., 144
Say, George, 84
Schuyler, Peter, 56
Schuyler, Philip, on Macomb’s Great Purchase, 67
Schuyler, Robert, 281
Schuylkill River, 62, 166
Scioto Associates, 103–110
Scioto Project, 103–110
Scioto River, 102, 108, 113
Scioto Valley, 176
Scott, Thomas A., 301
Scottish Illinois Land Investment Company, 246
Seaboard Air Line, 346
Sears, William, 295
Seattle, Wash., railroad and land “booms,” 323
Second Bank of the United States, The, Ralph C. H. Catterall, 178, note
Seguin, Juan M., 227
Senate Report No. 354, 32nd Congress, 1st Session, 200, note
Seneca Lake, 55, 62
Seventy Years of an Active Life, Louis Sterne, 230, note
Sevier, John, 13, 127, 128, 131, 135
Seward, William H., 251

agent for the Holland Land Company, 84
Seybert, Adam, 210
Shee, John, 21
Sherman, Charles E., 271
Sherman family, 123
Shorter, John, 144
Sibbald, George, 144
Sierra Nevada Mountains, 267, 270
Silver King Mining Company, 273
Sir William Johnson Papers, The, notes, 4, 16
Six Nations, 17
decline, 54
land purchases from, 23
Sketches of America, etc., Henry Bradshaw Fearon, 187, note
Slavery, struggle of free-staters against, 314
Smith, George, 246
Smith, Hugh N., 270
Smith, John Gregory, 301
Smith, Lyman C., 324
Smith, Melancthon, 67, 107
Smith, Peter, 262
Smith, William Henry, 182, note
Smith, W. S., 60
Smithfield, Va., 44
Snipes, William Clay, 125
Sobriety township, N. Y., 97
Society in America, Harriet Martineau, 249; 250, note
Society, Manners and Politics in the United States, Michael Chevalier, notes, 233, 239
Sodus, N. Y., 75
Softenburg, Baron von (see Parish, George)
Soulard, Antoine, 197
Soulé, Frank, notes, 257, 258, 259
Southard, S. L., 199
South Carolina, 4, 49, 143
claims in Yazoo country, 124, 125
South Carolina Yazoo Company, 125–129, 132
Southern Pacific Railway Company, 273, 274, 318
Southold, L. I., N. Y., 110
South Sea Bubble, 321
Spain, claims in Yazoo country, 124, 125
in Louisiana, 192–212
speculative colonial attitude, 1
Spanish grants, antedaters, 193–212
in California, 256
in New Mexico, 273
in West Florida, 210
peddled, 195
Specie Circular, 236–238
Sproat, David, 20
Spuyten Duyvil, 41

Stadnitzki, Peter, 62
Staël, Madame de, 42, 91, 93, 171
Stanton, Edwin M., 264
Staten Island, 326
lot “boom,” 252
State Papers, United States (see American State Papers)
Virginia Calendar of, 14
“Sterling, Lady Kitty,” 41
“Sterling, Lord,” 41
Sterne, Louis, 229; 230, note
Steuben County, N. Y., 77
Steubenville, Ohio, land office, 170
Stevens family, 252
Stewart, Senator, 302
Stiles, Ezra, 23
Stilwell, Silas M., 244, 245
Stites, Benjamin, 112
Stockbridge, Frank Parker, 343
Stockbridge, Mass., 55, note
Story, Franklin H., 271
Strawbridge, James, 140
Sturgis, Jonathan, 281
Suburban development, 326, 329
Suffield, Conn., 45
Sullivan, James, 46, 71
Sullivan, John W., 243
Sumner, Charles, 285
Sumner, William Graham, 59, note
Sumner, William H., 223
Superior, Wise, 246, 297
Supporter or Doily Repast, The, 37
Supreme Court, land decisions, 200, 203, 205, 265, 268
Survilliers, Count (see Bonaparte, Joseph)
Susquehannah Company, 22, 25
Susquehanna River, 23, 74, 150; 55, note
Sussex County, N. J., 111
Suter’s Tavern, 153
Sutter, John, 265–266, 272
Sutter Basin Company, 266
Swartout, Samuel, 223, 224, 226, 229, 252
Sweet, Leonard, 295
Symmes, John Cleves, 66, 110–119, 169
use of land “scrip,” 53
Symmes Purchase, 33, 172
T., John Smith, 196
Tacoma, Wash., land booms in, 322–324
Tacoma Land Company, 309, 322
Tahucano Indians, 221
Talleyrand, Charles Maurice, 51

Taney, Roger B., 199
Taylor, George Keith, 32, 44
Tennessee, 13, 127
emigrants to Texas, 214
Tennessee Company, 133, 135
Tennessee Yazoo Company, 126, 131
Texas, 200, 201, 255
European colonization, 230
fraudulent grants, 229
independent republic, 218
land booms in, 229–23I, 333
Mexican grants, 217–227
Mexican settlement restrictions, 222, 224–228
origin of immigrants, 214
Republic loan, 224
sale rumored, 218
settlement through empresarios, 213–231
Spanish land grants in, 213–217
war of independence, 229
Texas and Pacific Railroad, 273
Texas Association, 220–223, 229, 230
Texas Historical Association Quarterly Magazine, 229, note
Thomson, J. Edgar, 295
Thoughts on the Increasing Wealth, etc., Samuel Blodget, Jr., 156, note
Thurman, John, 26
Thurston, Charles M., 199
Toledo, Ohio, “boom” town, 247–248
founding, 174, 175
Tombigbee River, 126
“Tom Thumb,” 253
Tontine Association, 154
Topeka, Kansas, 315
Topeka Town Association, 316
Topographical . . . North America, Gilbert Imlay, 49
Tories, property confiscated, 26
Totten, Joseph, 25, 26, 28
Tour in America, A, Richard Parkinson, 51, note
Town jobbing, 172–178, 246–254, 279
in the Louisiana territory, 207–210
Town lots, speculation in, 209
Towns, development of, 313–330
Trails, Rails and War, the Life of General G. M. Dodge, J. R. Perkins, notes, 283, 287
Train, George Francis, 298, 304
career of, 288–293
“Transylvania,” 12
Transylvania Company, 12
Travels, Theodore Dwight, 82; notes, 135, 137, 143
Travels, Timothy Dwight, 32, note
Travels, etc., La Rochefoucauld, 137, 162–164; notes, 147, 168
Travels in America, Isaac Weld, 76; notes, 160, 163

Travels in America, Performed in 1806, Thomas Ashe, notes, 110, 118
Travels in the United States of America, William Priest, 52
Treat, Pay son Jackson, notes, 57, 106, 169
Trenton, N. J., 149
Trenton Falls, N. Y., 35, 150
Tribune, New York, 284
Trinity Corporation, 190
Triplet, Robert, 227
Trollope, Anthony, on the aim of railroads, 282
Troup, Robert, 56, 76
Trudeau, Zenon, 194
Trumbull, Jonathan, 24
Truth About Florida, The, Charles Donald Fox, 342
Turner, O., 75, note
Union Pacific Railroad, 254, 283, 289
United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies, 20, 31, 35, 38, 112
United States, immigration expected, 31
Indian policy, 124, 128
land grants to soldiers, 105
land sale statistics, 235
public land auctions, 234
small scale land sales, 117, 169, 233
state papers (see American State Papers)
Texas purchase rumored, 218
western land cession, 33, 99
Yazoo claims conflicts, 124, 136
Upper Mississippi Land Company, 133, 137
Upper Trinity River, 230
Valencia County, N. M., 270
Van Buren, Martin, 190
Vandalia Company, 16, 17, 25
Van Dyke, T. S., 321
Van Sweringen, Mantis P., 329
Van Sweringen, Orvis P., 329
Vehlein, Joseph, 223, 226
Venable, Abraham B., 129
Vermont, 26–28
Vespucci, Madame, 95
Vibbard, Chauncey, 295
Vicksburg, Miss., 125
View of the Title to Indiana, Samuel
Wharton, 18
View of the United States of America, Tench Coxe, 48
Vigo, Francois, 183
Villard, Henry, 309, 323
Vincennes, Ind., 112, 180, 181
Virginia, 129, 213
and the Federal City, 148

Calendar of State Papers, 14
city building in, 325
economic changes, 11
emigrants to Texas, 214
Gorham land in, 45
land fraud in, 44
land grants by, 3–5, 8
military land warrants, 32, 176, 177
pre-Revolutionary claims in Northwest Territory, 180
Virginia Military Reserve, 176, 177
Virginia Yazoo Company, 126, 129–131
Visit to North America, etc., Adlard Welby, 187, note
Wabash Land Company, 19
(see also United Illinois and Wabash Land Companies)
Wabash River, 19, 112
Waco Indians, 221
Waco, Texas, 221
Wadsworth, James, 45, 57
as Burr’s agent, 79
in the “Gore” controversy, 71
land peddling, 57, 58
Wadsworth, Jeremiah, 40
and the Bank of Hartford, 45
and the Bank of New York, 45
Genesee River land purchase, 57
Wadsworth family, as “Lords of Geneseo,” 58
Waggoner, Clark, 175, note
Walcott, Roger, 23
Walker, Dr. Thomas, 4, 13
Wallace, J. B., 79
Wall Street Journal, 346
Walpole, Thomas, 16
Walpole Grant, 16
Walsh, Thomas (see “Washington,” Thomas)
Wanborough, Ohio, 188
Ward, Andrew, 69
Ward, Samuel, 95–96
War of 1812, 77, 95
Warren County, N. Y., 25
Warville, Brissot de, 49
Washington, Augustine, 4
Washington, George, 28
attitude on “Indian Boundary,” 20
dislike of land jobbing, 11
in the Washington “boom,” 150–157
in the Yazoo land troubles, 127–132, 138
land interests, 4–12, 14
Washington, H. A., notes, 128, 207 Washington, Lawrence, 4
Washington, Lund, 9

Washington, Martha, 161
“Washington,” Thomas, 125
Washington, D. C., George Washington’s land interests in, 12
land “boom,” 147–168
land lotteries, 155–156
land speculation at founding, 37, 38
Washington County, Ga., 142, 144
“Washington’s Interest in Western Lands,” Herbert B. Adams, notes, 7, 8
Washita River, 201
Watkins, Francis, 129
Watkins, partner of Greenleaf, 37
Watson, Jacob, 26
Watson, James, 37, 40, 70
Wavell, Arthur G., 217
Wayne, James M., 205
Webster, Daniel, in land litigation, 190, 199, 205
lawyer for eastern capitalists, 280
on land grants for internal improvements, 276
on land speculation, 236–238
Webster, Pelatiah, 24
Welby, Adlard, 187
Weld, Isaac, 75, 160, 163; 76, note
Wentworth, Benning, 27
Wentworth, John, 283
Wereat, John, 132
Western Land Association, 294
Western Land Association of Minnesota, 298
Western Reserve, 45, 71, 119–123
West Florida, Spanish grants, 210
West Indies, 44
West Virginia, 17, 32
Wethersfield, Conn., 20
Weyerhaeusers, 308
Wharton, Joseph, 16
Wharton, Samuel, 16–18
Whitcomb, Henry, 324
Whitestone, L. I., N. Y., 40
Whitney, Asa, 286
Whitney, James G., 270
Whitney, Joel P., 270
Whitney, Stephen, 189
Wichita River, 201, 202
Wickwire, Ward S., 350
Wilkesbarre Gazette, 75
Wilkinson, James, 119, 127–129, 172, 196, 202, 206
in Texas, 217
William B. Ogden and the Early Days in Chicago, Isaac N. Arnold, 254, note
Williams, Samuel M., 219, 222, 228
Williamsburg, Pa., 74
Williamsburg, Va., 148

Williamson, Charles, 74–77, 79
Williamsport, Pa., 74
Willing, George M., Jr., 273
Willing, Thomas, 35
Willink, W. & J., 62, 74
Wilson, Henry, 287
Wilson, James, 20, 21, 29, 38, 60, 135, 144
military land warrant trading, 32
Wimico and St. Joseph Land Company, 332
Windham, Conn., 23
Windsor, Conn., 45
Winning of the West, The, Theodore Roosevelt, notes, 127, 146
Winter, Elisha, 204
Winterbottom, William, 49
Wirt, William, 208
Woburn, Mass., 154
Wolcott, Alexander, 71
Wolcott, Oliver, 70
Wolf, Charles J. Michael de, 88
Woodward, P. H., 123, note
Works, Hubert Howe Bancroft, notes, 264, 269
Works, Thomas Jefferson, 128; 207, note
Works, George Washington, 157, note
Works of Daniel Webster, The, notes, 236, 276
Works of Henry Clay, 238, note
Wright, John S., 283
Writings of George Washington, The, notes, 153, 154, 155
Wurtz Brothers, 79
Wyandotte Indians, 316
Wyoming (Pennsylvania country), 22
Yale College, 23, 101
Yazoo country, cession to United States, 137
South Carolina claims, 124, 125
Spanish claims, 124, 125
Yazoo Land Companies, The, Charles Homer Haskins, notes, 126, 127, 129, 130, 141
Yazoo land frauds, 124–141
Yazoo River, 125
Year’s Residence in the United States of America, A, William Cobbett, 187, note
Yerba Buena, Calif., 259, 261
Yonkers, N. Y., 328
York Lord, 19
York Pa, 20
Youghioghehy River, 5, 8
Young, John P., notes, 258, 262
Young, Notiey, 158
Yrujo, Marques de 39
Zavala Lorenzo de 223, 226

