= The Oxford Handbook of
SPONTANEOUS
THOUGHT
MIND-WANDERING, CREATIVITY, AND DREAMING

The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought

O X F O R D  L I BR AR Y  OF P S Y C H O L O G Y
A r e a  E d i t o r s
Clinical Psychology 
David H. Barlow
Cognitive Neuroscience
Kevin N. Ochsner and Stephen M. Kosslyn
Cognitive Psychology 
Daniel Reisberg
Counseling Psychology
Elizabeth M. Altmaier and Jo-Ida C. Hansen
Developmental Psychology 
Philip David Zelazo
Health Psychology 
Howard S. Friedman
History o f Psychology 
David B. Baker
Methods and Measurement 
Todd D. Little
Neuropsychology 
Kenneth M. Adams
Organizational Psychology 
Steve W. J. Kozlowski
Personality and Social Psychology 
Kay Deaux and Mark Snyder

O X F O R D  
L I B R A R Y  O F  
P S Y C H O L O G Y
The Oxford Handbook 
of Spontaneous Thought
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G ,  C R E A T I V I T Y ,
A N D  D R E A M I N G
Edited by
Kieran C. R. Fox 
Kalina Christoff
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS

OXFORD
U N IV E R S IT Y  P R E S S
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers 
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education 
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University 
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2018
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted 
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction 
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the 
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the 
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Fox, Kieran C. R., editor. | Christoff, Kalina, editor.
Title: The Oxford handbook of spontaneous thought: mind-wandering, creativity, and dreaming / 
edited by Kieran C. R. Fox and Kalina Christoff.
Description: New York, NY : Oxford University Press, [2018] |
Series: Oxford library of psychology | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017035192 | ISBN 9780190464745 (hardcover : alk. paper) | ISBN 9780190464769 (epub) 
Subjects: LCSH: Creative thinking. | Thought and thinking. | Cognition.
Classification: LCC BF408 .094 2018 | DDC 154.3—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017035192
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed by Sheridan Books, Inc., United States of America

S H O R T  C O N T E N T S
About the Editors 
vii 
Contributors 
ix 
Table of Contents 
xiii 
Chapters 
1-594
Index 
595


A B O U T  T H E  E D I T O R S
Kieran C. R. Fox
Kieran C. R. Fox studied neuroscience, philosophy, and world religions dur­
ing his undergraduate degree at McGill University. He used functional neu­
roimaging to study the cognitive neuroscience of meditation and spontaneous 
thought during his Masters and PhD at the University of British Columbia, 
working with Dr. Kalina Christoff. Currently, he is using intracranial electroen­
cephalography to pursue these lines of research in the Department of Neurology 
at Stanford University, working with Dr. Josef Parvizi.
Kalina Christoff
Kalina Christoff is a Professor of Psychology at the University of British 
Columbia in Vancouver, Canada. Her work focuses on understanding human 
thought, using a combination of functional neuroimaging (fMRI), behavioral 
testing, and theoretical work.
vii


C O N T R I B U T O R S
Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna
Department of Psychology and
Interdisciplinary Program in Cognitive 
Science
University of Arizona 
Tucson, Arizona, United States 
John S. Antrobus
Department of Psychology 
City University of New York 
New York, New York, United States 
Roger E. Beaty
Department of Psychology 
Center for Brain Science 
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States 
Mathias Benedek
Institute of Psychology 
University of Graz 
Graz, Austria 
Boris C. Bernhardt
Neuroimaging of Epilepsy Lab 
Montreal Neurological Institute 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
David Q. Beversdorf
Department of Radiology, Neurology, and 
Psychology
University of Missouri 
Columbia, Missouri, United States 
Kalina Christoff
Centre for Brain Health 
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Arnaud D’Argembeau
Department of Psychology 
Psychology and Neuroscience of 
Cognition Research Unit 
University of Liege 
Liege, Belgium
Charles Dobson
Emily Carr University of Art and Design 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
G. William Domhoff
Department of Psychology 
University of California 
Santa Cruz, California, United States 
Elizabeth DuPre
Laboratory of Brain and Cognition 
Montreal Neurological Institute 
Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Halvor Eifring
Department of Culture Studies and 
Oriental Languages 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
Myrthe Faber
Department of Psychology 
University of Notre Dame 
South Bend, Indiana, United States 
Leo Ferraro
Department of Psychology 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Kieran C. R. Fox
Department of Neurology and 
Neurological Sciences 
Stanford University 
Stanford, California, United States 
Manesh Girn
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Todd C. Handy
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
IX

Wendy Hasenkamp
Mind &C Life Institute 
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States 
Arianne Herrera-Bennett
Munich Center of the Learning Sciences 
Ludwig Maximilions University Munich 
Munich, Germany 
Muireann Irish
Neuroscience Research Australia 
School of Psychology 
University of New South Wales 
Sydney, Australia 
Zachary C. Irving
Departments of Philosophy and 
Psychology
University of California, Berkeley 
Berkeley, California, United States 
Emanuel Jauk
Institute of Psychology 
University of Graz 
Graz, Austria 
Elizabeth Jefferies
Department of Psychology 
York Neuroimaging Centre 
University of York 
York, England, United Kingdom 
Rex E. Jung
Department of Neurosurgery 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, New Mexico,
United States 
Julia W. Y. Kam
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute 
University of California 
Berkeley, California, United States 
Laurence J. Kirmayer
Division of Social and Transcultural 
Psychiatry 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Eric Klinger
Department of Psychology 
University of Minnesota 
Morris, Minnesota, United States 
Ernst H. W. Koster
Department of Experimental-Clinical and 
Health Psychology 
Ghent University 
Ghent, Belgium
Aaron Kucyi
Department of Neurology and 
Neurological Sciences 
Stanford University 
Stanford, California, United States 
Daniella M. Kupor
Questrom School of Business 
Marketing Department 
Boston University
Boston, Massachusetts, United States 
Michael Lifshitz
Integrated Program in Neuroscience 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
John H. Mace
Department of Psychology 
Eastern Illinois University 
Charleston, Illinois, United States 
Marek Malus
Department of Psychology 
University of Ostrava 
Ostrava, Czech Republic 
Igor Marchetti
Department of Experimental-Clinical and 
Health Psychology 
Ghent University 
Ghent, Belgium 
Daniel Margulies
Neuroanatomy and Connectivity Group 
Max Planck Institute for Human and 
Cognitive Brain Sciences 
Leipzig, Germany 
Thomas Metzinger
Philosophisches Seminar 
Gutenberg Research College 
Johannes Gutenberg-Universitat Mainz 
Mainz, Germany 
Caitlin Mills
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Carey K. Morewedge
Questrom School of Business 
Marketing Department 
Boston University
Boston, Massachusetts, United States
x
C O N T R I B U T O R S

Tore Nielsen
Centre for Advanced Research in Sleep 
Medicine
University of Montreal 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Georg Northoff
Institute of Mental Health Research 
University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
Claire O’Callaghan
Department of Psychology 
University of Cambridge 
Cambridge, England, United Kingdom 
Alex Soojung-Kim Pang 
The Restful Company 
Palo Alto, California, United States
A. Dennis Rank
A. Dennis Rank Associates 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Jonathan W. Schooler
Department of Psychology 
University of California 
Santa Barbara, California, United States 
Paul Seli
Department of Psychology 
Harvard University 
02138 Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
United States 
Eli Oda Sheiner
Division of Social and Transcultural 
Psychiatry 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Dean Keith Simonton
Department of Psychology 
University of California, Davis 
Davis, California, United States 
Jonathan Smallwood
Department of Psychology 
York Neuroimaging Centre 
University of York 
York, England, United Kingdom 
Daniel Smilek
Department of Psychology
University of Waterloo
N2L 3G1 Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Elizaveta Solomonova
Centre for Advanced Research in Sleep 
Medicine
University of Montreal 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
R. Nathan Spreng
Laboratory of Brain and Cognition 
Montreal Neurological Institute 
Department of Neurology and 
Neurosurgery 
McGill University 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
Chandra S. Sripada
Departments of Philosophy and 
Psychiatry
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States 
Dylan Stan
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
David Stawarczyk
Department of Psychology, Psychology 
and Neuroscience of Cognition 
Research Unit 
University of Liege 
Liege, Belgium 
Peter Suedfeld
Department of Psychology 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Evan Thompson
Department of Philosophy 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Oshin Vartanian
Department of Psychology 
University of Toronto Scarborough 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
John Vervaeke
Department of Psychology 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Ursula Voss
Institut fur Psychologie
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universitat
Frankfurt, Germany
C O N T R I B U T O R S
XI

Jeffrey D. Wammes
Department of Psychology 
University of Waterloo 
N2L 3G1 Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 
Erin J. Wamsley
Department of Psychology and Program 
in Neuroscience 
Furman University 
Greenville, South Carolina,
United States
Jennifer M. Windt
School of Philosophical, Historical and 
International Studies 
Monash University 
Melbourne, Australia 
Claire M. Zedelius
Department of Psychology
University of California
Santa Barbara, California, United States
xu
C O N T R I B U T O R S

C O N T E N T S
Part I 
• 
Introduction and Overview
1. Introduction: Toward an Interdisciplinary Science 
of Spontaneous Thought 
3
Kieran C. R. Fox and Kalina Christoff
Part II 
• 
Theoretical Perspectives
2. Why the Mind Wanders: How Spontaneous Thoughts Default Variability 
May Support Episodic Efficiency and Semantic Optimization 
n  
Caitlin Mills, Arianne Herrera-Bennett, Myrthe Faber, and Kalina Christoff
3. An Exploration/Exploitation Trade-off Between Mind-Wandering 
and Goal-Directed Thinking 
23
Chandra S. Sripada
4. When the Absence of Reasoning Breeds Meaning: Metacognitive 
Appraisals of Spontaneous Thought 
35
Carey K  Morewedge and Daniella M. Kupor
5. The Mind Wanders with Ease: Low Motivational Intensity 
Is an Essential Quality of Mind-Wandering 
47
Dylan Stan and Kalina Christoff
6. How Does the Brains Spontaneous Activity Generate Our Thoughts?
The Spatio temporal Theory of Task-Unrelated Thought (STTT) 
55 
Georg Northoff
7. Investigating the Elements of Thought: Toward a Component Process 
Account of Spontaneous Cognition 
71
Jonathan Smallwood, Daniel Margulies, Boris C. Bernhardt, 
and Elizabeth Jefferies
Part III 
• 
Philosophical, Evolutionary, 
and Historical Perspectives
8. The Philosophy of Mind-Wandering 
87 
Zachary C. Irving and Evan Thompson
9. Why Is Mind-Wandering Interesting for Philosophers? 
97
Thomas Metzinger
10. Spontaneity in Evolution, Learning, Creativity, and Free
Will: Spontaneous Variation in Four Selectionist Phenomena 
113
Dean Keith Simonton
xiii

11. How Does the Waking and Sleeping Brain Produce Spontaneous Thought 
and Imagery, and Why? 
123
John S. Antrohus
12. Spontaneous Thinking in Creative Lives: Building Connections Between 
Science and History 
133
Alex Soojung-Kim Pang
Part IV • 
Mind-Wandering and Daydreaming
13. The Neuroscience of Spontaneous Thought: An Evolving 
Interdisciplinary Field 
143
Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna, Zachary C. Irving, Kieran C. R. Fox,
R. Nathan Spreng, and Kalina Christoff
14. Neural Origins of Self-Generated Thought: Insights from Intracranial 
Electrical Stimulation and Recordings in Humans
Kieran C. R. Fox
15. Mind-Wandering and Self-Referential Thought 
181
Arnaud DArgembeau
16. Phenomenological Properties of Mind-Wandering and Daydreaming:
A Historical Overview and Functional Correlates 
193
David Stawarczyk
17. Spontaneous Thought and Goal Pursuit: From Functions Such 
as Planning to Dysfunctions Such as Rumination 
215
Eric Klinger, Igor Marchetti, and Ernst H. W. Koster
18. Unraveling What’s on Our Minds: How Different Types 
of Mind-Wandering Affect Cognition and Behavior 
233 
Claire M. Zedelius and Jonathan W. Schooler
19. Electrophysiological Evidence for Attentional Decoupling during 
Mind-Wandering 
249
Julia W. Y. Kam and Todd C. Handy
20. Mind-Wandering in Educational Settings 
259 
Jeffrey D. Wammes, Paul Seli, and Daniel Smilek
Part V • 
Creativity and Insight
21. Interacting Brain Networks Underlying Creative Cognition 
and Artistic Performance 
275
Roger E. Beaty and Rex E. Jung
22. Spontaneous and Controlled Processes in Creative Cognition 
285 
Mathias Benedek and Emanuel Jauk
23. Wandering and Direction in Creative Production 
299 
Charles Dobson
24. Flow as Spontaneous Thought: Insight and Implicit Learning 
309 
John Vervaeke, Leo Ferraro, and Arianne Herrera-Bennett
xiv
C O N T E N T S

25. Internal Orientation in Aesthetic Experience 
327 
Oshin Vartanian
26. Neuropsychopharmacology of Flexible and Creative Thinking 
337 
David Q. Beversdorf
Part VI 
• 
Sleep, Dreaming, and Memory
27. Dreaming Is an Intensified Form of Mind-Wandering, Based 
in an Augmented Portions of the Default Network 
355
G. William Domhoff
28. Neural Correlates of Self-Generated Imagery and Cognition Throughout 
the Sleep Cycle 
371
Kieran C. R. Fox and Manesh Girn
29. Spontaneous Thought, Insight, and Control in Lucid Dreams 
385 
Jennifer M. Windt and Ursula Voss
30. Microdream Neurophenomenology: A Paradigm for Dream 
Neuroscience 
411
Tore Nielsen
31. Sleep Paralysis: Phenomenology, Neurophysiology, and Treatment 
435 
Elizaveta Solomonova
32. Dreaming and Waking Thought as a Reflection 
of Memory Consolidation 
457
Erin J. Wamsley
33. Involuntary Autobiographical Memories: Spontaneous Recollections 
of the Past 
469
John H. Mace
Part VII 
• 
Clinical Contexts, Contemplative Traditions, and 
Altered States of Consciousness
34. Potential Clinical Benefits and Risks of Spontaneous Thought: 
Unconstrained Attention as a Way into and a Way out
of Psychological Disharmony 
479
Dylan Stan and Kalina Christoff
35. Candidate Mechanisms of Spontaneous Cognition as Revealed by 
Dementia Syndromes 
493
Claire O'Callaghan and Muireann Irish
36. Rumination Is a Sticky Form of Spontaneous Thought 
509 
Elizabeth DuPre and R. Nathan Spreng
37. Pain and Spontaneous Thought 
521 
Aaron Kucyi
38. Spontaneous Thought in Contemplative Traditions 
529 
Halvor Eifring
39. Catching the Wandering Mind: Meditation as a Window into 
Spontaneous Thought 
539
Wendy Hasenkamp
C O N T E N T S
XV

40. Spontaneous Mental Experiences in Extreme and Unusual 
Environments 
553
Peter Suedfeld, A. Dennis Rank, and Marek Malus
41. Cultural Neurophenomenology of Psychedelic Thought: Guiding the 
“Unconstrained” Mind Through Ritual Context 
573
Michael Lifshitz, Eli Oda Sheiner, and Laurence J. Kirmayer
Index jyy
XVI
C O N T E N T S

The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought


Strong
Weak
Rumination and obsessive thought
Spontaneous thought
■
Goal-directed
thought
Dreaming
Mind­
Creative
wandering
thinking
Weak
Deliberate constraints
Strong
Figure 1.1. Conceptual space relating different types of thought and their constraints. Reproduced, with permission, from Christoff et al. 
(2016).
>  Pattern Separation
Entorhinal
Cortex
Figure 2.1. Diagram representing the pathways for pattern completion and pattern separation from the cortex to the medial 
temporal lobe (and back to the cortex).
Memory encoded 
Reactivation 1
•  O q O
oocdpo
°o*o2op
oS?>o*
n ° n * °
go9£o
oocS9o
Q
°%s°
oo Non-overlapping features 
suppressed
Reactivation 2
Overlapping features, 
0  strengthened 
over-reactivations
oocS?o
° n ^ o » o «
• o ^ o 0 o
o2o#2
0g8°
Figure 2.2. Graphic illustration of how overlapping features are preserved and non-overlapping features are suppressed.

Sequential Firing: Clustered Learning
little time in between replay, increased associations over time 
De-correlated Due to Spacing across Time
lower probability of occurring sequentially 
due to content variability
Figure 2.3. Examples of low variability in thought (top), corresponding to clustered learning, and highly variable thought content 
(bottom), corresponding to de-correlated memories via temporally spaced memories in spontaneous thoughts.
Process modelt
Content model1
Brain’s spontaneous
c 
. 
, 
activity and its
\n iit in t p m n n r a l 
J
Figure 6.1. Spatiotemporal theory of task-unrelated thought (STTT).
Somatically 
guided contents
Perceptually 
guided contents
Spatiotemporal integration within the 
spontaneous activity
Spatiotemporal binding between stimuli
Interoceptive 
stimuli
Figure 6.2. Spatiotemporal integration and binding.

Faster frequency with higher 
and lower amplitudes
Slower frequency phase 
with troughs and peaks
Figure 6.3. Schematic illustration of cross-frequency coupling.
Extension of self-generated contents 
(prefrontal) to perceptually guided 
contents (visual cortex)
—
:------------►
Functional connectivity from
prefrontal to visual cortex
-------------------►
Functional connectivity from visual 
cortex to insula
Extension of perceptually guided 
contents (visual cortex) to somatically 
guided contents (insula)
Transformation of 
contents into thoughts
Degree of functional 
connectivity
Figure 6.4. Spatial extension of contents into thoughts.
High
frequencies
Low
frequencies
Infraslow
frequencies
Discrete point in time of 
a particular content
Temporal extension of 
the content along the 
cycle duration of slower 
frequencies
Transformation of 
contents into thoughts
Degree of cross­
frequency coupling
Figure 6.5. Temporal extension of contents into thoughts.

Dimensions
Group level
■ft
Laboratory Task
Probe level data
I
Components
High
Low
OfFTask 
Other 
Past 
Self 
Future 
Positive 
Negative
F 
P 
E
OfFTask
Other
Past
Self
Future
F
P u
High
Low
Figure 7.1. Multi dimensional experience sampling (MDES). Participants are asked to provide information on multiple different 
aspects of their ongoing experience.
Posterior Cingulate
Figure 7.3. Spatial distribution of the core hubs of the default mode network.
|
 Ventral attention
Executive Control
|
 Default Mode Network
|
 Medial Occipital
Limbic System
Sensorimotor
Dorsal Attention
Network
Figure 7.4. Default mode network as observed in tasks and at rest.

Figure 7.5. Relationship between the default mode network and the semantic and episodic systems.
Figure 7.6. Evidence of perceptual decoupling during spontaneous thought.

A
Specific Semantic Association
B
Meta-cognition for Episodic Memory
Left
1140
1120
2  1060 ■
1040 ■
1020 ------.------------.---
Superordinate 
Specific
c
Specific Spontaneous Thought
D
Neural Activity in Easy Tasks
Figure 7.7. The role of parietal cortex in specific memory retrieval.
Figure 13.1. A dynamic model of spontaneous thought. Spontaneous thought spans a conceptual space, inclusive of night dreaming, 
mind-wandering, and creative thought, that is relatively free from two kinds of constraints: (1) deliberate constraints (x-axis), and 
(2) automatic constraints (y-axis). According to this model, adapted and extended from Christoff and colleagues (2016), ruminative 
and obsessive thought are not truly spontaneous in nature due to strong bottom-up, “automatic” constraints that bias their 
content. The dynamics of thought—the way thoughts unfold and flow over time—represent an important element of this model.
As shown in the bottom left box, thoughts that are free from both kinds of constraints should transition relatively quickly and span 
different phenomenological content (represented by different colors). Conversely, excessively constrained thoughts should have longer 
durations with similar content (bottom right box).

Figure 13.3. Meta-analytic findings reveal neuroimaging correlates of task-unrelated and/or stimulus-independent thought. A meta­
analysis of 10 fMRI studies demonstrates that many regions within the brains default network (outlined in blue, using 7-network 
parcellations from Yeo et al., 2011) and the frontoparietal control network (outlined in red) are reliably engaged across studies of 
task-unrelated and/or stimulus-independent thought. Regions within the default network include: medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), 
posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC, a part of the medial temporal subsystem; see Yeo et al., 2011), inferior 
parietal lobule (IPL), angular gyrus (AngG), superior temporal sulcus (STS), and ventral lateral PFC (vlPFC). Regions within the 
frontoparietal control network include: rostral lateral prefrontal cortex (rlPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), and precuneus 
(preC). Regions spanning other networks include mid insula (mid-ins), somatosensory cortex (SS), and temporal pole (TP, extending 
into the dorsal medial subsystem of the default network). Note that the fMRI studies included in the meta-analysis do not differentiate 
between spontaneous and constrained forms of thinking, so it is unclear which regions are involved in spontaneous thought, and which 
are involved in exerting constraints on those thoughts (see text).
Creative Idea Evaluation > Generation
^MFFC^V. 
RLPFC 
•RLRFC
A-INS
/ -----
TPC
ikLj
TPC
' 
1 Jr  Arj \
DACC \  
/
r] DLPFC*
>DLPFC
A 
*
PCC*
PREC*
#
\  r ^  J
. ^
Y* 
wT nr 
m >TPJ
r
-20
1 9V *
+28
+44
Figure 13.4. Neural underpinnings of night dreaming and creative thought. (A) A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on REM 
sleep (a sleep stage characterized by dreaming) reveals greater activity in a number of brain regions compared to awake rest. Among 
others, these include medial temporal and medial prefrontal regions within the default network, and visual cortex. (B) Creative thinking 
is associated with distinct temporal activity dynamics. The medial temporal lobe becomes engaged to a greater degree early in the 
creative process while generating a creative idea. Other regions within the default network, as well as key frontoparietal control network 
regions, become engaged to a greater degree during later stages of creative thinking, when evaluating creative ideas. A-INS = anterior 
insula; dACC = dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC = dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex; CBL = cerebellum; HPC = hippocampus; IPL = inferior parietal 
lobule; MPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; PHC = parahippocampus; PMA = premotor area (PMA); PCC = posterior cingulate cortex; PREC = precuneus; 
TPC = temporopolar cortex; TPJ = temporoparietal junction. Figures adapted from Fox et al., 2015 (A), and Ellamil et al., 2011 (B).

Figure 14.1. Meta-analysis of brain areas consistently recruited by self-generated forms of thought. Meta-analytic clusters indicating 
brain regions consistently recruited across various forms of spontaneous and self-generated thought. Outline of the frontoparietal (red) 
and default (blue) networks are shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission from Fox et al. (2015).
Figure 14.2. Brain regions recruited during the self-generation of creative ideas. Activations throughout the brain during 
the generation of visual artwork. Numbers indicate z-coordinates in MNI space. HPC: hippocampus; IPL: inferior parietal lobule; 
PHC: parahippocampus; PMA: premotor area. Reproduced with permission from Ellamil et al. (2012).

A- Left hippocampus
B. Right hippocampus
-2 0 2 4 6 8 10 
Time (s)
. Left parahippocampus
E.
0
■2 0 2 4 6 8 10 
Time (s)
Posterior cingulate cortex
0-15 -I 
S 0.10 -
- °'05'Au
|  o.oo ^
J  -0.05 - 
^
- 0.10 - 
-A
G.
■2 0 2 4 6 8 10 
Time (s)
Rostral anterior cingulate
D. Right parahippocampus
0.15 ■
0.10 -
4 - 2  0 2 4 6 8 10 
Time (s)
F. Inferior parietal lobule
0.15 -I 
0.10 - 
, U 
0.05 - 
0.00 
-0.05 - 
- 0.10
4 - 2  0 2 4 6 8 10 
Time (s)
H. Posterior insula
©
Figure 14.3. Time-course of brain regions where activation peaks just prior to awareness of spontaneously arising of thoughts. Brain 
regions where activation peaked prior to the conscious awareness of a spontaneous thought arising are indicated by the button-press 
icon. Note that although the results suggest an important role for the medial temporal lobe, the temporal resolution of fMRI could 
not distinguish these early activations from those in other brain regions, such as the posterior cingulate cortex and rostral anterior 
cingulate. Reproduced with permission from Ellamil et al. (2016).
Figure 14.4. Preferential involvement of medial temporal lobe structures and the temporopolar cortex in electrophysiological 
stimulations (or spontaneous discharges) eliciting memories, thoughts, mental imagery, or hallucinatory, dream-like 
experiences. Percentage of stimulations or spontaneous discharges that elicited a first-person experience of memories, thoughts, 
or hallucinatory, dream-like experiences, based on more than 100 independent investigations. Not shown are data for hundreds 
of other stimulations throughout the brain, for which no such thought- or dream-like experiences have ever been reported. Only 
brain areas with >10 stimulations or discharges reported in the literature are visualized. HPC: hippocampus; IPL: inferior parietal lobule; 
ITG: inferior temporal gyrus; MTG: middle temporal gyrus; PHC: parahippocampal cortex; PMC: posteromedial cortex; STG: superior temporal 
gyrus; TOJ: temporo-occipital junction; TPC: temporopolar cortex.Drawn from data in our Table 14.1, based on data in Supplementary Table 1 of the 
comprehensive review of Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi (2010); updated and modified based on my previously published figure (Fox et al., 2016).

Figure 14.5. Null effects of electrical brain stimulation in the posteromedial cortex default network hub. Summary figure showing 
subjective effects produced by electrical brain stimulation of various regions of the medial posterior portions of cerebral cortex. More 
dorsal stimulations preferentially evoke motor effects (red circles), and more ventral stimulations largely evoke visual effects (green 
circles). Some 248 stimulations of more central regions, however (white circles), corresponding closely to a major hub of the default 
network and overlapping with numerous regions known to be recruited by self-generated thought (see Figure 14.1), resulted in no 
discernible subjective effects of any kind. Reproduced with permission from Foster & Parvizi (2017).
C
CNV
Mind-Wandering
Fz
■ oddball 
standard
100 
200 
300 
400
Time (ms)
Parietal Target P3
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Figure 19.1. Attenuation of external responses during mind-wandering. This pattern of attenuation was observed in several types 
of responses during task-unrelated thoughts indexed by different measures. (A) Sensory-level processing of auditory stimuli, as 
indexed by the N1 component as shown at Fz, and visual stimuli, as indexed by the PI component shown at Oz, was attenuated 
during mind-wandering based on self report probe-caught measures using experience sampling. (B) Automatic change detection in 
auditory perception as indexed by the MMN (i.e., the difference between standard and oddball waveforms) is also disrupted during 
task-unrelated thoughts, as reported by participants during a breath-monitoring task. (C) Performance errors in a target detection 
task as a proxy for mind-wandering has been associated with reduction in both the P3 and the CNV components, indicative of 
disrupted target detection and anticipatory response to an expected stimulus, respectively, during mind-wandering. Sources: Kam et al. 
(2011); Braboszcz & Delorme (2011); O ’Connell et al. (2009).

PLF
A
X
fc
Sa
g*£
STIM. ^  
Task Focus (TF)
-100 
0 
200 
400 
600
0.3
0.2
0.1
Figure 19.2. Neural mechanisms underlying attentional attenuation during mind-wandering. (A) Decreased phase synchrony in 
the theta band within parietal cortex was observed during episodes of mind-wandering, highlighting the potential role of phase­
locking of theta band oscillations in the sensory attenuation of external stimuli during mind-wandering. (B) The increased phase 
synchronization in theta, alpha, and gamma bands across regions of the DMN during mind-wandering suggests the role of inter­
regional synchronization in facilitating functional coupling within the DMN. Sources: Baird et al. (2014); Kirschner et al. (2012).

(A) Whole-brain functional connectivity
(B) Posterior cingulate seed connectivity
(C) Posterior cingulate dynamic connectivity
pc:c:
Insula
M TG
PMC
ACC
DLPFC
IPL
STG
RLPFC
ANG
2
4
6
8
Time (s)
Figure 21.1. Default network interactions during divergent thinking. (A) A whole-brain network associated with divergent thinking, 
including several default regions (e.g., posterior cingulate). (B) The posterior cingulate shows increased coupling with control (e.g., 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and salience (e.g., insula) network regions across the task duration. (C) Temporal analysis reveals early 
coupling of the posterior cingulate with salience regions and later coupling with control regions, among others. ACC = anterior 
cingulate cortex; ANG = angular gyrus; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; IPL = inferior parietal lobe; MTG = middle temporal 
gyrus; PMC = pre-motor cortex; RLPFC = rostrolateral prefrontal cortex; STG = superior temporal gyrus.
»
t
#
»
Bengtsson et a l. (2007) 
Berkowitz and Ansari (2008) 
Donnay et al. (2014)
Limb and Braun (2008) 
Liuet al. (2012)
Manzano and Ullen (2012a) 
Manzano and Ullen (2012b)
Primary Motor Cortex (BA 4)
■ Premotor Cortex (BA 6)
Posterior Parietal Cortex (BA 7)
, Frontal Eye Fields (BA 8)
Anterior Prefrontal Cortex (BA 10)
I Extrastriate Cortex (BA 19) 
i Superior Temporal Lobe (BA 22)
■
 Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40)
IFG Pars Opercularis (BA 44)
■
 IFG Pars Triangularis (BA 45)
!— I Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (BA 46) 
■J IFG Pars Orbitalis (BA 47)
Figure 21.2. Visualization of brain activation peaks reported in fMRI studies of improvisation. Highlighted regions indicate areas 
with activation reported in at least two of the seven studies included in the figure. Note that several activations are located within 
regions of the default network (anterior prefrontal cortex) and control network (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex).

Addition of 
sand grains: « 
slope increases
Critical slope
Avalanche 
- occurrence: 
slope decreases
Figure 24.3. Self-organizing criticality (SOC): The sand pile model. Growing instability of a system (i.e., increased entropy due 
to addition of sand grains) will results in a critical period (or slope) where the system will spontaneously restructure itself (i.e., 
redistribution of sand pile); in other words, demonstrate the phenomenon of emergent and spontaneous self-organization.
Figure 25.1. Examples of traditional Chinese and realistic old landscape paintings. Adapted with permission from Wang et al. (2015).
Figure 25.2. The aesthetic triad. According to this framework, aesthetic experiences are an emergent property of the interaction of 
the sensory-motor, emotion-valuation, and knowledge-meaning neural systems. Reprinted, with permission, from Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 18 ©2014 by Cell Press.
Figure 26.1. Noradrenergic pathways. The locus coeruleus (LC) projects posteriorly to the cerebellum and up to the thalamus (thal) 
and amygdala (amyg), as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating posteriorly at the hippocampus 
(Heimer, 1995). The descending fibers to the spinal cord are also shown. Not shown is the lateral tegmental noradrenergic 
system, which also projects to the amygdala and down to the spinal cord. Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). 
Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots of cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 284—304). New York: Oxford University Press.

Figure 26.2. Dopaminergic pathways. Projections from the substantia nigra (SN) to the striatum are demonstrated, as are projections 
from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the amygdala (amyg), ventral striatum, and frontal cortex (Heimer, 1995). Not shown 
are the tuberoinfundibular and posterior hypothalamic dopaminergic systems. Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). 
Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots of cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 284—304). New York: Oxford University Press.
Figure 26.3. Cholinergic pathways. Cortical projections from the basal forebrain are demonstrated to the cingulate and pericingulate 
cortex, as well as the mesial frontal cortex along a mesial pericingular tract, and laterally through the external capsule and 
claustrum to the capsular region and lateral neocortex (Selden et al., 1998). Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). 
Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots of cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 284-304). New York: Oxford University Press.
Figure 26.4. Serotonergic pathways. The dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) project posteriorly to the cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and 
up to the thalamus (thal), with projections also to the amygdala (amyg), hippocampus (hippo), hypothalamus, olfactory and entorhinal 
cortices, then to the ventral striatum, as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating posteriorly at the 
hippocampus (Heimer, 1995). Not shown are the caudal raphe nuclei, which also project to the cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, 
and down to the spinal cord. Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & 
B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots of cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and neuropsychology (pp. 284-304). New York: Oxford University Press.

Stage
Sub
stages1
EEG Signature
EEG Signature Wave­
form
Wake
1
Alpha wave 
train
2
Alpha wave 
intermittent
(>50%)
NREM 1
3
Alpha wave 
intermittent
(<50%)
4
EEG flattening 
(<20 |IV)
-------------—
-
5
Theta ripples
6
Vertex sharp 
wave (<200 
pV)
---------
7
> 1 Vertex 
sharp wave 
(<200 pV)
8
Incomplete
spindle
NREM 2
9
Complete
Spindle
NREM 3-4
Delta
y v v u w A
REM
Theta
Figure 28.1. Main electrophysiological correlates of each sleep stage. NREM 1 substages are included, as is eyes-closed waking rest, for 
comparison. Note the easily differentiable EEG signature accompanying each sleep stage. Reproduced from Stenstrom, Fox, et al. (2012).
Figure 29.1. Standardized current source density power (CSD) in a waking participant with eyes closed (top), during a lucid dream 
(middle), and during ordinary REM sleep (bottom). Topographical images are based on movement-free EEG episodes and were 
corrected for eye movements. WEC refers to waking with eyes closed. Darker color corresponds to higher 40 Hz activity. For a full 
color picture, see Voss et al., 2009. Source: Voss et al. (2009).

Figure 29.2. EEG Power (POT = scalp potential) in the analyzed frequencies from 1 to 48 Hz, averaged over three lucid dreams 
and for all electrode recording sites, corrected for eye movements (Gratton et al. 1983). Blue line: Waking, eyes closed (WEC), lying 
down. Red line: lucid dream sleep. Black line: non-lucid REM sleep. Source: Voss et al. (2009).
Effect of tACSon EEG gamma power
Figure 29.3. Effect of transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) on EEG gamma power (37-43 Hz). tACS electrodes were 
placed bilaterally at frontal and temporal positions (black rectangles) and current was flowing back and forth between these electrodes. 
EEG electrode placements are indicated as dark dots. (A) Stimulation with 6 Hz resulted in no change in lower gamma activity 
around 40 Hz (37-43 Hz). (B) Stimulation with 40 Hz led to a strong increase in lower gamma activity around 40 Hz. (C) Grand 
average Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) power ratios of activity during versus activity prior to stimulation for the 6-Hz stimulation 
condition. Yellow shading represents mean values ± 2 standard errors (s.e.). Any excursions outside of this range would be considered 
significant at least at the p < .05 level. However, with 6 Hz, we see no significant stimulation-induced increase in 6 Hz activity. Grand 
average FFT power ratios of activity during versus activity prior to stimulation for the 40-Hz stimulation condition. Yellow shading 
represents mean values ± 2 standard errors (s.e.). Note that lucid dreams (red line) are accompanied by a significantly larger increase 
in the 40 Hz frequency band than non-lucid dreams (blue line) (independent two-sided t tests between lucid and non-lucid dreams 
during stimulation with 40 Hz: t40Hz = 5.01, df = 35,p  < 0.001). Source: Voss & Hobson (2015).

Brief coherent images
Specturm of oneiragogic experience in the sleep onset 
transition: imagery types and associated sleep/wake stages
9 CDa
CD
a D
aa
a □
Stage 1 sleep
Stage 2 sleep
^  Hallucinatory images, 
Regressive images
B c,
Sleepiness sensations 
Fleeting images
Sleepiness sensations 
Fleeting images
{ 
\ 
CD 
°
 
CD
a  
a  
a
1 T 
10
a
Waking reverie
Mildly drowsy
Very drowsy
Brief coherent images Longer images
D
CD
CD
□
□
□
SB
□
Partial SOREM sleep
-1 sec
Sleep Onset Transition
Full-blown dream imagery
SBDBCOBD
m sn n n n n n
SOREM sleep
Figure 30.1. Some varieties of experience falling on the oneiragogic spectrum (i.e., the phenomenological events characterizing 
the sleep-onset transition). Experiences of increasing complexity are proposed to occur during passage through different sleep-onset 
states, as described in the text. The briefest and least complex events are presumed to occur during microsleeps that may occur during 
(A) waking reverie (blue bars) or (B) mildly or (C) very drowsy wakefulness (red bars) and more complex events during (D) Stage 1 
and (E) Stage 2 NREM sleep (purple bars). Longer images and full-fledged dreaming occurs during either (F) Partial SOREM sleep, 
when only some signs of REM sleep (e.g., muscle atonia, alpha EEG reduction) are visible (green bars), or (G) SOREM sleep, when 
all basic signs of REM sleep are visible. SOREM events are very prevalent, occurring under various situations of sleep disruption, 
including especially combinations of low NREM and high REM propensity.
R & K
stage
Hori
stage
EEG composition
EEG appearance
W
1
Alpha wave train
W
2
Alpha wave intermittent (>50%)
SI
3
Alpha wave intermittent (<50%)
SI
4
EEG flattening
--------—
SI
5
Ripples of low-voltage theta waves
Si 
5 
Vertex sharp wave solitary
Si 
y 
Vertex sharp wave train/brust
51 
g Vertex sharp wave and incomplete spindle
52 
9 
At least one complete spindle
• l “ l •—r • ■ i 1 ■ i •—i r i • I •
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
EEG sleep onset stage
Figure 30.2. Left panel: definitions of Hori sleep-onset substages (Hori stage) in relation to standard Rechtschaffen and Kales 
sleep/wake stages (R&K stage). Right panel: Percentages of subjects reporting dreams and claiming to be asleep (upper panel) and 
sensory attributes of reported imagery for 9 EEG-defined sleep-onset substages. Note that visual imagery can occur in the earliest 
substages. W = wake; SI = stage 1; S2 = stage 2. Source: Hori, Hayashi, & Morikawa, (1994).

Im m e d ia te
.M em ory
S h o rt-te rm
M e m o ry
M e d iu m -te rm
M em o ry
L o n g -term  
M em o ry
Im ag e 
E le m e n ts
Kinesthetic
Cutaneous
sensations
sensations in (w
in left
left Sit/
forearm
forearm
----------------------------------------------- / -----
A. Round object with 
blue and white swirls
B. Blue and white ball 
approaches: left forearm 
flexes to intercept it
C. Forearm contacts ball, 
senses its light weight
About one 
second
Image: /  see a small blue-and-white object far 
o ff to my left. Its colors are very bright and form  
a swirled pattern. It suddenly and unexpectedly 
flies toward me, horizontally but with a slight 
arc. It was as i f  someone had thrown it at me. 
Close to me it is about the size o f a basketball. I 
make a quick, reflexive movement with my left 
arm  as i f  to strike or intercept it. For an instant l 
feel a sensation on the upper part o f the elbow 
and forearm as the ball makes contact with me 
From this I perceive that the ball is much lighter 
and thinner in consistency than I had expected- 
like a beach ball. Though I expect it to bounce, it 
stays in my arm as if I had caught it there.
However, I wake up abruptly at the moment o f 
contact, before anything else can happen. I was 
surprised by the image.
f igure 30.5. Multi-temporal description of memory sources associated to a single, one-second microdream (right panel) and hypothetical model of their combination during image formation. Four 
categories of memory elements (y-axis) combine to produce elements of the microdream as they unfold chronologically. Arrows indicate possible causal influences among elements via a process referred 
to as transformative priming. The image is proposed to unfold in three steps: (1) a combination of several short-term and one long-term memory elements to produce a round, blue-and-white object seen 
at a distance; (2) combination of the prior 
result with immediate memory impulsions (kinesthetic) and one medium-term 
memory (flight of ball, motor respons e )  to produce a transformed image of
an approaching ball and reflex motor response: (3) combination of the prior result with further immediate memory impressions (cutaneous), and a long-term memory element (beach hall) to produce a 
transformed image of object contact with cutaneous feedback. Elements are thought to transform subsequent elements as they trigger (“prime") them—hut all very quickly and ar a preconscious level. The 
result is a continuous, de novo integration of memory elements that reflects features from all of the contributing memories but which expunges other features. In the present case, the primary memory 
element—a reflex arm movement—is modified by several secondary elements: features such as color, trajectory, weight, and texture are changed, but only slightly. Transformative priming may sustain the 
spatiotemporal coherence of the imagery sequence, may account for its persistently novel character, and may explain why larger episodic memories arc typically not represented. Source: Nielsen (2017; 1995).
 Blue and 
 white objects 
 (eg. plate)
Flight of 
volleyball 
and motor 
response
Photo of 
| Earth seen
from  space
D. Awakening
Texture and 
weight of 
beach ball

Figure 31.1. A representation of sleep paralysis experience. The sleeper is awakened suddenly and sees a menacing shadowy 
creature on top of him. He experiences the sensation of being pushed into the bed, while the bed itself is swirling in a sort of a 
tornado. The two faces of the dreamer represent the “double” consciousness during sleep paralysis: he is simultaneously terrified of 
the supernatural attacker and also knows that if he does not resist the experience and allows himself to drift back into sleep he may 
have a lucid dream (this lucid consciousness is represented as a sleeping face with a detailed brain, denoting vibrant possibilities of 
lucidity). Artist: Benjamen Samaha, Montreal, Canada, 2016. Reproduced with the artist’s permission.
Figure 31.2. H en ry  Fuseli, The N ightm are (1781). Detroit Institute of Art. Public Domain image: https://commons.wikimedia.Org/w/index. 
php?curid= 15453518

Figure 31.3. Takehara Shunsen, Yamachichi{ 1841). Public domain image: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=2074508
Figure 31.4. Predisposing, precipitating factors and experience and outcome of sleep paralysis episodes. Note: OBE = out-of-body 
experience; SP = sleep paralysis.

Figure 35.1. (A) The default network. The MTL subsystem (dark grey) encompasses the hippocampal formation, parahippocampal 
cortex, retrosplenial cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and posterior inferior parietal lobule, whereas the dmPFC subsystem (light 
grey) comprises the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, temporoparietal junction, lateral temporal cortex, and temporal pole. The midline 
core (white) refers to the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, and the posterior cingulate cortex. Regional anatomical boundaries are 
approximate. Abbreviations: dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; MTL = medial temporal lobe. (B) Characteristic patterns of 
atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease, semantic dementia, and behavioral variant FTD. Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (diagonal stripes) 
show hippocampal, medial temporal and retrosplenial cortex involvement, spreading to lateral parietal and medial prefrontal regions 
with disease progression. In semantic dementia (dark grey), the typical pattern of atrophy is lateralized (generally left greater than 
right hemisphere), targeting the anterior temporal lobes and temporal pole, including the hippocampal formation and amygdala, 
and spreading to ventromedial prefrontal cortical regions as the disease progresses. Patients with behavioural variant FTD (white) 
show bilateral atrophy in mesial and orbital frontal regions, extending to the temporal pole and hippocampal formation as the disease 
progresses. Regional anatomical boundaries are approximate. Abbreviation: FTD = frontotemporal dementia. Figure and legend adapted 
with permission from Nature Reviews Neurology (Irish, Piguet, et al., 2012).
Attention to Pain
RalPS
Pain 
Else 
Pain 
Else 
Pain 
Else 
Pain 
Else
Attention Away from Pain
PCC/Prec 
RTO J 
LTOJ 
mPFC
Figure 37.1. Brain dynamics of self-reported attention to and spontaneous mind-wandering from pain. Brain regions within salience 
and frontoparietal networks show increased activation during attention to pain, compared to attention away from pain (top). During 
attention away from compared to toward pain, brain regions in the default mode network show decreased deactivation (middle) and the 
periaqueductal gray shows increased functional connectivity with the medial prefrontal node of the default mode network. alNS = anterior 
insula; alPS = anterior intraparietal sulcus; mPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; dlPFC = dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex; MTL = medial temporal lobe; mPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; PAG = periaqueductal gray; PCC = posterior cingulate 
cortex; Prec = precuneus; TOJ = temporo-occipital junction; TPJ = temporoparietal junction. Adapted with permission from Kucyi et al. (2013).

Figure 39.2. Brain networks involved in FA meditation. Using a button-press from the participant to mark the moment of awareness, 
four brief cognitive phases were defined around this time point, and neural activity was analyzed accordingly. These results show activity 
during the FOCUS, AWARE, and SHIFT phases compared to the MW phase; MW activity is compared to SHIFT activity. Mind­
wandering was associated with default mode regions (blue), awareness of mind-wandering was associated with the salience network 
(green; red shows activations due to a motor control for the button press), and shifting and maintaining attention was associated with 
the executive network (orange, light orange). Image modified with permission from Hasenkamp (2014).
FO C U S 
____________ M W
F O C U S 
H YBRID 
M W
(e.g., 2 sec)
Figure 39.3. Defining the temporal window of analysis. This schematic depicts three hypothetical cognitive scenarios and related window 
of analysis for a neuroimaging study of self-caught mind-wandering. Tick marks denote TRs (the fMRI scanners sampling rate, here 2 
seconds each), and the yellow bar represents an analytical window of 10 seconds prior to the button press. (A) A scenario where the window 
of analysis is accurate and only includes mind-wandering states. (B) A scenario where the window is too long, and includes contaminating 
focused states. (C) A graded transition between focused attention and mind-wandering, showing a hybrid state where some portion of the 
attention remains on the object for a time, but spontaneous thought still occurs. In this case, the window contains all three mental states, 
again confounding the analysis.
.......«
Percent of attention off breath 
0 I M I | I I *0101
thought qua 
• * & + + -4-KD'
Figure 39.4. Possible characterization of individual thought episodes through first-person reports during FA meditation. This schematic 
shows two temporally and phenomenally different episodes of mind-wandering that could occur during the course of FA meditation. In 
this kind of design, each time the practitioner becomes aware of mind-wandering, she would press a button, and then provide subjective 
report on any number of variables, including (A) the estimated duration of the episode (based on units of analysis, such as TRs);
(B) percentage of off-task attention; and (C) various dimensions of thought content. These and other measures could be gathered alone 
or in combination, depending on the research question. Subjective data could then be used to drive analyses of physiological correlates 
by providing both temporal and phenomenological constraints. For example, the window of analysis for mind-wandering could be 
customized for each episode, as shown by the yellow bars. Other approaches could combine episodes with similar characterizations (e.g., 
percent attention, thought content, etc.) to determine specific neural correlates.

Figure 40.1. Bruce McCandless II, floating alone in the darkness of space. Source: NASA.
Figure 40.4. REST chamber, University of British Columbia. Photo by Peter Suedfeld.
Figure 40.5. R E S T  flotation tank. Reproduced by permission of Float O n LLC, Portland, OR.

Figure 40.6. Art from the flotation tank. Created by Cori Kindred and reproduced by permission of the publisher and copyright holder, Float On.
Figure 40.7. “Lady Darkness”: Art from Dark Therapy.

P A R T
Introduction 
and Overview


CHAPTER
1
Introduction: Toward an Interdisciplinary 
Science of Spontaneous Thought
Kieran C. R. Fox and Kalina Christoff
Abstract
Enormous questions still loom for the emerging science of spontaneous thought: What, exactly, is 
spontaneous thought? Why does the human brain engage in spontaneous forms of thinking, and when 
is this most likely to occur? And perhaps the question most interesting and accessible from a scientific 
perspective: How does the brain generate, elaborate, and evaluate its own spontaneous creations?
The central aim of this volume is to bring together views from neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, 
phenomenology, history, education, contemplative traditions, and clinical practice in order to begin to 
address the ubiquitous but poorly understood mental phenomena collectively known as “spontaneous 
thought.” Perhaps no other mental experience is so familiar in daily life, and yet so difficult to understand 
and explain scientifically. The present volume represents the first effort to bring such highly diverse 
perspectives to bear on answering the what, when, why, and how of spontaneous thought.
Key Words: mind-wandering, creativity, dreaming, daydreaming, spontaneous thought, self-generated 
thought
Where Do Spontaneous Thoughts 
Come From?
It may be surprising that the seemingly straightfor­
ward answers “from the mind” or “from the brain” are 
in fact an incredibly recent, modern understanding 
of the origins of spontaneous thought. For nearly all 
of human history, our thoughts— especially the most 
sudden, insightful, and important—were almost uni­
versally ascribed to divine or other external sources. 
Cultures around the world believed that dreams were 
messages sent from the gods (Kracke, 1991); inven­
tions like writing and agriculture were credited to 
ancient culture heroes and tutelary deities long lost in 
the mists of legend (Chang, 1983); and the belief that 
artistic creativity was inspired by the Muses (Murray, 
1989) held sway for two millennia (McMahon, 
2013). Even the original sense of the word inspiration 
was that the divine had been “breathed into” a mere 
mortal, accounting for the new idea or insight. There 
were of course exceptions—Aristotle, for instance, 
put forward the naturalistic hypothesis that dreams
were created by the mind of the dreamer (Gallop, 
1996)— but nowhere, it seems, was there a wide­
spread belief in the spontaneity, originality, and cre­
ativity of the unaided human mind.
We still sometimes worship our great intellec­
tual innovators— artists, scientists, philosophers— as 
semi-divine figures. But somewhere, somehow, our 
perspective changed and we began to see ourselves 
as the authors of our own thoughts, however inex­
plicable their origins might seem. Perhaps the begin­
nings of this shift in perspective are echoed in the 
ancient myth of Prometheus, who “stole and gave to 
mortals” the “fount of the arts, the light of fire”—  
in other words, the power of conjuring up novel 
thoughts (Griffith, 1983). Although this internal­
ization of thoughts origins began long ago, only 
in the past few centuries have human beings truly 
taken responsibility for their own mental content, 
and finally localized thought to the central nervous 
system— laying the foundations for a protoscience of 
spontaneous thought.
3

This shift has broadly answered the who and the 
where of spontaneous thought: we are the source 
of our thoughts, and these thoughts seem to be 
constructed in our heads. But enormous questions 
still loom: W hat, exactly, is spontaneous thought? 
Why does the brain engage in spontaneous forms 
of thinking, and when is this most likely to occur? 
And perhaps the most interesting and accessible 
question from a scientific perspective: H ow does 
the brain generate, elaborate, and evaluate its own 
spontaneous creations? Each chapter that follows 
aims to provide at least preliminary answers to these 
perplexing questions.
The central aim of this volume is to bring together 
views from neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, 
phenomenology, history, education, contemplative 
traditions, and clinical practice in order to begin to 
address the ubiquitous but poorly understood men­
tal phenomena that we collectively call “spontane­
ous thought.” Perhaps no other mental experience 
is so familiar to us in daily life, and yet so difficult 
to understand and explain scientifically. The pres­
ent volume represents the first effort to bring such 
highly diverse perspectives to bear on answering the 
what, when, why, and how of spontaneous thought.
Although “spontaneous thought” as a term has 
been used throughout the last decade in both the 
psychological (Klinger, 2008) and neuroscientific lit­
erature (Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews- 
Hanna, 2016; Christoff, Ream, & Gabrieli, 2004; 
Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 
2015), recent years have marked tremendous
progress in our theoretical understanding of what 
spontaneous thought is and what phenomena it 
encompasses. Spontaneous thought can be defined 
as thought that arises relatively freely due to an 
absence of strong constraints on its contents or on 
the transitions from one mental state to another 
(Christoff et al., 2016). In other words, spontane­
ous thought moves freely as it unfolds (Figure 1.1).
There are two general ways in which thought can 
be constrained (Figure 1.1). One type of constraint is 
flexible and deliberate, and is implemented through 
cognitive control. Another type of constraint is 
automatic in nature. Automatic constraints can be 
thought of as a family of mechanisms that operate 
outside of cognitive control to hold attention on a 
restricted set of information. Examples of automatic 
constraints are emotional significance and habits, 
both of which can constrain our thoughts without 
any effort or intention on our part (Christoff et al., 
2016; Fox, Kang, Lifshitz, & Christoff, 2016; Todd, 
Cunningham, Anderson, & Thompson, 2012).
Spontaneous thought can also be understood as a 
broader family of mental phenomena, including our 
daytime fantasies and mind-wandering (Christoff, 
2012; Fox et al., 2015); the flashes of insight and 
inspiration familiar to the artist, scientist, and 
inventor (Beaty, Benedek, Silvia, & Schacter, 2016; 
Kounios & Beeman, 2014; Zabelina & Andrews- 
Hanna, 2016); and the nighttime visions we call 
dreams (Christoff et al., 2016; Domhoff & Fox, 
2015; Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & 
Christoff, 2013). There is a dark side to spontaneous
Weak 
Strong
Deliberate constraints
Figure 1.1. (See Color Insert) Conceptual space relating different types of thought and their constraints. Reproduced, with permission, 
from Christoff et al. (2016).
4
I N T R O D U C T I O N

thought as well— the illumination of which is 
yet another major goal of this volume. Repetitive 
depressive rumination, uncontrollable thoughts 
in obsessive-compulsive disorder, the involuntary 
and lifelike re-experiencing of post-traumatic stress 
disorder— all these, we suggest, can be considered 
dysfunctional forms of spontaneous thought, and 
need to be understood in relation to our natural and 
healthy propensity toward novel, variable, imagina­
tive thought (Christoff et al., 2016; see also Mills 
et al., Chapter 2 in this volume).
Spontaneous should in no way suggest random or 
meaningless. Another key aim of this volume is to 
highlight the ample evidence in favor of the idea 
that goal-related and “top-down” processing often 
co-occurs with and can sometimes guide sponta­
neous thought (Fox & Christoff, 2014; Fox et al., 
2016; Klinger & Cox, 2011; Seli, Risko, Smilek, 
& Schacter, 2016). Although the cause and mean­
ing of specific thoughts or dreams often elude us, 
the rare but sensational occurrences of transgressive 
thoughts or highly bizarre and emotional dreams 
tend to obscure just how mundane (but, quite pos­
sibly, useful) most of our self-generated mental 
content really is (Domhoff, 2003; Fox et al., 2013; 
Klinger, 2008). The degree to which mental pro­
cesses that are ostensibly spontaneous and beyond 
our control appear to be planned, relevant, and 
insightful with respect to our personal goals and 
concerns is striking— and, we believe, deserving of 
further exploration.
These ubiquitous spontaneous mental phenom­
ena raise some intriguing questions: Can we engage 
in planning and other executive processes in the 
absence of conscious awareness? To what extent are 
“we” in control of our own minds? The true quali­
ties and content of spontaneous thought also fly in 
the face of many culturally sanctioned but unwar­
ranted beliefs about the inexplicability of our fan­
tasy lives, the randomness and meaninglessness of 
dreams, or the disorderliness of creative thoughts 
and insights in artists and scientists. A closer look 
at psychological, neuroscientific, and philosophi­
cal work shows not only the co-occurrence of cog­
nitive processes like planning, mentalizing, and 
metacognition with various forms of spontaneous 
thought (Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & 
Schooler, 2009; Fox & Christoff, 2014; Fox et al., 
2015; Seli et al., 2016), but also a compelling cor­
respondence between the content of ones spontane­
ous thoughts and the content and concerns of ones 
daily life (Klinger, 2008). The Oxford Handbook o f 
Spontaneous Thought is the first volume of its kind to
bring together experts from so many diverse fields 
to explore these phenomena, and should therefore 
be of interest to psychologists, neuroscientists, phi­
losophers, clinicians, educators, and artists alike—  
indeed, to anyone intrigued by the incredibly rich 
life of the mind.
Overview of the Handbook
This Handbook is divided into seven separate but 
closely interrelated parts. This introductory chapter 
comprises Part I, providing an overview of sponta­
neous thought in general and the many chapters of 
this book in particular.
Part II dives right into fundamental theoretical 
issues surrounding the definition and investiga­
tion of spontaneous thought. In Chapter 2, Caitlin 
Mills, Arianne Herrera-Bennett, Myrthe Faber, 
and Kalina Christoff ask why the mind wanders 
at all, and propose the default variability hypoth­
esis: the idea that by default, spontaneous thought 
tends to exhibit high variability of content over 
time— variability that serves as an adaptive mecha­
nism that enhances episodic memory efficiency 
and facilitates semantic knowledge optimization. 
Chandra Sripada, in Chapter 3, puts forward a 
theoretical framework within which spontaneous 
and deliberate thought can be compared, respec­
tively, with “exploration” of the environment in 
search of new resources versus “exploitation” of the 
resources we already have at hand. In Chapter 4, 
Carey Morewedge and Daniella Kupor provide an 
overview of people’s metacognitive appraisals of the 
meaning and relevance of spontaneous thoughts, 
with the surprising conclusion that people tend 
to attribute more importance to thought whose 
origin is mysterious— perhaps hearkening back to 
the ancient human view of the origins of thought 
discussed at the outset of this chapter. Dylan Stan 
and Kalina Christoff, in Chapter 5, propose that a 
key quality of mind-wandering is an accompanying 
subjective experience of ease, or low motivational 
intensity. In Chapter 6, Georg Northoff proposes 
a novel theory aiming to explain how spontane­
ous brain activity generates and constitutes subjec­
tively experienced spontaneous thought. Finally, in 
Chapter 7, Jonathan Smallwood, Daniel Margulies, 
Boris Bernhardt, and Elizabeth Jeffries present their 
component process framework of spontaneous 
thought, explaining how different types of thought 
can arise through the interaction of specific under­
lying neurocognitive processes.
Part III explores broader philosophical, evolu­
tionary, and historical perspectives on spontaneous
K I E R A N  C . R.  F O X  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
5

thought. In Chapter 8, Zachary Irving and Evan 
Thompson provide an in-depth introduction to the 
philosophy of mind-wandering, reviewing several 
psychological and philosophical accounts and pro­
viding a new view of their own. Thomas Metzinger, 
in Chapter 9, addresses the question, “Why is 
mind-wandering interesting for philosophers?” In 
Chapter 10, Dean Keith Simonton relates the spon­
taneity of human thought to other spontaneous 
generative processes, highlighting the connections 
with “selectionist” views of evolution and creativ­
ity. John Antrobus, in Chapter 11, offers an analysis 
of how the brain in both waking and sleeping can 
so effortlessly produce a constant stream of visual 
imagery and thoughts— and what use they might 
have. Rounding out Part III, Alex Soojung-Kim 
Pang, in Chapter 12, explores how spontaneous 
thought was viewed in the past, how it was used 
by creative people to further their endeavors, and 
how deep historical research could lead to an under­
standing of the role of spontaneous thought in the 
history of ideas.
Part IV focuses on mind-wandering and day­
dreaming. In Chapter 13, Jessica Andrews-Hanna, 
Zachary Irving, Kieran Fox, Nathan Spreng, and 
Kalina Christoff present an interdisciplinary over­
view of the rapidly evolving neuroscience of sponta­
neous thought. Investigating what we have learned 
from intracranial electrophysiology in humans, 
Kieran Fox, in Chapter 14, then synthesizes the 
available evidence on how and where self-generated 
thought is initiated within the brain. In Chapter 15, 
Arnaud D ’Argembeau provides a detailed discus­
sion of the link between mind-wandering and 
self-referential thinking, and their common neural 
basis. David Stawarczyk, in Chapter 16, provides a 
detailed overview of the phenomenological proper­
ties of all kinds of mind-wandering and daydream­
ing, covering both the historical trajectory of these 
investigations and the present state of research. In 
Chapter 17, Eric Klinger, Igor Marchetti, and Ernst 
Koster discuss the critical importance of goal pur­
suit to spontaneous thought, elaborating on how 
these thoughts are adaptive in everyday life but can 
go awry in a variety of clinical conditions. Claire 
Zedelius and Jonathan Schooler, in Chapter 18, 
provide a fine-grained view of the many different 
kinds of mind-wandering and the evidence that 
they have distinctive effects on task performance, 
mood, and creativity. In Chapter 19, Julia Kam 
and Todd Handy comprehensively review the evi­
dence from human electrophysiology that mind­
wandering involves a decoupling of attention from
the external world. Finally, Jeffrey Wammes, Paul 
Seli, and Daniel Smilek, in Chapter 20, review what 
we know about mind-wandering in educational 
settings, and how excessive, unintentional mind­
wandering in the classroom impacts learning and 
academic performance.
Part V covers creativity and insight, and their 
relation to other forms of spontaneous thought. 
Roger Beaty and Rex Jung, in Chapter 21, offer an 
overview of how large-scale brain networks interact 
during creative thinking and creative performance. 
In Chapter 22, Mathias Benedek and Emanuel 
Jauk offer detailed empirical evidence for a “dual­
process” model of creative cognition, wherein the 
flexible switching between controlled and spontane­
ous cognition is critical to an optimal creative pro­
cess. Charles Dobson, an artist as well as a professor 
of fine arts, offers in Chapter 23 an insiders view of 
what he calls “flip-flop thinking,” and outlines his 
firsthand experiences of what helps (and what hurts) 
the creative process. In Chapter 24, John Vervaeke, 
Leo Ferraro, and Arianne Herrera-Bennett develop 
an intriguing account of the “flow” state as a form 
of spontaneous thought characterized by a cascade 
of successive insights and learning experiences. 
Oshin Vartanian, in Chapter 25, delves into how 
self-referential thoughts can be elicited by aesthetic 
appreciation of artworks, such as paintings. Finally, 
in Chapter 26, David Beversdorf provides an exten­
sive review of the neurochemical basis of flexible 
and creative thinking.
Spontaneous thought does not cease when we 
close our eyes and turn out the lights. Part VI explores 
the many normal, extraordinary, and sometimes 
pathological varieties of spontaneous thought that 
take place throughout the sleep cycle, and how these 
are related to memory consolidation and involun­
tary memory retrieval. In Chapter 27, G. William 
Domhoff provides an overview of the neural basis 
of dreaming and REM sleep, while Chapter 28, by 
Kieran Fox and Manesh Girn, provides a compre­
hensive review of what is known about the neural 
correlates of all sleep stages throughout the sleep 
cycle. In Chapter 29, Jennifer Windt and Ursula 
Voss provide an in-depth treatment of the phe­
nomenon of lucid dreaming, bringing psychologi­
cal, philosophical, and neuroscientific perspectives 
to bear to better explain this remarkable mental 
state. Tore Nielsen, in Chapter 30, explores the 
fascinating topic of “microdreaming” and hypna­
gogic imagery as a paradigm for a fine-scaled neu- 
rophenomenological approach to inner experience. 
In Chapter 31, Elizaveta Solomonova offers an
6
I N T R O D U C T I O N

interdisciplinary look at the little-known phenom­
enon of sleep paralysis, and the spontaneous visions 
and emotions that accompany it. Erin Wamsley, in 
Chapter 32, explores how spontaneous thought in 
both waking and sleep can be seen as an expression 
of memory consolidation and recombination, and 
John Mace, in Chapter 33, provides a comprehen­
sive overview of involuntary memories— how often 
they occur, how they can chain together, how they 
differ from voluntarily recalled information, and 
what their function might be.
Part VII takes us to the fringes and also the cut­
ting edge of research on spontaneous thought: its 
relationship to clinical conditions and altered states 
of consciousness. Dylan Stan and Kalina Christoff 
begin, in Chapter 34, by outlining the many 
potential clinical benefits and risks of spontane­
ous thought. In Chapter 35, Claire O ’Callaghan 
and Muireann Irish describe the neural underpin­
nings of how spontaneous thought changes in rela­
tion to aging and dementia syndromes. Elizabeth 
DuPre and Nathan Spreng, in Chapter 36, explore 
the relationships between depression, rumination, 
and spontaneous thought. In Chapter 37, Aaron 
Kucyi explores the intriguing relationships between 
mind-wandering and both chronic and acute pain, 
and how these interactions are mediated by large- 
scale brain networks. Halvor Eifring, in Chapter 38, 
investigates how religious and contemplative tradi­
tions around the world have tended to see mind­
wandering as an obstacle, while at the same time 
viewing spiritual attainment and liberation as a 
spontaneous process of transformation that can­
not be actuated deliberately. In Chapter 39, Wendy 
Hasenkamp outlines how meditation and mindful­
ness practices can provide a window into the rapid 
fluctuations of mind-wandering. Peter Suedfeld, 
Dennis Rank, and Marek Malus offer in Chapter 40 
an account of spontaneous thought in extreme and 
unusual environments, exploring rarely seen records 
of the thoughts and experiences of polar explorers, 
astronauts, and those undergoing severe sensory 
deprivation. Finally, Michael Lifshitz, Eli Sheiner, 
and Laurence Kirmayer detail in Chapter 41 how 
the powerful unconstrained cognition brought on 
by psychedelic substances can be guided by culture 
and context.
All told, these chapters provide the most com­
prehensive overview of the wide-ranging field of 
spontaneous thought to date— and there could be 
no better guides to this realm than the 64 outstand­
ing scientists, historians, philosophers, and artists 
who have come together to write them.
Spontaneous forms of thought enable us to 
transcend not only the here and now of perceptual 
experience, but also the bonds of our deliberately 
controlled and goal-directed cognition; they allow 
the space for us to be other than who we are, and 
for our minds to think beyond the limitations of 
our current viewpoints and beliefs. In studying 
such an abstruse and seemingly impractical subject, 
we need always to remember that our capacity for 
spontaneity, originality, and creativity defines us as 
a species— and as individuals.
The painting adorning the cover of this 
H andbook is by artist and neuroscientist Greg 
Dunn, who draws inspiration for his work from the 
ancient sum i-e tradition of ink wash painting still 
practiced in Japan. The essence of sum i-e, which has 
deep roots in Taoism and Zen Buddhism, is to com­
bine discipline with spontaneity, to evoke a complex 
essence with simplicity— to bring order, so to speak, 
out of chaos, and to give rise to a creation that is 
coherent and integrated, yet natural and unforced 
(Cheng, 1994; Van Briessen, 2011; Watts, 1957). 
We could think of no better artist to provide a visual 
overture to the multifaceted exploration of these 
same themes throughout the pages of this book.
Philosopher Alan Watts eloquently captured 
the tension and interplay between spontaneity and 
purpose when he wrote, “spontaneity is not by any 
means a blind, disorderly urge, a mere power of 
caprice. A philosophy restricted [by] conventional 
language has no way of conceiving an intelligence 
which does not work according to plan, according 
to a one-at-a-time order of thought. Yet the concrete 
evidence of such an intelligence is right to hand . ..” 
(Watts, 1957, p. 17). We hope the chapters that fol­
low help to illuminate this elusive wisdom of spon­
taneous thought in all its many manifestations.
References
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(2), 87-95.
Chang, K. (1983). Art, myth, an d ritual: The path  to p o liti­
cal authority in ancient China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Cheng, F. (1994). Em pty an d full: The language o f Chinese p a in t­
ing. Boston: Shambhala.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51-59. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.brainres.2011.09.060
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy 
o f Science U S A ,  106(21), 8719-8724. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
K I E R A N  C . R.  F O X  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
7

Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. N ature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2004). Cognitive 
and neural basis of spontaneous thought processes. Cortex, 40, 
623-630.
Domhoff, G. W. (2003). The scientific study o f dreams: N eural 
networks, 
cognitive 
development, 
an d 
content 
analysis. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. R. (2015). Dreaming and 
the default network: A review, synthesis, and counterin­
tuitive research proposal. Consciousness a n d  Cognition, 33, 
342-353.
Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilita­
tion of spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition 
helps the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & 
C. D. Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience o f metacognition 
(pp. 293-319). Berlin: Springer.
Fox, K. C. R., Kang, Y., Lifshitz, M., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
Increasing cognitive-emotional flexibility with medita­
tion and hypnosis: The cognitive neuroscience of de­
automatization. In A. Raz & M. Lifshitz (Eds.), Hypnosis an d 
meditation: Toward an integrative science o f conscious planes 
(pp. 191-219). New York: Oxford University Press.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in H um an Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Gallop, D. (1996). Aristotle on sleep an d dreams: A  text an d trans­
lation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Griffith, M. (1983). Aeschylus: Prometheus bound. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Klinger, E. (2008). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), H andbook o f  imagination an d m ental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (2011). Motivation and the goal the­
ory of current concerns. In W. M. Cox & E. Klinger (Eds.), 
H andbook o f m otivational counseling: Goal-based approaches to 
assessment an d intervention w ith addiction an d other problem s 
(pp. 1-47). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Kounios, J., & Beeman, M. (2014). The cognitive neuroscience 
of insight. A nnu al Review o f Psychology, 65, 7 1-93.
Kracke, W. (1991). Languages of dreaming: Anthropological 
approaches to the study of dreaming in other cultures. In J. 
Gackenbach & A. A. Sheikh (Eds.), Dream  images: A  call to 
m ental arms (pp. 203-224). Amityville, NY: Baywood.
McMahon, D. (2013). D ivine fury: A  history o f  genius. New York: 
Basic Books.
Murray, P. (1989). Genius: The history o f an idea. Oxford: B. 
Blackwell.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Mind­
wandering with and without intention. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 20(8), 605-617.
Todd, R. M., Cunningham, W. A., Anderson, A. K., & 
Thompson, E. (2012). Affect-biased attention as emotion 
regulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(7), 365-372.
Van Briessen, F. (2011). The way o f the brush: Painting techniques 
o f China an d  Japan. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle.
Watts, A. W. (1957). The way o f Zen. New York: Pantheon Books.
Zabelina, D. L., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Dynamic net­
work interactions supporting internally-oriented cognition. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 40, 86-93.
8
I N T R O D U C T I O N

Theoretical Perspectives


CHAPTER
2
Why the Mind Wanders: How Spontaneous 
Thought’s Default Variability May 
Support Episodic Efficiency and 
Semantic Optimization
Caitlin Mills, Arianne Herrera-Bennett, Myrthe Faber, and Kalina Christoff
Abstract
This chapter offers a functional account of why the mind—when free from the demands of a task or 
the constraints of heightened emotions—tends to wander from one topic to another, in a ceaseless and 
seemingly random fashion. We propose the default variability hypothesis, which builds on William James’s 
phenomenological account of thought as a form of mental locomotion, as well as on recent advances 
in cognitive neuroscience and computational modeling. Specifically, the default variability hypothesis 
proposes that the default mode of mental content production yields the frequent arising of new mental 
states that have heightened variability of content over time. This heightened variability in the default 
mode of mental content production may be an adaptive mechanism that (1) enhances episodic memory 
efficiency through de-correlating individual episodic memories from one another via temporally spaced 
reactivations, and (2) facilitates semantic knowledge optimization by providing optimal conditions for 
interleaved learning.
Key Words: mind-wandering, default variability hypothesis, episodic memory, semantic memory, learning, 
neuroscience
Why doesn’t the mind grind to a halt when we 
are not doing anything? Why does it keep mov­
ing instead? And why does this movement tend to 
proceed in a seemingly haphazard manner, with 
thoughts jumping from one topic to another, often 
distant, seemingly unrelated topic— creating a vari­
ability in thought content to which the mind seems 
to default?
More than 100 years ago, William James 
described thought as a form of mental locomo­
tion. Here we build on James’s phenomenological 
account and on recent advances in cognitive neu­
roscience and computational modeling to offer a 
functional account of why the mind, when free 
from the demands of a task or the constraints of
heightened emotions, ceaselessly moves from one 
topic to the next. We introduce the default vari­
ability hypothesis, which highlights the continuous 
change and heightened variability of the contents 
of spontaneous thought as they unfold over time. 
The default variability hypothesis proposes that our 
default mode of mental content production, with 
its continuous change and heightened variability 
over time, may be an adaptive mechanism that 
(1) enhances episodic storage efficiency by help­
ing de-correlate individual episodic memories from 
one another via temporally spaced reactivations, 
and (2) facilitates semantic knowledge optimiza­
tion by providing optimal conditions for inter­
leaved learning.
i i

Overview of the Default Variability 
Hypothesis
People 
report 
highly variable 
moment-to- 
moment experiences during “resting states” that 
facilitate spontaneous thought (Hurlburt, Alderson- 
Day, Fernyhough, & Kuhn, 2015). For example, a 
thought about the scallops one had for dinner the 
day before might be followed by a memory of a 
bus ride taken a week ago, followed by an image 
of a sunny beach. The mental states that form our 
thought flow need not be events that have actually 
occurred (Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 2008; Schacter, 
Addis, & Buckner, 2007). In addition to conjuring 
up veridical episodic events, details from the past 
can also be recombined in novel ways to produce 
episodic mental simulations and other mental states 
that become part of the stream of thought.
We operationalize content variability as the 
extent to which consecutive mental states in the 
stream of thought are episodically and/or seman­
tically distinct from each other. The greater the 
semantic/episodic distance between consecutive 
mental states, the more variable thought content 
would be over time. We propose that a default 
mode of variability in thought contents serves two 
purposes: to facilitate efficient encoding of separate 
episodic events (the episodic efficiency hypothesis), 
and to support the integration and transformation 
of episodic memories into semantic knowledge (the 
semantic optim ization hypothesis).
In what follows, we elucidate the two sub­
hypotheses that together make up the default 
variability hypothesis. We draw on the episodic 
and semantic memory formation and consolida­
tion literature to explain how these processes are 
inextricably connected to spontaneous thoughts 
default variability. Finally, we integrate our hypoth­
esis into existing accounts of mind-wandering, and 
offer some suggestions for empirically testing each 
sub-hypothesis.
Episodic Efficiency Hypothesis
We propose that a default mode of content vari­
ability in the stream of thought improves episodic 
memory efficiency by optimizing the distinctive­
ness of different episodic memories. In this section, 
we give a brief description of two pivotal episodic 
memory mechanisms— pattern separation and pat­
tern completion— followed by an account of how 
the content variability of spontaneous thought 
may lead to increased episodic memory efficiency. 
We propose that this process is twofold: First, 
pattern separation processes produce separable
(i.e., distinct) episodic memories, through de­
co rrelating (i.e., making distinct) the corresponding 
activation patterns in the hippocampus and neo­
cortex. A default content variability in spontaneous 
thought may directly support pattern separation 
processes via mental simulations (reactivations or 
novel recombinations) that adaptively separate the 
memories over time by providing dissimilarities in 
consecutive representations over time. Second, pat­
tern completion may help strengthen representa­
tions of the separately encoded memories through 
multiple, similar re-instantiations of the same mem­
ories (which could be triggered by either external or 
internal cues).
Pattern Separation
Pattern separation is a process through which 
distinct representations of episodic experiences, and 
their contextual properties, are indexed in the hippo­
campus as separate and discrete events (Rolls, 2016). 
Pattern separation plays a vital role in episodic mem­
ory storage and retrieval by helping us create distinct 
neural representations for individual episodic events. 
Here, we propose that a fundamental function of a 
default variability in mental contents over time is to 
support pattern separation by helping de-correlate 
distinct memories from one another.
At the neural level, pattern separation is con­
sidered to be dependent on hippocampal pro­
cesses (Leutgeb, Leutgeb, Moser, & Moser, 2007; 
Rolls, 2016; Yassa & Reagh, 2013). It begins with 
input from the en to rhinal cortex (see Figure 2.1), 
which feeds into the granule cells of the dentate 
gyrus (DG) by way of the perforant path (Witter, 
1993, 2007). The DG cells are proposed to serve 
as a modifiable network that ultimately produces 
sparse, orthogonalized outputs to Cornu Amonis 
region 3 (CA3). DG granule cells exhibit unique 
functional properties: They have relatively sparse fir­
ing rates, yet exert a strong influence on CA3 cells 
(Jung & McNaughton, 1993; Leutgeb et al., 2007). 
Moreover, only a very small number of connec­
tions are received at each CA3 cell. For example, it 
is presumed that the small number of connections 
(approximately 46 mossy fiber connections to each 
CA3 cell) creates a randomizing effect (i.e., for any 
given event, a random set of CA3 neurons is acti­
vated). In other words, there is an extremely low 
probability that any two CA3 neurons would receive 
input from a similar set of DG cells (Kesner, 2007). 
As a result, event (i.e., episodic) representations 
should be as highly differentiated as possible from 
one another (Rolls, 1989, 1989; Rolls & Kesner,
12
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

■> Pattern Separation
Entorhinal
Cortex
Figure 2.1. Diagram representing the pathways for pattern completion and pattern separation from the cortex to the medial 
temporal lobe (and back to the cortex). (See Color Insert)
2006; Rolls & Treves, 1990), which affords optimal 
storage capacity of distinct event representations 
(Hunsaker & Kesner, 2013; Myers & Scharfman, 
2009, 2011; Treves & Rolls, 1992, 1994).
The mechanisms in pattern separation ultimately 
contribute to the orthogonalization of episodic mem­
ory representations, characterized by reduced overlap 
or redundancy between distinct event representations. 
Sometimes referred to as dilution or diluted connectiv­
ity, orthogonalization is characterized by low levels 
of correlation between different encoded episodic 
memories and a low number of synaptic connections 
between each of the CA3 neurons themselves— as lit­
tle as one connection between any pair of randomly 
connected CA3 neurons within the network (Rolls, 
2013). Supporting evidence comes from both rodent 
and human studies suggesting that the DG and CA3 
can update the de-correlated network after exposure 
to even slight deviations in previously encountered 
contexts or stimulus (Bakker, Kirwan, Miller, & 
Stark, 2008; Gilbert, Kesner, & Lee, 2001; Leutgeb 
et al., 2007). For example, novelty is associated with 
increased firing rates from certain inhibitory neurons 
in the DG (Nitz & McNaughton, 2004), which 
may serve as a filtering mechanism for determining 
when new events should be encoded as such (Jones 
& McHugh, 2011).
From Pattern Separation in the 
Hippocampus to Neocortical Competition
Although the exact neural details of pattern separa­
tion are still a subject of debate, one thing is clear: the
ability to separate different episodic memory patterns 
requires an efficient storage mechanism. In addition to 
the sparse encoding in the DG and CA3, efficient stor­
age capacity is also proposed to be achieved through 
hippocampo-cortical interactions, according to the hip­
pocampal indexing theory (Teyler & DiScenna, 1986). 
While individual memory traces are indexed separately 
in the hippocampus, additional details of the memory 
are thought to be stored elsewhere in the cortex. Yassa 
and Reagh (2013) have described this process by com­
paring the neocortex to a library where information is 
stored, and the hippocampus as the librarian who can 
refer to where the information is stored.
Based on this idea, the competitive trace theory 
(Yassa & Reagh, 2013) makes a specific prediction 
about the benefits of episodic memory reactivation. 
According to this theory, certain episodic features of 
a memory are preserved through multiple reactiva­
tions of this memory over time (Figure 2.2). Every 
reactivation causes a trace to be re-encoded in the 
DG, so that this trace does not completely overlap 
with the traces created by other reactivations or by 
the original event. Across multiple reactivations 
over time, some features of the memory will overlap 
(i.e., will be the same), while others will not (i.e., 
they will differ; Figure 2.2). Over time, overlap­
ping features are strengthened with respect to their 
corresponding hippocampal and neocortical repre­
sentations, which results in their higher fidelity dur­
ing retrieval. On the other hand, non-overlapping 
features compete for representation in the cortex 
(unlike overlapping features), and mutually inhibit
C A I T L I N  M I L L S ,  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T ,  M Y R T H E  F A B E R ,  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
13

Memory encoded 
Reactivation 1
•  O q O  
O O q O
oooppo 
000X)0
°o*o2go 00#oOop
° 0
§
0
0 »
°o2o°.8 
0^ 8°
o2o#8
°o8*
o
Reactivation 2
° ° o P
O O O X K
• #
>
»
o2o«2
°o 8°
o
Q  Non-overlapping features 
^  suppressed
Overlapping features,
®  strengthened 
over-reactivations
-> 
t O n O
o # d » o
O ^ t r ^ O o O
Figure 2.2. Graphic illustration of how overlapping features are preserved and non-overlapping features are suppressed. 
(See Color Insert)
one another through anti-Hebbian learning (i.e., 
active neurons initiate inhibitory competition, and 
weakly activated neurons are subsequently inhib­
ited). Therefore, non-overlapping features— which 
are presumably likely to be the less common and 
less important features of the memory— will have a 
reduced likelihood of being retrieved.
The idea that both the hippocampus and neo­
cortex are involved in pattern separation is impor­
tant for considering how temporally variable mental 
simulations (reactivations and novel recombina­
tions) can aid in efficient separation. The neocortex, 
where much of the episodic memory information 
is stored, is associatively modifiable through com­
petitive learning so that given some input, compe­
tition is generated among neural representations 
(i.e., multiple representations of a memory receive 
some level of activation, resulting in a competition 
between them to win total activation, resulting in 
an action potential). The “winner” of the competi­
tion then becomes activated, thus strengthening the 
association between the input and particular neural 
activations in the neocortex. Indeed, the mossy fiber 
system in the DG and its connections to CA3 also 
exhibit an associative Hebbian learning network 
(Treves & Rolls, 1994), where concurrent presyn- 
aptic activity and postsynaptic action potentials 
result in a strengthened connection and increased 
synaptic efficiency (Treves & Rolls, 1994). In turn, 
this type of synaptic strengthening supports the 
sparse coding in the DG and CA3, which may be 
a sufficient mechanism for orthogonalization in the 
hippocampus.
The idea that memories can become de-correlated 
over time in the neocortex also bears relation to other
proposed mechanisms. For example, Hulbert and 
Norman (2015) propose a process similar to pat­
tern separation, called differentiation, in which epi­
sodic memories can become de-correlated through 
competitive learning in the hippocampus and corti­
cal regions. Their explanation distinguishes between 
pattern separation, which is asserted to be automatic, 
and differentiation, which is driven by competition 
(in the neocortex) after pattern separation has already 
occurred (in the hippocampus). Hulbert and Norman 
(2015) present functional magnetic resonance imag­
ing (fMRI) evidence that a reduction in similarity in 
the hippocampus between memories is correlated with 
retrieval-induced facilitation, which is the opposite of 
retrieval-induced forgetting (e.g., impaired memory 
for related items). This pattern of results supports the 
idea that when memories are differentiated from one 
another, they do not hinder retrieval due to similarity. 
Further support also comes from Favila et al. (2016), 
who showed that reducing the similarity between 
memories can be an adaptive process: learning serves 
to reduce the amount of overlap in hippocampal rep­
resentations of highly similar stimuli, which in turn 
prevents interference during subsequent retrieval.
Role of Content Variability
How does the content variability inherent to 
spontaneous thought contribute to episodic mem­
ory separation? At a basic level, spontaneous reac­
tivations can provide the foundation for initiating 
competition between multiple instantiations of a 
given memory, ultimately preserving the important 
(i.e., recurring) features of the memory; that is, since 
each spontaneous thought is re-encoded as a new 
memory trace (Yassa & Reagh, 2013), competition
H
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

is generated among the non-overlapping features in 
the new and previously encoded memories. The idea 
here is that essential overlapping features that are 
present in both (or more) versions of the encoded 
memory will be strengthened and retained for later 
recall due to spontaneous reactivations. At the same 
time, spontaneous reactivations are unlikely to be 
veridical instantiations of the memory. Therefore, 
the non-overlapping, and perhaps irrelevant, fea­
tures of that memory will be inhibited and poten­
tially lost over time. See Figure 2.2 for a graphical 
example.
A second proposed role of content variability is 
that memories can become de-correlated through 
continual shifts in mental content, where mem­
ory reactivations are not temporally or spatially
bound from one spontaneous thought to the next 
(see Figure 2.3 for an example). The variability 
of content over time acts to provide a time buffer 
between overlapping memories. Enough time can 
pass between similar memory traces, such that acti­
vation from one memory can die down before other 
related memories are activated, thus avoiding the 
“fire together, wire together” association rule origi­
nally proposed by Hebb.
We argue therefore that default content vari­
ability plays a functional role in organizing episodic 
memories by optimizing de-correlated memories in 
the hippocampus and neocortex. Although the flow 
of mental states during spontaneous thought may 
seem randomly disjointed, spontaneous thoughts 
are often tied to recent memories, past events, or
Sequential Firing: Clustered Learning
little time in between replay, increased associations over time 
De-correlated Due to Spacing across Time
lower probability of occurring sequentially 
due to content variability
Figure 2.3. Examples of low variability in thought (top), corresponding to clustered learning, and highly variable thought content 
(bottom), corresponding to de-correlated memories via temporally spaced memories in spontaneous thoughts. (See Color Insert)
C A I T L I N  M I L L S ,  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T ,  M Y R T H E  F A B E R ,  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
15

future plans (Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; 
Klinger & Cox, 2004). Thus, spontaneous mental 
simulations may play a critical role in separating 
episodic memories that are important to one’s life, 
such as episodic experiences that need to be distin­
guished from others and should not be grouped with 
them due to factors such as temporal contiguity.
Pattern Completion
Pattern completion is a process through which 
completion of a whole memory of an event or expe­
rience is generated from recall of any of its parts. 
In other words, partial or degraded cues can trig­
ger the respective stored event representation, 
which then serves to reactivate the original episodic 
memory and its accompanying features, including 
the context in which it was originally experienced 
(Marr, 1971). The phenomenological qualities of 
the original event— including even elements such as 
the emotional tone of the initial experience— can 
be recaptured and reinstated, and in this sense viv­
idly re-experienced by the individual. As such, pat­
tern completion is central to the notion of episodic 
memory retrieval, in that it supports not only the 
recall of the information surrounding a given event, 
but also taps into the fundamental conscious feel­
ing of reliving a moment as a specific, rich, and 
unique subjective episode (Nadel & Moscovitch, 
1997; Teyler & Rudy, 2007). Pattern completion 
therefore elicits a sense of autonoetic consciousness 
(e.g., the ability to mentally put ourselves in other 
situations— past, 
present, 
and 
imagined— and 
reflect on them), a hallmark of episodic awareness 
(James, 1890; Tulving, 2002), which is necessary for 
episodic memory retrieval.
At the neural level, the hippocampus and the 
surrounding structures of the medial temporal 
lobe (MTL) are considered to be among the key 
neural substrates underlying the reinstatement of 
episodic memories (see Figure 2.1). While pat­
tern separation is thought to be mediated by the 
DG, areas CA1 and CA3 have been implicated as 
more central components of pattern completion. 
Incoming information stems from the entorhinal 
cortex, and perforant path projections onto CA3 
cells initiate retrieval in CA3 (without passing 
through the DG). The process of pattern comple­
tion itself is principally subserved by the CA3 
auto-associative network architecture (a network 
that can essentially retrieve a memory from par­
tial information about the memory itself; Marr, 
1971). This auto-associative CA3 architecture is 
considered to operate as a single attractor network
(Rolls, 2013). Because of that, a retrieval cue need 
not be very strong in order to produce accurate 
recall— the retrieval process itself is taken over by 
the CA3 recurrent auto-associative system (Rolls, 
2013; Treves & Rolls, 1992).
Completion is then carried out via CA3 projec­
tions to CA1 neurons, which then results in diver­
gent back-projections from CA1 to the entorhinal 
cortex and subsequent neocortical areas. These back- 
projections occur through a Hebbian-like com­
petitive learning network (i.e., associative learning, 
where similar firing patterns result in strengthened 
connections), so that inputs from CA3 generate 
competition among the cells in CA1. Subsequently, 
cells with the strongest activation in CA1 instigate 
a winner-take-all effect, thereby strengthening that 
specific pattern and suppressing shared activation 
among other memory representations that were not 
completed. Thus, an anti-Hebbian effect takes place 
when the active neurons initiate inhibitory compe­
tition, thereby depressing activations from weakly 
activated neurons.
CA1 projections act as efficient retrieval cues 
(even partial or degraded), ultimately eliciting 
activity in those areas of the cerebral cortex that 
initially supplied input to the hippocampus. In 
other words, those areas of the brain that served 
to generate the initial episodic experience are 
again recruited upon retrieval. In this way, pattern 
completion can be conceptualized as “a reverse 
hierarchical series of pattern association networks 
implemented by the hippocampo-cortical back- 
projections, each one of which performs some pat­
tern generalization, to retrieve a complete pattern 
of cortical firing in higher-order cortical areas” 
(Rolls, 2013, p. 1).
Pattern Completion as a Source 
of Continuously Generated Mental Content
In addition to strengthening the existing memo­
ries, we also propose that pattern completion might 
serve as a source of the ceaseless change in mental 
content (i.e., the frequent generation of new men­
tal states). Indeed, a similar idea was proposed 
earlier by O ’Neill, Pleydell-Bouverie, Dupret, and 
Csicsvari (2010), where pattern completion in the 
CA3 was suggested to be well suited for promot­
ing reactivation during rest. Further, there is evi­
dence that spontaneous reactivation of a memory 
can be triggered by partial cues from the memory’s 
retrieval context, as evidenced by qualitative over­
lap between thought content and its cue (Berntsen, 
1996; Berntsen & Hall, 2004).
16
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

We therefore consider the possibility that memo­
ries recalled during pattern completion might pro­
vide partial or degraded cues that may then serve to 
trigger further pattern completions, thus facilitating 
a continuous change in mental contents. For exam­
ple, one might see a chocolate cupcake. Chocolate 
may then become a cue to complete a memory of a 
birthday party with chocolate cake. The cue of birth­
day might lead to completing a memory of the Ninja 
Turtles, and green may serve as a cue to remember 
a favorite green shirt. This continuous cue provi­
sion and pattern completion tendency may help us 
understand why the mind keeps moving, with novel 
mental contents emerging repeatedly.
If, as we propose here, there is a bias for con­
secutive spontaneous mental simulations to be de- 
correlated via pattern separation processes, these 
partial cues are likely to trigger patterns that are at 
least somewhat dissimilar to the immediately pre­
ceding pattern that was triggered. This might be one 
reason that spontaneous thought exhibits a height­
ened variability over time, while at the same time 
allowing for thematic relationships or other partial 
associations to be present among consecutive men­
tal states. In turn, the completed patterns may also 
work together with pattern separation processes to 
further differentiate episodic events by strengthen­
ing the hippocampal-neocortical representations of 
an episodic memory when it is reactivated.
Cascades of thought might spontaneously arise 
within the hippocampus and propagate through­
out the brain (Ellamil et al., 2016). Some of these 
thoughts may end up being experienced con­
sciously, whereas others may fail to reach aware­
ness. This account is consistent with the notion 
of thoughts shifting in and out of the foreground 
of ones focus of attention, and the accompanying 
subjective experience of competing or coexisting 
streams of thought. It also speaks to the ease with 
which we experience a high level of content vari­
ability from one moment to the next, a large pro­
portion of which may unfold spontaneously from 
partial cues in the internal or external environment.
Semantic Optimization Hypothesis
How do we transform our fragmented episodic 
experiences into a meaningful understanding of our 
world— or what scientists call “semantic knowl­
edge”? Prominent consolidation models, such as 
the standard consolidation theory (Scoville & Milner, 
1957; Squire, 1992; Squire & Alvarez, 1995; 
Squire & Zola, 1998) and the m ultiple trace theory 
(Nadel & Moscovitch, 1997)— although not in
full theoretical agreement— share a central assump­
tion with regard to this episodic-to-semantic trans­
formation: at the neural level, episodic memories 
for events are primarily hippocampus-dependent, 
whereas semantic memories rely primarily on neo- 
cortical substrates. Here, we propose that default 
variability not only supports the organization of 
episodic memory in the hippocampus and neocor­
tex, but also supports the organization of semantic 
memory by providing the conditions necessary for 
efficient episodic-to-semantic transformation.
The creation of semantic knowledge out of 
episodic experiences is a gradual process that 
occurs across multiple instantiations (McClelland, 
McNaughton, & O ’Reilly, 1995). Variability across 
instantiations plays an important role in semantic 
knowledge acquisition. A combination of similar­
ity and dissimilarity across representations facilitate 
the extraction of regularities and the development 
of categorization (Gelman & Markman, 1986; 
Sloutsky, 2003). Similarity (i.e., overlapping fea­
tures that should be extracted for meaning-making) 
provides evidence for regularities within a category, 
whereas dissimilarity (i.e., specific differences in 
individual events) provides contrasting evidence 
that helps identify category boundaries. Moreover, 
the experience of repeated events in various contexts 
aids the encoding of relationships between its typi­
cal elements (Avrahami & Kareev, 1994). Over mul­
tiple subsequent exposures, these event elements are 
stored together in one schema, affording economi­
cal representations of semantic concepts (Nadel, 
Hupbach, Gomez, & Newman-Smith, 2012). As 
part of the default variability hypothesis, we pro­
pose that spontaneous thought s heightened content 
variability serves to support and optimize semantic 
abstraction by providing multiple mental simula­
tions that are both similar and dissimilar in nature. 
A default mode of content variability in spontane­
ous thought may therefore provide a mechanism 
for generating contextually variable episodic simu­
lations (both veridical and novel recombinations). 
The similarity in consecutive mental simulations 
can provide the basis for abstracting general mean­
ing and overarching categories through multiple 
exposures, while the dissimilarities can help ensure 
that one specific instance is not overlearned (e.g., if 
you only saw one breed of dog, you may not realize 
that another breed is also a dog).
Aside from the variability of consecutive repre­
sentations, gradual exposure is also considered to 
play a critical role. Gradual exposure, also referred 
to as interleaved learning, affords optimal semantic
C A I T L I N  M I L L S ,  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T ,  M Y R T H E  F A B E R ,  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
17

abstraction (McClelland et al., 1995). Based on evi­
dence from connectionist models, interleaved learn­
ing is theorized to critically support the progressive 
refinement of stable representations at the concep­
tual level. Semantic representations resulting from 
interleaved learning are optimally flexible in assum­
ing and reflecting “the aggregate influence of the 
entire ensemble of patterns” elicited across events, 
while simultaneously being resilient to large modi­
fications due to exposure to a single episodic trial 
(e.g., catastrophic interference; McClelland et al., 
1995, p. 429).
Accuracy in neocortical conceptual representa­
tion formation is argued to be a function of both 
sample size (i.e., number of experiences being aggre­
gated across) and learning rate, whereby a slower 
rate allows for a greater number of interleaved 
samples to be factored into each computed estimate 
(White, 1989). For example, after enough gradual 
exposure to the meaning of “cat,” a child would 
be less susceptible to fundamental misunderstand­
ings of the cat category (e.g., classifying a small dog 
as a cat). However, if a child is shown 50 pictures 
of cats in one day, he or she may confuse a small 
dog for a cat one week later. Interleaved learning is 
assumed to operate by “basically causing the net­
work to take a running average over a larger num­
ber of recent examples” (McClelland et al., 1995, 
p. 437). We propose that a default content variabil­
ity in spontaneous thought serves as a mechanism 
for increasing the opportunities for interleaved 
episodic-to-semantic transformation. By combining 
spontaneous reactivations that are highly variable 
from moment to moment, but also have recurring 
themes over time (e.g., particular things that are 
relevant to goals or current concerns), spontaneous 
thought may optimize the conditions for episodic- 
to-semantic abstraction and semantic memory 
organization overall.
Another important property of interleaved 
learning is that it can deter catastrophic interference 
(the loss of previously learned information due to 
the introduction of new information; McCloskey & 
Cohen, 1989). As commonly portrayed through the 
A B -A C paradigm  (for more details, see McClelland, 
McNaughton, & O ’Reilly, 1995), newly learned 
associations (A Q  can exhibit retroactive interfer­
ence upon a previously acquired set of associations 
(AB). In this example, A C  can interfere with the 
ability to recall A B  later— because A C  has “replaced” 
our concept of the A B  association. Avoiding cata­
strophic interference means that we can actually 
distinguish A B  and A C  as different instances in an
overarching category, rather than letting exposure to 
one harm the memory of the other.
If “what one learns about something is stored in 
the connection weights among the units activated in 
representing it” (McClelland et al., 1995, p. 433), 
then abstraction or generalization is only possible to 
the extent to which conceptual pattern representa­
tions overlap (Hinton, McClelland, & Rumelhart, 
1986). Therefore, it is imperative that a system is 
not only capable of—but also capitalizes upon— the 
ability to extract shared properties among concepts, 
while 
simultaneously 
minimizing 
catastrophic 
interference. 
McClelland, 
McNaughton, 
and 
O ’Reilly (1995) aptly highlight the existence of two 
independent yet complementary learning systems 
that meet both these needs: rapid acquisition at the 
hippocampal level (pattern separation and comple­
tion), paired with gradual interleaved learning con­
solidation at the neocortical level.
Taken together, we propose that the content 
variability that characterizes spontaneous thought 
supports episodic-to-semantic transformation and 
semantic memory organization by providing both 
increased variability and frequency over time in a 
set of samples— novel combinations of elements 
and reinstatements of episodic memories in new 
contexts— which facilitates rapid extraction of reg­
ularities and allows for generalization across them. 
In this way, spontaneous thought’s default variabil­
ity plays a critical role in optimizing the efficient 
abstraction and organization of semantic memory.
Other Potential Benefits of Spontaneous 
Thought
Novel Association Formation
Another key prediction of the semantic opti­
mization hypothesis is that novel association 
formations can arise out of MTL activity. Fox, 
Andrews-Hanna, and Christoffs (2016) expanded 
account of the hippocam pal indexing theory (Teyler 
& DiScenna, 1986; Teyler & Rudy, 2007) sug­
gests that the generation of novel thought is sup­
ported by the same mechanisms involved in the 
spontaneous reactivation of memory traces. This 
is consistent with the idea that the organization 
of memory traces in MTL regions is considered 
associative (Moscovitch, 1995). In other words, 
immediate temporal contiguity or simultane­
ity will largely dictate which combinations of 
cues and ensuing memory reactivations will arise 
together.
In this way, novel thought patterns that 
are constructive or generative in nature can be
18
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

potentially facilitated by spontaneous mental 
simulations, whereby randomization of emergent 
thought patterns might in part promote more 
flexible, as opposed to fixated, thinking (Fox, 
Kang, Lifshitz, & Christoff, 2016). In fact, it has 
been shown that noise or variability in attractor 
networks is indeed beneficial for decision-making 
and memory, because it causes them to be non- 
deterministic, which in turn can cultivate new 
problem solutions and creativity (Deco, Rolls, & 
Romo, 2009; Rolls, 2013, 2014). Furthermore, 
spontaneous thought has also been recognized as 
supporting many constructive cognitive functions 
(Fox & Christoff, 2014; Fox, Kang, et al., 2016; 
McMillan, Kaufman, & Singer, 2013; Smallwood 
& Andrews-Hanna, 2013), including generation 
of creative solutions and ideas to present problems 
(Baird et al., 2012; Campbell, 1960; Simonton, 
1999), simulated thinking (Rice & Redcay, 2015; 
Spiers & Maguire, 2006), and coordination and 
planning of future goals (Smallwood & Andrews- 
Hanna, 2013; Spreng, Stevens, Chamberlain, 
Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010).
According to the default variability hypothesis, 
mind-wandering and spontaneous thought activ­
ity can be considered a mechanism involved in not 
only consolidating past episodes, but also process­
ing ongoing current concerns and upcoming future 
events, a system that is expected and theorized to 
continuously update and integrate new information 
into existing semantic knowledge.
Reconciling Existing Mind-Wandering 
Frameworks
Several theories of spontaneous thought and 
mind-wandering have been proposed, yet there 
is a lack of consensus about functional role(s) and 
underlying mechanisms. Smallwood (2013) recently 
attempted to differentiate two accounts: the first 
explained why the spontaneous onset of uncon­
strained 
self-generated 
mental 
activity 
arises 
(deemed “occurrence” hypotheses), while the second 
explained how the continuity of internal thought is 
maintained once initiated (i.e., “process” accounts).
Although his process-occurrence model cer­
tainly helps unify the various accounts under 
one framework, it falls short of providing a func­
tional reason for why the mind evolved to wander. 
Instead, Smallwood suggests that the prospective 
consolidation hypothesis might be a possible expla­
nation for the source and function of internally 
generated thought (Smallwood, 2013). The pro­
spective consolidation hypothesis suggests that “a
core function of the hippocampal-cortical system is 
to use remnants of past experiences to make pre­
dictions about upcoming events” (Buckner, 2010, 
p. 42). Our hypothesis extends this idea to also 
include the reactivation of past and current infor­
mation. Specifically, the default variability hypothe­
sis provides further insight into the question of why 
we have evolved to produce spontaneous thought 
marked by heightened variability of content over 
time. First and foremost, we propose a functional 
account for why spontaneous thought is such a 
prevalent and ongoing experience in daily waking 
life, and the mechanisms that support this ongoing 
mental activity. Second, we suggest that from one 
moment to the next, high levels of content variabil­
ity— thoughts that seem unrelated to each, or only 
loosely related— are capable of arising quickly, rang­
ing and shifting between past and current episodic 
reactivations to future-related simulated events. 
Finally, the current account takes a step away from 
the traditional task-centric literature, and suggests 
that this ongoing mental activity persists in both the 
presence and absence of external input.
As such, the content of spontaneous thought 
itself may be partially determined by simple ran­
dom probability of thought-pattern reactivation, 
as determined by any incoming externally or inter­
nally generated partial cues, paired with the effect of 
constraints acting upon the cognitive system within 
each given moment (Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, 
& Andrews-Hanna, 2016). These constraints might 
be a function of salience, whether personal or per­
ceptual in nature (e.g., the current concerns hypoth­
esis; Klinger & Cox, 2004), the effect of attentional 
control (e.g., the executive failure hypothesis', McVay 
& Kane, 2009), a result of ones capacity to iden­
tify the contents of one’s consciousness (e.g., the 
meta-awareness hypothesis', Schooler, 2002), or most 
likely the outcome of a combination of all of those, 
functioning to different degrees. In this way, it can 
be expected that mental contents are constantly 
emerging from within hippocampal structures, 
whereby the extent to which they are transformed 
into thoughts and unfold throughout the rest of the 
brain (and the extent to which they are likely to be 
experienced consciously) is determined by the level 
and specificity of those constraints.
Conclusion
Our minds frequently tend to “wander” about, 
shaping a spontaneous thought flow marked by 
heightened content variability over time. Since the 
signature of free movement and content variability
C A I T L I N  M I L L S ,  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T ,  M Y R T H E  F A B E R ,  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
19

are likely to come at a considerable metabolic cost 
(Laughlin, de Ruyter van Steveninck, & Anderson, 
1998; Pla9ais & Preat, 2013), there is likely some 
evolutionary advantage of the dynamic nature of 
human thought. Thus, this chapter has attempted 
to introduce an account of the neural and cognitive 
evolutionary benefits of spontaneous thought and 
its inherent content variability.
Specifically, the default variability hypothesis 
proposes that mind-wandering is characterized by 
content variability and continuous movement that 
support both efficient episodic storage (episodic 
efficiency hypothesis) and semantic knowledge 
abstraction (semantic optimization hypothesis). The 
episodic efficiency hypothesis suggests that the reac­
tivations and recombinations underlying content 
variability play a critical role in pattern separation 
by helping to de-correlate memories in the hippo­
campus and neocortex. Pattern completion, on the 
other hand, is proposed to strengthen the separated 
episodic memory representations, while also being 
a potential source of continuous mental content, 
where one activated memory serves as a partial cue 
for the next. In addition, the semantic optimization 
hypothesis maintains that content variability sup­
ports episodic-to-semantic abstraction through mul­
tiple mental simulations that are both similar and 
dissimilar: The similarities provide the opportunity 
for repeated exposures so that concepts and catego­
ries can be strengthened over multiple exposures, 
while the dissimilarities mitigate the danger of over­
learning a single instance. Through mental simula­
tions, stemming from novel recombinations as well 
as reactivations, semantic abstraction is optimized 
due to increased variability and frequency over time 
in a set of samples containing similar yet dissociable 
information.
References
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). Age- 
related changes in the episodic simulation of future events. 
Psychological Science, 19( 1), 33-41. https://doi.org/10.llll/ 
j. 1467-9280.2008.02043.x
Avrahami, J., & Kareev, Y. (1994). The emergence of events. 
Cognition, 53(3), 239-261.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W., Franklin, 
M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by distraction 
mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. Psychological 
Science, 23(10), 1117-1122.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness a n d  Cognition, 20(4), 
1604-1611.
Bakker, A., Kirwan, C. B., Miller, M., & Stark, C. E. L. (2008). 
Pattern separation in the human hippocampal CA3 and
dentate gyrus. Science (N ew York, N .Y ), 3/5(5870), 1640- 
1642. https://doi.org/10T 126/science.l 152882
Berntsen, D. (1996). Involuntary autobiographical memories. 
A pplied Cognitive Psychology, 10(5), 435-454.
Berntsen, D., & Hall, N. M. (2004). The episodic nature 
of involuntary autobiographical memories. M em ory &  
Cognition, 32(5), 789-803.
Buckner, R. L. (2010). The role of the hippocampus in pre­
diction and imagination. A nnu al Review o f Psychology, 
61, 27-48.
Campbell, D. T. (I960). Blind variation and selective reten­
tions in creative thought as in other knowledge processes. 
Psychological Review, 67(6), 380.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. N ature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 27(11), 718-731.
Deco, G., Rolls, E. T., & Romo, R. (2009). Stochastic dynam­
ics as a principle of brain function. Progress in Neurobiology, 
55(1), 1-16.
Ellamil, M., Fox, K. C., Dixon, M. L., Pritchard, S., Todd, 
R. M., Thompson, E., & Christoff, K. (2016). Dynamics 
of neural recruitment surrounding the spontaneous aris­
ing of thoughts in experienced mindfulness practitioners. 
Neuroimage, 136( 1) 186-196.
Favila, S. E., Chanales, A. J., & Kuhl, B. A. (2016). Experience- 
dependent 
hippocampal 
pattern 
differentiation 
pre­
vents interference during subsequent learning. N ature 
Communications, 7( 11066).
Fox, K. C., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, K. (2016). The 
neurobiology of self-generated thought from cells to systems: 
Integrating evidence from lesion studies, human intracranial 
electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and neuroendocrinology. 
Neuroscience, 33 5 , 134-150.
Fox, K. C., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilitation of 
spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition helps 
the wandering mind find its way. In S. Fleming & C. Frith 
(Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience o f metacognition (pp. 293- 
319). Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer.
Fox, K. C., Kang, Y., Lifshitz, M., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
Increasing cognitive-emotional flexibility with medita­
tion and hypnosis: The cognitive neuroscience of de­
automatization. In A. Raz & M. Lifshitz (Eds.), Hypnosis an d 
meditation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and 
induction in young children. Cognition, 2 3(3), 183-209.
Gilbert, P. E., Kesner, R. P., & Lee, I. (2001). Dissociating hip­
pocampal subregions: A double dissociation between dentate 
gyrus and CA1. Hippocampus, 11(6), 626-636.
Hinton, G. E., McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. (1986). 
Distributed representations, parallel distributed processing: 
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. In D. E. 
Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed pro­
cessing: Explorations in the microstructure o f cognition (Vol. 1, 
pp. 77-109). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hulbert, J. C., & Norman, K. A. (2015). Neural differentia­
tion tracks improved recall of competing memories follow­
ing interleaved study and retrieval practice. Cerebral Cortex, 
2 5 (1 0 ), 3994-4008.
Hunsaker, M. R., & Kesner, R. P. (2013). The operation of pattern 
separation and pattern completion processes associated with 
different attributes or domains of memory. Neuroscience &  
Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(1), 36-58.
20
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

Hurlburt, R. T., Alderson-Day, B., Fernyhough, C., & Kuhn, 
S. (2015). What goes on in the resting-state? A qualitative 
glimpse into resting-state experience in the scanner. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 6( 1535).
James, W. (1890). 
The Principles o f Psychology, 
Volume 1. 
New York, NY: Holt.
Jones, M. W., & McHugh, T. J. (2011). Updating hippo­
campal representations: CA2 joins the circuit. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 34(10), 526-535.
Jung, M. W., & McNaughton, B. L. (1993). Spatial selectivity of 
unit activity in the hippocampal granular layer. Hippocampus, 
3(2), 165-182.
Kesner, R. P. (2007). A behavioral analysis of dentate gyrus func­
tion. Progress in Brain Research, 163, 567-576.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (2004). Motivation and the theory 
of current concerns. In W. M Cox & E. Klinger (Eds.), 
H andbook o f  m otivational counseling: Concepts, approaches, 
a n d  assessment (pp. 3-27). Chichester, England: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Laughlin, S. B., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. R., & Anderson, 
J. C. (1998). The metabolic cost of neural informa­
tion. N ature Neuroscience, 2(1), 36-41. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/236
Leutgeb, J. K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M.-B., & Moser, E. I. (2007). 
Pattern separation in the dentate gyrus and CA3 of the hip­
pocampus. Science, 375(5814), 961-966.
Marr, D. (1971). Simple memory: A theory for archicortex. 
Philosophical Transactions o f the Royal Society o f London B, 
2 6 2 , 23-81.
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. 
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in 
the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes 
and failures of connectionist models of learning and mem­
ory. Psychological Review, 102(3), 419.
McCloskey, M., & Cohen, N. J. (1989). Catastrophic inter­
ference in connectionist networks: The sequential learn­
ing problem. Psychology o f Learning an d M otivation, 24, 
109-165.
McMillan, R., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode to 
positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 626.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train of 
thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and mind 
wandering in an executive-control task .Journal o f Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(1), 196.
Moscovitch, M. (1995). Recovered consciousness: A hypoth­
esis concerning modularity and episodic memory. Journal o f 
C linical an d Experim ental Neuropsychology, 17(2), 276-290.
Myers, C. E., & Scharfman, H. E. (2009). A role for hilar cells 
in pattern separation in the dentate gyrus: A computational 
approach. Hippocampus, 19(4), 321-337.
Myers, C. E., & Scharfman, H. E. (2011). Pattern separation 
in the dentate gyrus: A role for the CA3 backprojection. 
Hippocampus, 27(11), 1190-1215.
Nadel, L., Hupbach, A., Gomez, R., & Newman-Smith, K. 
(2012). Memory formation, consolidation and transforma­
tion. Neuroscience &  Biobehavioral Reviews, 3 6(7), 1640- 
1645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.03.001
Nadel, L., & Moscovitch, M. (1997). Memory consolidation, 
retrograde amnesia and the hippocampal complex. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2), 217-227.
Nitz, D., & McNaughton, B. (2004). Differential modulation 
of CA1 and dentate gyrus interneurons during exploration
of novel environments. Journal o f Neurophysiology, 91(2), 
863-872.
O’Neill, J., Pleydell-Bouverie, B., Dupret, D., & Csicsvari, J. 
(2010). Play it again: Reactivation of waking experience and 
memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 33(5), 220-229.
Pla^ais, P.-Y., & Preat, T. (2013). To favor survival under 
food 
shortage, 
the 
brain 
disables 
costly 
memory. 
Science, 335(6118), 440-442. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science. 1226018
Rice, K., & Redcay, E. (2015). Spontaneous mentalizing captures 
variability in the cortical thickness of social brain regions. 
Social Cognitive an d Affective Neuroscience, 10(3), 327-334.
Rolls, E. T. (1989). Parallel distributed processing in the 
brain: Implications of the functional architecture of neuro­
nal networks in the hippocampus. In R. G. M. Morris (Ed.), 
Parallel distributed processing: Implications fo r psychology an d 
neurobiology (pp. 286-308). New York: Clarendon Press/ 
Oxford University Press.
Rolls, E. T. (2013). The mechanisms for pattern comple­
tion and pattern separation in the hippocampus. Frontiers 
in Systems Neuroscience, 7, 74. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnsys.2013.00074
Rolls, E. T. (2014). Emotion and decision-making explained: A 
precis. Cortex, 59, 185-93.
Rolls, E. T. (2016). Pattern separation, completion, and categori­
sation in the hippocampus and neocortex. Neurobiology o f 
Learning an d M emory, 129, 4-28. https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.nlm.2015.07.008
Rolls, E. T., & Kesner, R. P. (2006). A computational theory 
of hippocampal function, and empirical tests of the theory. 
Progress in Neurobiology, 79(1), 1—48.
Rolls, E. T., & Treves, A. (1990). The relative advantages of 
sparse versus distributed encoding for associative neuronal 
networks in the brain. Network: Computation in N eural 
Systems, 7(4), 407-421.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past to imagine the future: The prospec­
tive brain. N ature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(9), 657-661. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2213
Schooler, 
J. 
W. 
(2002). 
Re-representing 
consciousness: 
Dissociations between experience and meta-consciousness. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(8), 339-344.
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory 
after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal o f Neurology, 
Neurosurgery &  Psychiatry, 2 0 ( 1), 11-21.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Creativity as blind variation and selec­
tive retention: Is the creative process Darwinian? Psychological 
Inquiry, 10(4), 309-328.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the develop­
ment of categorization. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(6),
246-251.
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the mind 
wanders: A process-occurrence framework for self-generated 
mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 519.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds 
that wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspec­
tive on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4 , 4 4 1.
Spiers, H. J., & Maguire, E. A. (2006). Spontaneous mental­
izing during an interactive real world task: An fMRI study. 
Neuropsychologia, 44(16), 1674-1682.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity,
C A I T L I N  M I L L S ,  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T ,  M Y R T H E  F A B E R ,  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
21

coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. 
Neuroimage, 53(1), 303-317. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j .neuroimage.2010.06.016
Squire, L. R. (1992). Memory and the hippocampus: A synthesis 
from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans. Psychological 
Review, 9 9 (2), 195.
Squire, L. R., & Alvarez, P. (1995). Retrograde amnesia and 
memory consolidation: A neurobiological perspective. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 5(2), 169—177.
Squire, L. R., & Zola, S. M. (1998). Episodic memory, semantic 
memory, and amnesia. Hippocampus, 8(3), 205-211.
Teyler, T. J., & DiScenna, P. (1986). The hippocampal mem­
ory indexing theory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 100 (2 ), 147.
Teyler, T. J., & Rudy, J. W. (2007). The hippocampal index­
ing theory and episodic memory: Updating the index. 
Hippocampus, 17(12), 1158-1169.
Treves, A., & Rolls, E. T. (1992). Computational con­
straints suggest the need for two distinct input systems
to the hippocampal CA3 network. H ippocampus, 2(2 ), 
189-199.
Treves, A., & Rolls, E. T. (1994). Computational analysis of the 
role of the hippocampus in memory. Hippocampus, 4(3), 
374-391.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. 
A nnu al Review o f Psychology, 53(1), 1-25.
White, H. (1989). Learning in artificial neural networks: A sta­
tistical perspective. N eural Computation, 1(4), 425-464.
Witter, M. P. (1993). Organization of the entorhinal- 
hippocampal system: A review of current anatomical data. 
Hippocampus, 3(S1), 33—44.
Witter, M. P. (2007). The perforant path: Projections from the 
entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus. Progress in Brain 
Research, 163, 43-61.
Yassa, M. A., & Reagh, Z. M. (2013). Competitive trace the­
ory: A role for the hippocampus in contextual interference 
during retrieval. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 7, 107.
22
W H Y  T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S

C H A P T E R
3
An Exploration/Exploitation Trade-off 
Between Mind-Wandering and 
Goal-Directed Thinking
Chandra S. Sripada
Abstract
Agents invariably face trade-offs between exploration, which increases informational stores and 
potentially opens up new opportunities, and exploitation, which utilizes existing informational stores to 
take advantage of known opportunities. This exploration/exploitation trade-off has been extensively 
studied in computer science and has been productively applied to multiple cognitive domains. In 
this chapter, this framework is extended to the ubiquitous alternation between two modes of serial 
thought: mind-wandering and goal-directed thought. The exploration/exploitation framework provides 
a new perspective on the functionality of mind-wandering and its pattern of regular switching with goal- 
directed thought. It also raises new hypotheses about the regulation of mind-wandering across time and 
differences in the propensity to mind-wander across individuals.
Key Words: mind-wandering, goal-directed thought, serial thought, exploration, exploitation
[W]hilst we are awake, there will always be 
a train of ideas succeeding one another in 
our minds. [W]hen the mind with great ear­
nestness, and of choice, fixes its view on any 
idea . . . and will not be called off by the ordi­
nary solicitation of other ideas, it is that we 
call . . . “study.” [W]hen ideas float in our 
mind without any reflection or regard of the 
understanding, it is that which the French call 
reverie . . . .
—John Locke (1689, II, 19 $1)
Theorists in psychology and neuroscience often 
distinguish two modes of serial thinking. The first, 
which is here dubbed goal-directed thinking, is a vol­
untary, focused, purposeful mode. It depends on 
working memory (Baddeley, 1996, 2012) and cog­
nitive control (Botvinick & Cohen, 2014; Miller, 
2000) and is similar to what cognitive psychologists 
call “system 2” thinking (Evans, 2008). It is engaged 
during tasks that involve top-down control, vigilant
attention, planning, problem-solving, and delib­
erative decision-making, among others. The sec­
ond mode is mind-wandering (Callard, Smallwood, 
Golchert, 
& Margulies, 2013; Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2015), and it has been a topic of increas­
ing investigation in the last decade. In this mode of 
thinking, individual thoughts spontaneously pop 
into mind, transitions between them are unpre­
dictable, and the ongoing stream is discursive 
(Irving, 2015).
These two modes of serial thought appear to be 
competitive. As Locke noted, the modes of thought 
alternate with each other; episodes of one mode are 
displaced by episodes of the other with a complex 
pattern of switching. In this chapter, I develop a 
high-level theory that provides a unified under­
standing of these two modes of serial thought and 
the regulation of transitions between the two. The 
approach is rooted in the exploration/exploita­
tion trade-off that was first described in theoreti­
cal models of learning (see Sutton & Barto, 1998
2-3

for a discussion) but is increasingly recognized as 
an important topic in psychology, neuroscience, 
and psychiatry. The model highlights the distinctive 
functionality of each mode of thought. It also sheds 
light on how the balance between the two modes 
of thought is tuned across time and varies across 
individuals.
The Exploration/Exploitation Framework
Consider a rabbit in a large patch with numerous 
bushes spread throughout, which vary considerably 
in the quantity of berries they have. The rabbit starts 
at one of the bushes and knows how many berries it 
offers, but it is unaware of the quantity of berries at 
any of the other bushes. At each moment in time, 
the rabbit faces a choice: continue to feed from the 
current bush, depleting it further (exploit), or visit 
other bushes to get a better sense of where they are 
and how many berries they have (explore).
In most environments, the optimal strategy will 
involve some combination of these. If the rabbit 
exclusively exploits, it might miss significant oppor­
tunities. For example, it might happen to be in a 
particularly barren region of the patch where ber­
ries are hard to come by, while abundant berries are 
available if it shifts to another corner of the patch. If 
the rabbit exclusively explores, it will build up better 
and better estimates of where the berries are distrib­
uted in the patch. But there are likely to be dimin­
ishing returns in making the estimates increasingly 
precise, not to mention that these precise estimates 
will be useless if the rabbit starves to death before 
they can be used.
In short, the problem faced by the rabbit pits two 
kinds of competing actions against each other. At 
an abstract level, they can be differentiated in terms 
of the kinds of search processes that they employ. 
Exploration involves wider, more open-ended 
search, the main purpose of which is to increase 
the agents information about the properties of the 
search space (e.g., its size, structure, distribution of 
rewards, what actions are available). Exploitation 
employs a narrower, more goal-directed search 
strategy. Exploration and exploitation also differ in 
the types of uncertainty involved during search. In 
exploration, uncertainty tends to take the form of 
“unknown unknowns.” For example, key param­
eters about the search space— its size, the magni­
tude and distribution of rewards, and so on— either 
lack adequate prior estimates or the confidence 
intervals around them are large. In exploitation, 
in contrast, uncertainty tends to take the form of 
“known unknowns” (i.e., uncertainty for which at
least minimally reliable probability estimates are 
available).
While exploration and exploitation are some­
times presented in terms of a sharp dichotomy 
between two “pure” types of action, the preced­
ing characterization suggests a continuum. Across 
various different domains, agents face trade-offs 
between actions that are relatively more exploratory 
versus actions that are relatively more exploitative. 
Exploration and exploitation are thus not defined 
in absolute terms, but rather should be understood 
comparatively and relative to a particular context.
The exploration/exploitation framework has 
been usefully applied to a number of real-world 
domains. Early theoretical work focused on rein­
forcement learning problems faced by animals 
and humans (Kaelbling, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 
1998). Applied work examined foraging prob­
lems (Krebs, 1978), visual search (Wolfe, Cave, 
& Franzel, 1989), memory search (Hills, Jones, & 
Todd, 2012), and attention (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 
2005; Usher, Cohen, Servan-Schreiber, Rajkowski, 
& Aston-Jones, 1999), among other topics (see 
Cohen, McClure, & Yu, 2007; Hills, Todd, Lazer, 
Redish, & Couzin, 2015). In what follows, the 
exploration/exploitation framework is extended 
to another domain: goal-directed thinking, mind­
wandering, and their transitions (see also Mittner, 
Hawkins, Boekel, & Forstmann, 2016; Smallwood 
et al., 2012).
Applying the Exploration/Exploitation
Framework to Serial Thought
Mind- Wandering Is an Exploratory Process
Recent studies suggest that we spend an enor­
mous portion of our waking lives mind-wandering 
(Kane et al., 2007; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Klinger & Cox, 1987). What might be the purpose 
of this activity? While there are different perspectives 
on this question, an emerging view, supported by 
multiple lines of evidence, is that mind-wandering 
facilitates pattern learning and creativity. I review 
theoretical and empirical evidence for this “deep 
learning” approach to mind-wandering in detail 
elsewhere (Sripada, 2016) so here I will be brief.
During mind-wandering, 
various 
kinds 
of 
thoughts are called to mind, and much of the con­
tent is quasi-perceptual and imagistic: autobio­
graphical memories of remote events, replays of 
more recent events, prospections into the near and 
distant future (Delamillieure et al., 2010; Klinger 
& Cox, 1987). The transitions between individual 
thoughts are discursive. There are often thematic
24
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

continuities (Bar, Aminoff, Mason, & Fenske, 
2007) between adjacent thought items but also sub­
stantial discontinuities. This kind of meandering 
thought stream is ideal for identifying interesting 
patterns and relationships. Thoughts are juxtaposed 
next to others in unpredictable and partially ran­
dom ways, thus enabling implicit learning systems 
to “observe” these novel thought streams— in the 
same way they would observe actual unfolding 
events in the world— and to extract new patterns, 
generalizations, interpretations, and insights.
Several lines of evidence support the view that 
mind-wandering facilitates pattern learning and 
creativity. In early work, Jerome L. Singer and col­
leagues (Singer & Antrobus, 1963; Singer, 1974; 
Singer & Schonbar, 1961) found that a higher 
propensity to daydream was predictive of higher 
levels of creativity. Behavioral studies manipulated 
the quantity of mind-wandering during a specific 
interval of time and found that participants who 
mind-wandered more scored higher on measures of 
creativity (Baird et al., 2012). Studies using func­
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) found 
greater activation in the default mode network 
(DM N), which has been associated with mind­
wandering (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Huang, & 
Buckner, 2010; Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & 
Spreng, 2014), predicted better mnemonic func­
tioning (Wig et al., 2008), greater depth of social 
understanding 
(Yang, 
Bossmann, 
Schiffhauer, 
Jordan, & Immordino-Yang, 2012), and greater 
creativity (Wang et al., 2009).
If the preceding picture that mind-wandering 
facilitates pattern learning and creativity is correct, 
then mind-wandering is naturally understood as an 
exploratory process. It involves a wide, discursive 
search through a vast space of memories, prospec- 
tions, and other thought items. The search yields 
information gain through extraction of hidden pat­
terns and production of creative insights.
Goal-Directed Thought Is 
an Exploitative Process
Relative 
to 
mind-wandering, 
goal-directed 
thinking is naturally understood as a more exploit­
ative process, one that implements a narrow, tar­
geted search strategy. The hallmark of goal-directed 
thinking is the coordinated use of attention, work­
ing memory, and cognitive control for the pur­
poses of achieving a specific goal (Baddeley, 1996, 
2012; Botvinick & Cohen, 2014; Evans, 2008; 
Miller, 2000). The coordination of these elements 
is achieved by task sets, which are conceptualized as
explicitly encoded instructions activated by specific 
task contexts (Dosenbach et al., 2006; Hazel tine & 
Schumacher, 2016).
Consider a specific example: mental arithmetic. 
Here the overall goal is to get the solution of a math 
problem, and instructions specify the steps that 
need to be undertaken (e.g., start at the right col­
umn and sum the digits; if the sum is greater than 
10, then carry the one; move one column to the 
left, etc.). Each element of the unfolding sequence 
of thought is constrained by the task instructions. If 
attention is spontaneously redirected to something 
salient in the environment, cognitive control pro­
cesses redirect attention and resume the sequence of 
steps (Miller, 2000).
Notice that, unlike mind-wandering, goal- 
directed thinking is not open-ended or discursive. 
Rather, this mode of thought is aimed at achiev­
ing a specific goal and is constrained by explicit 
instructions. This form of thinking is thus unlikely 
to uncover novel patterns or to produce creative 
insights.
There Is a Trade-off Between Goal-Directed 
Thinking and Mind- Wandering
In the quote at the head of this chapter, Locke 
notes that goal-directed thinking (what he called 
“study”) and mind-wandering (what he calls “rev­
erie”) typically alternate; that is, they are not usu­
ally co-present, but rather follow each other in 
succession. One could interpret this observation 
as an instance of a broader thesis that goal-directed 
thinking and mind-wandering exhibit a competi­
tive relationship: Engaging in one tends to interfere 
with the other.
Behavioral studies provide one line of evidence 
in favor of this thesis. A number of studies have 
examined 
mind-wandering 
during 
prolonged, 
relatively monotonous tasks. These studies reli­
ably find that measures of task performance, such 
as accuracy, reaction time, and reaction variability, 
significantly deteriorate during intervals when par­
ticipants are engaged in mind-wandering (McVay & 
Kane, 2009; Schooler, Reichle, & Halpern, 2004; 
Smallwood, 
Brown, 
Baird, 
Mrazek, 
et 
al., 
2012; Smallwood, McSpadden, Luus, & Schooler, 
2008; Smallwood, McSpadden, & Schooler, 2007).
There is also support for competition between 
goal-directed thinking and mind-wandering from 
neuroimaging. Goal-directed thinking is associ­
ated with activity in a frontal and parietal network 
of regions encompassing dorsal lateral prefrontal 
cortex (dlPFC), superior parietal cortex, frontal eye
C H A N D R A  S. S R I P A D A
2-5

fields, anterior insula, and supplementary motor 
cortex. These regions are reliably activated in a broad 
array of otherwise diverse cognitively demanding 
tasks (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000) and thus have been 
dubbed variously: general demand cortex (Duncan 
& Owen, 2000), the task-positive network (M. 
D. Fox et al., 2005), and the cognitive control net­
work (Cole & Schneider, 2007).
Mind-wandering, in contrast, is associated with 
preferential activity in the DM N (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010, 2014), a network of midline, lateral 
parietal, and medial and lateral temporal brain 
regions. Regions of this network are associated 
with internally directed attention, representations 
of self, and episodic memory, among other func­
tions (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; 
Buckner & Carroll, 2007).
During tasks, the neural regions that subserve 
goal-directed thinking on the one hand, and the 
DM N on the other, exhibit a robust reciprocal 
relationship: while the task stimulus is present, the 
former regions are activated and the DM N is deac­
tivated, while the reverse is true during rest intervals 
(Mazoyer et al., 2001; Raichle et al., 2001; Shulman 
et al., 1997). Additionally, tasks that are more 
cognitively demanding are associated with more 
activation in the regions subserving goal-directed 
thinking, more deactivation in the DM N, and 
reduced mind-wandering (McKiernan, D ’Angelo, 
Kaufman, & Binder, 2006; McKiernan, Kaufman, 
Kucera-Thompson, & Binder, 2003). This has led 
to the suggestion that the DM N is being adap­
tively downregulated during cognitively demand­
ing tasks to facilitate task performance (McKiernan 
et al., 2006).
The preceding neural evidence suggests reliable 
antagonism between the neural regions supporting 
goal-directed thinking and mind-wandering. There 
is a complication, however. Some theorists propose 
that during mind-wandering, there is significant 
activation in specific regions that are often associ­
ated with goal-directed thinking, for example dlPFC 
(K. C. R. Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & 
Christoff, 2015; Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, 
Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Smallwood, Brown, 
Baird, & Schooler, 2012; Teasdale et al., 1995).
Findings such as these, however, can be recon­
ciled with the hypothesis of antagonism between 
goal-directed thinking and mind-wandering. The 
key is to recognize that antagonism is being pro­
posed at the level of overall brain-wide neural 
signatures: stronger presence of one signature is reli­
ably associated with reduced presence of the other
signature. Such antagonism between aggregate sig­
natures is compatible with the respective signatures 
exhibiting overlap at one or more specific nodes. So 
even if dlPFC (as well as certain other “executive” 
regions) are activated during goal-directed thinking 
as well as during mind-wandering, the overall signa­
tures of the former and latter are still quite distinct, 
and these signatures remain reciprocally related.
An 
exploration/exploitation 
trade-off exists 
when there is a relatively exploratory course of 
action, a relatively exploitative course of action, 
and there is a trade-off between doing one and 
the other. The evidence reviewed in the preceding 
subsection builds a case that mind-wandering and 
goal-directed thinking are, respectively, relatively 
exploratory and relatively exploitative. The behav­
ioral and neural evidence reviewed in the present 
subsection suggests there is a trade-off between the 
two modes of thought, that is, engaging in one gen­
erally entails forgoing the other
Management of the Exploration/ 
Exploitation Trade-off in Serial Thought
If the alternation between mind-wandering and 
goal-directed thinking is an instance of an explora­
tion/exploitation trade-off, then this raises a ques­
tion: How are the transitions between the two 
managed? It is plausible that there are mechanisms 
that balance the two modes of thought and produce 
an adaptive distribution between them.
There are important theoretical results about how 
to optimally solve exploration/exploitation trade-offs 
(Gittens, 1979). However, these solutions tend to be 
computationally intensive and rely on assumptions 
that are unlikely to hold in many real-world circum­
stances. Thus it is plausible that exploration/exploita­
tion trade-offs that arise in the kinds of problems faced 
by humans and other animals are usually solved by 
various kinds of simplifying shortcuts (Cohen et al., 
2007). Here, three regulatory strategies are proposed 
that might potentially play a role in adaptive transi­
tions between goal-directed and mind-wandering 
modes of serial thought. Note that these aren’t strate­
gies that people consciously and intentionally imple­
ment. Rather, it is proposed that mental systems can 
be thought of “as if” they execute these strategies—  
the strategies are, in effect, built into the procedures 
implemented by these mental systems.
The Default Strategy
Goal-directed thought is useful in certain spe­
cific kinds of situations where sequencing and 
guidance of thought by task sets are required.
26
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

These situations will (typically) arise intermittently 
with long intervening periods where goal-directed 
thought is not needed. Given this pattern, a rea­
sonable way to handle the allocation between goal- 
directed thought and mind-wandering is to treat 
mind-wandering as a kind of default state: it is what 
the person will do so long as goal-directed thought 
is not required. When necessary, this default state of 
mind-wandering can be interrupted for brief bursts 
of goal-directed thought, after which the default 
state automatically resumes.
Evidence for the default strategy comes from 
the neuroimaging studies described earlier. There 
it was noted that during cognitively demanding 
tasks, the regions supporting goal-directed think­
ing are activated, while the DM N, which supports 
mind-wandering, is deactivated. However, as soon 
as a rest interval is provided, the DM N is imme­
diately activated and remains so for the duration 
of the rest. Experience sampling studies show that 
during these rest intervals, participants experience 
streams of autobiographical memories and prospec­
tive thoughts characteristic of mind-wandering 
(Delamillieure et al., 2010). Notice that the experi­
menter does not have to tell participants that they 
should mind-wander as soon as the task ends. 
Nor are children explicitly socialized or trained to 
do this. Rather, the tendency to engage in mind­
wandering whenever not engaged in a cognitively 
demanding task seems to be universal, automatic, 
and unlearned, which is precisely what is predicted 
by the view that a default strategy is being utilized.
The Oscillation Strategy
Earlier it was noted that it is almost never a 
sound strategy to engage exclusively in exploration 
or exclusively in exploitation. An agent that only 
exploits will fail to develop informational stores that 
may lead to still greater rewards. An agent that only 
explores will fail to seize on known opportunities, 
and if the relevant opportunities consist of food or 
shelter, the agent may even perish. It is thus adap­
tive to engage in some balance between exploration 
and exploitation.
Now consider a second agent (that lives for many 
years) that balances the total amount of time spent 
in each mode in the following way: the agent engages 
exclusively in exploration during the first half of its 
lifetime and exclusively in exploitation during the 
second half of its lifetime. This is a maladaptive 
allocation for nearly the same reasons that applied 
to the first agent that engages in exclusive explora­
tion or exclusive exploitation (i.e., over each half
of its life, this second agent either fails to build up 
informational stores or fails to seize known oppor­
tunities). The example illustrates that an adaptive 
allocation between exploration and exploitation not 
only balances the total time spent in each, but also 
maintains this balance within some appropriately 
short unit of time. Moreover, it is clear that this rel­
evant unit of time is much shorter than a lifetime, 
and it plausibly might even be as short as minutes 
and hours.
One efficient way to ensure that an agent achieves 
a balance between exploration and exploitation 
across some relatively short unit of time is to have 
an inner “drive” to engage in each, where the drive 
exhibits temporal oscillation within the relevant 
unit of time. Interestingly, there is some evidence 
that goal-directed thought and mind-wandering do 
exhibit the kinds of temporal oscillations that are 
predicted by this type of model.
In everyday experience, we are familiar with 
attention fluctuating over time on timescales of 
seconds to minutes. For example, a person atten­
tively reads a dense academic article for a minute 
or so, her mind wanders away from the article for 
a minute, she returns to attentive reading of the 
article, and the cycle continues. A useful method 
for quantitatively measuring these ongoing cycles of 
attention is reaction time variability (RTV), which 
is a measure of the instability of reaction time across 
time within the same individual. During episodes 
of goal-directed thought, RTV is lower as the focus 
of attention is on the task at hand. During episodes 
of mind-wandering, RTV increases as attention 
turns away from the task and toward the ongo­
ing discursive stream of memories and prospec- 
tions (Allan Cheyne, Solman, Carriere, & Smilek, 
2009; Mooneyham & Schooler, 2013; Smallwood 
et al., 2008).
Given this link between RTV and modes of 
serial thought, it is noteworthy that a number of 
recent studies find that RTV is not constant across 
time, but itself exhibits a somewhat fluctuating pat­
tern. Individuals typically experience short epochs 
(lasting tens of seconds) of low RTV, reflecting 
higher levels of attention, interspersed with epochs 
of high RTV, reflecting lower levels of attention 
(Esterman, Noonan, Rosenberg, & Degutis, 2013; 
Esterman, Rosenberg, & Noonan, 2014). This 
observation suggests that there are regular ongoing 
oscillatory shifts between goal-directed thought and 
mind-wandering.
Other studies shed light on the mechanistic basis 
of these oscillatory shifts. Usher and colleagues
C H A N D R A  S. S R I P A D A
2-7

(Usher et al., 1999) trained Cynomolgus monkeys 
to perform an extended visual discrimination task 
and divided the train of responses into epochs of 
good and bad performance. They measured neurons 
in the locus coeruleus (LC), a midbrain nucleus that 
is the principal site of norepinephrine synthesis and 
has projections throughout the prefrontal cortex, 
among other brain regions. They found that modes 
of LC activity mediated shifts between epochs of 
good and bad performance, with the “phasic mode” 
of LC activity (low baseline and high task-evoked 
LC output) associated with good epochs, and the 
“tonic mode” of LC activity (high baseline and low 
task-evoked LC output) associated with bad epochs. 
They speculated that the LC plays a role in manag­
ing the exploration/exploitation trade-off, with the 
tonic LC mode characterized by less attention to 
task and greater exploration (see also Aston-Jones 
& Cohen, 2005; Cohen et al., 2007; McClure, 
Gilzenrat, & Cohen, 2006).
Pupillary diameter has been shown to reliably 
reflect phasic versus tonic modes of LC activity 
(Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). Smallwood and 
colleagues took advantage of this relationship to 
study attention fluctuation and mind-wandering in 
human participants performing an extended contin­
uous performance task (Smallwood, Brown, Baird, 
Mrazek, et al., 2012). They found that epochs of 
poor performance were characterized by increased 
mind-wandering (as measured by experience sam­
pling) as well as pupillary signatures of the tonic 
LC mode. (Of note, pupillary findings are more 
difficult to interpret when time-on-task is taken 
into account, especially in demanding vigilance 
tasks that minimize breaks between trials. These 
tasks often find lower pupillary baselines as time- 
on-task increases (Brink, Murphy, & Nieuwenhuis, 
2016; Grandchamp, Braboszcz, & Delorme, 2014; 
Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 
2015; Van Orden, Jung, & Makeig, 2000), and the 
role of the LC in producing these effects remains 
poorly understood.)
Putting together the preceding lines of evidence, 
the overall picture looks like this: The LC serves 
as something like an internal pacemaker, shift­
ing back and forth over timescales of seconds to 
minutes (extending perhaps to hours, though this 
has been less studied) between two modes: (1) an 
exploitative mode, characterized by a high degree of 
task-directed attention and good task performance; 
and (2) an exploratory mode, characterized by a 
lower degree of task-directed attention, high levels 
of mind-wandering, and poor task performance.
According to the “oscillation strategy” model, this 
pattern of oscillatory fluctuation produces balanced 
sampling of both exploration and exploitation strat­
egies across relatively short intervals of time.
Recently, Mittner and colleagues proposed an 
alternative model that links phasic versus tonic 
modes of LC functioning to modes of serial 
thought, but their model differs from the pres­
ent one in many respects (Mittner et al., 2016). 
For example, they link the exploitative phasic LC 
mode with both goal-directed thinking and mind­
wandering, while the exploratory tonic LC mode is 
linked with a third “off-focus” state that mediates 
transitions between the two. A comprehensive dis­
cussion of their model, and evidence for and against 
it, is beyond the scope of this chapter. But their 
work illustrates the fruitfulness of the exploration/ 
exploitation framework for spurring novel hypoth­
eses about regulation of serial thinking.
The Fatigue Strategy
It is plausible that goal-directed thinking and 
mind-wandering exhibit different profiles of mar­
ginal utility with time. Goal-directed thinking is 
likely to exhibit diminishing marginal utility over 
relatively short stretches of time (i.e., minutes and 
hours). This is because this mode of thinking is usu­
ally initiated to achieve some well-defined specific 
goal, perhaps deliberating on a set of options or 
trying to solve some specific problem (e.g., figuring 
out the shortest route between two locations). After 
a certain amount of time, additional efforts in delib­
erating or explicit problem-solving are unlikely to 
yield additional gains; the person is better off stop­
ping and moving forward with action.
Mind-wandering, in contrast, is likely to exhibit 
relatively constant value over time. Earlier, mind­
wandering was interpreted in terms of a wide search 
process that operates over a vast space of episodic 
memories, prospections, and so on. The search 
process yields information gains through pattern 
learning and generation of creative insights. Given 
the vastness of the search space over which mind­
wandering operates, there is no obvious reason that 
its usefulness should decline over relatively short 
stretches of time (i.e., minutes to hours).
Let us assume that this picture is correct, and 
that the two modes of serial thought differ in terms 
of marginal utility with time. It follows that to max­
imize utility, it would be adaptive to have a time- 
on-task dependent signal that limits the duration in 
which one engages in goal-directed thinking. This 
signal should gradually build with time, so that it
28
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

becomes harder to continue with goal-directed 
thinking as the signal becomes stronger. Such a sig­
nal would tend to motivate the person away from 
goal-directed thought after a prolonged interval. 
Given the default strategy noted earlier, the person 
would naturally resume mind-wandering once goal- 
directed thinking had ceased.
It is possible that cognitive fatigue plays precisely 
the role of the time-on-task dependent signal just 
proposed (for a related suggestion, see Carruthers, 
2015; Irving, 2016). Consistent with the proposed 
model, cognitive fatigue does in fact occur in a wide 
variety of tasks that engage goal-directed thinking, 
including tasks involving inhibitory control, vigilant 
attention, decision-making, and planning (Hagger, 
Wood, Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010; See, Howe, 
Warm, & Dember, 1995; van der Linden, Frese, & 
Meijman, 2003). In contrast, mind-wandering is 
described as feeling automatic and effortless, and it 
is not accompanied by cognitive fatigue (McVay & 
Kane, 2010).
The model of cognitive fatigue being proposed 
here has clear similarities to a model by Kurzban 
and colleagues, which appeals to the idea that engag­
ing in cognitive processes for certain tasks incurs 
opportunity costs (Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & 
Myers, 2013). There is a critical difference, however. 
Kurzban and colleagues propose that “controlled 
cognition” (what is here being called goal-directed 
thinking) depends on a “prefrontal executive net­
work,” which constitutes a versatile cognitive 
resource that can be used for multiple purposes. 
The function of cognitive fatigue, on their view, is 
not to get a person to disengage from goal-directed 
thinking. Rather, it is to get the person to switch 
from using goal-directed thinking for one specific 
task and instead deploy it for another specific task. 
In short, the model from Kurzban and colleagues 
treats cognitive fatigue during goal-directed think­
ing as a signal that represents the opportunity cost 
of alternative tasks that one could instead be doing. 
In contrast, on the model being presently proposed, 
cognitive fatigue during goal-directed thinking rep­
resents the opportunity cost of an alternative mode 
o f  serial thought that one could instead be engaged 
in, an exploratory mode of thought that delivers a 
more or less stable quantity of utility irrespective of 
duration.
The two models of cognitive fatigue— Kurzban 
and colleagues’ model and the one being presently 
proposed— make different predictions about what 
happens when a person engages in goal-directed 
thinking for a prolonged period of time (assume
that he or she is performing a single task, say a dif­
ficult planning problem). Kurzban and colleagues’ 
model says the buildup of cognitive fatigue will 
motivate the person to disengage from the current 
task and instead take up any of a number of suf­
ficiently distinct tasks that also engage goal-directed 
thought, say a task requiring vigilant attention. In 
contrast, the model being presently proposed says 
that the buildup of cognitive fatigue will motivate 
the person to disengage from goal-directed thought 
and instead take up mind-wandering, a mode of 
serial thought that is distinctive in being effortless 
and non-fatiguing. While direct head-to-head com­
parisons of the predictions of the two models are 
lacking, ordinary experience seems much more sup­
portive of the second model.
Individual Differences: Mind Wandering 
and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder
So far, the exploration/exploitation trade-off 
has been used to try to provide deeper understand­
ing of the trade-off between mind-wandering and 
goal-directed thinking, and the mechanisms by 
which the trade-off is managed across time in the 
same individual. In this section, the focus will be 
on individual differences, that is, ways in which the 
trade-off might be managed in systematically differ­
ent ways in different persons. In particular, the case 
of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
is examined in detail as a way of shedding light on 
the broader issue of individual differences.
ADHD is the most common psychiatric disorder 
of childhood, affecting roughly 5%-8% of youth 
(Polanczyk & Rohde, 2007), and involves inat­
tention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity (American 
Psychiatric Association & DSM-5 Task Force, 
2013). Recently, Hauser and colleagues proposed 
an intriguing model in which ADH D is caused 
by a pervasive increase in exploration relative to 
exploitation (Hauser, Fiore, Moutoussis, & Dolan, 
2016). Their model builds on the observation that 
individuals with ADH D exhibit alterations in cate­
cholamine neurotransmitter systems (including the 
norepinephrine system discussed earlier), which are 
hypothesized to play a role in managing the balance 
between exploration and exploitation (Aston-Jones 
& Cohen, 2005; McClure et al., 2006). They pro­
pose that one of the ways that increased explora­
tion in ADH D manifests is through the decision 
temperature variable, which governs the stochastic- 
ity of choice. More specifically, agents usually select 
actions that have highest expected utility based on
C H A N D R A  S. S R I P A D A
29

their current (potentially incorrect) estimates. But 
as the decision temperature setting goes higher, 
agents increasingly deviate from responding in line 
with their current utility estimates and instead ran­
domly select alternative actions, which constitutes 
an exploratory strategy.
Hauser and colleagues’ model focuses on greater 
exploration in ADH D primarily in the domains 
of decision-making and action. It is notable, how­
ever, that individuals with ADHD also exhibit a 
greater propensity to mind-wander (G. A. Shaw 
& Giambra, 1993; Franklin et al., 2014; Seli, 
Smallwood, Cheyne, & Smilek, 2015). This obser­
vation suggests an extension to their model: In 
addition to a greater propensity for exploration in 
decision and action, individuals with ADHD might 
also have a greater propensity for exploration in 
serial thought.
What are the neurocognitive mechanisms that 
lead to greater exploration and mind-wandering in 
ADHD? Interestingly, certain lines of research link 
increased mind-wandering in ADH D to altera­
tions in some of the strategies discussed earlier for 
management of the exploration/exploitation trade­
off in serial thought. For example, consider the 
oscillation strategy. Several studies have measured 
changes in RTV during the course of an extended 
task (note: fluctuations in RTV over long intervals 
of time might themselves be regarded as “low fre­
quency” aspects of RTV). These studies find that 
individuals with ADH D have more pronounced 
fluctuations in RTV compared to healthy indi­
viduals (Castellanos et al., 2005; Di Martino et al., 
2008; Tamm et al., 2012). Recall that high RTV 
during an interval of time is thought to reflect the 
occurrence of mind-wandering during that inter­
val. The more pronounced fluctuations in RTV 
across time in ADH D could potentially reflect 
an increased tendency to regularly punctuate epi­
sodes of goal-directed thought with bouts of mind­
wandering, which would produce more frequent 
back-and-forth switching and thus more variation 
in RTV.
Other studies suggest an alteration in the fatigue 
strategy in ADHD. Many studies have documented 
that nearly all individuals show diminished perfor­
mance with prolonged engagement in cognitively 
demanding tasks, which is plausibly thought to 
reflect the buildup of cognitive fatigue (Hagger 
et al., 2010; See et al., 1995; van der Linden et al., 
2003). In individuals with ADHD, this decline in 
performance with time-on-task appears to be more 
pronounced (Bioulac et al., 2012; Borger et al.,
1999; Tucha et al., 2015). This could reflect exag­
gerated operation of the fatigue strategy, which leads 
to more rapid disengagement from goal-directed 
thinking and the resumption of the default state of 
mind-wandering.
Another mechanism that might lead to greater 
exploration generally, and mind-wandering specifi­
cally, in ADH D is brain immaturity. Theorists have 
noted that the exploration/exploitation trade-off 
tends to be biased toward exploration during youth 
(Eliassen, Jorgensen, Mangel, & Giske, 2007; Mata, 
Wilke, & Czienskowski, 2013), which is reflected 
in a greater tendency to explore objects and places 
and to engage in pretend play. Interestingly, the 
brains of individuals with ADH D have reliably 
been found to be less developmentally mature than 
neurotypical individuals (Castellanos & Lee, 2002; 
P. Shaw et al., 2006, 2007, 2012, 2013). Studies 
of the development of functional networks in the 
brain, in particular, have shown that relative imma­
turity is especially prominent in (1) the networks 
supporting goal-directed thinking; (2) the DM N, 
which supports mind-wandering; and (3) inter­
connections between the two (Kessler, Angstadt, 
& Sripada, 2016; Sripada, Kessler, & Angstadt, 
2014). These observations suggest a neurodevel- 
opmental mechanism for greater exploration in 
ADHD: individuals with ADH D exhibit lower 
levels of brain maturation relative to healthy age- 
matched controls, resulting in the preservation of 
a relatively more youthful and more exploratory 
cognitive style.
Conclusion
The trade-off between exploration and exploi­
tation has been extensively studied in computer 
science and has been usefully applied to mul­
tiple cognitive domains, including learning, visual 
search, memory search, and decision-making. In 
this chapter, this framework was extended to the 
ubiquitous alternation between mind-wandering 
and goal-directed thought. The exploration/exploi­
tation framework potentially helps illuminate the 
default nature of mind-wandering, the fluctuation 
of attention over timescales of seconds to minutes, 
the increase in cognitive fatigue with time-on-task, 
and the greater propensity to mind-wander in youth 
and in those with ADHD.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Kalina Christoff, Kieran Fox, and Zac 
Irving for providing extensive written comments 
that greatly improved this chapter.
30
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

References
Allan Cheyne, J., Solman, G. J. F., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, 
D. (2009). Anatomy of an error: A bidirectional state model 
of task engagement/disengagement and attention-related 
errors. Cognition, 111(1), 98-113. https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.cognition.2008.12.009
American Psychiatric Association, & DSM-5 Task Force. (2013). 
Diagnostic a n d  statistical m anual o f m ental disorders: D SM -5. 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal o f Neurophysiology, 104(1), 322- 
335. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00830.2009
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals o f 
the N ew  York Academy o f Sciences, 1316(1), 29-52. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/nyas. 12360
Aston-Jones, G., & Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative theory 
of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: Adaptive gain 
and optimal performance. A nnual Review o f Neuroscience, 
2 8 (1 ), 
403-450. 
https://doi.org/10.ll46/annurev.
neuro.28.061604.135709
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the central executive. 
The 
Quarterly Journal o f  Experim ental Psychology Section A , 49(1), 
5-28. https://doi.org/10.1080/713755608
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working memory: Theories, models, and 
controversies. A nnual Review o f Psychology, 63, 1—29. https:// 
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100422
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., 
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by dis­
traction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. 
Psychological Science, 23(10), 1117-1122. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0956797612446024
Bar, M., Aminoff, E., Mason, M., & Fenske, M. (2007). The 
units of thought. Hippocampus, 17(6), 420-428. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/hipo.20287
Bioulac, S., Lallemand, S., Rizzo, A., Philip, P., Fabrigoule, C., 
& Bouvard, M. P. (2012). Impact of time on task on ADHD 
patient’s performances in a virtual classroom. European 
Journal o f Paediatric Neurology, 16(5), 514-521. https://doi. 
org/10.10l6/j.ejpn.2012.01.006
Borger, N., Meere, J. van D., Ronner, A., Alberts, E., Geuze, 
R., & Bogte, H. (1999). Heart rate variability and sus­
tained attention in ADHD children. Journal o f  A bnorm al 
C hild Psychology, 2 7 (1), 25-33. https://doi.org/10.1023/ 
A: 1022610306984
Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2014). The computational 
and neural basis of cognitive control: Charted territory and 
new frontiers. Cognitive Science, 38(6), 1249-1285. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/cogs. 12126
Brink, R. L. van den, Murphy, P. R., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2016). 
Pupil diameter tracks lapses of attention. PL O S O N E, 11(10), 
eO 165274. https://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0165274
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2008). The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and 
relevance to disease. Annals o f the N  Y  Academy o f Sciences, 
1124, 1-38.
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the 
brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 49-57.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition II: An 
empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal o f 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(1), 1-47.
Callard, F., Smallwood, J., Golchert, J., & Margulies, D. 
S. (2013). The era of the wandering mind? Twenty- 
first century research on self-generated mental activity. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 891. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2013.00891
Carruthers, P. (2015). The centered mind: W hat the science o f 
working memory shows us about the nature o f human thought. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Castellanos, F. X., & Lee, P. (2002). Developmental trajectories of 
brain volume abnormalities in children and adolescents with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. JA M A , 
2 8 8(14), 
1740-1748. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.288.l4.1740 
Castellanos, F. X., Sonuga-Barke, E. J. S., Scheres, A., Di 
Martino, A., Hyde, C., & Walters, J. R. (2005). Varieties 
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder-related intra­
individual variability. Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 14lb - 
1423. https://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.biopsych.2004.12.005 
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy 
o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  106, 8719-8724. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.0900234l06
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., & Yu, A. J. (2007). Should 
I stay or should I go? How the human brain manages the 
trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Philosophical 
Transactions o f the Royal Society o f London. Series B, Biological 
Sciences, 367(1481), 933-942. https://doi.org/10.1098/ 
rstb.2007.2098
Cole, M. W., & Schneider, W. (2007). The cognitive control net­
work: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions. 
Neuroimage, 37(1), 
343-360. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.neuroimage.2007.03.071
Delamillieure, P, Doucet, G., Mazoyer, B., Turbelin, M.-R., 
Delcroix, N., Mellet, E., . . . Joliot, M. (2010). The rest­
ing state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for 
evaluation of inner experience during the conscious resting 
state. Brain Research Bulletin, 81(6), 565-573. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2009.11.014 
Di Martino, A., Ghaffari, M., Curchack, J., Reiss, P., Hyde, C., 
Vannucci, M., . . . Castellanos, F. X. (2008). Decomposing 
intra-subject variability in children with attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder. B iol Psychiatry, 64, 607-14. https:// 
doi.org/10.10l6/j.biopsych.2008.03.008 
Dosenbach, N. U. F., Visscher, K. M., Palmer, E. D., Miezin, F. 
M., Wenger, K. K., Kang, H. C .,... Petersen, S. E. (2006). A 
core system for the implementation of task sets. Neuron, 50, 
799-812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.04.031 
Duncan, J., & Owen, A. M. (2000). Common regions of the 
human frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive demands. 
Trends in Neurosciences, 73(10), 475-483. https://doi.org/
10.1016/SO166-2236(00)01633-7 
Eliassen, S., Jorgensen, C., Mangel, M., & Giske, J. (2007). 
Exploration or exploitation: Life expectancy changes the 
value of learning in foraging strategies. Oikos, 116(5), 513— 
523. https://doi.Org/10.llll/j.2006.0030-1299.15462.x 
Esterman, M., Noonan, S. K., Rosenberg, M., & Degutis, 
J. (2013). In the zone or zoning out? Tracking behavioral 
and neural fluctuations during sustained attention. Cerebral 
Cortex (N ew York, N .Y.: 1991), 2 3 (1 1), 2712-2723. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs261
Esterman, M., Rosenberg, M. D., & Noonan, S. K. (2014). 
Intrinsic fluctuations in sustained attention and distractor
C H A N D R A  S. S R I P A D A
31

processing. The Journal o f  Neuroscience: The Official Journal 
o f the Society fo r Neuroscience, 34(5), 1724-1730. https://doi. 
org /10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2658-13.2014
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reason­
ing, judgment, and social cognition. A nnu al Review o f 
Psychology, 5 9 , 255-278. https://doi.org/10.ll46/annurev. 
psych.59.103006.093629
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. 
R., & Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta­
analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of mind­
wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. 
Neuroimage, 
111, 
611-621. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.neuroimage.2015.02.039
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van 
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain 
is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated 
functional networks. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy 
o f Sciences o f  the U  S. A , 102, 9673-9678. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.0504l36l02
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Anderson, C. L., Johnston,
C. , Smallwood, J., Kingstone, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). 
Tracking distraction: the relationship between mind­
wandering, meta-awareness, and ADHD symptomatology. 
Journal o f A ttention Disorders, 21(6), 475-486. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1087054714543494
Gittens, J. C. (1979). Bandit processes and dynamic allocation 
indices. Journal o f the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, 41, 
148-177.
Grandchamp, R., Braboszcz, C., & Delorme, A. (2014). 
Oculometric variations during mind wandering. Perception 
Science, 5, 31. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.20l4.00031
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. 
(2010). Ego depletion and the strength model of self- 
control: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136(4), 495- 
525. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019486
Hauser, T. U., Fiore, V. G., Moutoussis, M., & Dolan, R. 
J. (2016). Computational psychiatry of ADHD: Neural 
gain impairments across Marrian levels of analysis. Trends 
in Neurosciences, 3 9 (2), 63-73. https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.tins.2015.12.009
Hazeltine, E., & Schumacher, E. H. (2016). Chapter six— 
Understanding central processes: The case against simple 
stimulus-response associations and for complex task rep­
resentation. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), Psychology o f learn­
ing a n d  m otivation (Vol. 64, pp. 195-245). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press, http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ 
article/pii/S0079742115000377
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal forag­
ing in semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119(2), 431— 
440. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027373
Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, A. D., & Couzin, I.
D. (2015). Exploration versus exploitation in space, mind, 
and society. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(1), 46—54. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j .tics.2014.10.004
Hopstaken, J. F., van der Linden, D., Bakker, A. B., & 
Kompier, M. A. J. (2015). A multifaceted investigation of 
the link between mental fatigue and task disengagement. 
Psychophysiology, 52(3), 305-315. https://doi.org/10.llll/ 
psyp. 12339
Irving, Z. C. (2015). Mind-wandering is unguided atten­
tion: Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 
173(2), 
547-571. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
si 1098-015-0506-1
Irving, Z. C. (2016). M ind-wandering: On the nature an d norma- 
tivity o f attention (PhD dissertation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada).
Kaelbling, L. P. (1996). Reinforcement learning: A survey.
Journal o f A rtificial Intelligence Research, 4, 237-285.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 
18(7), 
614-621. 
https://doi.org/10.llll/
j. 1467-9280.2007.01948.x
Kessler, D., Angstadt, M., & Sripada, C. (2016). Brain network 
growth charting and the identification of attention impair­
ment in youth. Journal o f the American M edical Association 
Psychiatry, 73(5), 481-489.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wander­
ing mind is an unhappy mind. Science (N ew York, N .Y.), 
3 3 0 (6 0 0 6 ), 932. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192439 
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought 
flow 
in 
everyday 
life. 
Imagination, 
Cognition 
an d 
Personality, 
7(2), 
105-128. 
https://doi.org/10.2190/
7K24-G343-MTQW-115 V
Krebs, J. R. (1978). Test of optimal sampling by foraging great 
tits. Nature, 27 5 , 27-31. https://doi.org/10.1038/275027a0 
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J. W., & Myers, J. (2013). 
An opportunity cost model of subjective effort and task per­
formance. The Behavioral an d Brain Sciences, 36(6), 661— 
679. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0l40525X12003196 
Mata, R., Wilke, A., & Czienskowski, U. (2013). Foraging 
across the life span: Is there a reduction in exploration with 
aging? Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnins.2013.00053
Mazoyer, B., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O., 
Houde, O., . . . Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2001). Cortical net­
works for working memory and executive functions sustain 
the conscious resting state in man. Brain Research Bulletin, 
54, 287-298.
McClure, S. M., Gilzenrat, M. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2006). An 
exploration-exploitation model based on norepinepherine 
and dopamine activity. In Y. Weiss, B. Sholkopf, & J. Platt 
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 
18, pp. 867-874). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, http:// 
papers.nips.cc/paper/2950-an-exploration-exploitation- 
model-based-on-norepinepherine-and-dopamine-activity 
McKiernan, K. A., D’Angelo, B. R., Kaufman, J. N., & Binder, 
J. R. (2006). Interrupting the “stream of consciousness”: An 
fMRI investigation. Neuroimage, 2 9(4), 1185-1191. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j. neuroimage.2005.09.030 
McKiernan, K. A., Kaufman, J. N., Kucera-Thompson, J., & 
Binder, J. R. (2003). A parametric manipulation of factors 
affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroim­
aging. Journal o f Cognitive Neuroscience, 25(3), 394-408. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/089892903321593117 
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train 
of thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and 
mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal o f 
Experim ental Psychology: Learning, Memory, an d Cognition, 
35(1), 196-204. https://doi.org/10.1037/a00l4l04 
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering 
reflect executive function or executive failure? Comment 
on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and Watkins (2008). 
Psychological Bulletin, 
136(2), 188-197. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/a0018298
32-
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

Miller, E. (2000). The prefrontal cortex and cognitive control. 
N ature Reviews. Neuroscience, 7(1), 59—65. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/35036228
Mittner, M., Hawkins, G. E., Boekel, W., & Forstmann, B. 
U. (2016). A neural model of mind wandering. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 2 0 (8 ), 570-578. https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.tics.2016.06.004
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal 
o f Experim ental Psychology/Revue Canadienne de Psychologie 
E xperim ental, 
67(1), 
11-18. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0031569
Polanczyk, G., & Rohde, L. A. (2007). Epidemiology of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder across the lifespan. 
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 20(4), 386-392. https://doi. 
org /10.1097/YCO.ObO 13e3281568d7a
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. 
J., Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default 
mode of brain function. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy 
o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  .95(2), 676-682. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Schooler, J. W., Reichle, E. D., & Halpern, D. V. (2004). Zoning 
out while reading: Evidence for dissociations between experi­
ence and metacon-sciousness. In D. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking 
a n d  seeing: Visual metacognition in adults an d children. 
MIT Press.
See, J. E., Howe, S. R., Warm, J. S., & Dember, W. N. (1995). 
Meta-analysis of the sensitivity decrement in vigilance. 
Psychological Bulletin, 
117(2), 230-249. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/0033-2909.117.2.230
Seli, P, Smallwood, J., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2015). On 
the relation of mind wandering and ADHD symptomatol­
ogy. Psychonomic Bulletin &  Review, 22(3), 629—636. https:// 
doi.org/10.3758/s 13423-014-0793-0
Shaw, G. A., & Giambra, L. (1993). Task-unrelated thoughts 
of college students diagnosed as hyperactive in childhood. 
Developm ental Neuropsychology, 9(1), 17-30. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/87565649309540541
Shaw, P, Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W., Blumenthal, J., Lerch, J. P., 
Greenstein, D .,... Rapoport, J. L. (2007). Attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a delay in cortical 
maturation. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy o f Sciences o f 
the U S A ,  104(49), 19649-19654. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.0707741104
Shaw, P, Lerch, J., Greenstein, D., Sharp, W., Clasen, L., Evans, 
A., . . . Rapoport, J. (2006). Longitudinal mapping of corti­
cal thickness and clinical outcome in children and adoles­
cents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives 
o f General Psychiatry, 
63(5), 540-549. https://doi.org/ 
10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.540
Shaw, P., Malek, M., Watson, B., Greenstein, D., de Rossi, 
P., & Sharp, W. (2013). Trajectories of cerebral corti­
cal development in childhood and adolescence and 
adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry, 
7 4 (8 ), 
599-606. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.biopsych.2013.04.007
Shaw, P., Malek, M., Watson, B., Sharp, W., Evans, A., & 
Greenstein, D. (2012). Development of cortical surface 
area and gyrification in attention-deficit/hyperactivity dis­
order. Biological Psychiatry, 72(3), 191-197. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.01.031
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, 
F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1997). Common
blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in 
cerebral cortex. Journal o f Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 648— 
663. 
https://doi.Org/doi:10.l 162/jocn. 1997.9.5.648
%U 
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/ 
jocn. 1997.9.5.648
Singer, J. L. (1974). Daydreaming and the stream of 
thought: Daydreams have usually been associated with idle­
ness and inattentiveness. Now, however, through an empiri­
cal research program, their general function and adaptive 
possibilities are being elucidated. American Scientist, 62(4), 
417-425.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1963). A factor-analytic study 
of daydreaming and conceptually-related cognitive and per­
sonality variables. Perceptual a n d  M otor Skills, 17, 187—209. 
https://doi.org/10.2466/pms. 1963.17.1.187 
Singer, J. L., & Schonbar, R. A. (1961). Correlates of daydream­
ing: A dimension of self-awareness. Journal o f Consulting 
Psychology, 2 5(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0048906 
Smallwood, J., Brown, K., Baird, B., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). 
Cooperation between the default mode network and the 
frontal-parietal network in the production of an internal 
train of thought. Brain Research, 1428, 60-70. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.brainres.2011.03.072 
Smallwood, J., Brown, K. S., Baird, B., Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, 
M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Insulation for daydreams: A 
role for tonic norepinephrine in the facilitation of internally 
guided thought. PloS One, 7(4), e33706. https://doi.org/
10.1371 /journal.pone.0033706
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., Luus, B., & Schooler, J. (2008). 
Segmenting the stream of consciousness: The psychological 
correlates of temporal structures in the time series data of 
a continuous performance task. Brain an d Cognition, 66(1), 
50-56. https://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.bandc.2007.05.004 
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). 
The lights are on but no one’s home: Meta-awareness and 
the decoupling of attention when the mind wanders. 
Psychonomic Bulletin &  Review, 14(3), 527-533. https://doi. 
org/10.3758/BF03194l02
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. A nnu al Review o f Psychology, 66, 487—518. https://doi. 
org /10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331 
Sripada, C. (2016). Imaginative guidance: A mind forever 
wandering. In M. Seligman, P. Railton, R. Baumeister, 
& C. Sripada (Eds.), Homo Prospectus (pp. 103-132). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sripada, C., Kessler, D., & Angstadt, M. (2014). Lag in mat­
uration of the brain’s intrinsic functional architecture in 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Proceedings o f  the 
N ational Academy o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  111(39), 14259- 
14264. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.l407787111 
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An 
Introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tamm, L., Narad, M. E., Antonini, T. N., O’Brien, K. M., 
Hawk, L. W., Jr, & Epstein, J. N. (2012). Reaction time vari­
ability in ADHD: A review. Neurotherapeutics: The Journal o f 
the American Society fo r Experim ental NeuroTherapeutics, 9(3), 
500-508. https://doi.org/10.1007/sl3311-012-0138-5 
Teasdale, J. D., Dritschel, B. H., Taylor, M. J., Proctor, L., 
Lloyd, C. A., Nimmo-Smith, I., & Baddeley, A. D. (1995). 
Stimulus-independent thought depends on central executive 
resources. M em ory &  Cognition, 23(5), 551-559. https://doi. 
org/10.3758/BF03197257
C H A N D R A  S. S R I P A D A
33

Tucha, L., Fuermaier, A. B. M., Koerts, J., Buggenthin, R., 
Aschenbrenner, S., Weisbrod, M., . . . Tucha, O. (2015). 
Sustained 
attention 
in 
adult ADHD: Time-on-task
effects of various measures of attention. Journal o f N eural 
Transmission, 
124{ 1), 
39-53. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00702-015-1426-0
Usher, M., Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., Rajkowski, J., 
& Aston-Jones, G. (1999). The role of locus coeruleus in 
the regulation of cognitive performance. Science (N ew York, 
N .Y ),2 8 3 (5401), 549-554.
van der Linden, D., Frese, M., & Meijman, T. F. (2003). Mental 
fatigue and the control of cognitive processes: Effects on per­
severation and planning. Acta Psychologica, 113(1), 45-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001 -6918(02)00150-6 
Van Orden, K. F., Jung, T.-R, & Makeig, S. (2000). Combined 
eye activity measures accurately estimate changes in sustained 
visual task performance. Biological Psychology, 32(3), 221— 
240. https://doi.org/10.10l6/S0301-0511(99)00043-5 
Wang, K., Yu, C., Xu, L., Qin, W., Li, K., Xu, L., & Jiang, T. 
(2009). Offline memory reprocessing: Involvement of the
brain’s default network in spontaneous thought processes. 
PloS One, 4(3), e4867. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0004867
Wig, G. S., Grafton, S. T., Demos, K. E., Wolford, G. L., 
Petersen, S. E., & Kelley, W. M. (2008). Medial temporal 
lobe BOLD activity at rest predicts individual differences in 
memory ability in healthy young adults. Proceedings o f the 
N ational Academy o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  105(47), 18555— 
18560. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0804546105
Wolfe, J. M., Cave, K. R., & Franzel, S. L. (1989). Guided 
search: An alternative to the feature integration model for 
visual search. Journal o f  Experim ental Psychology: H um an 
Perception an d Performance, 15(3), 419-433. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/0096-1523.15.3.419
Yang, X.-F., Bossmann, J., Schiffhauer, B., Jordan, M., & 
Immordino-Yang, M. H. (2012). Intrinsic default mode 
network connectivity predicts spontaneous verbal descrip­
tions of autobiographical memories during social process­
ing. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 592. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2012.00592
34
a n  e x p l o r a t i o n / e x p l o i t a t i o n  t r a d e - o f f

C H A P T E R
4
When the Absence of Reasoning Breeds 
Meaning: Metacognitive Appraisals 
of Spontaneous Thought
Carey K. Morewedge and Daniella M. Kupor
Abstract
Intuitions, attitudes, images, mind-wandering, dreams, and religious messages are just a few of the many 
kinds of uncontrolled thoughts that intrude on consciousness spontaneously without a clear reason.
Logic suggests that people might thus interpret spontaneous thoughts as meaningless and be uninfluenced 
by them. By contrast, our survey of this literature indicates that the lack of an obvious external source 
or motive leads people to attribute considerable meaning and importance to spontaneous thoughts. 
Spontaneous thoughts are perceived to provide meaningful insight into the self, others, and the world. As 
a result of these metacognitive appraisals, spontaneous thoughts substantially affect the beliefs, attitudes, 
decisions, and behavior of the thinker. We present illustrative examples of the metacognitive appraisals 
by which people attribute meaning to spontaneous secular and religious thoughts, and the influence of 
these thoughts on judgment and decision-making, attitude formation and change, dream interpretation, 
and prayer discernment.
Key Words: spontaneous thought, mind-wandering, decision-making, attribution, metacognition
At times you have to leave the city of your 
comfort and go into the wilderness of your 
intuition. What you’ll discover will be won­
derful. What you’ll discover is yourself.
—Alan Alda, Commencement Speech 
at Connecticut College (1980)
Spontaneous 
thoughts 
are 
uncontrolled 
thoughts, generated for reasons and by processes 
inaccessible to the thinker (e.g., Marchetti, Koster, 
Klinger, & Alloy, 2016; Miller, 1962). As such, 
people might justifiably view spontaneous thoughts 
to be random and meaningless byproducts of their 
past or present circumstances. The literature that we 
survey suggests the opposite. Precisely because their 
origin is ambiguous, people attribute considerable 
meaning to spontaneous thoughts, including atti­
tudes, dreams, intuitions, intrusive thoughts and 
memories, mind-wandering, and prayers. People
perceive spontaneous thoughts to provide important 
insights about the self, others, and their world. As a 
consequence of the meaning imbued through these 
metacognitive appraisals, spontaneous thoughts can 
profoundly influence behaviors, including beliefs, 
attitudes, and decisions. We present a synopsis of 
this literature and illustrative examples in domains 
including judgment and decision-making, attitude 
formation and change, dream interpretation, and 
prayer.
Spontaneous Thoughts Are Attributed 
Peculiar Meaning
Spontaneous thoughts have long been attrib­
uted considerable meaning across a wide swath of 
religions, secular cognition, and scientific theory. 
Religious and mythological texts from antiquity 
relate many cases in which spontaneous thoughts 
in the form of dreams and visions were imbued
35

with divine commands and revelations. Early bib­
lical passages describe many instances in which 
God communicates God’s actions or will to believ­
ers and heathens through spontaneous visions and 
dreams. In contemporary religions, such as among 
Evangelical Christians, believers find meaning simi­
lar to that found by their ancient counterparts in 
their dreams and the spontaneous thoughts that 
occur to them during prayer (Luhrmann, 2012).
Secular literature and popular culture abound 
with similar examples of influential spontaneous 
thoughts. Famous cases include people tortured by 
intrusive thoughts (e.g., Dostoyevsky, 1866/2011; 
Homer, 8th century b c e ; Poe, 1976). Achilles was 
so tortured by intrusive thoughts of his deceased 
friend Patroclus that he could not sleep (Homer, 
8th century b c e ) . Mercutio and Lady Macbeth 
were similarly haunted with nightmares of past bat­
tles and murder, respectively (Shakespeare, 1595/ 
1985; 1623/2001). Modern literature is full of cases 
in which people are well guided by their intuition 
(e.g., “trust your gut”). Agatha Christie lauded the 
utility of trusting intuition in her famous mystery 
novels (Christie, 1930/2011), for instance, as did 
Madeleine L’Engle in her popular fantasy novels for 
children (e.g., 1973).
Early and recent clinical, cognitive, and social 
psychological theories and methods reflect a simi­
lar view of the importance attributed to dreams and 
spontaneous thoughts. Early psychoanalytic tradi­
tions viewed dreams as a “royal road” to the uncon­
scious motives and emotions that guide behavior 
(e.g., Freud, 1900/1953). More recent psychologi­
cal theories and practices place considerable value 
on the elicitation of spontaneous thought because 
those thoughts are perceived to provide access 
into unconscious processes (e.g., Gawronski & 
De Hoouwer, 2014; Mihura, Meyer, Dumitrascu, 
Bombel, 2013; Murray, 1943; Schafer, 1954), are 
purported to reflect the undistorted preferences of 
the thinker (e.g., Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren, & 
Van Baaren, 2006; Wilson & Schooler, 1991), and 
may be less affected by self-presentational concerns 
and experimental demand than similar deliberate 
forms of cognition (Nosek, 2007; cf. Fiedler & 
Bluemke, 2005). For instance, the first thought that 
occurs spontaneously in response to the prompt 
“African American” might reveal which of several 
concepts related to that stimulus is most chroni­
cally accessible (Bargh & Chartrand, 2014), and 
spontaneous methods of attitude elicitation such as 
the implicit association test (LAT) may reveal more 
negative associations with “African American” than
a typical person might be willing to explicitly reveal 
(Gawronski & De Hoouwer, 2014).
In this section, we review evidence suggesting 
that both laypeople and scientists often attribute 
greater meaning to spontaneous thoughts in the 
form of intuitions, attitudes, counterfactuals, intru­
sive thoughts, dreams, and prayers than to similar 
forms of deliberate cognition. Indeed, people per­
ceive that the spontaneity of a thought signals its 
truth-value and accuracy (e.g., Topolinski & Reber, 
2010), or the quality of a decision (e.g., Kupor, 
Tormala, Norton, & Rucker, 2014). People even 
attribute greater meaning to spontaneous thoughts 
than more deliberative or effortful thinking when 
the content of spontaneous and deliberate cogni­
tions is similar (Morewedge, Giblin, & Norton, 
2014; Morewedge & Norton, 2009).
Spontaneous Thoughts Are Meaningful 
Mental Events
Although it would be reasonable to believe that 
random thoughts are less meaningful than thoughts 
with an apparent cause, secular laypeople, religious 
congregants, and scientists in many cases attri­
bute meaning to thoughts precisely because they 
occurred spontaneously. Features of spontaneous 
thoughts, such as their high processing fluency, cer­
tainly can contribute to the meaning they are attrib­
uted. However, the spontaneity of a thought itself 
may be taken as a signal of its importance, whether 
the thinker is examining her thoughts for traces 
of a divine origin, inferring if an action is morally 
praiseworthy or blameworthy, or determining her 
attitude toward a new stimulus or recent decision.
Approximately one-third to one-half of thought 
is spontaneous (Klinger & Cox, 1987), and people 
derive significant meaning from the occurrence 
of their spontaneous thoughts. Indeed, people 
explicitly attribute meaning to thoughts to the 
extent that they are perceived to be spontaneous. 
In one study we conducted, research participants 
(N  = 198) appraised 13 categories of thought on 
the extent to which each provided insight into the 
self, and the extent to which they tend to occur 
spontaneously versus deliberately: intuition, delib­
eration, dreaming, Freudian slips, thoughts under 
hypnosis, 
mind-wandering, 
logical 
thoughts, 
problem-solving, random thoughts, rumination, 
spontaneous thoughts, and thoughts while under 
the influence of a truth serum. The greater the 
extent to which each of those categories of thought 
was perceived to be spontaneous linearly predicted 
the extent to which it was perceived to reveal
36
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

meaningful insight into the mind of the thinker 
(Morewedge et al., 2014; Figure 4.1).
The spontaneity of a thought may imbue it 
with meaning by signaling its truth-value. “Ah- 
ha” moments, solutions to problems that appear 
to the thinker through sudden insight, are per­
ceived to provide true insight to the extent that 
they are perceived to have been surprising. These 
solutions benefit from their high fluency (i.e., ease 
of cognitive processing), which can lead them 
to be evaluated more positively (Zajonc, 1968). 
However, spontaneous insights must be distinctive 
in their prominence or suddenness to be perceived 
as more creative and truer than alternative solu­
tions (Pronin, 2013; Topolinski & Reber, 2010). 
Manipulating fluency through the figure-ground 
contrast of font and background colors, Reber 
and Schwartz (1999) found that people perceived 
high-fluency statements to be truer than low-flu­
ency statements, but only when the high-fluency 
statements immediately followed low-fluency state­
ments. When a high-fluency statement was embed­
ded in a block of other high-fluency statements, its
fluency was insufficiently surprising to increase its 
perceived truth-value.
For some, the spontaneity of a thought during 
prayer is taken as a possible signal of its divine truth—  
that it is the will of God. Evangelical Christians in 
the Vineyard tradition regularly engage in commu­
nication with God through prayer. The form of this 
communication often follows a question-response 
format. The person praying deliberately formulates 
a query or topic, and then waits for a response from 
God in the form of a spontaneous thought. This 
potentially divine thought is then examined by the 
individual and her religious community through a 
process of prayer discernment, with many thoughts 
classified as divine messages from God. One exam­
ple of such a “discourse” is the individual picturing 
a person for whom she is concerned, and wait­
ing until a word is spoken or appears in her mind 
across the picture. These spontaneous thoughts are 
often described as verbal or visual stimuli, such 
as a spoken word, written word, or image, which 
are often accompanied by a positive affective cue 
(Luhrmann, 2012).
Figure 4.1. Greater perceived thought spontaneity increases perceived insight into the thinker’s mind. Reprinted from Morewedge, 
Giblin, and Norton (2014).
C A R E Y  K. M O R E W E D G E  A N D  D A N I E L L A  M .  K U P O R
37

Secular spontaneous beliefs and attitudes are 
often immediately accepted as true (e.g., Frederick, 
2005; Morewedge & Kahneman, 2010). Rather 
than questioning why they occurred, people often 
engage in post hoc rationalization and a search 
for supporting arguments to justify these intuitive 
beliefs and attitudes. A sudden disgust response, for 
instance, can prompt the thinker to generate rea­
sons justifying her initial feeling (e.g., Haidt, 2001). 
If a disgust response occurs when she is evaluat­
ing non-normative but harmless activities, such as 
homosexual sex, that explanatory process may lead 
her to then believe that the activity is immoral (e.g., 
Inbar, Pizarro, Knobe, & Bloom, 2009).
More generally, spontaneous affective reactions 
to stimuli cause people to immediately and unin­
tentionally evaluate stimuli across a wide range of 
domains as good or bad. People interpret positive 
(or negative) affect as an indicator that their atti­
tudes toward a focal stimulus must be positive (or 
negative; Chaiken, 1987; Zajonc, 1980). Such 
automatic evaluations occur even when people do 
not have a goal of evaluating the stimulus (Bargh, 
Chaiken, Raymond, & Hyme, 1996). As a result 
of these spontaneous thoughts, people’s preferences, 
judgments, and attitudes can be formed before they 
are consciously aware of them (e.g., Loewenstein, 
Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001; Morewedge & 
Kahneman, 2010; Zajonc, 1980).
Spontaneous thoughts can also serve as mean­
ingful signals about the quality of an activity or 
decision. If spontaneous thoughts arise that are 
unrelated to the focal activity in which the thinker 
is engaged, she may infer that she is unsatisfied 
with it (e.g., bored; Eastwood, Frischen, Fenske, 
& Smilek, 2012). If a moviegoer finds his mind 
wandering to other pleasant or entertaining events, 
he is more likely to infer that he is not enjoying 
the movie than that he has a poor attention span 
(Critcher & Gilovich, 2010; Eastwood et al., 2012). 
Indeed, people report being happier throughout 
the day when their mind is focused on the activity 
in which they are engaged than when their mind 
wanders elsewhere (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Smallwood & Schooler, 2015).
Counterfactual thoughts, a particular type of 
mind-wandering in which people imagine what 
could have been if events had unfolded differently, 
can signal dissatisfaction with a decision or outcome 
in the recent or distant past (e.g., Iyengar, Wells, 
& Schwartz, 2006). If a consumer thinks about 
a laptop other than the laptop he just purchased, 
he might infer that he isn’t happy with the laptop
that he bought (Mannetti, Pierro, & Kruglanski, 
2007; Morewedge, 2016). Similarly, a students 
counterfactual thoughts about how she might have 
performed better on a test are likely to indicate to 
her that she is unhappy with her test performance 
(Roese & Hur, 1997). Intriguingly, people also 
report being less attracted to their current or recent 
significant other if mind-wandering leads them to 
think of another person to whom they are sexu­
ally attracted than if the attractive other is identi­
fied through more deliberate reasoning processes 
(Morewedge et al., 2014).
Spontaneous Thought Content Is Important 
Thought Content
In many contexts, people perceive the content of 
spontaneous thoughts to provide more meaningful 
information about the self, other people, and their 
world, than the content of similar deliberative and 
effortful thinking. In other words, people attribute 
greater meaning and importance to the content of 
their intuitions, reflexive and implicit attitudes, 
spontaneous thoughts, and even their dreams, than 
to similar content arising from more deliberate 
forms of cognition.
INTUITION
People explicitly believe that intuition provides 
better solutions for some of their decisions than 
deliberate forms of thinking, as when choosing a 
spouse or dessert (Inbar, Cone, & Gilovich, 2010). 
People also apply this same belief to others’ deci­
sions. When an actor makes a fast decision about an 
easy choice set (e.g., a choice set in which products 
differ only in color), observers infer that the actor 
is a better decision-maker and are more willing to 
follow that actor’s advice in the future. In contrast, 
when an actor makes a fast decision about a difficult 
choice set (e.g., a choice set in which products differ 
across multiple non-aligning attributes), observers 
infer that the actor is a poor decision-maker (Kupor, 
Tormala, Norton, & Rucker, 2014). Whether peo­
ple make decisions for themselves or simply observe 
others’ decisions, people explicitly believe that intu­
ition can be a conduit to quality decisions.
These beliefs are not necessarily misguided. In 
some cases, intuition may be a better way to make 
decisions than deliberation (Dijksterhuis et al., 
2006; Wilson & Schooler, 1991; cf. Payne, Samper, 
Bettman, & Luce, 2008). When making complex 
decisions involving multiple attributes, deliberation 
can lead people to place undue weight on a subset 
of attributes that happen to be salient at the time
38
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

of judgment for idiosyncratic reasons. A chronic 
flaw in graduate admissions, for example, is the 
tendency to base admissions decisions on how can­
didates performed in their interview, rather than 
on more predictive and quantifiable measures of 
their performance, such as their GRE exam score 
(Dawes, 1979).
Even in cases where people believe deliberation 
is a better process by which to make decisions than 
intuition, people perceive decisions that they made 
through intuition to be as good or better than deci­
sions that they made through deliberation. In an 
incentive-compatible experiment in which students 
received one of five posters for their dorm room, 
students predicted that they would like the poster 
that they chose more, and would be willing to forgo 
more money to keep their poster, if they selected 
a poster deliberately than if they selected a poster 
by letting their mind wander until a choice came 
to mind (Giblin, Morewedge, & Norton, 2013). In 
a second group of students who actually selected a 
poster (see Figure 4.2), both groups of participants 
reported liking their poster equally and were will­
ing to forgo similar amounts of money to keep their 
poster. In addition, both groups liked and valued 
their poster considerably more than did students 
who were randomly assigned a poster.
People even prefer to rely on their intuition 
when compelling reasons suggest that their intu­
ition is wrong (e.g., Denes-Raj & Epstein, 1994; 
Kirkpatrick & Epstein, 
1992; Morewedge &
Kahneman, 2010; Simmons & Nelson, 2006). 
One surprising example is ratio-bias. When people 
are given the chance to win money for drawing 
a red bean from a bowl, they intuit that they are 
more likely to win if they draw from a bowl that 
holds a larger number of red beans (e.g., 7 out of 
100) rather than a bowl with a smaller number of 
beans with better odds (e.g., 1 out of 10). In other 
words, intuition suggests choosing the bowl with 
the most “chances” of winning, whereas rational 
deliberation suggests choosing the bowl with the 
most favorable ratio. Some people exhibit this ratio 
bias even when they are explicitly reminded that 
their odds are worse if they draw from the larger 
bowl (Peters et al., 2006).
People also believe that intuition reveals more 
about the mind and character of the thinker than 
more deliberate forms of cognition, whether the 
thinker is another person or the self. For example, a 
person who finds a cash-filled wallet and decides to 
keep it is judged to be more immoral if he quickly 
decides to keep the wallet than if he decides to 
keep it after deliberating. Conversely, a person who 
decides to return the wallet to its rightful owner is 
judged to be more moral if he quickly decides to 
return the wallet than if he returns it after deliberat­
ing (Critcher, Inbar, & Pizarro, 2013).
People similarly derive more self-insight from 
their own intuitive than deliberative decision­
making, even when the decision they are making 
is how to categorize other people. In an illustrative
How Much Students Were Willing to Accept to Sell 
the Poster That They Chose ($)
Figure 4.2. How much real money participants were willing to forgo ($USD) to keep a poster they received through random 
assignment, spontaneous selection process (i.e., mind-wandering), or a deliberate selection process. Adapted from Giblin, Morewedge, and 
Norton (2013).
C A R E Y  K. M O R E W E D G E  A N D  D A N I E L L A  M .  K U P O R
3 9

experiment, research participants were shown four 
people and were asked to generate one word to 
describe each person (Morewedge et ah, 2014). 
Participants who generated these descriptions intu­
itively (i.e., who used the first word that came to 
mind to describe each person) inferred that they 
gained greater self-insight from the descriptions that 
they generated than did participants who generated 
these descriptions in a more deliberate manner (i.e., 
who used the word they thought most logical to 
describe each person). In short, intuition is often 
perceived to provide more valuable insight into the 
self and others than similar deliberate forms of judg­
ment and decision-making.
ATTITUDES
The spontaneous thoughts elicited by a persua­
sive message are a primary determinant of attitude 
formation and change (Greenwald, 1968). Rather 
than shaping peoples attitudes directly, persuasive 
messages shape attitudes through the thoughts 
people have in response to the persuasive message. 
Consider a voter who hears Donald Trump advo­
cate the construction of a wall between the United 
States and Mexico (e.g., “Its gonna be a great 
w all.... This will be a wall with a big, very beautiful 
door because we want the legals to come back into 
the country”; Jerde, 2015). The voter is likely to be 
more persuaded by the content of her spontaneous 
reactions to the proposal (e.g., “That’s inhumane 
and absurd!” or “That will save American jobs!”) 
than by the proposal itself. Repeated exposure to 
persuasive information can increase persuasion by 
inducing increasingly favorable cognitive responses 
(due to mere exposure). On the other hand, exces­
sive repeated exposure can decrease persuasion by 
inducing unfavorable cognitive responses (because 
of repetition-induced tedium; Cacioppo & Petty, 
1979; Calder & Sternthal, 1980). The thoughts that 
people have in response to a persuasive communica­
tion often determine whether the communication 
successfully instills or changes attitudes.
People also derive significant meaning from the 
content of others’ spontaneous implicit evalua­
tive associations. For example, when assessing the 
extent of racial bias in a group of people (e.g., police 
officers), researchers rely heavily on the people’s 
spontaneous implicit associations. Indeed, some 
researchers have described measures that elicit spon­
taneous implicit racial responses as “unobtrusive 
measure[s] of racial attitudes” (e.g., Fazio, Jackson, 
Dunton, & Williams, 1995; Frazer & Wiersma, 
2001). Moreover, some researchers suggest that
among individuals who express no explicit racial 
bias (i.e., do not behave in a biased manner), only 
individuals who show no implicit racial bias are 
“truly unprejudiced” (Fazio, Jackson, Dunton, 
& Williams, 1995). It is important to note that 
researchers are not in full agreement that implicit 
measures reflect people’s true attitudes (e.g., Arkes 
& Tetlock, 2004), but many do argue that attitudes 
about race (and other topics) can be inferred from 
implicit spontaneous responses (e.g., Green et al., 
2007; Teachman et al., 2003).
ASSOCIATIONS AND COGNITIVE RESPONSES
The content of a wide variety of more general 
associative and cognitive responses, whether regard­
ing a person, experience, or object, is perceived to 
be more meaningful when it results from sponta­
neous rather than deliberative thinking. The recol­
lection of a positive or negative childhood memory 
is believed to provide more meaningful informa­
tion about the self if it occurs spontaneously rather 
than deliberately (Morewedge et al., 2014). For 
memories of past experiences recovered during 
therapy, whether or not those recovered memo­
ries are accurate, people believe the memories to 
be more meaningful if they are perceived to have 
been spontaneously recovered during therapy than 
if their recovery is perceived to have been deliber­
ately prompted by another client or therapist (even 
though all such recovered memories are effectively 
prompted by someone other than the self; Bowers 
& Farvolden, 1996). Unplanned behaviors such as 
action slips, and errors of production such as slips 
of the tongue, are similarly believed to provide more 
telling information about the producer than com­
parable actions without error (Norman, 1981).
Spontaneous thought content not only is 
attributed greater meaning than similar deliberate 
thought content, but also can more potently influ­
ence downstream evaluations. For example, when 
people identify a person to whom they are attracted 
other than their present or most recent significant 
other, they perceive the person whom they identi­
fied to reveal more meaningful information about 
the self if they identified that person through mind­
wandering rather than deliberation. Moreover, 
people report feeling more attracted to the per­
son they identified through mind-wandering than 
deliberation, an effect mediated by the greater self­
insight they attribute to the thought of that person 
(Morewedge et al., 2014).
Perhaps the most influential form of spontaneous 
thought may be that which occurs during prayer.
40
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

Most Americans (97%) report engaging in prayer 
(Smith et al., 2011), which typically takes the 
form of the individual asking a question of God, 
and then waiting for God to respond (Spilka & 
Ladd, 2012). Those responses can take the form of 
a voice, a word, an image, or a feeling. Although 
diverse in their form, a necessary condition for 
these mental events to be categorized as divinely 
inspired, and acted on, is that they are perceived 
to have occurred spontaneously. Individuals in the 
Vineyard tradition might seek divine guidance on 
consequential topics. The few domains they are 
trained to avoid seeking advice on through prayer 
include prophesizing a birth, death, or marriage 
(Luhrmann, 2012).
DREAMS
One of the most curious phenomena is the 
meaning people attribute to dreams. Rather than 
viewing dream content as the random byproduct of 
stimuli encountered, assisting memory consolida­
tion or problem-solving, a majority of participants 
in college student samples from the United States 
(56%), India (73.8%), and South Korea (64.9%) 
endorsed a Freudian view of dream content. They 
believed that dreams are most likely to reveal hidden 
emotions, beliefs, and desires to which the thinker 
normally lacks access than to reflect these other 
functions (Morewedge & Norton, 2009).
Not only do people believe that dreams pro­
vide them privileged access inside their own mind, 
people seem to believe that dreams provide them 
with special insight into their external world. 
A separate group of participants imagined that one 
of four events occurred the day before they were 
scheduled to fly: they had a dream of their plane 
crashing; they had a conscious thought of their 
plane crashing; the Department of Homeland 
Security increased the national threat level to 
“Orange” (indicating a high risk of a terrorist 
attack); or a real plane crash occurred on the route 
they planned to fly. Participants in the dreaming 
condition reported that they would be as likely 
to avoid flying the next day as did participants 
in the condition in which there was an actual 
plane crash. Moreover, participants reported that 
having a dream of a plane crash would lead them 
to be more likely to avoid flying than having a 
conscious thought of a plane crash, or even the 
issue of a real federal warning suggesting that a 
terrorist attack was imminent (Morewedge & 
Norton, 2009).
Why Are Spontaneous Thoughts Attributed 
Meaning and Importance?
People have a belief in an “authentic” or “true” self 
(e.g., Aristotle, 350 bce/1998; Newman, Bloom, & 
Knobe, 2013; Newman, Lockhard, & Keil, 2010; 
Schlegel, Hicks, Arndt, & King, 2009) to which 
they lack full access (Wilson, 2004). The true self 
is a valued construct, purported to be who one 
really is, regardless of outward behavior. People who 
believe they know their true self are more likely to 
report that their life is meaningful (Schlegel, Hicks, 
King, & Arndt, 2011). We suggest that the attri­
bution of meaning to a thought is a metacognitive 
process of determining whether a thought is per­
ceived to reveal meaningful information about the 
thinker’s true self, which follows a general model of 
source attribution (e.g., Gilbert, 1998; Wilson & 
Brekke, 1994). Specifically, people anchor on the 
belief that thoughts provide meaningful insight 
into the mind of the thinker, but may correct or 
deviate from this appraisal if the thought appears 
to be due to external influence. Because sponta­
neous thoughts are less likely to have an obvious 
external cause than deliberative thoughts, and are 
less likely to evoke the recruitment of external justi­
fications, they are less likely to prompt this correc­
tion process (Morewedge et al., 2014; Morewedge 
& Norton, 2009).
Attribution of Meaning as 
a Correction Process
Any given thought has the potential to reveal 
information about one’s true self to the extent that 
it is uninfluenced or uncontaminated by exter­
nal sources. Given that thoughts originate within 
one’s own mind, we argue that the default is to 
assume that a thought reflects one’s true self and 
is free of external influence (with prayer and dis­
ordered thought being notable exceptions). As 
people believe they see the world objectively (e.g., 
Ross & Ward, 1996; Scopelliti et al., 2015), they 
should only correct from this default assumption 
when they believe that a thought was due to exter­
nal influence (e.g., Bern, 1967), and only when they 
have sufficient motivation and capacity to correct 
from their default assumption.
Consider two examples: love and pizza. At first, 
the thought of a former lover is likely to be inter­
preted as providing meaningful information about 
one’s beliefs, attitudes, or desires. If no stimulus 
that could have evoked the thought is salient, the 
thinker is likely to assume that the thought occurred 
for some meaningful reason. If a stimulus that could
C A R E Y  K. M O R E W E D G E  A N D  D A N I E L L A  M .  K U P O R
4i

have evoked the thought is salient, such as the pres­
ence of the love interest in a social media feed, the 
thinker is likely to discount the meaning of the 
thought if she is motivated to engage in that dis­
counting (e.g., she is currently in love with another 
person) and has sufficient cognitive resources to 
perform that discounting (Morewedge et al., 2014). 
Similarly, the thought of pizza while watching 
television might be initially interpreted as provid­
ing meaningful information about ones self, such 
as that one likes pizza, is hungry and wants pizza, 
or is struggling to adhere to one’s diet (Kavanagh, 
Andrade, & May, 2005). If a potential external 
source of influence is particularly salient, however, 
such as an advertisement for pizza during the last 
commercial break, the thinker is likely to discount 
the meaning of the thought unless the television 
show is sufficiently distracting or the thinker is 
not motivated to adhere to his diet (e.g., Gilbert, 
Pelham, & Krull, 1988).
As evidence of this discounting model, people 
attribute considerable meaning to their dreams, but 
attribute more meaning to dreams that are more 
consistent with their desires and important beliefs. 
For example, people are more likely to attribute 
meaning to a pleasant dream that involved a per­
son whom they like than to an unpleasant dream 
involving a liked person. Motivated reasoning in 
the attribution of meaning, however, may be over­
ridden by important personal beliefs. For example, 
agnostics are more likely to attribute meaning to 
a dream in which God commands them to take a 
year off from their work to travel the world than 
to a dream in which God tells them to take a year 
off from their work to serve the sick and destitute. 
By contrast, religious believers perceive that both 
dreams are meaningful (Morewedge & Norton, 
2009). It appears that people first appraise sponta­
neous thoughts, such as dreams, as meaningful— as 
did agnostics for dreams with pleasant implications 
(taking off for a year to travel the world), and as 
did religious believers for dreams with both pleas­
ant and unpleasant implications. When the dream 
conflicts with an important belief or desire (e.g., 
betrayal by a loved one or giving up college to serve 
the poor), however, dreamers discount its meaning.
Religious believers engage in an analogous 
form of explicit discounting through their pro­
cess of prayer discernment: how they decide which 
thoughts to attribute to God. Prayer discern­
ment is an interesting case because individuals 
test whether another agent caused their thought, 
rather than test whether they were the agent that
caused their thought. When Evangelical Christians 
have a thought during prayer, they first examine 
whether the thought was spontaneous or deliber­
ate. Deliberate thoughts are viewed as caused by 
the person who is praying, and thus are unlikely 
to have a divine origin. By contrast, spontaneous 
thoughts are viewed as possibly emanating from 
God. People then initiate a process of discounting 
in which they evaluate the thoughts for their adher­
ence with her God concept, which is informed by 
her understanding of God’s values, beliefs, and 
desires. As a final step, the individual often shares 
thoughts she believes might be communications 
from God with other members of her congregation, 
who often examine those thoughts for motivated 
reasoning on the part of the individual (Luhrmann, 
2012). Although the focus of hypothesis testing 
is inverted relative to spontaneous thoughts with 
secular origins, these individuals follow a similar 
metacognitive appraisal process to discern whether 
a thought should be attributed to God (an external 
agent) or a different source.
Our discounting model is rooted in theories 
elucidating the attribution of causality and person 
perception. Basic models of animacy and mind per­
ception attribute actions to the actor’s mental states 
to the extent that the actions are internally rather 
than externally caused (Heider, 1958; Michotte, 
1963; for a more recent review, see Morewedge, 
Gray, & Wegner, 2010). Which hypothesis is 
tested— whether an action is internally or externally 
caused— is generally determined by the attentional 
focus of the person making the attribution (for a 
review, see Gilbert, 1998). Observers judging the 
extent to which the behavior of an actor reveals 
information about her disposition tend to anchor on 
attributing that behavior to her disposition and fail 
to correct sufficiently for situational influences on 
her behavior (Jones & Harris, 1967; Scopelliti et al., 
2016). Conversely, observers judging the extent to 
which an actor’s behavior reveals information about 
the influence of her situation tend to anchor on 
attributing her behavior to situational influences and 
fail to sufficiently correct for the role of her disposi­
tion (Krull, 1993).
We suggest that when people attribute meaning 
to a particular thought, the focal hypothesis tested 
is “Does this reveal meaningful insight about the 
mind of the thinker?” This focus anchors their judg­
ment on the thinker as a cause, a hypothesis that 
is likely to be confirmed unless there is compelling 
reason for adjustment from this anchor or disconfir- 
matory hypothesis testing (Nickerson, 1998).
42
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

Other roots of our model stem from research 
testing dual-process models of attitudes, such as the 
heuristic systematic model (Chaiken, Liberman, & 
Eagly, 1989; Trumbo, 2002; Zhang, Luo, Burd, & 
Seazzu, 2012) and the elaboration likelihood model 
(Kupor & Tormala, 2015; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; 
Petty & Wegener, 1999; Rucker & Petty, 2006). In 
these models, the extent to which a persuasive mes­
sage is incorporated into the recipient’s belief system 
and forms or changes her attitudes is largely a func­
tion of whether or not she generates countervailing 
cognitive responses, such as counterarguments to its 
message. If the message recipient is unmotivated or 
is too cognitively overloaded to systematically pro­
cess the message and correct for its influence (Petty, 
Cacioppo, & Schumann, 1983; Petty, Wegener, & 
White, 1998), her attitude is likely to move in the 
direction of that message.
Spontaneous Thoughts Evoke Less 
Correction
When people appraise the extent to which a 
thought reflects their true self, we suggest that 
spontaneous thoughts are less likely to prompt a 
correction process than similar deliberate forms 
of reasoning because the former are less likely to 
be attributed to external sources. Spontaneous 
thoughts are less easily linked to an obvious external 
cause, and they are less likely to prompt thinkers to 
search for corroborating external reasons to justify 
those thoughts than similar thoughts generated via 
deliberation.
The link between spontaneous thoughts and 
the external stimuli that caused them is often 
more ambiguous than the link between a delib­
erate thought and external stimuli. Many of the 
images, voices, feelings, and thoughts that arise 
spontaneously explicitly fall into the category of 
“stimulus-independent thought” (Mason et ah, 
2007), suggesting that they are less likely to be 
tied to stimuli in the thinkers immediate environ­
ment than more deliberate “stimulus-dependent 
thought.” Indeed, mind-wandering and dreaming 
are forms of thought that are typically unrelated 
to the present environment of the thinker. By defi­
nition, dreaming occurs while the thinker has no 
conscious awareness of her present environment. 
Intuitions are similarly difficult to trace to external 
causes, as the process by which they were generated 
is usually inaccessible to the thinker (Johansson, 
Hall, Sikstrom, & Olsson, 2005; Nisbett & Wilson, 
1977). The more ambiguous link between spontane­
ous thoughts and their external causes than between
similar deliberate thoughts and their external causes 
should make the thinker less likely to discount the 
meaning attributed to her spontaneous rather than 
deliberate thinking.
In addition to less obvious external causes, we 
argue that thinkers are less likely to explicitly search 
for external reasons to justify a spontaneous thought 
than a similar deliberate thought. People are cer­
tainly able to generate reasons for their spontaneous 
thoughts (although they may be spurious reasons; 
Johansson, Hall, Sikstrom, & Olsson, 2005; Nisbett 
& Wilson, 1977), but in many cases people may 
not naturally generate reasons for their spontaneous 
thoughts unless they are explicitly directed to do 
so (e.g., Fernbach, Rodgers, Fox, & Sloman, 2013; 
Wilson & Schooler, 1991). Consider the judg­
ment, “This is good wine.” When made intuitively, 
no external stimulus other than the wine itself is 
required to validate the intuition. One could even 
make the judgment having never tasted the wine, 
having only seen its name on a menu or label. When 
made deliberatively, however, reasons are likely to 
be generated to justify the judgment (e.g., Shafir, 
Simonson, & Tversky, 1993), which are likely to 
make external potential causes of the thought more 
salient. Even if trivial, the mere identification of 
potential external causes is likely to reduce the attri­
bution of a thought to causes internal to the thinker 
(Nisbett, Zukier, & Lemley, 1981).
Conclusion
Thinking in the absence of reasoning breeds 
meaning. Metacognitive appraisals of spontane­
ous thought imbue those thoughts with mean­
ing. Spontaneous thoughts are believed to provide 
valuable insight into the self, other people, and 
the external world. The presence of a spontaneous 
thought is itself perceived to be a meaningful event, 
signaling something revealing about the thinker, 
the truth-value of the thought, or the value of the 
activity or decision in which the thinker is engaged. 
Spontaneous thought content is also meaningful 
thought content. People explicitly believe that some 
kinds of spontaneous thought provide more insight 
into the self and the world than similar deliber­
ate thought, and people even value spontaneous 
thought content more than deliberate thought con­
tent when logic suggests that they shouldn’t.
We suggest that the greater meaning and insight 
attributed to spontaneous thoughts is due to a 
metacognitive appraisal process through which 
thought is attributed meaning. The greater inacces­
sibility of their external origins leads the meaning
C A R E Y  K. M O R E W E D G E  A N D  D A N I E L L A  M .  K U P O R
43

of spontaneous thoughts to be discounted less than 
similar deliberate thoughts. This is reflected in the 
metacognitive processes by which people attribute 
meaning to dreams and engage in discernment dur­
ing prayer.
O f course, we do not mean to imply that people 
are wrong to attribute meaning to their spontane­
ous thoughts. Decisions and thoughts that are truly 
spontaneous and not prompted by the current 
context may best reflect chronic preferences and 
beliefs of the thinker (e.g., Bargh & Chartrand, 
2014; Dijksterhuis et al., 2006; Wilson & Schooler, 
1991). Moreover, many of the judgments exam­
ined in this work are subjective— preferences, atti­
tudes, attraction, and personal faith. Meaning may 
reside as much in the subjective assessment of the 
perceiver as in objective properties of the object of 
perception. We merely attempt in our inquiry to 
elucidate the fascinating metacognitive processes by 
which meaning is created and determined.
References
Aristotle (1998). Nicomachean ethics (J. L. Ackrill, J. O. Urmson, 
& D. Ross, Trans.). New York: Oxford University Press. 
(Original work published 350 b c e ).
Arkes, H. R., & Tetlock, P. E. (2004). Attributions of implicit 
prejudice, or “Would Jesse Jackson ‘fail’ the Implicit 
Association Test?” Psychological Inquiry, 15, 257-278.
Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Raymond, P., & Hymes, C. (1996). 
The automatic evaluation effect: Unconditionally automatic 
attitude activation with a pronunciation task. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 185—210.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2014). The mind in the mid­
dle: A practical guide to priming and automaticity research. 
In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research 
methods in social and personality psychology (2nd ed., pp. 311— 
344). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bern, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation 
of cognitive dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review, 
74, 183.
Bowers, K. S., & Farvolden, P. (1996). Revisiting a century- 
old Freudian slip—from suggestion disavowed to the truth 
repressed. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 355-380.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1979). Effects of message repeti­
tion and position on cognitive response, recall, and persua­
sion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 97—109. 
Calder, B. J., & Sternthal, B. (1980). Television commer­
cial wearout: An information processing view. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 17, 173-186.
Chaiken, S. (1987). The heuristic model of persuasion. In M. 
P. Zanna, J. M. Olson, & C. P. Herman (Eds.), Social influ­
ence: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 5, pp. 3—39). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and 
systematic processing within and beyond the persuasion con­
text. In J. Uleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought 
(pp. 212-252). New York: Guilford Press.
Christie, A. (2011). The murder at the Vicarage: A Miss Marple 
mystery. Thorndike, ME: Center Point.
Critcher, C. R., & Gilovich, T. (2010). Inferring attitudes from 
mindwandering. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
36, 1255-1266.
Critcher, C. R., Inbar, Y., & Pizarro, D. A. (2013). How quick 
decisions illuminate moral character. Social Psychological and 
Personality Science, 4, 308—315.
Dawes, R. M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper linear mod­
els in decision making. American Psychologist, 34, 571—582.
Denes-Raj, V., & Epstein, S. (1994). Conflict between intuitive 
and rational processing: When people behave against their 
better judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
66, 819-829.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & Van Baaren, 
R. B. (2006). On making the right choice: The deliberation- 
without-attention effect. Science, 311(5765), 1005-1007.
Dostoyevsky, F. (2001). Crime and punishment (C. Garnett, 
Trans.). New York: Dover. (Original work published 
1866).
Eastwood, J. D., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., & Smilek, D. 
(2012). The unengaged mind: Defining boredom in terms 
of attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 482-495.
Fazio, R. H., Jackson, J. R., Dunton, B. C., & Williams, C. J. 
(1995). Variability in automatic activation as an unobtrusive 
measure of racial attitudes: A bona fide pipeline? Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1013—1027.
Fernbach, P. M., Rogers, T., Fox, C. R., & Sloman, S. A. (2013). 
Political extremism is supported by an illusion of under­
standing. Psychological Science, 24, 939—946.
Fiedler, K., & Bluemke, M. (2005). Faking the LAT: Aided and 
unaided response control on the Implicit Association Tests. 
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 27, 307-316.
Frazer, R. A., & Wiersma, U. J. (2001). Prejudice versus discrim­
ination in the employment interview: We may hire equally, 
but our memories harbour prejudice. Human Relations, 54, 
173-191.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. 
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4), 25-42.
Freud, S. (1953). The interpretation of dreams. London: Hogarth 
Press. (Original work published 1900).
Gawronski, B., & De Hoouwer, J. (2014). Implicit measures in 
social and personality psychology. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd 
(Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality 
psychology (2nd ed., pp. 282-310). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Giblin, C. E., Morewedge, C. K., & Norton, M. I. (2013). 
Unexpected benefits of deciding by mind wandering. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 598.
Gilbert, D. T. (1998). Ordinary personology. In D. T. Gilbert, S. 
T., Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology 
(4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 89-150). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gilbert, D. T., Pelham, B. W., & Krull, D. S. (1988). On 
cognitive busyness: When person perceivers meet persons 
perceived. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
733-740.
Green, A. R., Carney, D. R., Pallin, D. J., Ngo, L. H., Raymond, 
K. L., Iezzoni, L. I., & Banaji, M. R. (2007). Implicit bias 
among physicians and its prediction of thrombolysis deci­
sions for black and white patients. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 22, 1231-1238.
Greenwald, A. G. (1968). Cognitive learning, cognitive response 
to persuasion, and attitude change. In A. G. Greenwald, T. 
C. Brock, & T. M. Ostrom (Eds.), Psychological foundations 
of attitudes (pp. 147-170). New York: Academic Press.
44
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A 
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological 
Review, 108, 814-834.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Inbar, Y., Cone, J., & Gilovich, T. (2010). Peoples intuitions 
about intuitive insight and intuitive choice. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 232.
Inbar, Y., Pizarro, D. A., Knobe, J., & Bloom, P. (2009). Disgust 
sensitivity predicts intuitive disapproval of gays. Emotion, 
9(3), 435.
Iyengar, S. S., Wells, R. E., & Schwartz, B. (2006). Doing bet­
ter but feeling worse: Looking for the “best” job undermines 
satisfaction. Psychological Science, 17, 143-150.
Jerde, S. (2015, August 23). Trump: Wall between U.S. 
and Mexico would have a door for “Good People.” 
http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/donald-trump- 
mexico-wall-good-people.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Sikstrom, S., & Olsson, A. (2005). 
Failure to detect mismatches between intention and outcome 
in a simple decision task. Science, 310(5745), 116-119.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attribution of attitudes. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3(1), 1—24.
Kavanagh, D. J., Andrade, J., & May, J. (2005). Imaginary rel­
ish and exquisite torture: The elaborated intrusion theory of 
desire. Psychological Review, 112, 446—467.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330, 932.
Kirkpatrick, L., & Epstein, S. (1992). Cognitive—experiential 
self-theory and subjective probability: Further evidence for 
two conceptual systems. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 63, 534-544.
Klinger, E., Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 7, 
105-128.
Krull, D. S. (1993). Does the grist change the mill? The effect 
of the perceiver’s inferential goal on the process of social 
inference. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 
340-348.
Kupor, D. M., & Tormala, Z. L. (2015). Persuasion, inter­
rupted: The effect of momentary interruptions on message 
processing and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 42, 
300-315.
Kupor, D. M., Tormala, Z., Norton, M. I., & Rucker, D. 
D. (2014). Thought calibration: How thinking just the 
right amount increases one’s influence and appeal. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science, 5, 263—270.
L’Engle, M. (1973). A wind in the door. New York: Crosswicks.
Loewenstein G. F., Weber E. U., Hsee C. K., & Welch N. (2001). 
Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267—286.
Luhrmann, T. M. (2012). When God talks back: Understanding 
the American evangelical relationship with God. New York: 
Vintage Books.
Mannetti, L., Pierro, A., & Kruglanski, A. (2007). Who regrets 
more after choosing a non-status-quo option? Post decisional 
regret under need for cognitive closure. Journal of Economic 
Psychology, 28, 186-196.
Marchetti, I., Koster, E. H., Klinger, E., & Alloy, L. B. (2016). 
Spontaneous thought and vulnerability to mood dis­
orders: The dark side of the wandering mind. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 4(5), 835-857.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
Michotte, 
A. 
(1963). 
The 
perception 
of 
causality. 
New York: Basic Books.
Mihura, J. L., Meyer, G. J., Dumitrascu, N., & Bombel, 
G. (2013). The validity of individual Rorschach vari­
ables: Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of the compre­
hensive system. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 548—605.
Miller, G. A. (1962). Psychology: The science of mental life. 
New York: Harper & Row.
Morewedge, C. K. (2016). Utility: Anticipated, experienced, and 
remembered. In G. Keren and G. Wu (Eds.), Wiley-Blackwell 
handbook of judgment and decision making (vol. 1, pp. 295— 
330). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Morewedge, C. K., Giblin, C. E., & Norton, M. I. (2014). The 
(perceived) meaning of spontaneous thoughts. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 1742—1754.
Morewedge, C. K., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2010). Perish 
the forethought: Premeditation engenders misperceptions 
of personal control. In R. Hassan, K. Ochsner, & Y. Trope 
(Eds.), Self-control in brain, mind, and society (pp. 260—278). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Morewedge, C. K., & Kahneman, D. (2010). Associative pro­
cesses in intuitive judgment. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 
435_440.
Morewedge, C. K., & Norton, M. I. (2009). When dreaming is 
believing: The (motivated) interpretation of dreams. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 249—264.
Murray, H. A. (1943). Manual for the Thematic Apperception Test. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newman, G. E., Bloom, P, & Knobe, J. (2013). Value judg­
ments and the true self. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 40, 1-14.
Newman, G. E., Lockhart, K. L., & Keil, F. C. (2010). “End- 
of-life” biases in moral evaluations of others. Cognition, 115, 
343-349.
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phe­
nomenon in many guises. Review of General Psychology, 2, 
175-220.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we 
can know: Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological 
Review, 84, 231-259.
Nisbett, R. E., Zukier, H., & Lemley, R. E. (1981). The dilution 
effect: Nondiagnostic information weakens the implications 
of diagnostic information. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 248—277.
Norman, D. A. (1981). Categorization of action slips. 
Psychological Review, 88, 1—15.
Nosek, B. A. (2007). Implicit—explicit relations. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 16, 65—69.
Payne, J. W., Samper, A., Bettman, J. R., & Luce, M. F. (2008). 
Boundary conditions on unconscious thought in complex 
decision making. Psychological Science, 19, 1118—1123.
Peters, E., Vastfjall, D., Slovic, P, Mertz, C. K., Mazzocco, K., 
& Dickert, S. (2006). Numeracy and decision making. 
Psychological Science, 17, 407-413.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likeli­
hood model of persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123—205). 
New York: Academic Press.
Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Schumann, D. (1983). Central 
and peripheral routes to advertising effectiveness: The mod­
erating role of involvement. Journal of Consumer Research, 
10, 135-146.
C A R E Y  K. M O R E W E D G E  A N D  D A N I E L L A  M .  K U P O R
45

Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1999). The elaboration likeli­
hood model: Current status and controversies. In S. Chaiken 
& Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual process theories in social psychology 
(pp. 41-72). New York: Guilford Press.
Petty, R. E., Wegener, D. T., & White, P. H. (1998). Flexible cor­
rection processes in social judgment: Implications for persua­
sion.” Social Cognition, 16, 93—113.
Poe, E. A. (1976). The tell-tale heart. In S. Levine & S. Levine 
(Eds.), The short fiction of Edgar Allen Poe (pp. 259-262). 
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Pronin, E. (2013). When the mind races: Effects of thought speed 
on feeling and action. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 22(4), 283-288.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual flu­
ency on judgments of truth. Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 
338-342.
Roese, N. J., & Hur, T. (1997). Affective determinants of coun- 
terfactual thinking. Social Cognition, 15, 274-290.
Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1996). Naive realism: Implications for 
social conflict and misunderstanding. In T. Brown, E. Reed, 
and E. Turiel (Eds.), Values and Knowledge (pp. 103-135). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rucker, D., & Petty, R. (2006). Increasing the effectiveness of 
communications to consumers: Recommendations based on 
elaboration likelihood and attitude certainty perspectives. 
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 25, 39-52.
Schafer, R. (1954). Psychoanalytic interpretation in Rorschach 
testing: Theory and application. New York: Grune and 
Stratton.
Schlegel, R. J., Hicks, J. A., Arndt, J., & King, L. A. (2009). 
Thine own self: True self-concept accessibility and mean­
ing in life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 
473-490.
Schlegel, R. J., Hicks, J. A., King, L. A., & Arndt, J. (2011). 
Feeling like you know who you are: Perceived true self- 
knowledge and meaning in life. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 37, 745-756.
Scopelliti, I., Min, H. L., McCormick, E., Kassam, K. S., & 
Morewedge, C. K. (2016). Individual differences in cor­
respondence bias: Measurement, consequences, and cor­
rection of biased interpersonal attributions. Management 
Science, Articles in Advance, 1-32.
Scopelliti, I., Morewedge, C. K., McCormick, E., Min, 
H. L., LeBrecht, S., & Kassam, K. S. (2015). Bias 
blind spot: Structure, measurement, and consequences. 
Management Science, 67(10), 2468-2486.
Shafir, E., Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based 
choice. Cognition, 49, 11—36.
Shakespeare, 
William. 
(1595/1985). 
Romeo 
and Juliet. 
Woodbury, NY: Barron’s.
Shakespeare, William. (1623/2001). The Tragedy of Macbeth. Vol. 
XLVI, Part 4. The Harvard Classics. New York: P. F. Collier 
& Son (1909-1914); Bartleby.com, 2001.
Simmons, J. P., & Nelson, L. D. (2006). Intuitive confi­
dence: Choosing between intuitive and nonintuitive alter­
natives. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(3), 
409-428.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Smith, T. W., Marsden, P. V., & Hout, M. (2011). General social 
survey, 1972-2010 cumulative file (ICPSR31521-vl) [data 
file and codebook]. Chicago: National Opinion Research 
Center [producer]. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university 
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
Spilka, B., & Ladd, K. L. (2012). The psychology of prayer: A sci­
entific approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Teachman, B. A., Gapinski, K. D., Brownell, K. D., Rawlins, 
M., & Jeyaram, S. (2003). Demonstrations of implicit anti­
fat bias: The impact of providing causal information and 
evoking empathy. Health Psychology, 22, 68—78.
Topolinski, S., & Reber, R. (2010). Gaining insight into the 
“Aha” experience. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
19(6), 402-405.
Trumbo, C. W. (2002). Information processing and risk per­
ception: An adaptation of the heuristic-systematic model. 
Journal of Communication, 52(2), 367—382.
Wilson, T. D. (2004). Strangers to ourselves. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T. D., & Brekke, N. C. (1994). Mental contamination 
and mental correction: Unwanted influences on judgments 
and evaluations. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 117—142.
Wilson, T. D., & Schooler, J. W. (1991). Thinking too 
much: Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences 
and decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 
181-192.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: Monograph 
Supplement, 9, 1—27.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no 
inferences. American Psychologist, 35, 151—175.
Zhang, W., Luo, X., Burd, S. D., & Seazzu, A. F. (2012). How 
could I fall for that? Exploring phishing victimization with 
the heuristic-systematic model. In System science (HICSS), 
2012 45th Hawaii international conference on system science 
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 1 (pp. 2374-2380).
4 6
W H E N  T H E  A B S E N C E  O F  R E A S O N I N G  B R E E D S  M E A N I N G

C H A P T E R
5
The Mind Wanders with Ease: Low 
Motivational Intensity Is an Essential 
Quality of Mind-Wandering
Dylan Stan and Kalina Christoff
Abstract
Although mind-wandering has received increased attention in the field of cognitive neuroscience, 
definitions have not always aligned. Most have emphasized the contents of thought, treating it as 
synonymous with either task-unrelated thought or stim ulus-independent thought. Such definitions miss an 
important aspect of what it means to let one’s mind wander: the easeful way that thoughts move about. 
A more recent definition looks, instead, at the dynamics of thought—the way that thoughts unfold over 
time—positioning mind-wandering as a type of spontaneous thought. By doing so, it is therefore more 
readily equipped to incorporate this quality of ease. While the term m ind-w andering can sometimes 
refer either to a momentary event or to an ongoing activity, both usages, this chapter argues, will be 
unsatisfactory if they do not address this gentle mode of movement. Some benefits that ease can provide 
for future research are proposed.
Key Words: mind-wandering, task-unrelated thought, stimulus-independent thought, spontaneous 
thought, dynamics of thought, ease
When we speak of minds wandering, we may 
find ourselves borrowing, at different times, from 
different aspects of the word. The predominant 
definitions at use in our current scientific discourse 
emphasize the contents of a wandering mind and 
their relationship to the current sensory environ­
ment and/or the current task. As such, their focus 
is primarily on where the mind travels, not on the 
way that it moves around. A recent theoretical 
development has been aimed at capturing the more 
dynamic quality of mind-wandering, addressing 
the need to examine the flow of thoughts over time 
(Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 
2016). While this can be seen as an improve­
ment, the discussion thus far has neglected what 
is arguably one of the most important features of 
a wandering mind: a phenomenal quality of ease. 
To move with ease is to move with the “absence of 
difficulty or effort,” or the “absence of rigidity or
discomfort” (McKean, 2005). Amidst the constella­
tion of terms related to mind-wandering, a consid­
erable number— including daydreaming, creative 
thought, aimless attention, and others— seem to 
share this phenomenal sense of ease as a common 
thread. In this chapter, we give an argument for 
why ease should be included in definitions of mind­
wandering as the field moves forward.
We begin by distinguishing between two main 
phenomena to which the term m ind-wandering can 
refer: a brief attentional shift, and a longer-lasting 
mental process. After all, it is not uncommon to 
hear the phrases “my mind just w andered’ and “I 
was mind -wandering being used in different con­
texts. Accounts for either, we argue, are unsatis­
factory if they do not include the quality of ease. 
We suggest that mind-wandering is best described 
not by where the mind ends up, but by the quali­
ties of its movement— and that ease is an essential
4 7

characteristic. Incorporating it would not only 
better fit our intuitions of what it means to mind- 
wander, but also provide some benefits for future 
research.
It would be useful to elaborate on the nature 
of mental ease itself before considering it in our 
discussion of mind-wandering. We propose that 
ease should be interpreted in the context of moti­
vation. Indeed, the forces that pull us toward our 
various shifts in attention seem to be behind both 
our highly pressured thought states and our peri­
ods of tranquil reverie. In the latter case, it is the 
relative absence of motivational forces that sets the 
tone of ease. Attention-grabbing, motivationally 
salient stimuli have been associated with activation 
of the amygdala, a region known for its involvement 
in automatic vigilance and physiological prepared­
ness for action (Cunningham & Brosch, 2012; P. J. 
Lang & Bradley, 2010). This is in line with various 
theories on emotional/motivational intensity that 
suggest evidence for their close relationships with 
bodily arousal and attentional narrowing (Gable & 
Harmon-Jones, 2010; A. Lang, Bradley, Sparks, & 
Lee, 2007). This readiness for action, with its con­
comitant sympathetic nervous system reactivity and 
its mental constraints, seems to be the antithesis of 
ease. It should be noted that these states need not 
necessarily be experienced as negatively valenced; 
positive states high in approach motivation— such 
as desire or interest— also have been shown to have 
a range of attention-narrowing effects on visual 
processing, memory, and other cognitive domains 
(Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2010).
In addition, it seems that even our deliberately 
guided thoughts can be influenced by the same 
motivational sources. Being interconnected with 
emotion and motivation centers— such as the 
amygdala— the anterior cingulate cortex has been 
hypothesized to contribute to the impact of affec­
tive information on effortful cognitive control 
(Pessoa, 2009). It also has been proposed that this 
region plays a role in initiating executive control 
when it detects conflicts or errors in information 
processing that need to be resolved (Botvinick, 
Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001; Botvinick, 
Nystrom, Fissell, Carter, & Cohen, 1999). These 
relationships may be at play when one feels drawn 
to attend to and cogitate upon highly motivating 
topics, or to sort out inconsistencies that might pose 
challenges to oneself; both these conditions, again, 
seem to oppose the notion of ease.
When our attention is held captive by a thought 
or a compelling event in our surroundings,
occasionally something greater comes along to steal 
the show. If a loud noise interrupts our already firm 
gaze, or a concerning memory interrupts our focus, 
we could say that a second motivational impulse 
out-competed the force that was previously keeping 
us fixed. This is a good illustration of how we can 
be drawn to a thought or salient object, as opposed 
to easing tow ard it, and how cascading motiva­
tional forces might contribute to states becoming 
more constrained. As the motivation to attend 
decreases— for instance, because our curiosity or 
concern is resolved— other, 
lower-motivational 
impulses might then reach a competitive threshold 
(Desimone & Duncan, 1995; Raymond & O ’Brien, 
2009). This reduction in motivational intensity 
seems critical to the easeful and dynamic nature of 
mind-wandering: We would find ourselves transi­
tioning gently between thoughts, rather than being 
pressured toward them.
States low in motivational intensity, whether 
positively or negatively valenced— such as content­
ment and sometimes sadness— have, interestingly, 
been shown to broaden the scope of mental activity 
(Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2010). Low-motivation 
positive states have been hypothesized to signal that 
“things are going better than necessary,” thus trig­
gering “coasting,” in search of new opportunities 
(Carver, 2003, p. 241). Low-motivation negative 
states, such as a depression following the loss of a 
sought-after goal, have been suggested to be adap­
tive for similar reasons; a “more open, unfocused, 
unselective, low-effort mode of attention” may force 
an individual to abandon her unachievable goal, 
and be receptive to new alternatives (Hecker & 
Meiser, 2005, p. 456). These descriptions of coast­
ing and unselective/low-effort attention seem closely 
related to mind-wandering, and the gentle, shifting 
states that we can find ourselves in.
“My Mind Just Wandered'
When directing our thoughts toward an activ­
ity or goal, it is usually not long before we find 
that we have ended up somewhere entirely dif­
ferent from where we intended. Someplace along 
the way marked a diversion in our attention from 
what we were currently doing, toward an unrelated 
sequence of thoughts. It is this diversion that desig­
nates the first type of mind-wandering we will dis­
cuss here, and it has been the topic of much study 
in the field of cognitive neuroscience. Experience 
sampling research has found that mind-wandering 
might occur in up to 30%-50% of our day-to-day 
thoughts (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Klinger &
48
T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S  W I T H  E A S E

Cox, 1987). Even in conversation, it would not 
be uncommon to hear people refer to this when 
they remark, with an air of frustration, “my mind 
wandered.”
A recent theoretical review defines mind­
wandering as “a shift in the contents of thought 
away from an ongoing task and/or from events in 
the external environment” (Smallwood & Schooler, 
2015, p. 488). According to this definition, the act is 
seen primarily as a momentary occurrence; the m ov­
ing aw ay from  the task or external world is what is 
significant, not necessarily what comes after. While 
this designates certain conditions for the occurrence 
of mind-wandering, it says little about the nature 
or the qualities of the shift itself. In this way, this 
definition could be seen to be lacking in specific­
ity, leaving unclear how mind-wandering can be set 
apart from other forms of distraction or absorption.
To wander is to “walk or move in a leisurely, 
casual, or aimless way” (McKean, 2005) or to “move 
hither and thither without fixed course” (Simpson 
& Weiner, 1989). If a quality were to be ascribed 
to a mind-wandering shift, perhaps the best place 
to start might be to incorporate this sense of casu­
alness, or ease. Indeed, it seems to express a sen­
timent that we often have when we speak of it in 
ordinary language. If ones attention to a dry lecture 
was pierced suddenly by the memory of an important 
and overdue point of business, we may be hesitant 
to refer to it as the mind having “wandered.” On the 
other hand, if we drift o ff to some casual daydream, 
the term might come more readily.
These examples are exaggerative, of course, and 
mind-wandering need not necessarily be restricted 
to 
only the gentlest thought-transitions— but 
hopefully the intuition has been evoked. We are 
presenting here, once again, the contrast between 
being drawn to a mental experience and m oving 
casually, w ith ease toward it. The two are not only 
phenomenologically different (i.e., different in how 
they are subjectively experienced), but would likely 
also be found to have different originating fac­
tors. For example, shifting with high motivational 
intensity away from a task or from external stim­
uli might occur in cases of cognitive or emotional 
dissonance— when information poses a threat to 
one’s beliefs or self-image— or when an alluring dis­
traction or concern arises. Shifting away with low 
motivational intensity may occur out of boredom or 
disinterest, mental fatigue, or simply out of amuse­
ment with some passing memory. Current defini­
tions lack the ability to discern between this range 
of experiences, leaving mind-wandering relatively
unspecified. Moreover, it is the latter examples, with 
their reduced motivational intensity, that seem to 
be most consistent with the origins and nature of 
a wandering mind. If mind-wandering is seen as a 
shift, it should be considered to occur with a sense 
of softness.
While, so far, we have addressed one meaning of 
the term— m ind-w andered as a momentary, isolated 
event— we have left aside another meaning that is 
also very commonly used: “I was mind-wandering,” 
as an ongoing activity. This usage may also be more 
prevalent, making its discussion in the context of 
ease all the more consequential.
“I Was Mind- Wandering’
The ongoing act of m ind-w andering is still rela­
tively varied in the range of experiences it can refer 
to. As a somewhat newly emerging field of study, 
consensus and differences of opinion are still being 
balanced. Sometimes we might say that we were 
mind-wandering by virtue of having realized that 
our mind had wandered. The shifting aw ay, previ­
ously mentioned, can be seen to give rise to ongoing 
periods of thought, with task-unrelated or stimulus- 
independent content (Smallwood & Schooler,
2015) . A different usage refers to mind-wandering, 
not as a state of content, but as a mode of move­
ment: When we are mind-wandering, our attention 
moves freely about, unconstrained by our deliberate 
control or other strong influences (Christoff et al.,
2016) . This dynamic view, we believe, is able to 
avoid a few challenges that the content-based view 
cannot; these issues will be discussed in the follow­
ing paragraphs. Incorporating a notion of ease in 
describing the manner in which these experiences 
unfold will prove to be important for maintaining 
our common-sense intuitions.
In the content-based view, mind-wandering can 
be seen as any mental activity that is not related to 
an ongoing task or to sensory stimuli. This could 
best capture moments of distraction, where our 
attention is somewhere other than what we were 
in the middle of doing. This meaning happens to 
inherit some of the issues that the shift itself car­
ried. Most notably, the states of content are so 
broad that they may not convincingly speak about 
only one mental phenomenon; a task-unrelated 
state could include worrying, pondering, excite­
ment, absent-mindedness; a stimulus-independent 
state could include the same, and many others. If 
mind-wandering, as a state of content, can take the 
form of any or all of these, it might not be narrowly 
defined enough to be considered a distinct topic of
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
49

investigation. By looking at it, instead, as a process 
(Christoff, 2012), or a mode of movement— the 
way that thoughts change over time— we acquire 
means by which to narrow its scope. The qualities 
of its motion can then be incorporated into the 
mind-wandering definition to add specificity.
In addition, if it is left broad, certain states that 
seem inconsistent with mind-wandering can be let 
in the door. One significant example of this is rumi­
nation. This automatic preoccupation with past or 
future-related concerns is a state that we can find 
ourselves in despite our best efforts. While it can 
be considered mind-wandering, according to the 
content-based view— since it is often stimulus- 
independent, and unrelated to the current task—  
its fixed nature is inconsistent with the hither an d 
thither motions of wandering (Christoff et al., 2016; 
Irving, 2015). Describing the way thoughts move 
during mind-wandering is essential, and from the 
example of rumination we might decide that the 
quality of dynam ic motion is an important feature of 
a wandering mind (Christoff et al., 2016); that is, 
thoughts do not remain stuck, but are able to move 
about freely.
Another issue with the content-based view is 
that the contexts, themselves, appear to be too 
restrictive to account for the range of situations 
where we would expect mind-wandering to be 
found. It could be argued that mind-wandering 
can occur even when an ongoing task is not 
around for us to wander from. Relaxing on a park 
bench, for example, we might notice our thoughts 
drifting about. It also seems that our minds can 
sometimes wander in fa vo r of a task— especially 
in creative contexts, such as writing. To accom­
modate these cases, mind-wandering may best be 
seen as occurring irrespective of any particular 
context. This is another reason that it should be 
examined as a mode of movement; in this way, 
its fluid transitions can be seen to occur across a 
range of situations.
The dynamic framework of mind-wandering 
arose as a response to precisely these issues 
(Christoff, 2012; Christoff et al., 2016). Mind­
wandering is seen through this lens as a specific kind 
of spontaneous thought, which is defined according 
to tendencies of movement: Spontaneous thought 
is “a mental state, or a sequence of mental states, 
that arises relatively freely due to an absence of 
strong constraints on the contents of each state 
and on the transitions from one mental state to 
another” (Christoff et al., 2016, p. 719). Mind­
wandering is described as fitting within a range
of spontaneous thought experiences— being more 
constrained than dreaming, but less constrained 
than creative forms of thought (Christoff et al., 
2016). This notion of being constrained fas closely 
with our discussion of motivational intensity. We 
would expect that the constraints on the flow of 
thought would increase as the motivational inten­
sity to attend or perform some mental action 
increases.
It is this discussion of constraints that has been 
used to argue against states of rumination being con­
sidered as mind-wandering (Christoff et al., 2016; 
Irving, 2015). When we are stuck on one topic, we 
are actually under the pressure of high constraints—  
and thus, are not mind-wandering. There is another 
reason, however, aside from the lack of motion or 
variability, that makes rumination a counterintui­
tive candidate for wandering: It is typically accom­
panied with a sense of tension or discomfort— not a 
sense of leisureliness or casualness.
One can also be in a state affected by high 
constraints that does not manifest as rigidity, but 
instead presents itself in a highly dynamic way. An 
example of one such state could be diffuse anxiety. 
There are, no doubt, cases where ones anxiety is 
about a particular item of concern that one’s atten­
tion is continuously held upon. Anxiety, however, 
can also arise as a more dispersed state, undirected 
toward any one concern, as in generalized anxiety 
disorder or panic disorder (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013; World Health Organization, 
2004). In a state of panic, one’s awareness may 
be turbulent— tossed to and fro— as each new 
encounter brings no relief. These examples would 
also likely not be the ordinary referents when 
someone expresses “my mind was wandering.” 
They illustrate how m otion, alone, is not enough 
to differentiate mind-wandering from other states, 
and how a lack of strong constraints— even brief 
ones— is an attribute not to be neglected. Without 
accounting for this other mode of motion—  
ease— certain states of anxiety could be considered 
mind-wandering.
While not explicitly discussed in our previous 
work, the dynamic framework of mind-wandering 
(Christoff et al., 2016) does indirectly imply a state 
of ease, as it could be presumed to naturally follow 
from a lack of constraints. After all, cognitive and 
attentional constraints likely fluctuate with and 
are driven by variations in motivational intensity. 
Exploring the involvement of motivation in the 
implementation and maintenance of these con­
straints would be a valuable next step.
50
T H E  M I N D  W A N D E R S  W I T H  E A S E

Implications
As we have hopefully conveyed, the mind­
wandering phenomenon features gentle thought 
movements, rather than pressured ones. These 
gentle movements are interpreted as being mental 
activity low in motivational intensity. O f course, 
while we feel a motivation behind each and every 
thought-act, the easeful experience can be consid­
ered to involve pulls of lower relative force. In a very 
narrow scope, we might consider mind-wandering 
to occur when we transition from a constrained 
state to a more relaxed one. In a broader scope, 
mind-wandering could involve moving about in an 
already easeful manner.
A consequence of this is that we may not actu­
ally mind-wander as often as we think we do. Our 
general preoccupation with, and concern for, mat­
ters in our lives must see us entertaining highly 
motivating thoughts on a regular basis (Klinger, 
1971). If this is true, then we are more frequently 
not actually w andering about our mental activi­
ties, but being forcefully drawn. The experience 
sampling studies mentioned earlier, which cited 
mind-wandering in up to 30%-50% of our wak­
ing cognition, are thus probably overestimates, 
if considered in light of the more specific defini­
tion of mind-wandering adopted here. In the light 
of this discussion— if ease were to be taken into 
account— those numbers are likely to be greatly 
inflated.
In addition, a popular study, claiming that mind­
wandering leads causally to feelings of unhappiness, 
may be interpreted in a new light (Killingsworth 
& Gilbert, 2010). In this study, mind-wandering 
was defined as thinking that is not centered on 
what is happening here an d now, or “thinking 
about something other than what you’re currently 
doing” (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010, p. 932). 
Experience sampling reports from daily life found 
that positive mind-wandering topics had very little 
effect on peoples’ overall happiness, whereas neu­
tral and negative topics had a significant detrimen­
tal effect (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010). While 
negatively valenced states are not necessarily incon­
sistent with mind-wandering, highly motivational 
ones are, and this study did not include questions 
that could determine the motivational intensity of 
a thought experience. Again, given the prevalence 
of various pressures in our day-to-day life, it is not 
unlikely that much of what was reported as mind­
wandering in this study was not, in fact, wandering, 
but was, instead, made up of other less easeful forms 
of preoccupation.
One might raise the concern that the think­
ing about something other than w hat you were doing 
mind-wandering is just a different kind than the 
ongoing periods of gentle, dynamic movement, and, 
thus, would have no need to account for the quality 
of ease spoken about here. If mind-wandering can 
be considered entirely separate from a sense of ease, 
however, then a different term might be more appro­
priately used— one without such qualitative conno­
tations. Wandering, after-all, implies the “leisurely, 
casual, or aimless way” that one is moving (McKean, 
2005). In this event, a shift in terminology could 
also help to minimize the confusion caused by hav­
ing a number of different meanings sharing the 
same word. Given the frequent linking of off-task 
or stimulus-independent thought with prospective 
thinking, planning, and meaning-making (Baird, 
Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; Mooneyham & 
Schooler, 2013; Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 
2013; Smallwood & Schooler, 2015)— processes 
by which we sort through and organize our men­
tal lives— perhaps mind-ordering might be a more 
fitting term.
Another concern could be brought up about the 
relative nature of ease in the view presented here. 
If mind-wandering is seen as a dynamic mode of 
mental movement that happens with ease, we 
might be making it harder to identify specific wan­
dering events. It may seem that, since each men­
tal movement may be more or less easeful, relative 
to some other, all movements are to be considered 
wandering. While the presence of a continuum of 
ease is undeniable, this does not present a strong 
theoretical challenge. We can easily speak meaning­
fully of someone being more or less excited, nervous, 
focused, or content— mind-wandering should be no 
exception from these other non-discrete states. The 
trouble arises only when one tries to pinpoint an 
exact event of mind-wandering. Settling for rougher 
boundaries is not far off from the way researchers 
commonly go about it, anyway.
Benefits for Future Research
The benefits of incorporating the quality of ease 
into future definitions are numerous. First, as we 
hopefully have conveyed through this chapter, it 
captures a defining characteristic of what it means 
to wander— both physically, and in its metaphorical 
application to the mind. Second, we are afforded the 
opportunity to draw connections between a variety 
of other mental phenomena that share similar quali­
ties of motion. Mind-wandering, we may find, is 
situated among an array of other experiences: from
DYLAN STAN AND KALINA C H R I S T O F F
5i

daydreaming— being perhaps its most easeful 
waking-state relative— to creative thought, which 
includes rapid fluctuations between periods of high 
and low constraints (Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & 
Christoff, 2012) (see also Dobson, Chapter 23 in 
this volume). The quality of ease provides us with 
another point from which to explore these various 
mental states.
Third, in a research context, we acquire two new 
sets of tools with which we can investigate mind­
wandering. One set of tools could be a series of addi­
tional questions that can be posed to participants in 
a thought-sampling context, to gauge the degree of 
motivational intensity in their experience: “Were 
your thoughts moving with a sense of casual­
ness or ease?” “Did you feel a strong draw to your 
thoughts, or did you feel like you were going gently 
along with them?” “Do you feel calm right now, or 
tense?” Given that levels of motivational intensity 
have been related to degrees in cognitive narrowness 
and broadness (Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2010), 
we might also ask questions like “To what extent 
were your thoughts focused on specific topics?” or 
“Did your mind feel expansive and broad, or more 
focused and narrow?” If personal significance is 
any indicator of ones motivational intensity, as has 
been suggested, then we could ask “How important 
were your thoughts to you?” “Did you feel like your 
thoughts were working toward resolving a certain 
concern or attaining a desired outcome?” “How 
anxious or uncomfortable would you become if you 
were forced to stop thinking about these thoughts?” 
(Irving, 2015). While refinement is needed, this 
general line of questioning could provide a valu­
able method for determining the extent to which a 
period of thought-flow is accompanied by the qual­
ity of ease.
The other set of tools could be gained from the 
incorporation of various physiological monitoring 
techniques into mind-wandering studies. The mea­
surement of stress responses— through heart rate 
and skin conductance, for example— could be an 
indicator of the persons overall state of ease. These 
could be captured alongside functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalograhy 
(EEG) data, and analyzed at points of interest, help­
ing to give extra context to how relaxed someone 
was when certain brain activity was occurring. 
They could also be measured immediately before 
experience-sampling probes in everyday-life con­
texts. Physiological thresholds could even be used, 
in whatever form of study, as cues to question indi­
viduals about their thought-state, especially when
states of ease or arousal are detected. While motiva­
tional intensity overlaps significantly with arousal, 
states of physiological arousal appear to exist inde­
pendently, and without any influence on attentional 
narrowing (Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2013). Since 
arousal may not always correlate with patterns of 
thought movement, caution should be used when 
incorporating these measures. Nevertheless, even 
further investigation into the extent that they do 
would be a worthwhile pursuit.
Summary
The term m ind-w andering encompasses a range 
of different uses across scientific and everyday 
contexts— perhaps partly, in the former, due to 
the infancy of this field of study. One of the most 
important features of what it means to wander— 
the sense of casualness by which we move— has not 
received proper attention in the scientific litera­
ture. Two broad meanings of m ind-wandering were 
explored here: brief attentional shifts, and ongoing 
mental events. Both, we have argued, neglect this 
sense of ease, and could be improved by includ­
ing it. For mind-wandering as an ongoing mental 
event, seeing it as a mode o f movem ent rather than 
a particular k in d o f content holds most theoreti­
cal promise. When it is seen as a dynam ic mode of 
movement, a quality of ease helps distinguish mind­
wandering episodes from other highly variable, but 
still more constrained states. Adopting this qual­
ity not only fits with predominant intuitions, but 
provides experimental tools that can help us better 
discern between subjective experiences, as well as 
neurophysiological data.
As mind-wandering exists within a sea of other 
mental phenomena, framing it in isolation might 
lead to an incomplete or narrow view. By recogniz­
ing it as part of a wider continuum, we gain access 
to means by which to explore its nature more fully. 
The quality of ease provides one such avenue for this 
investigation.
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and sta­
tistical manual of mental disorders (3th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 1604- 
1611. doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2011.08.007 
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., & 
Cohen, J. D. (2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive con­
trol. Psychological Review, 108{3), 624-632. doi: 10.1037// 
0033-295X.I08.3.624
52.
T H E  M I N D  W AN DE R S W IT H  EASE

Botvinick, M., Nystrom, L. E., Fissell, K., Carter, C. S., & 
Cohen, J. D. (1999). Conflict monitoring versus selection- 
for-action in anterior cingulate cortex. Nature, 402(6758), 
179-181. doi: 10.1038/46035
Carver, C. (2003). Pleasure as a sign you can attend to something 
else: Placing positive feelings within a general model of affect. 
Cognition and Emotion, 27(2), 241-261. doi: 10.1080/ 
02699930302294
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determi­
nants and correlates. Brain Research, 1428(C), 51-59. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.brainres.2011.09.060 
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K.C.R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J.R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 27(11), 718-731.
Cunningham, W. A., & Brosch, T. (2012). Motivational 
salience: Amygdala tuning from traits, needs, values, and 
goals. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22(1), 54- 
59. doi: 10.1177/0963721411430832 
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. 
(1995). Neural mecha­
nisms of selective visual attention. Annual Review of 
Neuroscience, 18{ 1), 193-222. doi:10.1 l46/annurev.ne.l8. 
030195.001205
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59(2), 1783-1794. http://doi. 
org /10.1016/j .neuroimage.2011.08.008 
Gable, P. A., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2013). Does arousal per se 
account for the influence of appetitive stimuli on attentional 
scope and the late positive potential? Psychophysiology, 50(4), 
344-350. doi: 10.1111/psyp. 12023 
Gable, P, & Harmon-Jones, E. (2010). The motivational 
dimensional model of affect: Implications for breadth 
of attention, 
memory, 
and cognitive categorisation. 
Cognition and Emotion, 24(2), 322-337. doi: 10.1080/ 
02699930903378305
Hecker, von, U., & Meiser, T. (2005). Defocused attention in 
depressed mood: Evidence from source monitoring. Emotion, 
5(4), 456-463. doi: 10.1037/1528-3542.5.4.456 
Irving, Z. C. (2015). Mind-wandering is unguided attention: 
Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 173(2), 547-571. doi: 
10.1007/sl 1098-015- 
0506-1
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932-932. 
doi: 10.1126/science.l 192439
Klinger, E. (1971). Structure and functions of fantasy New York: 
Wiley-Interscience.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 7(2), 
105-128. doi: 10.2190/7K24-G343-MTQW-115V
Lang, A., Bradley, S. D., Sparks, J. V., Jr., & Lee, S. (2007). The 
Motivation Activation Measure (MAM): How well does 
MAM predict individual differences in physiological indi­
cators of appetitive and aversive activation? Communication 
Methods and Measures, 1(2), 113-136. doi: 10.1080/ 
19312450701399370
Lang, P. J., & Bradley, M. M. (2010). Emotion and the moti­
vational brain. Biological Psychology, 84(3), 57-70. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsycho.2009.10.007
McKean, E. (Ed.). (2005). The new Oxford American dictionary. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67(\), 11-18. doi: 10.1037/a0031569
Pessoa, L. (2009). How do emotion and motivation direct execu­
tive control? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 160-166. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.tics.2009.01.006
Raymond, J. E., & O ’Brien, J. L. (2009). Selective visual atten­
tion and motivation: The consequences of value learning in 
an attentional blink task. Psychological Science, 20(8), 981— 
988. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02391.x
Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. S. C. (Eds.). (1989). Oxford English 
dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 441. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00441
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of con­
sciousness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66(1), 487-518. 
doi: 10.1 l46/annurev-psych-0108l4-015331
World Health Organization. (2004). The ICD-10 classifica­
tion of mental and behavioural disorders: Clinical descrip­
tions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva: World Health 
Organization.
DYLAN STAN AND KALINA C H R I S T O F F
53


C H A P T E R
6
How Does the Brain’s Spontaneous 
Activity Generate Our Thoughts?: 
The Spatiotemporal Theory of 
Task-Unrelated Thought (STTT)
Georg Northoff
Abstract
Recent investigations have demonstrated the psychological features (e.g. cognitive, affective, and social) 
of task-unrelated thoughts, as well as their underlying neural correlates in spontaneous activity, which 
cover various networks and regions, including the default-mode and central executive networks. Despite 
impressive progress in recent research, the mechanisms by means of which the brain’s spontaneous 
activity generates and constitutes thoughts remain unclear. This chapter suggests that the spatiotemporal 
structure of the brain’s spontaneous activity can integrate both content- and process-based approaches 
to task-unrelated or spontaneous thought—this amounts to what is described as the “spatiotemporal 
theory of task-unrelated thought” (STTT). Based on various lines of empirical evidence, the STTT 
postulates two main spatiotemporal mechanisms, spatiotemporal integration and extension. The STTT 
provides a novel brain-based spatiotemporal theory of task-unrelated thought that focuses on the 
brain’s spontaneous activity, including its spatiotemporal structure, which allows integrating content- and 
process-based approaches.
Key Words: task, thought, spatiotemporal theory of task-unrelated thought, brain, spatiotemporal, 
cognition
Introduction
Content Versus Process Models 
of Task-Unrelated Thought
Our daily mental life is characterized by strong 
thoughts that are unrelated to various external tasks 
and distractions in 25%-50% of our waking hours 
(Christoff et ah, 2016; Smallwood & Schooler, 
2015). These thoughts have been described by 
various terms, including spontaneous thoughts (see 
Andrews-Hanna, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Christoff, 
Chapter 13 in this volume), mind-wandering 
(Mason et ah, 
2007), task-unrelated thoughts 
(Doucet et al., 2012), random thoughts (Andreasen 
et al., 1995), self-generated thoughts (Smallwood &
Schooler, 2015), or stimulus-independent thoughts 
(Christoff et al., 2016; Dixon, Fox, & Christoff, 
2014; Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & 
Christoff, 2015). Regardless of how we name them, 
these thoughts imply that we no longer focus on 
some externally given task or stimuli and their 
respective external mental contents, but are instead 
drifting away to some internal mental contents that 
remain more or less unrelated to specific stimuli 
or tasks. These internal mental contents shall here 
be described as task-unrelated thoughts that, at 
the same time, are also stimulus-independent (Fox 
et al., 2015; Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). These 
task-unrelated thoughts (as implying stimulus inde­
pendence) are the focus in the present chapter.
55

Different kinds of task-unrelated thoughts have 
been suggested. Smallwood and Schooler (2015), 
for instance, distinguish between self-generated and 
perceptually guided thoughts, with the former being 
generated internally by the self, while the latter orig­
inate rather externally in perceptions. Importantly, 
both forms of thought can occur either in the 
absence or presence of a task (i.e., task-related or 
-unrelated). The distinction between self-generated 
and perceptually guided thoughts seems to be more 
or less analogous to the one between internally and 
externally directed thoughts (Dixon et al., 2014). 
Both forms of thought may then be either spon­
taneous without any goal or with a goal, and thus 
unintentional or goal-directed (Dixon et al., 2014).
The various distinctions (i.e., self- vs. percep­
tually generated thoughts, as well as internally vs. 
externally directed thoughts) are mainly based on 
contents that either are self-related and thus inter­
nally or perceptually based, or are not related to 
self and thus externally based. Such content-based 
approaches have recently been complemented 
by focusing on induction mode and dynamic or 
process-related features (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
Chapter 13 in this volume; Christoff et al., 2016). 
The induction mode, for instance, is considered 
when distinguishing spontaneous versus deliber­
ate thoughts, as well as unintentional versus inten­
tional task-unrelated thoughts (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., Chapter 13 in this volume; Christoff et al., 
2016)— these distinctions reflect different degrees 
of voluntary control when inducing task-unrelated 
thought, while the dynamic or process-related fea­
tures pertain to, for instance, the duration and flow 
(“stream of consciousness” as based on W. James) of 
task-unrelated thoughts.
The different forms of task-unrelated thoughts 
suggest a basic distinction between content mod­
els and process models of task-unrelated thoughts 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., Chapter 13 in this volume; 
Christoff et al., 2016; Ellamil et al., 2016). The long 
dominating content models focus on different con­
tents and our cognition, which supposedly deter­
mine task-unrelated thoughts— content models can 
therefore be considered cognitive models. Process 
models, on the other hand, emphasize the dynamic 
and process-based nature of task-unrelated thoughts 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., Chapter 13 in this volume; 
Christoff et al., 2016). How are both content and 
process models related to each other? I hypothesize 
that both contents and dynamic or process-based 
features of task-unrelated thoughts can be inte­
grated and linked by spatiotemporal features. For 
that reason, I here suggest what I describe as the spa­
tiotem poral theory o f task-unrelated thought (STTT) 
(see Figure 6.1).
From the Brain’s Spontaneous Activity 
to Task-Unrelated Thoughts
Psychologically, these different forms of task- 
unrelated thoughts have been associated with cog­
nitive, affective, and social functions. For instance, 
self-generated thoughts have been associated with 
affective functions like anxiety and depression while, 
at the same time, being decoupled from perception 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013; Baird, Smallwood, 
Lutz, & Schooler, 2014; Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, 
& Singer, 2013; Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, & 
Singer, 2013; Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). In 
contrast, perceptually derived thoughts are closely 
linked to the perception of external events or objects 
in the environment (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015).
Thoughts
A
Process model
it<
Coi
mts
Content model
Brain’s spontaneous
c 
. ^ 
, 
activity and its
Snatm tpm nnral 
-
Stimuli
Figure 6.1. Spatiotemporal theory of task-unrelated thought (STTT). (See Color Insert)
5 6
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

Neuronally, spontaneous or resting state activity 
(see later discussion for details) in the default-mode 
network (DMN; Raichle, 2015a, 2015b) and espe­
cially the cortical midline structures (Northoff & 
Bermpohl, 2004) has been highlighted in thoughts 
or mind-wandering (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
& Spreng, 2014; Doucet et ah, 2012; Mason et al., 
2007). However, other regions and networks like 
temporal cortical regions and the central execu­
tive network (CEN) have also been shown to be 
recruited during spontaneous or task-unrelated 
thought (Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & 
Schooler, 2009; Fox et al., 2015). These data suggest 
widespread recruitment of regions and networks 
across the entire brain in the resting state during 
task-unrelated and stimulus-independent thought.
Spontaneous thoughts are clearly related to and 
based on the brains resting state or spontaneous 
activity (see later discussion for conceptual dif­
ferentiation). The brains resting state can be char­
acterized spatially by different neural networks 
(including DM N and CEN) and temporally by dif­
ferent frequency fluctuations in the range between 
0.001 and 200 Hz (Cabral, Kringelbach, & Deco, 
2013; Northoff, 2014a for details). This suggests 
that the brains spontaneous activity shows an elabo­
rate spatiotemporal structure, whose details will be 
discussed later.
How does the brains spontaneous activity con­
stitute or generate our thoughts? Or in other words, 
how does something neuronal like the brains spon­
taneous activity generate or constitute something 
that is psychological (i.e., thoughts)? The question 
for transforming neuronal activity into something 
psychological (i.e., thoughts) must be distinguished 
from the question of how those same thoughts and 
their contents stand in relation to sensorimotor, 
cognitive, affective, or social functions.
My focus here is on the first question, the one 
for transformation, which encounters a serious 
problem. When measuring the brains spontaneous 
activity, we do not detect any thoughts at all; all we 
see are firing rates of neurons, different networks, 
and different frequency fluctuations. Beyond that, 
we will not detect anything else in the brains spon­
taneous activity. How is it possible for the brains 
spontaneous activity and its neuronal features to 
generate or constitute task-unrelated thoughts? This 
is the central question guiding the present chapter.
To address this question, one may want to 
suppose a common denominator that makes it 
possible to transform the brains spontaneous activ­
ity into task-unrelated thought. I here suggest
spatiotemporal features to be one such common 
denominator underlying both neuronal and psycho­
logical activity. This leads me to suggest the spatio- 
temporal theory of task-unrelated thought (STTT), 
which postulates two spatiotemporal mechanisms. 
First, the STTT supposes that the brains sponta­
neous activity integrates (and thereby transforms) 
different stimuli into content— this amounts to 
“spatiotemporal integration” and the contents of 
task-unrelated thoughts. Second, the STTT pos­
tulates that the brains spontaneous activity and its 
spatial and temporal features allow the extension of 
the contents beyond their original points in time 
and space— this amounts to “spatiotemporal exten­
sion,” by means of which contents are transformed 
into thoughts. Taken together, as in its name, the 
STTT can be conceived a spatiotemporal (rather 
than cognitive) theory that links content and pro­
cess models, as well as neuronal and psychological 
levels of task-unrelated thoughts.
“Spatiotemporal Integration”: 
Transformation of Stimuli into the 
Contents of Thoughts 
The Brain’s Spontaneous Activity: Different 
Stimuli and Their Baselines
How can we better describe the brains spontane­
ous activity? I here understand the concept of the 
brains spontaneous activity in a purely neuronal 
sense, as distinguished from a cognitive sense (as is 
often presupposed in the context of task-unrelated 
thought). Often the brains spontaneous activity is 
considered to be devoid of the processing of spe­
cific stimuli or tasks, for instance the absence of a 
particular visual picture during task-evoked activ­
ity. In that case, the concept of spontaneous activ­
ity is more or less equated with the “resting state” 
that is defined by the absence of specific external 
stimuli (Logothetis et al., 2009; Northoff, 2014a). 
However, it is important to note that the absence of 
specific stimuli or tasks does not imply the complete 
or total absence of any kind of stimuli (or tasks). 
Even in the resting state, there are still plenty of 
stimuli that are processed.
When closing the eyes, as during the resting 
state, there is the continuous interoceptive input or 
stimuli from the body that need to be processed. 
There is, for instance, continuous input from the 
heart (heartbeat) and lungs (respiration). One 
would therefore expect that neural activity in the 
resting state is related to the interoceptive activity 
in the body. This possibility is supported by a study 
that demonstrated that resting state functional
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
57

connectivity in the resting state is directly related to 
(i.e., correlates with) heart variability (Chang et al., 
2013), and by a recent meta-analysis of functional 
neuroimaging studies of spontaneous thought 
showing that the insula— the key interoceptive 
cortex— is consistently recruited (Fox et al., 2015). 
The close link between interoceptive stimuli from 
the body and the brains spontaneous activity is 
further supported by recent studies from the group 
around Tallon-Baudry that show how the heartbeat 
and the gastral dynamics (as related to slower fre­
quencies) are directly related and coupled to neural 
activity in the brains spontaneous activity (Babo- 
Rebelo et al., 2016; Park and Tallon-Baudry, 2014; 
Richter et al., 2016).
Due to the strong input of the body’s interocep­
tive stimuli, Marx and colleagues (2004) therefore 
characterize the resting state as obtained during 
eyes closed as an “interoceptive state” where neural 
activity is strongly determined by and reflects the 
predominant processing of interoceptive stimuli 
from the body by the brain. Correspondingly, Barry, 
Clarke, Johnstone, Magee, and Rushby (2007) 
speak of an “arousal baseline,” referring to an unspe­
cific level or state of arousal as triggered mainly by 
the body’s interoceptive input.
What happens if subjects open their eyes? In 
that case, additional exteroceptive input (e.g., visual 
input) is added to the ongoing exteroceptive input 
stemming from gustatory, olfactory, auditory, and 
tactile input (that is already ongoing in the intero­
ceptive state). The balance between the continuous 
interoceptive and exteroceptive input may thus shift 
toward the latter when opening the eyes. The pri­
marily interoceptive state and its “arousal baseline” 
is then transformed into a primarily “exteroceptive 
state” and a corresponding “activation baseline” 
(Barry et al., 2007).
In addition to the continuous interoceptive and 
exteroceptive input from body and environment, 
there is also input from the brain itself and its 
intrinsic activity. The thalamus, for instance, gener­
ates its own activity pattern with oscillations that 
may be imputed into other regions. Analogously 
to interoceptive and exteroceptive input, one may 
want to speak here of “neural input” with a “neu­
ral state” and a corresponding “neural baseline” 
(Northoff, 2014a). These different baselines (i.e., 
activation, arousal, and neural baseline) may be 
prevalent throughout the whole brain and thus in 
all regions and networks.
Different brain regions and networks may show 
different balances between the three different states,
though. For instance, subcortical regions in the 
brain stem receive strong interoceptive inputs from 
the body such that the interoceptive state and its 
arousal baseline may predominate here in the rest­
ing state. On the other hand, sensory regions and 
their respective sensory networks receive rather 
strong exteroceptive input so that the exteroceptive 
state and the activation baseline may predominate 
here. Finally, the “neural state” and its neural base­
line may predominate in regions like the cortical 
midline structures that neither receive direct stimu­
lus input (either interoceptive or exteroceptive) nor 
send out stimulus output (like the motor cortex and 
the executive control network) (Northoff, 2014a).
Taken together, these short deliberations show 
that the brain’s spontaneous activity is far from a 
true “resting” state in the literal sense of the term. 
There are many different stimuli being processed, 
interoceptive and exteroceptive and neural, which 
leads to different balances between interoceptive and 
exteroceptive and neural states (and their respective 
baselines) across different regions and networks in 
the brain. This raises the question of how the inte­
gration of these different stimuli ultimately results 
in the brain’s spontaneous activity (or resting state, 
if taken in an operational way). How are the dif­
ferent continuous inputs, interoceptive and extero­
ceptive and neural, linked or bound together such 
that they constitute what we observe as spontaneous 
(or resting state) activity? I suggest in the follow­
ing section that “spatiotemporal integration” and, 
more specifically, “spatiotemporal binding” may be 
central for that.
“Spatiotemporal BindingTransforming 
Stimuli into Contents
What is spatiotemporal binding? The concept 
of binding has been used often in the context of 
consciousness, where it describes the linkage (e.g., 
binding) between different stimuli into one con­
tent by means of which the latter is supposed to 
become conscious (Crick & Koch, 2003). This has 
been called the “binding hypothesis” of conscious­
ness (Crick & Koch, 2003; Rhodes, 2006). For 
instance, stimuli are supposed to be bound together 
by 40 Hz (i.e., gamma band) oscillations in the 
visual cortex that allow the stimuli to be synchro­
nized, amounting to “binding by synchronization” 
(Mudrik et al., 2014). However, the association 
of such binding of different stimuli into contents 
with conscious awareness has been contested. 
Studies have demonstrated that the linkage or bind­
ing between different stimuli, for instance during
58
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

multisensory integration, can occur in the absence 
of consciousness (Mudrik et al., 2014; Revonsuo, 
2006; Zmigrod & Hommel, 2011).
Independent of the association with conscious­
ness, one can conceive binding nevertheless as 
a central mechanism to link different stimuli. 
I suggest that such binding occurs in the brain’s 
spontaneous activity: the different continuous 
interoceptive and exteroceptive and neural inputs 
are temporally and spatially linked and thus 
bound together in that they result in contents that 
later resurface as the contents of thought. Such 
binding between the different contents occurs, 
I propose, on the grounds of the spatiotemporal 
features of the brain. Let us detail the mechanisms 
of such “spatiotemporal binding,” as I call it (I 
will distinguish it from other forms of binding in 
the next section).
Each region in the brain shows specific spatial 
and temporal features in its spontaneous activity. 
Spatially, brain regions may show a certain func­
tional connectivity pattern with other regions. For 
instance, cortical midline structures, the core part 
of the DM N, have shown a rather high (if not the 
highest) degree of functional connectivity within 
the brain’s spontaneous activity (when compared 
to other regions and networks) (de Pasquale et al., 
2012; Hagmann et al., 2008; Honey et al., 2009). 
In contrast, sensory regions show a much lower 
degree of functional connectivity. Temporally, each 
region (and network) seems to have its own range 
of time windows within which it can bind or inte­
grate different stimuli into one pattern of neural 
activity. These intrinsic time windows may surface 
in what has been described as “temporal receptive 
windows” (Hasson, Chen, & Honey, 2015; Honey 
et al., 2009; Murray et al., 2014) that have been 
shown to be rather short in sensory cortex (60-80 
ms), whereas they seem to be rather long in other 
areas, especially the cortical midline structures (up 
to 250-300 ms).
What do these spatial and temporal features 
imply for the binding of interoceptive and extero­
ceptive and neural inputs in the brain’s spontane­
ous activity? They suggest that different regions may 
bind different inputs in different ways, depending 
on their respective spatial and temporal profile. 
For instance, the sensory cortices, with their low 
degrees of functional connectivity and short intrin­
sic time windows, may not be able to bind as many 
and or as wide a range of stimuli, including their 
different points in time and space, together as the 
cortical midline structures, with their high degree
of functional connectivity and long intrinsic time 
windows. There consequently may be different spa- 
tiotemporally based “neural binding patterns” for 
integrating different stimuli across the brain’s differ­
ent regions and networks.
How are these different neural binding patterns 
related to thoughts and their contents? I propose 
that the contents of thought result from and are 
constituted or generated on the basis of the bind­
ing between different stimuli, including their differ­
ent points in time and space. By binding different 
stimuli and their different points in time and space 
together, a certain unity (an “objectual unity,” as 
philosophers would call it; cf. Bayne & Chalmers, 
2003) is constituted, which may correspond to what 
we describe as the content (or object) of thought.
Contents may then be distinguished on the basis 
of their neural binding pattern and its spatiotem­
poral features. Different contents (or objects) of 
thought may consequently be assumed to corre­
spond to different neural binding patterns and dif­
ferent spatiotemporal features. Depending on the 
predominant content, one may want to distinguish 
between somatically guided, perceptually guided, 
and self-generated thoughts.
If, for instance, interoceptive input prevails over 
exteroceptive input in the brain’s spontaneous activ­
ity, the contents of our spontaneous thought may 
more likely concern one’s body rather than refer­
ring to the environment. Such somatically guided 
thoughts may, for instance, predominate in psy­
chiatric patients with anxiety, panic, or depression, 
who can be abnormally preoccupied with their 
body (or parts of it, such as the heart), resulting in 
various somatic symptoms. In that case, one would 
expect that the balance of spontaneous activity shifts 
toward the subcortical or interoceptively involved 
regions like the insula and the somatosensory cor­
tex, which is indeed the case (Andrew-Hanna et al., 
2016; de Greek et al., 2012).
If, in contrast, exteroceptive input predomi­
nates, the spontaneous activity balance may shift 
more toward the sensory cortices, resulting in the 
predominance of external thoughts contents, for 
example “externally guided cognition” 
(Dixon 
et al., 2014) or alternatively, “perceptually guided 
thought” (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). Finally, 
the neural input from the brain’s spontaneous 
activity itself and especially that from the cortical 
midline structures may predominate in the brain’s 
spontaneous activity. In that case, one would expect 
internally guided cognition (Dixon et al., 2014), 
with thought contents strongly related to the self,
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
59

Somatically 
guided contents
Perceptually
guided contents
Supra-modal and domain-independent
Self-generated
contents
Spatiotemporal integration within the 
spontaneous activity
Spatiotemporal binding between stimuli
Interoceptive 
Exteroceptive 
Neuronal
stimuli 
stimuli 
stimuli
Figure 6.2. Spatiotemporal integration and binding. (See Color Insert)
amounting more or less to self-generated thoughts 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015) (see Figure 6.2).
How are the three different kinds of content 
related to each other? Since interoceptive, exterocep­
tive, and neural stimuli are all integrated and bound 
together within the brains spontaneous activity, 
there are no exclusively somatically or perceptually 
guided thoughts, nor solely self-generated thoughts. 
Instead, the contents of our thoughts are supra- 
modal and domain-independent and can therefore 
be traced to the balance between interoceptive, 
exteroceptive, and neural stimuli. Rather than con­
sidering each type of stimulus independent of the 
others, it is rather a matter of their balance and the 
degree to which one predominates over the others. 
The hypothesis of such a balance is consistent with 
recent findings of decoupling from sensory process­
ing, including sensory cortex, during self-generated 
thought (Andrews-Hanna et ah, 2014; Baird et al., 
2014; Gorgolewski et al., 2014).
“Spatiotemporal IntegrationBasic and 
Fundamental Form of Integration
I have suggested that “spatiotemporal integra­
tion” and, more specifically, “spatiotemporal bind­
ing” are central in constituting the contents of our 
thoughts. What exactly do I mean by integration? 
One can describe different forms of integration, 
such as multisensory integration, perceptual inte­
gration, semantic integration, cognitive integration, 
and formal mathematical integration (see Mudrik, 
Faivre, & Koch, 2014, for an excellent overview). 
These forms of integration implicate sensory and 
perceptual functions like multisensory integration
and perceptual integration, as well as cognitive func­
tions such as semantic and cognitive integration, or 
even higher-order cognitive functions as required in 
mathematical integration.
Those more complex forms of integration must 
be distinguished from the kind of integration 
proposed here. The integration between different 
stimuli in spontaneous brain activity does not yet 
implicate any specific active recruitment of sen­
sorimotor, perceptual, cognitive, or higher-order 
cognitive functions. Instead, the integration by the 
spontaneous activity occurs in an automatic way, by 
default, due to the nature of the spontaneous activ­
ity’s spatiotemporal structure. The interoceptive 
and exteroceptive and neural stimuli constituting 
the different baselines are by default (i.e., auto­
matically) integrated within the brains spontane­
ous activity. No recruitment of sensory, perceptual, 
motor, cognitive, or higher-order cognitive func­
tions is required.
Instead, the different stimuli and their spatial 
and temporal features are integrated by and within 
the spatiotemporal features of the brains sponta­
neous activity so that one may want to speak of 
“spatiotemporal integration.” Such spatiotemporal 
integration features a most basic and fundamental 
level of integration that is inherent in the spontane­
ous activity and its spatiotemporal structure prior to 
and independent of any subsequent sensorimotor, 
affective, cognitive, and social function, including 
their respective forms of integration (i.e., multisen­
sory, cognitive, etc.). Accordingly, taken together, 
spatiotemporal integration can be characterized 
by (1) its automatic nature occurring by default
6o
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

because of the spontaneous activity’s spatiotemporal 
structure; and (2) prior to and independent of the 
recruitment of specific sensorimotor, affective, cog­
nitive, and social function.
One may want to argue that such spatiotem­
poral integration is trivially true. Any integration 
between different stimuli occurs at one particular 
or discrete point in time and space within the brain, 
for instance at a particular region or cell population, 
as well as in a specific frequency range. This is not 
contested here. Taken in this sense, the characteriza­
tion of integration as spatiotemporal is indeed trivi­
ally true. However, that is not the sense that I mean 
by the concepts of space and time as the core of 
spatiotemporal integration. Rather than referring 
to discrete points, here the concepts of space and 
time refer to a distribution of different points across 
space and time entailing a stochastic or statistically 
based and ultimately neural, rather than mental, 
meaning of time and space.
Let us illustrate such stochastic meaning of space 
and time by the example of multisensory integration 
(Ferri et al., 2015; Stein et al., 2009). Multisensory 
integration is assumed to rely on different prin­
ciples, including spatial and temporal coincidence 
between the cross-modal stimuli: if the two cross- 
modal stimuli coincide at the same point in space, 
as for instance in a particular cell population or 
region, their likelihood of being integrated is much 
higher than when they do not spatially coincide (see 
Stein et al., 2009, as well as Chapter 10 in Northoff, 
2014a, for details). The same holds analogously for 
temporal coincidence: if the two stimuli temporally 
coincide and do thus occur stochastically at the same 
point in time, they can be much better integrated 
with each other than when occurring at different 
points in time. This makes it clear that multisensory 
stimuli are integrated with each other on stochasti­
cally based spatial and temporal grounds.
I now assume the same in an analogous way to 
hold for the integration of the ongoing interocep­
tive and exteroceptive and neural stimuli with each 
other into the brains spontaneous activity. The 
more the temporal and spatial features of interocep­
tive stimuli coincide with the spatial and temporal 
features of the brains spontaneous activity, the bet­
ter the former will be integrated within the latter. 
The same holds, obviously, for the integration of 
exteroceptive and neural stimuli into the spontane­
ous activity, which also occurs on purely spatial and 
temporal grounds.
Instead of the single stimulus itself and its spe­
cific points in time and space, the spontaneous
activity encodes the relation (e.g., difference) of 
the formers points in time and space to its own 
points in time and space (i.e., its own spatial and 
temporal features). The resulting neural activity is 
thus based on the stochastically based spatiotem­
poral difference between stimulus and spontaneous 
activity— this presupposes difference-based cod­
ing (as distinguished from stimulus-based coding) 
(Northoff, 2014a). I now postulate that such sto­
chastically based spatiotemporal encoding strategy 
(i.e., difference-based coding) allows for the kind of 
spatiotemporal integration and binding that trans­
forms simple stimuli into contents.
Such encoding strategy (i.e., difference-based 
coding) is based on the spatiotemporal features of 
stimuli; this distinguishes it from other strategies 
that are rather based on the nature of the stimuli 
themselves, like their origin, as in body, environ­
ment, or brain, or, alternatively, on associated sen­
sorimotor, cognitive, affective, or social function, as 
in more complex forms of integration (see earlier 
discussion). Therefore, the concept of “spatiotem­
poral” as presupposed in spatiotemporal integra­
tion cannot be considered trivially true but rather 
substantial in that it describes a most basic and 
fundamental form of integration. I postulate that 
spatiotemporal integration in this most basic and 
fundamental sense (i.e., prior to and independent of 
other more complex forms of integration) is central 
for integrating and binding and thus transforming 
stimuli into contents as essential ingredients of task- 
unrelated thought.
“Spatiotemporal Extension”:
Transformation of Contents into Thoughts 
The Brain’s Spontaneous Activity: Spatial 
and Temporal Features
The brains intrinsic activity (or spontaneous 
activity) can spatially be characterized by various 
neural networks that consist of regions showing 
close functional connectivity with each other. There 
is, for instance, the DM N that includes mainly the 
cortical midline structures (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
Chapter 13 in this volume; Northoff et al., 2006), 
which show strong low-frequency fluctuations 
(Northoff, 2014a; Raichle, 2009; Raichle et al., 
2001). Other neural networks include the sensorim­
otor network, the salience network, the ventral and 
dorsal attention network, the cingulum-operculum 
network, and the CEN (see Menon, 2011, for a 
review). These neural networks are related to each 
other in continuously dynamically changing con­
stellations (de Pasquale et al., 2010, 2012), resulting
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
6i

in what may be described as a spatial structure that, 
through its functional nature, supercedes the ana­
tomical structure.
In addition to such spatial structure on the func­
tional level, the spontaneous activity can also be 
characterized by fluctuations in its neural activity 
in different frequency bands, ranging from infra- 
slow (0.0001-0.1 Hz) through delta (1-4 Hz), 
theta (5-8 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), and beta (12- 
30 Hz) to gamma (30-180 Hz). Most important, 
these different frequency bands are coupled with 
each other, with for instance the phase of lower fre­
quency bands being coupled to the phase or power 
of higher ones (Buzsaki, 2006; Buzsaki, Logothetis, 
& Singer, 2013; Northoff, 2014a). This amounts to 
a complex temporal structure in the brains intrinsic 
activity that, as shown most recently, is related in 
some yet unclear ways to the spatial structure and its 
various neural networks (e.g., Ganzetti & Mantini, 
2013; Northoff, 2014a).
To be more specific, the spontaneous fluctua­
tions as observed in the functional magnetic reso­
nance imaging (fMRI) signal, i.e., BOLD, are 
found in lower frequency ranges, including the 
delta band (1-4 Hz), up- and down-states (0.8 Hz), 
and infraslow fluctuations (ISFs) (0.001-0.1 Hz) 
(Logothetis, 2008, Zhigalov et al., 2015). The slow- 
frequency fluctuations observed in fMRI have been 
assumed to correspond to what is measured as slow 
cortical potentials (SCPs) in electroencephalogra­
phy (EEG) (He & Raichle, 2009; Khader, Schicke, 
Roder, & Rosier, 2008). These SCPs are not easy to 
obtain in EEG because they are subject to artifacts 
caused by sweating, movements, and electrode drift; 
their measurement therefore requires a more direct 
approach by so-called direct current (DC) record­
ing. There is some evidence that what is measured as 
SCP in EEG corresponds, or is even identical, to the 
low-frequency fluctuations obtained in fMRI (He 
& Raichle, 2009; Khader et al., 2008).
In addition to such low-frequency fluctuations, 
there are also higher frequency fluctuations in the 
brains resting-state activity. These cover 1 Hz and 
higher frequency ranges, thus including delta (1-4 
Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (12-30 
Hz), and gamma (>30 Hz) (Mantini, Perrucci, Del 
Gratta, Romani, & Corbetta, 2007; Sadaghiani, 
Hesselmann, Friston, & Kleinschmidt, 2010). This 
raises the question of how low and high frequen­
cies are related to each other in the brains resting 
state (Canolty & Knight, 2010; Fell & Axmacher, 
2011; Fries, 2009; Sauseng & Klimesch, 2008). 
For instance, Vanhatalo et al. (2004) conducted an 
EEG study in healthy and epileptic subjects during 
sleep using DC-EEG to record low-frequency oscil­
lations. All subjects showed infraslow oscillations 
(0.02-0.2 Hz) across all electrodes— and thus the 
whole brain— without any specific, visually obvious 
spatial distribution evident.
Most interestingly, Vanhatalo et al. (2004) 
observed phase-locking or phase-synchronization 
between the phase of slow (0.02-0.2 Hz) oscilla­
tions and the amplitudes of the faster (1-10 Hz) 
oscillations: the amplitudes of the higher frequency 
oscillations (1-10 Hz) were highest during the 
negative phases or deflection (e.g., during periods 
in the fluctuating cycle of the low-frequency oscilla­
tion that show higher degrees of excitability for sub­
sequent stimuli when compared to positive periods 
in the cycle) of the slow oscillations (0.02-0.2 Hz) 
(see Figure 6.3).
Such phase-locking of high-frequency oscilla­
tions’ power to the phases of lower ones is described 
as phase-power coupling, with phase-phase and 
power-power coupling also being possible (Canolty 
& Knight, 2010; Sauseng & Klimesch, 2008). 
Generally, the coupling seems to occur in the direc­
tion from low- to high-frequency fluctuations as 
well as from phase to amplitude/power (Buzsaki, 
2006; Buzsaki et al., 2013)— the phase of the lower
Figure 6.3. Schematic illustration of cross-frequency coupling. (See Color Insert)
62
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

frequency entrains the amplitude of the higher fre­
quency. Such low-high frequency entrainment may 
be central in integrating and embedding the stimuli 
(and their respective contents) into the ongoing 
temporal structure of the brain’s intrinsic activity.
“Spatial Extension" of Contents: Functional 
Connectivity
What does the spontaneous neural activity’s spa- 
tiotemporal structure imply for the constitution or 
generation of thoughts? Thoughts are based on con­
tents. However, thoughts are more than contents, 
since we can have contents that do not transform 
into thoughts. Therefore, we need to consider addi­
tional mechanisms that transform contents into 
thoughts. For that, the STTT supposes yet another 
spatiotemporal mechanism, that is, spatiotemporal 
expansion.
We discussed earlier the different inputs into the 
brain’s spontaneous activity, including their bind­
ing into contents. Contents can consequently be 
determined as the linkage or binding of different 
stimuli into one unity, the unity of content (the 
“objectual” unity to which philosophers refer). This, 
however, leaves open the question of how contents 
can become thoughts. For that I assume that con­
tents need to be spatiotemporally extended. This shall 
be explicated in the following. For that, we first 
need to consider the regions that have been shown 
to be recruited during task-unrelated thought. Most
prominent among them are the cortical midline 
structures.
The cortical midline structures show the high­
est degree of functional connectivity within this 
region, as well as to all other regions in the brain 
(de Pasquale et al., 2012; Hagmann et al., 2008; 
Honey et al., 2009). This suggests that any con­
tent generated in, for instance, sensory regions gets 
somewhat linked and bound to midline regions. 
Conversely, it means that the contents generated in 
the midline impact contents elsewhere (see later in 
this chapter for details of what will be described as 
self-expansion). The original content is thus spatially 
extended beyond itself and its local origin at one 
particular point in space, entailing what I describe 
as spatial extension of content. The higher the 
degree of functional connectivity, the more the con­
tent can be spatially extended beyond its single dis­
crete point in space, and the stronger the respective 
thought contents will be experienced or perceived 
as spatially extended across self, body, and environ­
ment. (See Figure 6.4).
The assumption of such spatial extension is in 
accordance with an early study by Mason and col­
leagues (Mason et al., 2007). They demonstrated 
a direct correlation between cortical midline neu­
ral activity in the DM N and the degree of mind­
wandering: the stronger the midline activity in the 
DM N, the stronger the degree of mind-wandering 
(as sampled by a questionnaire). Unfortunately, they
Extension of self-generated contents 
(prefrontal) to perceptually guided 
contents (visual cortex)
■—
 ------------------------ ►
Functional connectivity from 
prefrontal to visual cortex
Functional connectivity from visual 
cortex to insula
Extension of perceptually guided 
contents (visual cortex) to somatically 
guided contents (insula)
Transformation of 
contents into thoughts
Figure 6.4. Spatial extension of contents into thoughts. (See Color Insert)
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
63

did not include functional connectivity measures 
of the midline regions, which, as I suggest, may be 
directly proportional to the degree of recruitment of 
midline structures during task-unrelated thought.
We have to be careful, though. In addition to 
cortical midline structures, various other regions 
and networks have been implicated in task- 
unrelated thought. A subsequent study by Christoff 
and colleagues (Christoff et al., 2009) observed 
that other regions, for instance the lateral prefron­
tal cortex and the CEN, are also recruited dur­
ing mind-wandering (see Fox et al., 2015, for a 
recent meta-analysis, as well as Dixon et al., 2014, 
for a discussion of competition vs. co-occurrence 
between internally and externally directed cogni­
tion). Relevant neuronal measures like inter- and 
intra-regional synchronization (as measured by 
functional connectivity and regional homogene­
ity), neuronal variability, and positive and negative 
BOLD responses, have been shown to be modulated 
by episodes of mind-wandering in both the DM N 
and CEN (and other networks like the dorsal atten­
tion network and the salience network) (Allen et al., 
2013; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014, Chapter 13 in 
this volume; Christoff et al., 2016; Doucet et al., 
2012; Fazelpour & Thompson, 2015; Gorgolewski 
et al., 2014; Zabelina & Andrews-Hanna, 2016).
Additionally, other regions like the dorsomedial 
prefrontal regions, the insula, the dorsal anterior 
cingulate cortex (as part of the salience network), 
and the medial temporal regions/network (that 
includes the hippocampus and its central role in 
episodic memory retrieval) have also be shown to 
be activated during mind-wandering (see Andrews- 
Hanna et al., 2014, as well as Fox et al., 2015, for 
a recent meta-analysis). The involvement of non- 
DM N regions is further supported by a recent 
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on mind­
wandering (Fox et al., 2015).
The authors reported involvement of typical 
DM N regions (like ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 
medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus/posterior cin­
gulate cortex, bilateral inferior parietal lobule, and 
left medial temporal lobe/parahippocampal cortex). 
In addition, they observed many regions from the 
executive control network, including dorsal anterior 
cingulate cortex, right rostro- and left ventrolateral 
prefrontal cortex, right anterior inferior parietal 
lobule, and precuneus. Finally, regions outside both 
the DM N and CEN were also implicated, includ­
ing right secondary somatosensory cortex, left mid­
insula, and left lingual gyrus. This further suggests 
that mind-wandering is not limited to the DM N
but involves brain regions and different networks 
and, ultimately, can involve more or less the entire 
brain, which may reflect the heterogeneity and com­
plexity of task-unrelated thought (Fox et al., 2015).
Why is the involvement of different regions 
and networks relevant for task-related thought? 
The different regions and networks show different 
functional connectivity patterns. For instance, as 
pointed out, the cortical midline structures show 
the highest degree of functional connectivity when 
compared to other regions like sensory regions (see 
earlier discussion). I now postulate that each region 
will contribute to the spatial extension of contents 
into thoughts based on its respective functional 
connectivity pattern. By showing a high degree of 
functional connectivity to other and more distant 
regions, the point in space featuring the respective 
content can be extended further, that is, connected 
with others, and thereby put into a larger spatial 
context.
Based on their functional connectivity patterns, 
different regions like sensory and midline regions 
may contribute to the spatial extension of contents 
in different ways. The spatial point of a content orig­
inating strongly in sensory cortex (i.e., perceptually 
derived content) may not be as spatially extended 
as a content related to the self (i.e., self-guided con­
tent). The different regions’ functional connectivity 
patterns, including their balance, may then strongly 
impact the degree to which a particular content and 
its particular point in space are extended to others 
and thus put in a larger spatial context. And, impor­
tantly, the larger the degree of spatial extension of 
the content, the more likely the content will be 
transformed into a thought. Accordingly, I hypoth­
esize direct proportional relationship between the 
degree of functional connectivity (of particular 
regions or networks) and their recruitment during 
task-unrelated thought.
“Temporal Extension” of Content: 
Cross-Frequency Coupling
The same kind of extension of the contents of 
thought may analogously occur on the temporal 
side. The different frequencies are not isolated from 
each other, but can become coupled. Accordingly, 
the infraslow-frequency fluctuations with their long 
cycle durations may couple to the shorter, higher- 
frequency fluctuations entailing cross-frequency 
coupling (Huang et al., 2017; Zhiaglov et al., 
2015). Especially the long cycle durations of the 
infraslow-frequency fluctuations may provide the 
perfect means to extend the single thought beyond
64
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

its own temporal features at one particular point 
in time into a longer duration: the longer the cycle 
duration and hence the lower the frequency range, 
the more and thus longer the respective content can 
be temporally extended beyond its own original dis­
crete point in time, and the more the thought will be 
perceived or experienced as temporally continuous.
As discussed earlier, the long cycle durations of 
the infraslow-frequency fluctuations may be espe­
cially central here. If the timing of a content falls 
into the beginning of the phase of an infraslow- 
frequency fluctuation with a cycle duration of, for 
instance, 100 s (as in 0.01 Hz), the contents initial 
and discrete point in time (at 5 s into the onset of 
cycle duration) may be extended into the high excit­
ability phase of the ongoing fluctuations (e.g., the 
trough, as distinguished from the peak). Since the 
trough covers half the cycle duration (e.g., 50 s of 
the 100 s total cycle duration), the content will be 
extended for an additional 45 s beyond its occur­
rence of 5 s into the cycle duration. In contrast, the 
shorter cycle durations of higher frequencies (like 
delta at 1 Hz) may not be able to temporally extend 
the thought to such a degree.
One could consequently hypothesize that regions 
and networks with a high degree of infraslow- 
frequency fluctuations may be able to temporally 
extend contents to a much higher degree than 
regions and networks with low degrees of the same 
frequency fluctuations. Investigations have indeed 
shown that the cortical midline structures that are 
part of the DM N show the highest and strongest 
degree of infraslow-frequency fluctuations, and 
sensory regions and networks exhibit a much lower 
degree of these frequency ranges while showing rel­
atively stronger power in higher frequency ranges
(Huang et al., 2016; Lee, Northoff, & Wu, 2014). 
One may now hypothesize that these temporal fea­
tures may contribute to the often observed recruit­
ment of cortical midlines structures in spontaneous 
thoughts and the overlap with the DM (Fox et al., 
2015) (see Figure 6.5).
How can we link such temporal extension to 
thoughts? Future investigations may want to directly 
relate the infraslow-frequency fluctuations to the 
duration of spontaneous thought contents. One 
would expect that thought contents that last longer 
show stronger recruitment of infraslow-frequency 
fluctuations and cortical midlines regions than 
short-duration thought contents that may impli­
cate higher frequencies and eventually the sensory 
regions to a higher degree. Methodologically, one 
may want to ultimately establish spatial and tem­
poral features of the thoughts themselves, including 
their contents, for instance on the basis of subjective 
reporting and timing. These spatial and temporal 
features of the thought contents can then be related 
to corresponding spatial and temporal features in 
the brains spontaneous activity. For instance, self- 
guided thought, as mainly based on midline regions 
and their strong infraslow frequencies, may last lon­
ger when compared to perceptually derived thought 
as it involves mainly sensory cortex that shows less 
power in infraslow frequencies.
“Spatiotemporal Extension” and 
the “Virtual” Nature of Thoughts
Spatiotemporal extension allows for the content 
to be extended beyond the discrete point in time 
and space of its original generation. This constitutes 
spatiotemporal continuity of contents. As based on 
the preceding evidence, I assume that the degree of
High
frequencies
Low
frequencies
Infraslow
frequencies
Discrete point in time of 
a particular content
the content along the 
cycle duration of slower 
frequencies
Degree of cross­
frequency coupling
Figure 6.5. Temporal extension of contents into thoughts. (See Color Insert)
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
65

spatiotemporal extension and thus the spatiotem- 
poral continuity of thought contents are directly 
proportional to the degree of functional connec­
tivity and cross-frequency coupling in the brains 
spontaneous activity: the higher the degrees of 
functional connectivity and cross-frequency cou­
pling, the higher the degree to which contents and 
their single discrete points in time and space can be 
spatiotemporally extended and thus constituted in 
a spatiotemporally continuous way, and the more 
we will perceive the respective thought content to 
be spatially and temporally continuous (rather than 
discrete).
This description, however, applies merely to the 
extension of contents into space and time of the 
brains spontaneous activity. How and why are these 
contents transformed into thoughts? By virtue of its 
spatial and temporal features, spontaneous activ­
ity may extend content beyond its single discrete 
point in time and space. That means that the single 
content becomes detached from its original origin, 
including its discrete point in time and space, at the 
same time that it becomes linked to other contents.
Conceived in spatiotemporal terms, this means 
that the contents become by default “virtual” within 
the spatiotemporal structure of the spontaneous 
activity. “Virtual” means that the content can no 
longer be located at one particular discrete point 
in time and space within the spontaneous activity. 
Instead, due to its spatiotemporal extension, the 
content occupies several discrete points in time and 
space, thus being stochastically distributed across 
different regions/networks and frequencies in the 
brains spontaneous activity. In that sense, the con­
cept of “virtual” can be more or less equated with 
being distributed: task-unrelated thoughts and their 
contents are spatiotemporal distributed.
However, there is more to task-unrelated thoughts. 
They constitute relations between different points in 
time and space (i.e., relational time and space) that 
as such can no longer be observed by us (in a direct 
way). Such a relational component allows the sim­
ulation of objects, events, or scenes (in a more or 
less realistic way); the constitution of such relational 
time and space (as distinguished from mere observa­
tional time and space) with subsequent simulation 
allows the transformation of mere content into task- 
unrelated thought. Based on its spatiotemporally 
relational and simulative nature, I describe task- 
unrelated thought as “virtual.” How can we explain 
the virtual nature of task-unrelated thought in more 
detail? The contents become stochastically and vir­
tually extended in a three-dimensional way across
different points in time and space within the spon­
taneous activity’s spatiotemporal structure. Due to 
spatiotemporal extension into the three-dimensional 
space of the spatiotemporal structure, the original 
content becomes distributed and “virtualized.” That, 
I postulate, is the moment when the mere content 
transforms into a thought: the higher the contents 
degree of stochastic spatiotemporal extension within 
the three-dimensional spatiotemporal structure of 
the brains spontaneous activity, the more virtual the 
content will become in spatial and temporal terms, 
and the more likely the content will be transformed 
into a thought.
Based on this assumption, one may want to sug­
gest the following neuronal hypotheses. The stron­
ger the degree of functional connectivity of regions 
such as cortical midline structures with the stron­
gest infraslow-frequency fluctuations, the higher 
the degree to which contents are transformed into 
thoughts and the longer those thoughts should last. 
This is supported by an example from psychiatry 
where patients with depression show an abnormally 
high degree of functional connectivity of cortical 
midline structures, while they suffer from exces­
sive thoughts with abnormally long duration—  
described as rumination (Berman et al., 2011; 
Kaiser et al., 2015; Northoff, 2015a, 2015b, 2015c, 
2015d; Northoff & Sibille, 2014; see Hamilton 
et al., 2015, for an excellent overview).
Moreover, the degree to which contents are 
transformed into thoughts should also be related 
to the degree of cross-frequency coupling. The 
higher the degree of cross-frequency coupling, 
especially between infraslow and higher frequency 
fluctuations, the more likely it is that contents will 
be transformed into thoughts. One would conse­
quently expect increased cross-frequency coupling 
in disorders like depression where patients suffer 
from increased amounts of thoughts, as in depres­
sive rumination (Northoff, 2015a). In contrast, a 
decrease in cross-frequency coupling, observed for 
instance in schizophrenia, should then go along 
with a blockade of and decrease in thoughts, which 
are frequently observed in these patients (Northoff, 
2015c, 2015d; Northoff & Duncan, 2016).
Spatiotemporal extension not only allows for 
extending particular contents in stochastic or vir­
tual time and space, but also may link different 
contents. This should result in a continuous flow of 
thoughts, a “stream of thoughts” (as analogous to 
James’s “stream of consciousness”) with both inter­
nally and externally directed contents (Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015). One would assume that such
66
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

a “stream of thoughts” recruits the entire spon­
taneous activity’s spatiotemporal structure and 
its full extension. Again, especially the infraslow- 
frequency fluctuations with their long cycle dura­
tions may be central in linking different contents 
and consequently thoughts. By being linked to 
other contents, the single content becomes even 
more stochastically virtual and extended beyond 
itself, which makes its transformation into a 
thought even more likely. Ideally, one would then 
want to investigate the spatiotemporal dynamics of 
the spontaneous activity as whole (see Fox et al., 
2015, for a discussion of this issue). In that case, 
one would want to apply, for instance, measures 
of global temporal structure like power law spec­
trum and exponent to characterize both the spon­
taneous activity’s spatiotemporal structure (Huang 
et al., 2016) and the time series of the spontane­
ous thoughts. Higher degrees of temporal structure 
in the spontaneous activity should then lead to a 
higher probability of contents being transformed 
into thoughts.
Are the transformation of content into thought 
and the supposed involvement of the entire 
brain accompanied by consciousness? This is a 
separate question, which I leave open here. The 
Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT) by 
Daheane (Dehaene & Changeux, 2011; Dehaene 
et al., 2014) postulates that the degree of neuronal 
globalization in spatial (i.e., prefrontal and parietal 
cortex) and temporal (i.e., late potentials like P300) 
terms is central for eliciting consciousness. How 
does such neuronal globalization compare to spatio- 
tem poral extension as postulated here? The GNW T 
argues that neuronal globalization is necessary to 
recruit cognitive functions that, in turn, are neces­
sary for consciousness. This is different in the case 
of spatiotemporal extension. Spatiotemporal exten­
sion does not refer to cognitive functions, as in 
neuronal globalization in the GNWT. Instead, it 
refers to the degree of spatial and temporal exten­
sion of a particular content and its point in time 
and space prior to and independent of recruiting 
cognitive functions. The concept of spatiotem­
poral extension must therefore be distinguished 
from neuronal globalization and, as one may want 
to say, cognitive extension. In a nutshell, neuronal 
globalization as in the GNW T is cognitive, while 
spatiotemporal extension as in the STTT is strictly 
spatiotemporal rather than cognitive. How much 
such spatiotemporal extension is related to con­
sciousness remains then to be discussed on separate 
grounds (Northoff, 2014b).
Conclusion
I here introduced a novel theory of thought, 
the spatiotemporal theory of thought (STTT). The 
STTT is primarily a spatiotemporal rather than 
a cognitive, sensorimotor, or semantic theory of 
thought. The STTT shifts the focus from the cog­
nitive features of task-unrelated thought to its spa­
tiotemporal features. The spatiotemporal features of 
task-unrelated thought are supposed to provide a 
common denominator that underlies both content 
and process. Therefore, STTT may be ideally suited 
to link and integrate content models and process 
models of task-unrelated thought.
Moreover, the STTT is strongly based on the 
brain and the spatiotemporal structure of its spon­
taneous activity. Unlike in cognitive theories, the 
STTT focuses not so much on the contents of 
thought, but rather on the temporal and spatial 
features of those contents and how they are inte­
grated into each other on the basis of their spatial 
and temporal features. I directly link the spatial and 
temporal features of task-unrelated thought to the 
spatiotemporal structure of the brain’s spontaneous 
activity, including its concrete physiological mecha­
nisms, such as functional connectivity and cross­
frequency coupling.
Future psychological investigation may want to 
characterize our thoughts not only in terms of their 
contents, but also with respect to their stochastically 
based spatial and temporal features, such as their 
spatial and temporal continuity (i.e., extension in 
our experience). Tackled in this way, thoughts and 
their contents are understood as stochastically based 
distributed and virtual three-dimensional spatio- 
temporal structures that are continuously sculpted 
and shaped by the spontaneous activity’s spatio- 
temporal structure: the more the contents are spa- 
tiotemporally extended by the stochastically based 
spatial and temporal features of the spontaneous 
activity’s spatiotemporal structure, the more distrib­
uted and virtual they become, and the more likely it 
is that they will be transformed into thoughts.
Such a spatiotemporal approach to thoughts 
can be tested experimentally on both neuronal and 
perceptual-experiential levels. Neuronally, one may 
want to focus not so much on the neuronal cor­
relates of specific contents like sensorimotor, affec­
tive, and cognitive contents, but rather on those 
neuronal mechanisms related to the respectively 
underlying spatial and temporal features of thought 
contents. Correspondingly, one may also sample 
the spatial and temporal features underlying the 
contents, in addition to the contents themselves,
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
67

on the perceptual-experiential level. This allows us 
to examine the relationship between the spatiotem- 
poral features of the thoughts and their contents, 
on the one hand, to different aspects of the brain 
and its spontaneous activity, on the other hand. The 
STTT postulates spatiotemporal correspondence 
(and, even stronger, spatiotemporal isomorphism; 
Fell, 2004) of the spatial and temporal features at 
the neuronal level with those at the perceptual- 
experiential level of thoughts.
Finally, it should be mentioned that I have left out 
a number of dimensions of thought. For instance, 
our thoughts show a higher or lower degree of per­
sonal relevance or self-relatedness. Our thoughts 
are frequently highly personal and thus individual 
in nature. This raises the question of the relation­
ship between thoughts and the self, with the latter 
expanding to the former. This expansion has been 
referred to as “self-expansion” (Sui & Humphreys, 
2015), and has been shown to be closely linked to 
the cortical midline structures (Northoff, 2015, 
2016, 2017; Northoff et al., 2006). Moreover, we 
can become consciously aware of our thoughts. 
This raises the question of the relationship between 
thoughts and consciousness. Both spatiotemporal 
integration and extension occur automatically and 
therefore remain unconscious. One would conse­
quently need to search for an additional mechanism 
by means of which awareness or consciousness is 
assigned to the thoughts. These questions remain 
important subjects for future research (Northoff, 
2014a, 2014b).
Acknowledgments
I thank Wendy Carter for sorting the references. 
Financial contributions to GN are acknowledged 
from the Canada Research Chair program (CRC), 
the Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR), 
the Michael Smith Foundation, and the National 
Science Foundation of China.
References
Allen, M., Smallwood, J., Christensen, J., Gramm, D., 
Rasmussen, B., Jensen, C. G., Roepstorff, A., & Lutz, A. 
(2013). The balanced mind: The variability of task-unrelated 
thoughts predicts error monitoring. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7, 743. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00743. 
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Cizadlo, T., Arndt, S., Rezai, 
K., Watkins, G. L .,... Hichwa, R. D. (1995). Remembering 
the past: Two facets of episodic memory explored with posi­
tron emission tomography. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
752(11), 1576-1585.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E., Reineberg, 
A. E., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. T. (2013). 
A penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated
thought content and relationships with individual differ­
ences in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 900.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316{\), 29—52.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Lutz, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). 
The decoupled mind: Mind-wandering disrupts cortical 
phase-locking to perceptual events. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 26( 11), 2596-2607.
Barry, R. J., Clarke, A. R., Johnstone, S. J., Magee, C. A., & 
Rushby, J. A. (2007). EEG differences between eyes-closed 
and eyes-open resting conditions. Clinical Neurophysiology, 
i m  12), 2765-2773
Bayne, T., & Chalmers, D. (2003). What is the unity of con­
sciousness? In A. Cleeremans (Ed.), The unity of consciousness 
(pp. 23-58). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Buzsaki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Buzsaki, G., Logothetis, N., & Singer, W. (2013). Scaling 
brain size, keeping timing: Evolutionary preservation of 
brain rhythms. Neuron, 80(3), 751-764. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuron.2013.10.002
Cabral, J., Kringelbach, M. L., & Deco, G. (2013). Exploring 
the network dynamics underlying brain activity during rest. 
Progress in Neurobiology, 114, 102—131.
Canolty, R. T., & Knight, R. T. (2010). The functional role 
of cross-frequency coupling. Trends in Cognitive Science, 
14(U), 506-515.
Chang, C., Metzger, C. D., Glover, G. H., Duyn, J. H., 
Heinze, H. J., & Walter, M. (2013). Association between 
heart rate variability and fluctuations in resting-state func­
tional connectivity. Neuroimage, 68, 93—104. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuroimage.2012.11.038
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U S A ,  106(21), 8719-8724. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 77(11), 718-731. doi: 10.1038/nrn.20l6.113
Crick, F., & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(2), 119-126. doi: 10.1038/ 
nn0203-l19
de Greek, M., Scheidt, L., Bolter, A. F., Frommer, J., Ulrich, 
C., Stockum, E., Enzi, B., Tempelmann, C., Hoffmann, T., 
Han, S., & Northoff, G. (2012) Altered brain activity dur­
ing emotional empathy in somatoform disorder. Human 
Brain Mapping, 33(11), 2666-2685. doi: 10.1002/ 
hbm.21392.
Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theo­
retical approaches to conscious processing. Neuron, 70(2), 
200-227. doi: 10.10l6/j.neuron.2011.03.018.
Dehaene, S., Charles, L., King, J. R., & Marti, S. (2014). 
Toward a computational theory of conscious processing. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 25, 76—84. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.conb.2013.12.005. Epub 2013 Dec 29.
de Pasquale, F., Della Penna, S., Snyder, A. Z., Lewis, C., 
Mantini, D., Marzetti, L., . . . Romani, G. L. (2010). 
Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain
68
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107(13), 6040-6045.
de Pasquale, F., Della Penna, S., Snyder, A. Z., Marzetti, L., 
Pizzella, V., Romani, G. L., & Corbetta, M. (2012). A corti­
cal core for dynamic integration of functional networks in 
the resting human brain. Neuron, 7-4(4), 753—764.
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). A frame­
work for understanding the relationship between exter­
nally and internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 
62, 
321-330. 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/
j. neuropsychologia.2014.05.024
Doucet, G., Naveau, M., Petit, L., Zago, L., Crivello, F., Jobard, 
G., . . . Mazoyer, B. (2012). Patterns of hemodynamic 
low-frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by 
the nature of free thought during rest. Neuroimage, 59(4), 
3194-3200.
Ellamil, M., Fox, K. C. R., Dixon, M. L., Pritchard, S., Todd, 
R. M., Thompson, E., & Christoff, K. (2016). Dynamics 
of neural recruitment surrounding the spontaneous aris­
ing of thoughts in experienced mindfulness practitioners. 
Neuroimage, 136, 186-196.
Fazelpour, S., & Thompson E. (2015). The Kantian brain: Brain 
dynamics from a neurophenomenological perspective. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 31,223-229. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.conb.2014.12.006.
Fell, J., & Axmacher, N. (2011). The role of phase synchroni­
zation in memory processes. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
12(2), 105-118.
Ferri, F., Costantini, M., Huang, Z., Perrucci, M. G., Ferretti, 
A., Romani, G. L., & Northoff, G. (2015). Intertrial vari­
ability in the premotor cortex accounts for individual differ­
ences in peripersonal space. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(50), 
16328-16339. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI. 1696-15.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. 
R., & Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta­
analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of mind­
wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. 
Neuroimage, 111, 611-621. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.neuroimage.2015.02.039
Fries, P. (2009). Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a 
fundamental process in cortical computation. Annual Review 
of Neuroscience, 32, 209-224.
Ganzetti, M., & Mantini, D. (2013). Functional connec­
tivity and oscillatory neuronal activity in the resting 
human brain. Neuroscience, 240, 297-309. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuroscience.2013.02.032
Gorgolewski, K. J., Lurie, D., Urchs, S., Kipping, J. A., 
Craddock, R. C., Milham, M. P., . . . Smallwood, J. (2014). 
A correspondence between individual differences in the 
brain’s intrinsic functional architecture and the content and 
form of self-generated thoughts. PLoS One, 9(5), e97176.
Hagmann, P, Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, 
C. J., Wedeen, V. J., & Sporns, O. (2008). Mapping the 
structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biology, 6(7), 
el59. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060159
Hamilton, J. P., Farmer, M., Fogelman, P., & Gotlib, I. H. (2015). 
Depressive rumination, the default-mode network, and the 
dark matter of clinical neuroscience. Biological Psychiatry, 
78(4), 224-230. doi: 10.10l6/j.biopsych.2015.02.020.
Hasson, U., Chen, J., & Honey, C. J. (2015). Hierarchical 
process memory: Memory as an integral component of 
information processing. Trends in Cognitive Science, 19(6), 
304-313.
He, B. J., & Raichle, M. E. (2009). The fMRI signal, slow corti­
cal potential and consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Science, 
13(7), 302-309.
Honey, C., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, 
J.-P, Meuli, R., & Hagmann, P. (2009). Predicting human 
resting-state functional connectivity from structural connec­
tivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(6), 
2035-2040.
Huang, Z., Ferri, F., Longtin, A., Dumont, G., & Northoff, 
G. (2016). Is there non-additive interaction between rest­
ing state and stimulus-induced activity? Phase dependency 
and the spontaneous activity’s temporal structure. Cerebral 
Cortex.
Huang, Z., Zhang, J., Longtin, A., Dumont, G., Duncan, N. W., 
Pokorny, J., Qin, P., Dai, R., Ferri, F., Weng, X., & Northoff, 
G. (2017). Is there a nonadditive interaction between sponta­
neous and evoked activity? Phase-dependence and its relation 
to the temporal structure of scale-free brain activity. Cerebral 
Cortex, 27(2), 1037-1059. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv288.
Khader, P, Schicke, T., Roder, B., & Rosier, F. (2008). On 
the relationship between slow cortical potentials and 
BOLD signal changes in humans. International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, 67(3), 252-261.
Lee, T. W., Northoff, G., & Wu, Y. T. (2014). Resting network 
is composed of more than one neural pattern: An fMRI 
study. Neuroscience, 274(0), 198-208. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.05.035
Logothetis, N. K. (2008). What we can do and what we cannot 
do with fMRI. Nature, 453(7197), 869-878. doi: 10.1038/ 
nature06976.
Logothetis, N. K., Murayama, Y., Augath, M., Steffen, T., 
Werner, J., & Oeltermann, A. (2009). How not to study 
spontaneous activity. Neuroimage, 45(4), 
1080-1089.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.010
Mantini, D., Perrucci, M. G., Del Gratta, C., Romani, G. L., 
& Corbetta, M. (2007). Electrophysiological signatures of 
resting state networks in the human brain. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences U SA, 104(32), 13170-13175. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700668104
Marx, E., Deutschlander, A., Stephan, T., Dieterich, M., 
Wiesmann, M., & Brandt, T. (2004). Eyes open and eyes 
closed as rest conditions: Impact on brain activation patterns. 
Neuroimage, 21(4), 1818-1824.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 375(5810), 393-395. doi: 10.1126/ 
science. 1131295
Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathol­
ogy: A unifying triple network model. Trends in Cognitive 
Science, 75(10), 483-506. doi: 10.10l6/j.tics.2011.08.003
Mudrik, L., Faivre, N., & Koch, C. (2014). Information integra­
tion without awareness. Trends in Cognitive Science, 18(9), 
488-496.
Murray, J. D., Bernacchia, A., Freedman, D. J., Romo, R., 
Wallis, J. D., Cai, X., . . . Lee, D. (2014). A hierarchy of 
intrinsic timescales across primate cortex. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 77(12), 1661-1663.
Northoff, G. (2012a). Autoepistemic limitation and the brain’s 
neural code: Comment on “Neuroontology, neurobiologi- 
cal naturalism, and consciousness: A challenge to scientific 
reduction and a solution” by Todd E. Feinberg. Physics of Life 
Reviews, 9(1), 38-39. doi: 10.10l6/j.plrev.2011.12.017
G E O R G  N O R T H O F F
69

Northoff, G. (2012b). Psychoanalysis and the brain: Why did 
Freud abandon neuroscience? Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 71. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00071
NorthofF, G. (2012c). From emotions to consciousness: A 
neuro-phenomenal and neuro-relational approach. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 3, 303. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00303
Northoff, G. (2014a). Unlocking the brain, Vol. 1: Coding. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Northoff, G. (2014b). Unlocking the Brain, Vol. II: Consciousness. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Northoff, G. (2015a). Spatiotemporal psychopathology I: Is 
depression a spatiotemporal disorder of the brain’s resting 
state? journal of Affective Disorder, 190, 854-866.
Northoff, G. (2015b). Spatiotemporal psychopathology II: How 
does a psychopathology of the brain’s resting state look like? 
Journal of Affective Disorder, 190, 867-879.
Northoff, G. (2015c). Is schizophrenia a spatiotemporal disorder 
of the brain’s resting state? World Psychiatry, 14{ 1), 34—35.
Northoff, G. (2015 d). Resting state activity and the “stream of 
consciousness” in schizophrenia-neurophenomenal hypoth­
eses. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 4l{ 1), 280-290. doi: 10.1093/ 
schbul/sbul 16
Northoff, G. (2017). Personal identity and cortical midline 
structure (CMS): Do temporal features of CMS neural 
activity transform into “self-continuity”?. Psychological 
Inquiry, 
28(2-3), 
122-131. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/
1047840X.2017.1337396.
Northoff, G., & Bermpohl, F. (2004). Cortical midline struc­
tures and the self. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(3), 102-107.
Northoff, G., & Duncan, N. W. (2016). How do abnormalities 
in the brain's spontaneous activity translate into symptoms 
in schizophrenia? From an overview of resting state activ­
ity findings to a proposed spatiotemporal psychopathology. 
Progress in Neurobiology, 145—146, 26-45. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.pneurobio.2016.08.003.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., Bermpohl, F., Niese, R., Pfennig, A., 
Pascual-Leone, A., & Schlaug, G. (2004). Reciprocal modu­
lation and attenuation in the prefrontal cortex: An fMRI 
study on emotional-cognitive interaction. Human Brain 
Mapping, 21(3), 202-212. doi:10.1002/hbm.20002
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greek, M., Bermpohl, F., 
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential 
processing in our brain: A meta-analysis of imaging studies 
on the self. Neuroimage, 31( 1), 440-457.
Northoff, G., & Sibille, E. (2014). Why are cortical GABA neu­
rons relevant to internal focus in depression? A cross-level 
model linking cellular, biochemical and neural network find­
ings. Molecular Psychiatry, 19(9), 966-977. doi: 10.1038/ 
mp.2014.68
Raichle, M. E. (2009). A brief history of human brain mapping. 
Trends in Neuroscience, 32(2), 118—126.
Raichle, M. E. (2015a). The restless brain: How intrinsic activ­
ity organizes brain function. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 370(1668), 
20140172.
Raichle, M. E. (2015b). The brain’s default mode network. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 38(1), 433—447.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences U SA, 98(2), 676-682.
Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner presence: Consciousness as a biological 
phenomenon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rhodes, P. (2006). The properties and implications of NMDA 
spikes in neocortical pyramidal cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 
26, 6704-6715.
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). How 
self-generated thought shapes mood: The relation between 
mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio-temporal 
content of thoughts. PLoS One, 5(10), e77554.
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Sackur, J., & Singer, T. (2013). Is 
self-generated thought a means of social problem solving? 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 962.
Sadaghiani, S., Hesselmann, G., Friston, K. J., & Kleinschmidt, 
A. (2010). The relation of ongoing brain activity, evoked 
neural responses, and cognition. Frontiers in Systems 
Neuroscience, 4, 20.
Sauseng, P., & Klimesch, W. (2008). What does phase infor­
mation of oscillatory brain activity tell us about cognitive 
processes? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(5), 
1001-1013.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Stein, B. E., Stanford, T. R., Ramachandran, R., Perrault, T. J. Jr, 
& Rowland, B. A. (2009). Challenges in quantifying multi- 
sensory integration: Alternative criteria, models, and inverse 
effectiveness. Experimental Brain Research, 198(2—3), 113— 
126. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-1880-8.
Sui, J., Chechlacz, M., Rotshtein, P., & Humphreys, G. W. 
(2013b). Lesion-symptom mapping of self-prioritization in 
explicit face categorization: Distinguishing hypo- and hyper­
self-biases. Cerebral Cortex, 25(2), 374-383.
Sui, J., Liu, M., Mevorach, C., & Humphreys, G. W. (2015). 
The salient self: The left intraparietal sulcus responds to social 
as well as perceptual-salience after self-association. Cerebral 
Cortex, 25(4), 1060-1068. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht302.
Vanhatalo, S., Palva, J. M., Holmes, M., Miller, J., Voipio, J., & 
Kaila, K. (2004). Infraslow oscillations modulate excitability 
and interictal epileptic activity in the human cortex during 
sleep. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U SA , 
101(14), 5053-5057.
Zabelina, D. L., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Dynamic net­
work interactions supporting internally-oriented cognition. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 40, 86—93.
Zhigalov, A., Arnulfo, G., Nobili, L., Palva, S., & Palva, 
J. M. (2015). Relationship of fast- and slow-timescale 
neuronal dynamics in human MEG and SEEG. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 35(13), 
5385-5396. 
doi: 
10.1523/ 
JNEUROSCI.4880-14.
Zmigrod, S., & Hommel, B. (2011). The relationship between 
feature binding and consciousness: Evidence from asyn­
chronous multi-modal stimuli. Consciousness and Cognition, 
20(3), 586-593.
70
H O W  D O E S  T H E  B R A I N  S S P O N T A N E O U S  A C T I V I T Y  G E N E R A T E  O U R  T H O U G H T S ?

C H A P T E R
7
Investigating the Elements of Thought: 
Toward a Component Process Account 
of Spontaneous Cognition
Jonathan Smallwood, Daniel Margulies, Boris C. Bernhardt, and Elizabeth Jefferies
Abstract
Spontaneous thoughts come in a large variety of different forms, varying in their experiential content 
as well as the functional outcomes with which they are associated. This chapter describes a component 
process architecture for spontaneous thought in which different types of experience arise through the 
combinations of different underlying neurocognitive processes. These underlying elements of cognition 
are not specific to spontaneous thought, since many, if not all, of these neurocognitive processes 
can be engaged when participants perform an externally directed task. We consider neurocognitive 
evidence that shows how this component process architecture provides explanatory value for accounts 
of spontaneous thought since it provides a mechanism that captures both the complex variety of 
spontaneous experiences that characterize the human condition, as well as the different functional 
outcomes that these different experiences are associated with.
Key Words: spontaneous thought, cognition, component process, functional outcome
Introduction
Our mind does not merely buzz into life in 
response to external events; it often generates 
ordered patterns of activity without the guidance 
of immediate sensory input. A manifestation of this 
capacity for spontaneous thought is the experience 
of mind-wandering (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006), 
a state observed across cultures (Deng, Li, & Tang, 
2012; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Levinson, 
Smallwood, & Davidson, 2012; Smallwood, Nind, 
Sc O ’Connor, 2009; Song Sc Wang, 2012; Tusche, 
Smallwood, Bernhardt, 
Sc Singer, 2014) and 
which occupies almost half of our waking thought 
(Killingsworth Sc Gilbert, 2010). Although familiar 
to every member of our species, we know surprisingly 
little about the process through which spontaneous 
thought arises, as can be seen by the controversial 
status of the mind-wandering state in cognitive sci­
ence and neuroscience (Franklin, Mrazek, Broadway,
Sc Schooler, 2013; Gilbert, Dumontheil, Simons, 
Frith, Sc Burgess, 2007; McVay Sc Kane, 2010; 
Smallwood, 2010, 2013a, 2013b). These controver­
sies arise because (1) the legacy of behaviorism has 
led to a focus on cognitive states that relate directly to 
behavior, despite the ubiquity of the mind-wander­
ing state (Callard, Smallwood, Sc Margulies, 2012); 
and (2) there are methodological challenges that 
arise when considering how to empirically capture 
spontaneous experiences (Smallwood, 2013a).
Spontaneous thought relates to a large class of 
experiences that arise with few obvious causes in 
the external environment, and at the psychologi­
cal level includes a wide range of experiences, such 
as daydreaming about a holiday while commuting 
to work, catching one’s mind wandering about an 
unrelated matter while reading. These experiences 
can be at odds with a task, but need not be. They 
are characterized by an onset that has no particular
7 i

association to stimuli in the environment, and this 
property has meant that they have been described 
as reflecting processes that are decoupled from per­
ceptual input (see Smallwood, 2013). Over the last 
decades, methodological advances have allowed 
spontaneous changes to be measured more effec­
tively, leading to insight into their relationship to 
functional outcomes and to ongoing neurocogni- 
tive functioning. Although this has advanced our 
understanding of the importance of spontaneous 
processing at both the neural and psychological 
level, these developments have also demonstrated 
how much more we need to understand before we 
will have a mature scientific account of how sponta­
neous thought operates. This chapter considers the 
psychological and neural evidence that spontaneous 
thought is a complex and varied phenomenon, and 
examines how this heterogeneity can be captured by 
a component process architecture in which different 
forms of experience are produced through the flex­
ible combination of different modular subsystems.
Spontaneous Thought Is Heterogeneous 
in Both Content and Functional Outcome
Spontaneous thought allows us to mentally 
escape from the moment and to imagine realities
that are different from the way things currently 
are (Buckner, 2010; Maguire & Hassabis, 2011; 
Smallwood, 2013a). When we imagine an event, 
place, or person in a way that they m ight he, we 
are deriving experiential content from representa­
tions of how we remember and understand the 
world (Buckner, 2010; Buckner & Carroll, 2007; 
Smallwood, 
2013a). 
Accordingly, 
spontaneous 
thoughts can take many forms, and measuring the 
variety of these experiences is an important goal for 
research.
Initial 
investigations 
highlighted 
different 
aspects of spontaneous thoughts, such as aware­
ness, temporal focus, intentionality, and emo­
tional features (for a recent review, see Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015). More recently, however, stud­
ies have begun to directly examine the heteroge­
neity of the content of spontaneous thought in a 
more systematic manner through the identifica­
tion of patterns of statistical variance that emerge 
from experience sampling reports that simultane­
ously probe different elements of experience. This 
approach is known as m ulti-dim ensional experience 
sam pling (MDES), and Figure 7.1 illustrates how 
it can be implemented in an experimental situa­
tion. Typically, participants complete a laboratory
bO
cL
o
acuaoOn
SoU
Laboratory Task
Probe level data
Dimensions
Questions 
Components
OffTask 
Other 
Past 
Self 
Future 
Positive 
Negative
F 
P 
E
OffTask
Other
Past
Self
Future
Group level
Components
F 
P
I
I
High
Low
High
Low
Figure 7.1. Multi dimensional experience sampling (MDES). Participants are asked to provide information on multiple different 
aspects of their ongoing experience. (See Color Insert)
72-
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

task in which different aspects of experience (such 
as the relation to an ongoing task, temporal focus, 
etc.) are assessed on many occasions. These data are 
then decomposed using techniques such as prin ci­
p a l components analysis (PCA) at the trial level, a 
procedure that reveals the dimensional structure 
that underlies the momentary experiential reports. 
This research has shown that there are reasonably 
stable patterns that emerge across multiple differ­
ent samples (see Figure 7.1) and suggests that these 
patterns may have unique cognitive and affective 
correlates (Engert, Smallwood, & Singer, 2014; 
Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 2013; Ruby, 
Smallwood, Sackur, & Singer, 2013).
Not only is the content of spontaneous thought 
variable, the functional outcomes that are associ­
ated with it are also heterogeneous. Studies have 
shown that spontaneous thought is common 
when the environment lacks compelling demands 
and we can mentally “switch off,” and this seems 
ubiquitous across cultures (Deng et al., 2012; 
Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Levinson et al., 
2012; Smallwood et al., 2009; Song & Wang, 
2012; Tusche et al., 2014). Under these conditions, 
spontaneous thought allows us to plan the future in 
our idle moments (Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 
2011; Smallwood, Brown, et al., 2011; Smallwood
et al., 2009; Smallwood, Schooler, et al., 2011) and 
affords creative solutions when we have reached an 
impasse on a problem (Baird et al., 2012; Ruby, 
Smallwood, Sackur, et al., 2013); however, it is 
also implicated in the ruminations that are linked 
with unhappiness (Ruby et al., 2013; Smallwood & 
O ’Connor, 2011). Moreover, studies have shown 
that sometimes spontaneous thoughts occur when 
we are engaged in a task, and when this happens, 
it can disrupt performance in complex tasks such 
as reading or tasks that require sustained vigilance 
to the external world. Under these circumstances, 
spontaneous thought can be the cause of absent- 
minded errors (McVay & Kane, 2009, 2011, 
2012a; Smallwood, Beach, Schooler, & Handy, 
2008; Smallwood, McSpadden, & Schooler, 2008). 
Figure 7.2 illustrates some of the beneficial and det­
rimental outcomes that have been associated with 
spontaneous thought.
Altogether, psychological investigations have 
shown that there are multiple aspects of the expe­
rience of spontaneous thought and that these are 
linked to a complex balance of beneficial and detri­
mental functional outcomes. A comprehensive sci­
entific account of spontaneous thought, therefore, 
must be able to account for this heterogeneity both 
in terms of content and functional outcomes.
A 
Poor Comprehension
Task-Unrelated Thought
Greater Working Memory
Task-Unrelated Thought
c
Unpleasant Mood
13 
Reduced Temporal Discounting
Interference 
Thought
Discounting
Task-Unrelated Ihought
I ask-Unrelated ihoughi
Discounting
= -.20
Figure 7.2. Heterogeneous functional outcomes linked to spontaneous thought.
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIELMARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
7 3

Spontaneous Neurocognitive Activity Is Both 
Ubiquitous and Heterogeneous
A pivotal moment in our understanding of 
spontaneous thought occurred at the turn of the 
twenty-first century through the identification of 
a neural system, anchored on anterior and pos­
terior regions of the medial surface of the cortex, 
which is often more active during baseline condi­
tions relative to tasks depending on a concentrated 
focus on external input (Raichle et ah, 2001). This 
system is now known as the default mode network 
(DM N), and its spatial distribution, as defined by 
its intrinsic behavior during a period of wakeful 
rest state, is presented in Figure 7.3. Regions that 
make up this network and include the medial pre­
frontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, the angu­
lar gyrus, and regions of the anterior temporal lobe 
and medial temporal lobe (including the hippo­
campus and parahippocampal gyrus). Subsequent 
to the identification of the DM N through meta­
analysis, it was shown to be active during periods of 
spontaneous thought, as assessed using experience 
sampling (Allen et al., 2013; Christoff, Gordon, 
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Fox, Spreng, 
Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015; Kucyi 
& Davis, 2014; Mason et al., 2007; Stawarczyk 
& D ’Argembeau, 2015; Stawarczyk, Majerus, 
Maquet, & D ’Argembeau, 2011; Tusche et al., 
2014). It was also shown to be activated by tasks 
that mimic states that make a likely contribution 
to the experiential content of naturally occurring 
spontaneous thought, such as a focus on the self 
(Kelley et al., 2002; Macrae, Moran, Heatherton, 
Banfield, & Kelley, 2004), imagining what may take 
place in the future (Schacter & Addis, 2007; Daniel 
L Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007), or attempts
to understand the thoughts and feelings of other 
people (Amodio & Frith, 2006).
Since the seminal work on the DM N, however, 
it is now known that it is wrong to equate this net­
work with the spontaneous neurocognitive activ­
ity occurring at rest. Rather than being limited to 
regions of the DM N, spontaneous activity during 
wakeful rest is ubiquitous across multiple neural 
networks, and this activity is spatially indistinguish­
able from that which arises when performing a task. 
Figure 7.4 illustrates two recent examples of the 
whole brain nature of spontaneous neurocognitive 
activity. The left-hand panel shows the result of a 
statistical decomposition of resting state networks 
conducted by Yeo and colleagues, which identified 
seven canonical networks that include motor cortex, 
lateral prefrontal regions, and parietal and occipital 
cortex— regions known to be important in acting 
on the external environment (Yeo et al., 2011). The 
right-hand panel shows a decomposition of resting 
state data using independent component analysis 
(ICA) performed by Smith and colleagues, who 
demonstrated that these components were spatially 
similar to networks generated through the applica­
tion of the same technique to a meta-analysis of task 
data (Smith et al., 2009). Crucially, as can be seen in 
this figure, the DM N is almost identical, regardless 
of whether it is identified through the application of 
ICA to task data or resting-state data.
Neuroimaging studies over the last decades, 
therefore, have implicated the DM N in conscious 
reports of spontaneous thought, while at the same 
time illustrating that spontaneous neural activ­
ity is a general property of how neural function 
is organized. The contrast between the seeming 
specificity of the DM N to spontaneous cognition,
Anterior Temporal Lobe
Functional connectivity o f the left pCC (n = 87)
Figure 7.3. Spatial distribution of the core hubs of the default mode network. (See Color Insert)
7 4
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

□
Ventral attention 
Default Mode Network 
Limbic System
Dorsal Attention 
Network
Executive Control 
| Medial Occipital 
| Sensorimotor
Task
Rest
Figure 7.4. Default mode network as observed in tasks and at rest. (See Color Insert)
on the one hand, and the ubiquity of spontane­
ous activity in the cortex highlights, on the other, 
highlights that spontaneous conscious experience 
cannot be reduced to spontaneous neurocognitive 
activity since this would implicate regions of the 
cortex unlikely to be involved directly in conscious 
experience.
Interim Summary
Psychological 
investigations 
of spontaneous 
thought have demonstrated the complex and het­
erogeneous nature of this form of experience, and 
studies of the unconstrained brain have revealed that 
spontaneous neurocognitive activity is not a prop­
erty of a single brain system, but rather a general 
property of neural functioning. Together, these two 
observations constrain formal scientific accounts 
of spontaneous thought in important ways. For 
example, conceptualizing spontaneous thought as a 
consequence of a simple module is clearly at odds 
with the evidence for the rich heterogeneous nature 
of spontaneous experience identified through psy­
chological studies. Similarly, the argument that 
spontaneous conscious experience is a primary con­
sequence of the process of spontaneous neurocogni­
tive activity is inconsistent with the observation that
these changes are not limited to the neural system 
that studies suggest is most important in spontane­
ous cognitive experience (i.e., the DMN).
Toward a Neurocognitive Component 
Process Account of Spontaneous Thought
The inability for simple modular or process 
accounts to provide a reasonable neurocognitive 
account of spontaneous thought highlights the 
need for a more complex treatment of the experi­
ence, and a starting point is a careful consideration 
of the information processing steps that take place 
when we generate a train of spontaneous thoughts 
(Smallwood, 2013a). Studies in Figure 7.1 illustrate 
that during spontaneous thought we often represent 
people, places, and events that are not present in 
the immediate environment, a phenomenon often 
described as mental time travel (Suddendorf & 
Corballis, 2007). This depends on retrieving inter­
nally stored representations that capture our memo­
ries of past episodes and our conceptual knowledge 
of the world, and attending to these rather than 
events in the here and now. Furthermore, our spon­
taneous experiences often form a coherent train of 
thought, suggesting that we may recombine and 
remodel representational information to allow new
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIELMARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
7 5

thoughts and experiences to emerge. In experiential 
terms, there seem to be at least three distinct ele­
ments of our conscious experience of spontaneous 
thought: (1) a focus away from the events in the 
here and now {decou plin g (2) the generation of 
mental content whose referent is absent from the 
environment (representation); and (3) the integra­
tion and evaluation of this information over time 
as the experiences evolves in a dynamic fashion 
{coordination).
Acknowledging that spontaneous 
thought 
depends on multiple distinct neurocognitive pro­
cesses is the basis of what is known as the compo­
nent process account of mental states (Smallwood, 
2013a, 2013b; Smallwood & Schooler, 2015), 
which 
assumes 
that 
spontaneous 
conscious 
thought is produced through the flexible inter­
action of a number of underlying subsystems. 
Unlike a simple modular view, the component 
process account can explain the large variety of 
spontaneous thoughts that we can experience, 
since this type of architecture can support a 
greater number of states than there are compo­
nents. Furthermore, since different experiential 
states would arise through differences in the way 
that information processing takes place, they 
would naturally give rise to different functional 
outcomes, and so the component process account 
can naturally explain why spontaneous thought 
has a complex suite of functional outcomes. 
Finally, since not all neural systems are equally 
important for conscious experience (e.g., Rees, 
Kreiman, & Koch, 2002), only spontaneous neu­
rocognitive activity in a subset of neural systems 
should be linked to core aspects of spontaneous 
thought, explaining why many more cortical 
regions than those in the D M N  exhibit organized 
spontaneous changes at rest.
In principle, therefore, a component process 
account of spontaneous thought can successfully 
explain key features of the empirical data because 
it provides an architecture in which heteroge­
neous experiential states naturally emerge through 
the variable combination of the components. The 
remainder of this chapter considers recent evidence 
that helps support scientific accounts of spontane­
ous thought by focusing on three specific questions 
regarding the neurocognitive basis of spontaneous 
thought: 1
1. 
What neurocognitive systems support the 
mental representations that form the content of 
spontaneous thought?
2. How do we flexibly organize information 
processing to allow a focus on internal rather than 
external sources of mental content?
3. How do we monitor, evaluate, or coordinate 
cognition during spontaneous thought?
The Default Mode Network Is Important 
for the Representational Content That Is 
Produced During Spontaneous Thought
A more nuanced exploration of the role of the 
DM N illustrates that it is active under task con­
ditions, and understanding the task conditions in 
which it is activated provides an important con­
straint on its role in spontaneous thought. One view 
is that this network is important for the integration 
of representations (based on prior knowledge) that 
provide self-generated mental content (Andrews- 
Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014). Advances 
in neuroimaging, including distortion-corrected 
imaging techniques (Binney, Embleton, Jefferies, 
Parker, & Lambon-Ralph, 2010; Visser, Jefferies, 
Embleton, & Lambon-Ralph, 2012) and tools 
for large-scale meta-analysis (Yarkoni, Poldrack, 
Nichols, Van Essen, & Wager, 2011), have led to the 
recognition that a number of tasks that depend on 
the processing of information from memory tend 
to activate regions in the DM N. For the purposes 
of illustration, Figure 7.5 shows the results of meta­
analysis using the search tool Neurosynth (Yarkoni 
et al., 2011) for two task domains that depend on 
manipulating knowledge of the world— episodic 
and semantic memory. For comparison, functional 
connectivity analysis of the posterior cingulate activ­
ity is presented to represent the canonical DM N. 
There is substantial neural overlap in each map, as 
well as important differences. For example, all three 
spatial maps show regions of the anterior temporal 
lobe, angular gyrus, as well as the medial core of 
the DM N. The evidence of similarity between the 
DM N and these meta-analytic maps illustrates that 
the core network can be activated under conditions 
that require the processing of external information 
as part of a task. Since the DM N is activated by 
cognition that relies on our knowledge of the world 
as part of a task, it is parsimonious to assume that it 
plays the same role in spontaneous thought.
Reductions in Perceptual Processing During 
Spontaneous Thought
Figure 7.5 illustrates the spatial similarity between 
the neural activation that occurs during tasks and the 
organization of the DM N as observed at rest. If the
76
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

Figure 7.5. Relationship between the default mode network and the semantic and episodic systems. (See Color Insert)
DM N can be recruited under externally demanding 
conditions as well as during spontaneous thought, 
then there must be a mechanism that allows this 
system to generate cognition based on both exter­
nal cues and intrinsic changes (Smallwood, 2013). 
It has been hypothesized that this ability to flexibly 
organize cognition to have an internal as opposed to 
an external focus is reflected in the process of p er­
ceptual decoupling known to occur during the mind­
wandering state. Studies have shown that during 
periods of spontaneous thought, evoked responses 
to external stimuli are reduced, particularly in the 
visual domain (Baird, Smallwood, Lutz, & Schooler, 
2014; Kam et al., 2011; Macdonald, Mathan, & 
Yeung, 2011; Smallwood, Beach, et al., 2008). This 
process is argued to lead to the neglect of external 
input, which can account for the enhanced errors 
that occur during periods of spontaneous thought 
(McVay & Kane, 2009, 2012b; McVay, Kane, & 
Kwapil, 2009; Smallwood, McSpadden, et al., 
2008; Smallwood, Baracaia, Lowe, & Obonsawin, 
2003; Unsworth, & McMillan, 2013; Unsworth, 
McMillan, Brewer, & Spillers, 2012). It is also 
thought to reduce the likelihood that attention is 
focused on external input, facilitating attention to 
representations that are generated internally and
so helping to preserve the integrity of spontaneous 
thought. Conceptually the phenomenon of per­
ceptual decoupling can explain how the DM N can 
represent either information pertinent to an exter­
nal task, or to a train of spontaneous thought, since 
under conditions when external input is reduced, it 
would be easier to devote attention to the internal 
environment.
Figure 7.6 presents neurocognitive evidence for 
perceptual decoupling during periods of sponta­
neous thought. A primary source of evidence that 
external events are neglected during the mind­
wandering state is derived from electroencephalo- 
graphic recordings during task performance. The 
upper left-hand panel shows studies demonstrating 
that electrical responses evoked by task are reduced 
during periods of spontaneous thought (Barron, 
Riby, Greer, & Smallwood, 2011; Kam et al., 2011). 
The lower left-hand panel illustrates that this reduc­
tion in evoked responses is attributable to changes in 
phase locking in the neural populations in regions 
of parietal and occipital cortex that are known to 
play an important role in the representation of visual 
information from the environment (Baird et al., 
2014). The right-hand panel shows evidence from 
a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIELMARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
7 7

A
Retrospective
Online
B Decreased Specificity
Decreased Prospection
C
STIMULUS
-1 0 0  
0 
200 
400 
600
Time (msec)
D
Figure 7.6. Evidence of perceptual decoupling during spontaneous thought. (See Color Insert)
study that found that individual differences in the 
intrinsic changes in regions of medial and lateral 
occipital cortex were associated with retrospective 
reports of different aspects of spontaneous thought 
(Gorgolewski et al., 2014). Together these studies 
show that elevated aspects of spontaneous thoughts 
are linked with reductions in evoked responses and 
intrinsic processing in visual or parietal cortex—  
observations that are compatible with the hypothesis 
that neglect of environmental input is important in 
allowing attention to be focused internally.
Focusing on Spontaneous Representations
Our spontaneous thought can often be focused 
on a specific topic, such as where to go for dinner 
with a friend, what type of holiday we might like 
to go on, or how we might be able to solve a work- 
related problem. Unlike a specific focus on external 
properties of the environment, a train of sponta­
neous thought cannot capitalize on the inherent 
organization of the stimuli in the environment to 
constrain cognition. Instead, intrinsic processes 
must be able to control the retrieval of information 
that is taking place to ensure that representations 
that are relevant to ongoing thought are generated. 
Task paradigms have highlighted that attending 
to memory depends in part on processes taking 
place in lateral parietal cortex (Cabeza, Ciaramelli,
Olson, & Moscovitch, 2008; Ciaramelli, Grady, & 
Moscovitch, 2008).
Figure 7.7 illustrates evidence from both task- 
based studies and studies of spontaneous thought 
that implicate the temporoparietal cortical regions 
in governing the specificity of thought. For exam­
ple, the application of transcranial magnetic stimu­
lation to the left angular gyrus disrupted the speed 
with which participants made judgments of seman­
tic association when the items were related at a spe­
cific level (Davey et al., 2015). A similar region in 
the right hemisphere was coupled to the medial pre­
frontal cortex for participants who exhibited high 
levels of meta-cognitive accuracy for semantic infor­
mation from memory (Baird, Cieslak, Smallwood, 
Grafton, & Schooler, 2015; Baird, Smallwood, 
Gorgolewski, & Margulies, 2013). Similarity judg­
ments when two items are strongly associated and 
subjective confidence in the voracity of episodic 
memory may both depend upon the capacity to 
access specific features of knowledge. The conse­
quence of this region of cortex for task-related pro­
cessing provides an important parallel for studies of 
spontaneous thought, which have observed more 
activity in a similar right hemisphere region for par­
ticipants whose spontaneous thought content was 
more specified (Gorgolewski et al., 2014). Also, the 
left hemisphere homologue of this region was more
7 8
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

A
Specific Semantic Association
B
Meta-cognition for Episodic Memory
1140
N o TMS 
TMS
Emotional Spontaneous Thought
Figure 7.7. The role of parietal cortex in specific memory retrieval. (See Color Insert)
active in a non-demanding task in which sponta­
neous thought occurs more commonly (Konishi, 
McLaren, Engen, & Smallwood, 2015). Experience­
sampling studies have shown that people who tend 
to engage in spontaneous thought under non­
demanding conditions have greater executive con­
trol (Levinson, Smallwood, & Davidson, 2012) and 
a less impulsive style of decision-making (Bernhardt
et al., 2014). Furthermore, studies have shown that 
the intensity with which participants imagine the 
outcomes of a decision-making process in which 
long-term and short-term opportunities must be 
contrasted leads to an increase in the likelihood 
that a more distant option was chosen (Benoit, 
Gilbert, & Burgess, 2011; Hakimi & Hare, 2015). 
Together these studies suggest that a mechanism in
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIEL MARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
7 9

lateral parietal cortex might allow for more specific 
imaginary experiences, and which in turn could be 
important in determining functional outcomes that 
emerge from spontaneous cognition. Consistent 
with this view, it is well established that the parietal 
cortex is important in allocating attention to partic­
ular types of stimuli (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002).
Conclusions and Future Directions
This chapter has summarized evidence indicat­
ing that spontaneous thought can be conceived as 
emerging from the interaction of component pro­
cesses that represent the building blocks of cogni­
tion. This perspective can easily accommodate the 
heterogeneity of spontaneous thought in terms of 
both content and functional outcomes, since both 
are a natural consequence of the fact of relative dif­
ferences in the contribution of different component 
processes for different experiential states. It can also 
explain why spontaneous neurocognitive activity at 
rest is not a specific property of the DM N per se, 
since only those neurocognitive processes that are 
important for conscious experience would be read­
ily linked to spontaneous conscious experience. 
The chapter has outlined a rudimentary set of com­
ponent processes that together could explain the 
representation of information during spontaneous 
thought, how this is decoupled from the external 
environment, and how we are able to focus on this 
information in order to evaluate it in a specific man­
ner. Although this provides basic support for the 
viability of a component process account of sponta­
neous thought, research in this area is still at a very 
early stage, not least because only a handful of stud­
ies have explored the brain correlates of spontaneous 
thought directly. It is therefore important to bear in 
mind that firm conclusions on either the specific 
nature of the neurocognitive components, or the 
manner with which they interact, are premature. 
Moving forward, there are a number of important 
questions that more specified component process 
accounts of spontaneous thoughts must address.
It is apparent from Figure 7.5, for example, that 
there are regions that are traditionally uncorrelated 
with the core of the DM N as defined by functional 
connectivity, which are nonetheless present in the 
meta-analytic maps of both semantic and episodic 
tasks. These regions include inferior regions of the 
lateral prefrontal cortex and the pre-supplementary 
motor area. One conclusion that can be drawn from 
this observation is that, at least under certain con­
ditions, the DM N does not act in isolation, but 
instead cooperates with other large-scale networks
to perform certain cognitive operations. There is 
now a growing body of task paradigms that have 
shown that this is indeed the case, including situ­
ations in which participants must plan their future 
(Gerlach, Spreng, Gilmore, & Schacter, 2011; 
Spreng, Gerlach, Turner, & Schacter, 2015; Spreng, 
Stevens, Chamberlain, Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010), 
and even demonstrations that these network inter­
actions occur when a task demands memorial infor­
mation to guide behavior in the context of a working 
memory task (Konishi et al., 2015; Spreng et al.,
2014). One open question, therefore, concerns the 
functional significance of interactions between the 
DM N and other large-scale networks for spontane­
ous thought, particularly lateral prefrontal regions, 
as these regions are often uncorrelated with the 
DM N at rest (see also Fox et al., 2015).
A second important question is the extent to 
which it is possible to differentiate the DM N into 
a set of subsystems. The DM N has been success­
fully fractionated into a set of underlying compo­
nents using both graph theoretical and meta-analytic 
tools (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, Poulin, 
& Buckner, 2010; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014). 
It is possible that different aspects of the larger 
DM N serve different functions during spontaneous 
thought, suggesting that variation in the content or 
form of experiences during spontaneous thought 
may depend on the differential involvement of par­
ticular aspects of the larger DM N. One way that 
this question could be addressed would be through 
combining MDES with simultaneous measures of 
neurocognitive function. This would help determine 
whether the differences between different types of 
spontaneous thoughts result from differences in neu­
ral activation in different aspects of the DMN.
References
Allen, M., Smallwood, J., Christensen, J., Gramm, D., 
Rasmussen, B., Jensen, C. G., . . . Lutz, A. (2013). The bal­
anced mind: The variability of task-unrelated thoughts pre­
dicts error monitoring. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 
743. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00743.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds: The 
medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 7(4), 268-277.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., & 
Buckner, R. L. (2010). Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network. Neuron, 65(4), 550-562. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29—52. doi: 10.1111/ 
nyas. 12360.
Baird, B., Cieslak, M., Smallwood, J., Grafton, S.T., & Schooler, 
J. W. (2015). Regional white matter variation associated
8o
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

with domain-specific metacognitive accuracy. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(3), 440—452. doi:10.1 l62/jocn_ 
a_0074l.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Gorgolewski, K. J., & Margulies, 
D. S. (2013). Medial and lateral networks in anterior 
prefrontal cortex support metacognitive ability for mem­
ory and perception. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(42),
16657-16665.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Lutz, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). The 
decoupled mind: Mind-wandering disrupts cortical phase­
locking to perceptual events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
26(11), 2596-2607. doklO.l l62/jocn_a_00656.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., 
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by dis­
traction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. 
Psychological Science, 23(10), 1117-1122. doi: 10.1177/ 
0956797612446024.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 1604— 
1611. doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2011.08.007.
Barron, E., Riby, L. M., Greer, J., & Smallwood, J. (2011). 
Absorbed in thought: The effect of mind wandering on the 
processing of relevant and irrelevant events. Psychological 
Science, 22(5), 596-601. doi: 10.1177/0956797611404083.
Benoit, R. G., Gilbert, S. J., & Burgess, P. W. (2011). A neural 
mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospection 
on farsighted decisions. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31 (18), 
6771-6779.
Bernhardt, B. C., Smallwood, J., Tusche, A., Ruby, F. J., Engen, 
H. G., Steinbeis, N., & Singer, T. (2014). Medial prefrontal 
and anterior cingulate cortical thickness predicts shared indi­
vidual differences in self-generated thought and temporal 
discounting. Neuroimage, 90, 290—297.
Binney, R. J., Embleton, K. V., Jefferies, E., Parker, G. J., & 
Lambon-Ralph, M. A. (2010). The ventral and inferolateral 
aspects of the anterior temporal lobe are crucial in seman­
tic memory: Evidence from a novel direct comparison of 
distortion-corrected fMRI, rTMS, and semantic dementia. 
Cerebral Cortex, 20(11), 2728-2738.
Buckner, R. L. (2010). The role of the hippocampus in prediction 
and imagination. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 27—48, 
C21-28. doi: 10.1 l46/annurev.psych.60.110707.163508.
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and 
the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2), 49—57. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.tics.2006.11.004.
Cabeza, R., Ciaramelli, E., Olson, I. R., & Moscovitch, M. 
(2008). The parietal cortex and episodic memory: An 
attentional account. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, .9(8), 
613-625.
Callard, F., Smallwood, J., & Margulies, D. S. (2012). Default 
positions: How neuroscience’s historical legacy has hampered 
investigation of the resting mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 
321. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00321.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Ciaramelli, E., Grady, C. L., & Moscovitch, M. (2008). Top- 
down and bottom-up attention to memory: A hypothesis 
(AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in mem­
ory retrieval. Neuropsychologia, 46(7), 1828—1851.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal- 
directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), 201—215.
Davey, J., Cornelissen, P. L., Thompson, H. E., Sonkusare,
5., Hallam, G., Smallwood, J., & Jefferies, E. (2015).
Automatic 
and 
controlled 
semantic 
retrieval: 
TMS
reveals distinct contributions of posterior middle tem­
poral gyrus and angular gyrus. Journal of Neuroscience, 
35(46), 15230-15239. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4705- 
14.2015.
Deng, Y.-Q., Li, S., & Tang, Y.-Y. (2012). The relationship 
between wandering mind, depression and mindfulness. 
Mindfulness, 5(2), 124—128.
Engert, V., Smallwood, J., & Singer, T. (2014). Mind your 
thoughts: Associations between self-generated thoughts 
and stress-induced and baseline levels of cortisol and alpha- 
amylase. Biological Psychology, 103, 283-291.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Broadway, J. M., & Schooler, 
J. W. (2013). Disentangling decoupling: Comment on 
Smallwood (2013). Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 536-541. 
doi: 10.1037/a0030515.
Gerlach, K. D., Spreng, R. N., Gilmore, A. W., & Schacter, D. 
L. (2011). Solving future problems: Default network and 
executive activity associated with goal-directed mental simu­
lations. Neuroimage, 55(4), 1816—1824.
Gilbert, S. J., Dumontheil, I., Simons, J. S., Frith, C. D., & 
Burgess, P. W. (2007). Comment on “Wandering minds: the 
default network and stimulus-independent 
thought.” 
Science, 377(5834), 43; author reply 43. doi: 10.1126/ 
science. 1140801.
Gorgolewski, K. J., Lurie, D., Urchs, S., Kipping, J. A., 
Craddock, R. C., Milham, M. P., . . . Smallwood, J. (2014). 
A correspondence between individual differences in the 
brain’s intrinsic functional architecture and the content and 
form of self-generated thoughts. PLoS One, 9(5), e97176.
Hakimi, S., & Hare, T. A. (2015). Enhanced neural responses 
to imagined primary rewards predict reduced monetary 
temporal discounting. The Journal of Neuroscience, 35(38), 
13103-13109.
Kam, J. W., Dao, E., Farley, J., Fitzpatrick, K., Smallwood, 
J., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2011). Slow fluc­
tuations in attentional control of sensory cortex. Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(2), 460—470. doi: 10.1162/ 
jocn.2010.21443.
Kelley, W. M., Macrae, C. N., Wyland, C. L., Caglar, S., Inati,
5., & Heatherton, T. F. (2002). Finding the self? An event- 
related fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14(5), 
785-794.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wander­
ing mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932. 
doi: 10.1126/science.l 192439.
Konishi, M., McLaren, D. G., Engen, H., & Smallwood, J. 
(2015). Shaped by the past: The default mode network sup­
ports cognition that is independent of immediate perceptual 
input. PLoS One, 10(6), eO 132209.
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2014). Dynamic functional con­
nectivity of the default mode network tracks daydreaming. 
Neuroimage, 100, 471—480.
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIEL MARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
8 i

Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). 
The persistence of thought: Evidence for a role of work­
ing memory in the maintenance of task-unrelated think­
ing. Psychological Science, 23(4), 375-380. doi: 10.1177/ 
0956797611431465.
MacDonald, J. S., Mathan, S., & Yeung, N. (2011). Trial-by- 
trial variations in subjective attentional state are reflected 
in ongoing prestimulus EEG alpha oscillations. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 2, 82. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00082.
Macrae, C. N., Moran, J. M., Heatherton, T. F., Banfield, J. F., 
& Kelley, W. M. (2004). Medial prefrontal activity predicts 
memory for self. Cerebral Cortex, 14(6), 647—654.
Maguire, E. A., & Hassabis, D. (2011). Role of the hippocam­
pus in imagination and future thinking. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the U S A ,  108( 11), E39. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.l018876l08.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 375(5810), 393-395.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train 
of thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and 
mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
35(1), 196-204. doi: 10.1037/a00l4l04.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering 
reflect executive function or executive failure? Comment 
on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and Watkins (2008). 
Psychological bulletin, 136(2), 188-197; discussion 198-207. 
doi: 10.1037/a0018298.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2011). Why does working memory 
capacity predict variation in reading comprehension? On 
the influence of mind wandering and executive attention. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(2), 302— 
320. doi: 10.1037/a0025250.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012a). Drifting from slow to 
“d’oh!”: Working memory capacity and mind wandering 
predict extreme reaction times and executive control errors. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 38(3), 525-549. doi: 10.1037/A0025896.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012b). Why does working mem­
ory capacity predict variation in reading comprehension? On 
the influence of mind wandering and executive attention. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(2), 302— 
320. doi: 10.1037/A0025250.
McVay, J. C., Kane, M. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2009). Tracking 
the train of thought from the laboratory into everyday 
life: An experience-sampling study of mind wandering across 
controlled and ecological contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 16(5), 857-863. doi: 10.3758/PBR. 16.5.857.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. 
J., Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default 
mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the U S A, 98(2), 676-682. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.98.2.676.
Rees, G., Kreiman, G., & Koch, C. (2002). Neural correlates of 
consciousness in humans. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(4), 
261-270.
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). How 
self-generated thought shapes mood: The relation between 
mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio-temporal 
content of thoughts. Public Library of Science One, 5(10), 
e77554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077554.
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Sackur, J., & Singer, T. (2013). Is self­
generated thought a means of social problem solving? Frontiers 
in Psychology, 4, 962. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00962.
Schacter, D. L., & Addis, D. R. (2007). The cognitive neuro­
science of constructive memory: Remembering the past 
and imagining the future. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481), 773-786. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2087.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past to imagine the future: The prospec­
tive brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(9), 657—661.
Smallwood, J. (2010). Why the global availability of mind wan­
dering necessitates resource competition: Reply to McVay 
and Kane (2010). Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 202—207. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0018673.
Smallwood, J. (2013a). Distinguishing how from why the 
mind wanders: A process-occurence framework for self 
generated thought. Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 519-535. 
doi: 10.1037/a0030010.
Smallwood, J. (2013b). Searching for the elements of thought: 
Reply to Franklin, Mrazek, Broadway, and Schooler (2013). 
Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 542-547. doi: 
10.1037/ 
A0031019.
Smallwood, J., Beach, E., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2008). 
Going AWOL in the brain: Mind wandering reduces cortical 
analysis of external events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
20(3), 458-469. doi: 10.1 l62/jocn.2008.20037.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K. S., Tipper, C., Giesbrecht, B., 
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., . . . Schooler, J. W. (2011). 
Pupillometric evidence for the decoupling of attention from 
perceptual input during offline thought. PloS One, 6(3), 
el8298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.OO 18298.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). 
When attention matters: The curious incident of the wan­
dering mind. Memory & Cognition, 36(6), 1144—1150. 
doi: 10.3758/MC.36.6.1144.
Smallwood, J., Nind, L., & O’Connor, R. C. (2009). When is your 
head at? An exploration of the factors associated with the tem­
poral focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and Cognition, 
75(1), 118-125. doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2008.11.004.
Smallwood, J., & O’Connor, R. C. (2011). Imprisoned by the 
past: Unhappy moods lead to a retrospective bias to mind 
wandering. Cognition & Emotion, 23(8), 1481—1490. 
doi: 10.1080/02699931.2010.545263.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 946-958. doi: 10.1037/ 
0033-2909.132.6.946.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. 
J., Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and 
the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness 
and 
Cognition, 
20(4), 
1120—1126. 
doi: 
10.1016/
j .concog.2010.12.017.
Smallwood, J. M., Baracaia, S. F., Lowe, M., & Obonsawin, M. 
(2003). Task unrelated thought whilst encoding informa­
tion. Consciousness and Cognition, 12(3), 452—484.
Smith, S. M., Fox, P. T., Miller, K. L., Glahn, D. C., Fox, P. M., 
Mackay, C. E., . . . Laird, A. R. (2009). Correspondence 
of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and 
rest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(31), 
13040-13045.
82
IN V E ST IG A T IN G  T H E  E L E M E N T S  OF T H O U G H T

Song, X., & Wang, X. (2012). Mind wandering in Chinese 
daily lives: An experience sampling study. PLoS One, 7(9), 
e44423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044423
Spreng, R. N., DuPre, E., Selarka, D., Garcia, J., Gojkovic,
S., 
Mildner, J., . . . Turner, G. R. (2014). Goal-congruent 
default network activity facilitates cognitive control. The 
Journal of Neuroscience, 34(42), 14108—14114.
Spreng, R. N., Gerlach, K. D., Turner, G. R., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2015). Autobiographical planning and the brain: Activation 
and its modulation by qualitative features. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(11), 2147—2157. doi: 10.1162/ 
jocn_a_00846.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. Neuroimage, 53(1), 303-317.
Stawarczyk, D., & D’Argembeau, A. (2015). Neural corre­
lates of personal goal processing during episodic future 
thinking and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. 
Human Brain Mapping, 36(8), 2928—2947. doi: 10.1002/ 
hbm.22818.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLoS One, 6(2), 
el6997-el6997.
Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (2007). The evolution of 
foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it unique to 
humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30(03), 299—313.
Tusche, A., Smallwood, J., Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. (2014). 
Classifying the wandering mind: Revealing the affective con­
tent of thoughts during task-free rest periods. Neuroimage, 
97, 107-116. doi: 10.10l6/j.neuroimage.2014.03.076.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2013). Mind wandering 
and reading comprehension: Examining the roles of working 
memory capacity, interest, motivation, and topic experience. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 39(3), 832.
Unsworth, N., McMillan, B. D., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. 
(2012). Everyday attention failures: An individual differences 
investigation. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 38(6), 1765-1772. doi: 10.1037/ 
a0028075.
Visser, M., Jefferies, E., Embleton, K. V., & Lambon-Ralph, M. 
A. (2012). Both the middle temporal gyrus and the ventral 
anterior temporal area are crucial for multimodal semantic 
processing: Distortion-corrected fMRI evidence for a double 
gradient of information convergence in the temporal lobes. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(8), 1766—1778.
Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C., 
& Wager, T. D. (2011). Large-scale automated synthesis of 
human functional neuroimaging data. Nature Methods, 5(8), 
665-670.
Yeo, B. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, 
D., Hollinshead, M., . . . Polimeni, J. R. (2011). The organi­
zation of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic 
functional connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106(3), 
1125-1165.
JONATHAN SMALLWOOD, DANIEL MARGULIES, BORIS C. BERNHARDT, AND ELIZABETH JEFFERIES
83


P A R T
Philosophical, 
Evolutionary, and 
Historical Perspectives


C H A P T E R
8
The Philosophy of Mind-Wandering
Zachary C. Irving and Evan Thompson
Abstract
This chapter provides an introduction to the philosophy of mind-wandering. It begins with a philosophical 
critique of the standard psychological definitions of mind-wandering as task-unrelated thought or 
stimulus-independent thought. Although these definitions have helped bring mind-wandering research 
onto center stage in psychology and cognitive neuroscience, they have substantial limitations. They do 
not account for the dynamics of mind-wandering, task-unrelated thought that does not qualify as mind­
wandering, or the ways in which mind-wandering can be task-related. The chapter reviews philosophical 
accounts that improve upon the current psychological definitions, in particular an account of mind­
wandering as “unguided thinking.” It critically assesses the view that mind-wandering can be defined 
as thought lacking meta-awareness and cognitive agency, as well as the view that mind-wandering is 
disunited thinking. The definition of mind-wandering as unguided thinking not only is conceptually and 
phenomenologically precise, but also can be operationalized in a principled way for empirical research.
Key Words: mind-wandering, psychology, neuroscience, cognition, task-unrelated thought, stimulus- 
independent thought, mental action
Before the twenty-first century, research on the 
wandering mind was “relegated to the backwaters 
of mainstream empirical psychology” (Smallwood 
Sc Schooler, 2006, p. 956). Not anymore. Indeed, 
some researchers have dubbed our time “the era 
of the wandering mind” (Callard, Smallwood, 
Golchert, 
Sc Margulies, 2013). Nevertheless, 
because the cognitive science of mind-wander­
ing is so young, foundational questions remain 
unanswered. In particular, there is no consensus 
about how to define mind-wandering (Christoff, 
2012; Irving, 2016), although recent philosophi­
cal work on mind-wandering has addressed this 
foundational issue (Carruthers, 2015; Dorsch, 
2015; Irving, 2016; Metzinger, 2013, 2015; 
Sutton, 2010; Thompson, 2015). In this chapter, 
we provide an introduction to the philosophy of 
mind-wandering, and we argue that mind-wan­
dering is best defined as “unguided thinking” 
(Irving, 2016).
We begin by criticizing the standard definitions 
of mind-wandering in psychology, according to 
which mind-wandering is “task-unrelated thought” 
or “stimulus-independent thought” (see Irving, 
2016). Scientists have used these definitions to pro­
duce important findings and bring mind-wandering 
into center stage in psychology and cognitive neu­
roscience (Schooler, Smallwood, Christoff, Handy, 
Reichle, Sc Sayette, 2011; Smallwood Sc Schooler, 
2006, 2015). Nevertheless, these definitions have 
substantial limitations that must be overcome in 
order for research to move forward. Specifically, 
the standard definitions do not account for (1) the 
dynamics of mind wandering, (2) task-unrelated 
thought that does not qualify as mind-wander­
ing, and (3) the ways that mind-wandering can be 
task-related.
We then survey three philosophical accounts 
that improve upon the current psychological 
definitions in various ways. We first present our
8 7

account of mind-wandering as “unguided think­
ing” (Irving, 2016). Next, we review Thomas 
Metzinger’s (2013) view that mind-wandering 
can be defined as thought lacking meta-awareness 
and cognitive agency, as well as Peter Carruthers’s 
(2015) and Fabian Dorsch’s (2015) definitions of 
mind-wandering as disunified thinking. We argue 
that these views are inadequate, and we show that 
our definition of mind-wandering as unguided 
thinking not only is conceptually and phenom­
enologically precise, but also can be operational­
ized in a principled way for empirical research.
Mind-Wandering as Task-Unrelated 
Thought or Stimulus-Independent 
Thought
Experientially, we all know mind-wandering 
when we see it. On the commute home, a pro­
grammers thoughts drift away from the sights and 
sounds of the subway car. At first she imagines the 
chicken she is brining for dinner. She can almost 
taste the thyme and rosemary when, suddenly, a line 
of code pops into her head. She plays with the code 
for a while, and then, smiling, remembers a joke she 
heard today . . . and so on. Clearly, the program­
mers mind is wandering. But what exactly makes 
her train of thought a case of mind-wandering? 
What precisely is mind-wandering?
Scientists in the empirical literature typically 
define mind-wandering as thought that is “task- 
unrelated” or “stimulus-independent,” or both. 
For example, Smallwood and Schooler define 
mind-wandering as “a shift in the contents of 
thought away from an ongoing task and/or 
from events in the external environment to self­
generated thoughts and feelings” (Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2015, p. 488). This definition correctly 
identifies paradigm cases of mind-wandering. For 
example, the programmer’s wandering thoughts 
are unrelated to her ongoing task— commuting 
home— and to her external environment— the 
subway car.
Nevertheless, this definition abstracts away 
from a central feature of mind-wandering, namely, 
its 
dynamics (Christoff, 2012; 
Irving, 
2016). 
Wandering trains of thought unfold in a distinc­
tive way over time. Experientially, the thoughts 
seem to drift: freely from one topic (a line of code) 
to another one (a joke). Irving (2016) notes that 
the term “mind-wandering” reflects these dynam­
ics: according to the Oxford English D ictionary 
(online), “to wander” means “to move hither and 
thither without fixed course or certain aim.” The
preceding definition of mind-wandering, however, 
focuses only on individual mental states and seeks to 
determine whether their content is related to one’s 
task or environment. This focus tells us nothing 
about how trains of thought unfold over time. As 
we now argue, this definition of mind-wandering in 
static terms is unsatisfactory in two ways: it cannot 
differentiate between mind-wandering and other 
kinds of task-unrelated and stimulus-independent 
thought; and it cannot account for the fact that 
mind-wandering can be task-related.
Varieties of Task-Unrelated Thought
Current definitions of mind-wandering cannot 
distinguish it from depressive rumination, which is 
typically task-unrelated and stimulus-independent, 
but which has dynamics that fundamentally differ 
from that of mind-wandering (Irving, 2016).
Rumination is “a mode of responding to distress 
that involves repetitively and passively focusing on 
symptoms of distress and on the possible causes and 
consequences of these symptoms. . . . People who 
are ruminating remain fixated on the problems and 
on their feelings about them” (Nolen-Hoeksema, 
Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008). Rumination is 
strongly associated with major depressive disorder, 
but also is found in the normal population (Zetsche 
& Joormann, 2011). For example, a non-depressed 
teacher might ruminate about how to discipline a 
problem student.
Rumination is frequently task-unrelated and 
stimulus independent. For example, when a teacher 
ruminates about a problem student during her 
commute home, her thoughts are unrelated to her 
current task (commuting home) and perceptual 
environment (the subway train). Current research­
ers, therefore, classify rumination as a form of 
mind-wandering (e.g., Smallwood & Schooler, 
2006, 2015).
Rumination, however, seems antithetical to 
mind-wandering. Consider the ruminating teacher 
in contrast to the programmer whose mind is wan­
dering. Both individuals have task-unrelated and 
stimulus-independent thoughts on their commute 
home. But the dynamics of their thoughts could 
hardly contrast more: whereas the teacher’s thoughts 
fixate on her problem student, the programmer’s 
thoughts drift from dinner to her computer code 
to a joke. In general, whereas rumination remains 
fixed on a single topic, mind-wandering drifts from 
one topic to the next. One has not wandered—  
“moved hither and thither”— if one has stayed on 
a single spot.
88
T H E  P H I L O S O P H Y  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Mind-Wandering and Goal-Directed 
Thought: A Dilemma
Current definitions of mind-wandering face 
a dilemma concerning the relationship between 
mind-wandering and cognitive tasks. On the one 
hand, if we say that all stimulus-independent think­
ing is mind-wandering, then some mind-wandering 
will be task-related, 
because some stimulus- 
independent thinking is goal-directed. On the other 
hand, if we say that mind-wandering must be task- 
unrelated thinking, then we run afoul of empirical 
evidence that suggests that mind-wandering can be 
task-related. Let us explain each alternative and its 
problems in turn.
Suppose we define mind-wandering as any and 
all stimulus-independent thought. Smallwood and 
Schooler adopt this view, because they define mind­
wandering as “a shift in the contents of thought 
away from an ongoing task and lor from  events in 
the external environm ent” (2015, p. 488, emphasis 
added). According to the most restrictive concep­
tion in the literature, stimulus-independent mental 
states not only are non-perceptual states, but also 
are unrelated to any immediately present perceptual 
stimuli (Schooler, Smallwood, Christoff, Handy, 
Reichle, & Sayette, 2011). For example, imagin­
ing or thinking about kicking the pigeon in front 
of you would not count as a stimulus-independent 
thought, but rather as a stimulus-related thought. 
Similarly, in a visual detection experiment, think­
ing “these pictures are flashing by too quickly,” 
would count as a stimulus-related thought, not a 
stimulus-independent one. Nevertheless, even this 
restricted specification of what is required for a 
thought to be stimulus-independent— that it be a 
non-perceptual state unrelated to any immediately 
present perceptual stimuli— classifies much of our 
goal-directed thought as stimulus-independent and 
hence (counterintuitively) as mind-wandering.
Consider a mathematician solving a proof in 
her head or a politician rehearsing a speech under 
her breath. Both women have thoughts unrelated 
to their external environments, so they count as 
mind-wandering, despite their thinking being goal- 
directed. The problem is that ones thoughts can­
not wander— “move hither and thither without 
fixed course or certain aim”— if they are directed 
by a goal. Indeed, theorists at least since Thomas 
Hobbes (1651) have defined mind-wandering by 
contrasting it to goal-directed cognition. In one 
of the first European philosophical discussions of 
mind-wandering, Hobbes states that thoughts that 
“wander . . . seem impertinent to each other, as in
a Dream” (1651, p. 20). In contrast, he wrote that 
goal-directed thinking is “more constant; as being 
regulated by some desire, and designe. For the 
impression made by such things as wee desire, or 
feare, is strong and permanent, or, (if it cease for a 
time,) of quick return” (1651, pp. 20-21).
To distinguish mind-wandering from goal- 
directed thought, we could maintain that all mind­
wandering is task-unrelated thought. According to 
this conception, neither the mathematician think­
ing about her proof nor the politician thinking 
about her speech is mind-wandering, because both 
are thinking about a task.
But now we face the second horn of the 
dilemma: 
Some 
m ind-wandering is 
task-related 
(Irving, 2016). Consider our vignette of a program­
mer whose mind is wandering on her commute 
home. Her thoughts drift to two personal goals—  
making dinner and writing code. Empirical evi­
dence indicates that our minds often wander in this 
way to personal goals (Klinger, 1999). Indeed, one 
study reported that at least 25% of a persons wan­
dering thoughts are about a “specific goal (defined 
as an objective or desired result that an individual 
endeavors to achieve)” (Baird, Smallwood, & 
Schooler, 2011, p. 1606). Another study found 
similar results with an experimentally induced goal. 
Participants were told that they would be quizzed 
on the names of US states after a “concentration 
task” (Morsella, Ben-Zeev, Lanska, & Bargh, 2010). 
When participants had this goal, approximately 
70% of their wandering thoughts were about geog­
raphy (especially US state names). In contrast, the 
minds of participants in control conditions wan­
dered to geography less than 10% of the time. This 
finding suggests that goals cause our minds to wan­
der to goal-relevant information.
To see how such findings bear on the current 
definitions of mind-wandering, we must consider 
how “task-unrelated” is defined in the scientific lit­
erature. Laboratory studies define mind-wandering 
as thought that is unrelated to the experimental 
task (e.g., Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, 
& Schooler, 2009). So far, so good: thoughts about 
personal goals such as making dinner are unrelated 
to the experimental task, and so correctly count as 
mind-wandering.
In studies of “real-world” mind-wandering 
outside the lab, however, “tasks” are operationally 
defined as w hatever the person is currently doing. 
For example, participants are asked whether “my 
mind had wandered to something other than 
w h at I  was doing 
(Kane et al., 2007, p. 616,
ZACHARY C. IR VIN G AND EVAN T H O M P S O N
89

emphasis added), or “are you thinking about 
something other than w h at you re currently doing?” 
(Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010, p. 932, emphasis 
added).
Here is the problem. W hat you are doing often 
includes working toward the personal goals to 
which your mind wanders. For example, if we ask 
you, “what are you doing?” it would be natural 
for you to answer, “planning dinner” or “prepar­
ing for a test.” Therefore, rather than supposing 
that mind-wandering is task-unrelated thought, we 
could argue that individuals switch tasks when their 
minds begin to wander. According to this view, 
when the programmer s mind wanders to computer 
code on the commute home, her task switches to 
coding from watching for her subway stop. Relative 
to the new task of coding, her thoughts about code 
count as task-related.
We can now bring the dilemma into full view. 
On the one hand, if we say that any and all stimulus- 
independent thought is mind-wandering, then we 
muddy the distinction between mind-wandering 
and goal-directed thinking. On the other hand, if 
we try to hold onto this distinction by supposing 
that mind-wandering must be task-unrelated think­
ing, then we contradict the empirical evidence that 
shows that task-related mind-wandering is not only 
possible but frequently actual.
Our diagnosis of the dilemma highlights the 
dynamics of mind-wandering. The distinction 
between 
mind-wandering 
versus 
goal-directed 
thinking does not concern whether m ental states 
are task-unrelated or stimulus-independent. Rather, 
the distinction concerns how trains o f thought unfold 
over time. When a mathematician solves a problem 
in her head, she maintains her attention on this 
problem for a prolonged period of time. In contrast, 
wandering thoughts “move hither and thither,” 
drifting between topics unchecked. Because cur­
rent definitions of mind-wandering abstract away 
from its dynamics, they cannot distinguish mind­
wandering from either rumination or goal-directed 
thinking. We now propose a theory that overcomes 
these limitations: mind-wandering is unguided 
thinking (Irving, 2016).
Mind-Wandering Is Unguided Thinking
We define mind-wandering as unguided think­
ing. This definition depends on a particular concept 
of guidance taken from the philosophy of action. 
Thought or behavior is said to be guided when it 
is monitored and regulated as it unfolds over time 
(Pacherie, 2008; Railton, 2006). Harry Frankfurt
provides a classic philosophical explanation of 
guidance:
Behavior is purposive when its course is subject to 
adjustments which compensate for the effects of 
forces which would otherwise interfere with the 
course of the behavior. . . . This is merely another 
way of saying that their course is guided. (Frankfurt, 
1978, pp. 159-160)
According to this account, “guidance” includes as 
part of its meaning a counterfactual aspect. To say 
that behavior is guided implies the following: Were 
ones behavior to go off course or deviate from some 
standard— as a result, for example, of interfering 
forces— one would alter that behavior in order to 
bring it back on course. In other words, as Frankfurt 
states, guidance implies adjusting behavior to com­
pensate for deviations. Thus the concept of guidance 
also includes a normative aspect: It implies the moni­
toring and correcting of behavior in relation to some 
norm or standard. For example, consider conversa­
tional interaction. In a conversation, you are guided 
to maintain a certain distance from your partner, 
for were your partner to stand too close to you, 
you would feel discomfited and drawn to step back 
(Brownstein & Madva, 2012). In other words, your 
behavior is guided in the sense that it compensates 
for deviations from the (culturally specific) standards 
or norms of conversation. It follows that for behav­
ior to be guided, there must be regulatory processes 
for bringing “deviant” behavior back on track.
We use this technical concept of guidance in 
order to specify what it means for thought to be 
guided. We propose that one’s thinking is guided 
only if one would feel pulled back to its topic, were 
one distracted from that topic. We also suppose 
that thinking can be guided in a variety of ways. 
Our thoughts can be guided back to goal-relevant 
information, as happens when we are goal-directed, 
or guided back to affectively salient information, 
as happens when we ruminate. Although different 
neurocognitive processes may underlie these two 
kinds of thinking, we argue that both kinds imple­
ment guidance in our technical sense.
Consider 
goal-directed 
thinking. 
In 
goal- 
directed thinking, one would feel pulled back to 
pursuing the goal were one to focus on information 
that seems irrelevant to it. Imagine a mathematician 
intently constructing a proof in a busy library. Her 
attentiveness manifests partly in how her attention 
is guided back from distractors. Were she to become 
momentarily distracted by students shuffling their 
papers, she would likely feel frustrated and pulled
90
T H E  P H I L O S O P H Y  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Table 8.1 Varieties of Guided Thinking
Goal-Directed
Thinking
Rumination
Guided toward
Goal-relevant
information
Distress, etc.
Implemented
thought
Cognitive control
Affective biases
Voluntary
Yes
Often not
Guided
Yes
Yes
Dynamically
stable
Yes
Yes
back to her work. Thus her mental activity is guided 
in its being regulated in relation to her goal.
We hypothesize that rumination also is guided. 
We predict that individuals who break away from 
their ruminative thoughts will feel pulled or drawn 
back to them. For thinking to be pulled or drawn 
back to a particular focus in this way is precisely for 
it to be counterfactually regulated and thus guided.
Our hypothesis that rumination is guided does 
not entail that it has the same psychological and neu­
ral profile as goal-directed attention (Table 8.1). On 
the contrary, as mentioned earlier, the genus “guided 
thought” allows for different species of guided think­
ing that are subserved by different brain processes. 
For example, top-down cognitive control processes 
appear to be largely responsible for the guidance of 
goal-directed thought (e.g., Corbetta & Shulman, 
2002; Kane & Engle, 2002), whereas affective biases 
of attention and memory (Todd, Cunningham, 
Anderson, &c Thompson, 2012) likely play a strong 
role in ones being guided toward ruminative thoughts. 
Furthermore, goal-directed attention is paradig- 
matically voluntary, whereas rumination typically is 
involuntary. The ruminator might complain, “I don’t 
want to think about distressing thoughts; they just 
keep pulling me back in.” Nevertheless, we propose 
that rumination and goal-directed attention are both 
guided in our technical sense: in either case, if individ­
uals were mentally distracted from their current focus, 
they would feel their thoughts pulled back to it.
That goal-directed thought and rumination are 
both guided explains why both kinds of thinking 
are dynamically stable. Our thoughts remain fixed 
on a restricted set of information because they are 
guided to remain there.
In contrast, we define mind-wandering as 
unguided thinking (Irving, 2016). Whereas a
guided thinker would feel pulled back if she were 
distracted from her current focus, an unguided 
thinker wanders from one topic (dinner) to another 
(computer code); her mind drifts unchecked, with 
nothing to pull her back to a particular focus.
This lack of guidance explains why mind­
wandering has an itinerant or unstable dynamics 
rather than a stable dynamics. Thoughts drift from 
topic to topic because nothing holds them in place. 
Thus our definition captures the dynamics of mind­
wandering. Moreover, we provide a principled way 
to distinguish between different varieties of task- 
unrelated and stimulus-independent thought: in 
rumination, thoughts are guided to remain on 
the same topic and hence exhibit greater dynami­
cal stability, whereas in mind-wandering, thoughts 
are unguided and hence exhibit greater dynamical 
instability.
Our account avoids 
the earlier-mentioned 
dilemma arising from the possibility of task- 
related mind-wandering. Recall that both wander­
ing thoughts and goal-directed thoughts can be 
related to everyday tasks, such as planning dinner 
or writing computer code. Because of this possibil­
ity, current definitions of mind-wandering cannot 
properly distinguish it from goal-directed thinking. 
According to our account, the difference between 
them concerns how trains of thought are guided 
as they unfold over time. Goal-directed thinking is 
guided to remain on the same topic (e.g., writing 
code). Mind-wandering is unguided, so it is free 
to drift from one topic to the next. Its dynamics 
are unguided even when one’s mind wanders to a 
personal goal (such as writing computer code). The 
crucial point is that if one’s thoughts were to drift 
onward (e.g., to a joke one heard today), one would 
not be drawn back to a particular focus.1
Our definition of mind-wandering as unguided 
thinking overcomes the limitations of previous 
definitions in the empirical literature. Our defini­
tion is based on an account wherein stretches of 
mind-wandering consist of trains of thought whose 
dynamics are unguided. This account, however, is 
not the only account of mind-wandering in the 
philosophical literature. We will now review two 
other accounts and critically assess them in relation 
to our own.
Mind-Wandering as Thought Lacking 
“Veto Control”
Thomas Metzinger (2013; see also Metzinger, 
Chapter 9 in this volume) proposes a theory 
of mind-wandering that helps to explain the
ZACHARY C. IR VIN G AND EVAN T H O M P S O N
9i

relationship between mind-wandering and cases 
of goal-directed thinking, such as a mathematician 
constructing a proof.2 Metzinger allows that mind­
wandering can be goal-directed, and so his theory 
can accommodate the evidence that our minds fre­
quently wander to our personal goals. Nevertheless, 
he maintains that mind-wandering differs from 
fully “autonomous” forms of goal-directed thinking, 
such as a mathematician consciously constructing a 
proof. In Metzinger’s view, goal-directed thinking is 
“mentally autonomous” only if one has the kind of 
cognitive control over one’s thoughts that he calls 
“veto control.”
The concept of “veto control” comes from cogni­
tive science. It refers to the persons ability to “with­
hold a . . . [behavior]3 whose preparation and path 
towards execution has already begun” (Filevich, 
Kuhn, & Haggard, 2012, p. 1108). Consider 
the following example in which you exercise veto 
control:
You are posting a letter, and are just about to release 
your grip on it and let it fall into the post box, when 
you suddenly get the feeling that you should check 
whether you put a stamp on the envelope. You 
tighten your grip and inspect the letter. (Filevich 
etal.,2012, p. 1108)
Note that you would have possessed veto con­
trol even if you had released the letter, because veto 
control requires only that you are able— and know 
that you are able— to suspend the relevant behavior 
(Metzinger, 2013, p. 4).
Metzinger argues that when our minds wan­
der, we lack veto control over our thoughts. Thus 
he distinguishes mind-wandering from autono­
mous goal-directed thinking that we can suspend 
at will— for example, consciously constructing a 
math proof. In support of this view, Metzinger 
appeals to evidence that mind-wandering unfolds 
without meta-awareness (Schooler et al., 2011).4 
“Meta-awareness” is defined as one’s explicit 
knowledge of the current contents of thought 
or 
one’s 
current 
conscious 
state 
(Schooler, 
Smallwood, Christoff, Handy, Reichle, & Sayette,
2011). Thus meta-aware mental states are higher- 
order mental states that are about one’s ongoing 
or just past mental states. One example is a lucid 
dreamer’s meta-awareness that she is dreaming 
(see Windt and Voss, Chapter 29 in this volume). 
Another example is the sudden realization that 
your mind was wandering.
Metzinger’s argument has two premises. First, 
meta-awareness is necessary for veto control over a
mental state or process (Metzinger, 2013, p. 3): A 
person cannot knowingly terminate something of 
which she is unaware. (Suppose I discover that you 
were not paying attention and I ask, “Why didn’t 
you stop your mind from wandering earlier?” You 
might reasonably respond, “I didn’t know my mind 
was wandering until just now.”) Second, Metzinger 
contends that whenever a person’s mind is wan­
dering, she lacks meta-awareness of her wander­
ing thoughts. From these two premises, it follows 
that people lack veto control over their wandering 
thoughts. Thus, Metzinger’s account suggests that 
mind-wandering can be defined as thinking that 
lacks meta-awareness and veto control.
The problem with this account is that the sec­
ond premise— that mind-wandering always occurs 
without meta-awareness— is 
questionable. 
The 
evidence suggests that although mind-wandering 
sometimes occurs without meta-awareness, this is 
not always the case (Christoff et al., 2009; Schooler, 
Smallwood, Christoff, Handy, Reichle, & Sayette, 
2011; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). Many studies 
of mind-wandering use self-reports to assess meta­
awareness. Individuals who catch themselves mind­
wandering or who report that their minds were 
wandering upon being probed are asked whether 
they were previously aware that their mind was 
wandering. For example, Smallwood and colleagues 
gave participants the following instructions in order 
to distinguish between aware (“tuning out”) versus 
unaware (“zoning out”) mind-wandering:
Tuning OuP. Sometimes when your mind wanders, 
you are aware that your mind has drifted, but for 
whatever reason you still continue to read. This is 
what we refer to as “tuning out”—i.e., when your 
mind wanders and you know it all along.
Zoning OuP. Other times when your mind wanders, 
you don’t realize that your thoughts have drifted away 
from the text until you catch yourself. This is what 
we refer to as “zoning out”—i.e., when your mind 
wanders, but you don’t realize this until you catch it. 
(Smallwood, McSpadden, & Schooler, 2007, p. 533)
Across all conditions, Smallwood and colleagues 
found that tuning out occurred as frequently or 
more frequently than zoning out. Therefore, it may 
be that mind-wandering occurs at least as often 
with meta-awareness as without it (cf. Smallwood 
et al., 2004; Smallwood, Beach, Schooler, & 
Handy, 2008).
Metzinger argues that cases of apparently auton­
omous mind-wandering involve the mere “illusion
92
T H E  P H I L O S O P H Y  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

of control” (Metzinger, 2013; cf. Schooler et al.,
2011), so he might question the reliability of reports 
of “tuning out” (mind-wandering with awareness). 
Nevertheless, tuning out and zoning out have dif­
ferent behavioral and neural profiles (Schooler 
et al., 2011). For example, compared to tuning 
out, zoning out is associated with better reading 
comprehension (Smallwood et al. 2008) and more 
activation of default network and executive regions 
(Christoff et al. 2009) that are generally associated 
with mind-wandering (Fox et al. 2015). It is not 
clear how to explain these differences, if reports of 
tuning out are entirely illusory.
Another limitation of Metzinger s theory is that 
it neglects the dynamics of mind-wandering. Veto 
control and the presence versus absence of meta­
awareness have no essential connection to how ones 
thoughts unfold over time, according to his account. 
Therefore, his account cannot distinguish mind­
wandering from rumination. Ruminators often 
seem to lack meta-awareness and hence veto con­
trol over their thoughts. For example, a commuter 
might fixate on her problems and distress without 
realizing that she has stopped watching for her sub­
way stop. Because she is unaware that she has begun 
to ruminate, she cannot disengage from (veto) her 
distressing thoughts and bring herself back on task. 
Indeed, trait ruminators show impaired disengage­
ment across a range of tasks (Whitmer & Gotlib,
2013). This finding suggests that rumination fre­
quently unfolds without veto control. Metzinger s 
theory does not have the resources to explain how 
mind-wandering differs from this antithetical phe­
nomenon of rumination.
Our account of mind-wandering as unguided 
thinking 
therefore 
has 
two 
advantages 
over 
Metzingers account (Irving, 2016, pp. 567-568). 
First, we allow that mind-wandering can unfold with 
or without meta-awareness. During cases of tuning 
out— “when your mind wanders and you know it 
all along” (Smallwood et al., 2007, p. 533)— we 
propose that you have meta-awareness of and thus 
veto control over your stream of unguided thoughts. 
Second, our account captures the dynamics of mind­
wandering. Accordingly, we can explain how rumi­
nation and mind-wandering differ: Whereas the 
former is guided, the latter is not.
Mind-Wandering as Disunified Thinking
Peter Carruthers (2015) and Fabian Dorsch 
(2015) independently have proposed accounts of 
mind-wandering that rival the explanatory power 
of our own account. We focus on Carrutherss
theory, but our critical discussion applies to both 
philosophers. Carruthers discusses mind-wandering 
because it provides an apparent counterexample to 
his view that all thinking is active and goal-directed. 
He concedes that mind-wandering does “not seem, 
introspectively, to be active in nature. Sometimes 
one’s thoughts change direction for no apparent 
reason (especially when one’s mind is wandering)” 
(Carruthers, 2015, p. 166). Therefore, he must 
explain away the apparent difference between mind­
wandering and goal-directed thought.
Carruthers explains away this apparent difference 
by drawing an analogy between mind-wandering 
and wandering around a garden: “Mind wander­
ing is active, I suggest, in much the same sense that 
someone physically wandering around in a garden 
is active” (Carruthers, 2015, pp. 167-168). Dorsch 
(2015) draws a similar analogy between mind­
wandering and physically wandering around a city. 
Both philosophers maintain that short stretches of 
physical and mental wandering are active. As you 
wander around a garden you might actively smell a 
rose or wish upon a dandelion. Similarly, you might 
actively plan dinner or write code while your mind 
wanders. Nevertheless, longer stretches of physi­
cal and mental wandering seem passive because no 
overarching goal unifies your thoughts. Given this 
point, Carruthers and Dorsch can explain away the 
apparent difference between mind-wandering and 
paradigm cases of goal-directed thought, such as a 
mathematician solving a proof in her head. Whereas 
the mathematician’s thoughts are all unified under a 
single goal (solving the proof), the mind-wanderer’s 
thoughts concern many goals (planning dinner, writ­
ing code, and so on). Thus mind-wandering seems 
more passive than goal-directed thought, though 
both are active when we look at them closely enough.
Carrutherss and Dorsch’s discussions suggest 
that mind-wandering be defined as disunified 
thinking. A sequence of thoughts constitutes mind­
wandering if and only if those thoughts are not 
unified under a common goal. This definition has 
major advantages. First, it captures the dynamics 
of mind-wandering: by definition, our wandering 
thoughts are dynamically unstable in the sense that 
they are not unified under a common goal. Second, 
this definition can account for the puzzling relation­
ship between mind-wandering and goal-directed 
thought. On the one hand, short stretches of mind­
wandering are related to tasks (such as preparing for 
a quiz), as the empirical evidence suggests. On the 
other hand, mind-wandering contrasts with goal- 
directed thinking because it is disunified.
ZACHARY C. IR VIN G AND EVAN T H O M P S O N
93

Despite the advantages of this conception of 
mind-wandering, it has a problematic consequence, 
which we can bring out in the following example. 
Imagine someone who works for 10 minutes com­
posing part of a lecture, then opens his web browser 
and responds to some emails for 6 minutes, and 
then looks outside the window, studying the pigeons 
across the street for 90 seconds. Furthermore, 
suppose that the person attentively pursues each 
goal. Nevertheless, no overarching goal unifies 
this whole sequence of thoughts, so they count as 
mind-wandering. Shifting from goal to goal in this 
way seems commonplace. Therefore, if we define 
mind-wandering as 
disunified 
thinking, 
most 
trains of goal-directed thinking will count as mind­
wandering. But then it seems that Carruthers and 
Dorsch have not captured the difference between 
mind-wandering and goal-directed thinking at all.
A deeper problem lurks in the vicinity. Whether 
thinking counts as disunified, and thus as mind­
wandering, depends on the scale of observation 
or how far we zoom out (Figure 8.1). Suppose we 
examine the persons thoughts in the previous exam­
ple. In the first five minutes, his attention is wholly 
guided by the goal of composing his lecture. During 
that interval, his attention is unified and his mind is 
not wandering. But if we zoom out to a seventeen- 
minute interval, we find thoughts about three sepa­
rate goals— composing a lecture, writing emails, and 
watching pigeons. From this broader perspective, his 
attention is disunified and his mind is wandering. 
The problem is that we lack principled reasons for 
deciding how far to zoom out, and therefore we lack 
principled reasons for saying whether his mind is 
wandering at any given point in time.
This consequence undermines the scientific 
methods we use to study mind-wandering. These 
methods require that we be able to specify when 
the mind is wandering versus when it is not, so that
Wandering
Goal-Directed
Compose Lecture
Write Emails
Study Pigeons
Time
Figure 8.1. Disunity and zoom.
we can study the distinctive features of M IND ­
WANDERING (such as ITS contents and neural 
correlates) versus other kinds of THINKING. For 
example, Christoff et al. (2009) compared neural 
activation when individuals were concentrating on 
a task versus mentally wandering away from it. If 
we define mind-wandering as disunified thinking, 
then we cannot use these methods, because if we 
zoom out, then the on-task thoughts are prob­
ably going to count as wandering thoughts. No 
methodological innovation could solve this prob­
lem. In other words, given the definition of mind­
wandering as disunified thinking, there will be no 
principled way to distinguish mind-wandering 
from goal-directed thought. Therefore, this defini­
tion is a non-starter for the cognitive science of 
mind-wandering.
In contrast, our definition of mind-wandering 
as unguided thought does not face these problems. 
We provide a principled way to distinguish goal- 
directed and wandering thought: The former is 
guided; the latter is not. Therefore, our definition 
is preferable on conceptual grounds as well as being 
more amenable to empirical investigation.
Conclusion
Psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists, and 
philosophers should be partners in the scientific 
investigation of mind-wandering. The challenges 
facing this young field are not only empirical, but 
also conceptual and theoretical. Our chapter begins 
with a philosophical critique of the most widely 
accepted definitions of mind-wandering in cogni­
tive psychology. This critique stems from the idea 
that mind-wandering is fundamentally dynamic. 
Our definition uses the technical philosophi­
cal notion of “guidance” to capture its dynam­
ics. Compared to the other extant philosophical 
definitions, our definition of mind-wandering as 
unguided thought is not only more theoretically 
defensible, but also more scientifically tractable. 
Putting this definition to work in cognitive science 
will require close collaborations with psychologists 
and cognitive neuroscientists. For example, diffi­
cult questions remain about how to measure the 
dynamics of mind-wandering (Christoff, 2012) and 
how to relate the philosophical notion of guid­
ance to dynamical neural networks and psycho­
logical processes (Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2016). The path forward requires 
that psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists, and 
philosophers work together to advance our under­
standing of mind-wandering.
9 4
T H E  P H I L O S O P H Y  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Notes
1. One might worry that our view characterizes mind­
wandering as too disordered. Although mind-wandering is 
certainly less stable than goal-directed or ruminative thought, 
our wandering thoughts are not entirely random: for exam­
ple, our minds often wander to personal goals and concerns 
(as noted earlier) and between associated thoughts. For simi­
lar reasons, we elsewhere propose a neuroscientific model 
on which the dynamics of mind-wandering are somewhat 
constrained, albeit less so than goal-directed or ruminative 
thoughts (Christoff, Irving, et al., 2016). Fortunately, our 
philosophical model of mind-wandering is compatible with 
the presence of dynamic constraints on mind-wandering. 
This is because guidance is not the only way that thought can 
be constrained. Mind-wandering can be probabilistically con­
strained, in that we often think of particular things (e.g., close 
associations, personal goals and concerns). Yet we contend 
that when the mind wanders, no guidance mechanism holds 
our thoughts in place; when the mind wanders to unusual 
ideas, or from one topic to another, nothing pulls us back. 
See Irving (2016) for an in-depth discussion of the differ­
ent types of constraints on thought, including those that are 
present and absent during mind-wandering.
2. Much of the material for this section is adapted from Irving 
(2016).
3. Filevich and colleagues originally defined “veto control” as 
the ability to “withhold an action.” We have changed the 
definition, replacing “action” with “behavior,” because veto 
control arguably is necessary for action (as opposed to mere 
movement). In that case, defining “veto control” as the abil­
ity to withhold an action would trivially imply that one never 
lacks veto control.
4. Thus Metzinger expands upon Smallwood and Schooler’s 
(2006) thesis that mind-wandering differs from goal- 
directed thought because the former always begins without 
meta-awareness.
References
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 1604— 
1611. http://doi.org/10.10l6/jxoncog.2011.08.007
Brownstein, M., & Madva, A. (2012). The normativity of auto- 
maticity. Mind & Language, 27(4), 410—434.
Callard, F., Smallwood, J., Golchert, J., & Margulies, D. S. 
(2013). The era of the wandering mind? Twenty-first cen­
tury research on self-generated mental activity. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4(891).
Carruthers, P. (2013). The centered mind: What the science of 
working memory shows us about the nature of human thought. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51—59.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goal- 
directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), 201-15. http://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrn755
Dorsch, F. (2015). Focused daydreaming and mind-wandering. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 6(4), 791—813.
Filevich, E., Kuhn, S., & Haggard, P. (2012). Intentional inhi­
bition in human action: The power of no. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(4), 1107—1118.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. NeuroImage, 111( 1), 
611-621.
Frankfurt, H. (1978). The problem of action. American 
Philosophical Quarterly, 15(2), 157—162.
Hobbes, T. (1651). Leviathan, or the matter, forme and power of a 
commonwealth ecclesiasticall and civil. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Irving, Z. C. (2016). Mind-wandering is unguided attention: 
Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 173(2), 547-571.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & and Thomas R. Kwapil. (2007). For whom 
the mind wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study 
of working memory and executive control in daily life. 
Psychological Science, 18(7), 614-621.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal cortex 
in working-memory capacity, executive attention, and gen­
eral fluid intelligence: An individual-differences perspective. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 637-671. http://doi. 
org/10.3758/BF03196323
Killingsworth, M. a, & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering mind 
is an unhappy mind. Science (New York, N.Y), 330(6006), 
932. http://doi.org/10T 126/science.l 192439
Klinger, E. (1999). Thought flow: Properties and mechanisms 
underlying shifts in content. In J. A. Singer and P. Salovey 
(Eds.), At play in the fields of consciousness: Essays in honor 
of ferome L. Singer (pp. 29—50). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4(931).
Metzinger, T. (2015). M-Autonomy. fournal of Consciousness 
Studies, 22(11-12), 270-302.
Morsella, E., Ben-Zeev, A., Lanska, M., & Bargh, J. A. (2010). 
The spontaneous thoughts of the night: How future tasks 
breed intrusive cognitions. Social Cognition, 28(5), 641—650. 
http://doi.Org/10.1521/soco.2010.28.5.64l
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). 
Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
3, 400-424.
Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A concep­
tual framework. Cognition, 107(1), 179-217. http://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cognition.2007.09.003
Railton, P. (2006). Normative guidance. Oxford Studies in 
Metaethics, 1, 3—34.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 75(7), 319-326. http://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.tics.2011.05.006
Smallwood, J., Beach, E., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2008). 
Going AWOL in the brain: Mind wandering reduces cortical
ZACHARY C. IR VIN G AND EVAN T H O M P S O N
95

analysis of external events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.,
20(3), 458-469.
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F., Sudberry, 
M., O’Connor, R., & Obonsawin, M. (2004). Subjective 
experience and the attentional lapse: Task engagement and 
disengagement during sustained attention. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 73(4), 657-690.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). The 
lights are on but no one’s home: Meta-awareness and the 
decoupling of attention when the mind wanders. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 14(3), 527-533. http://doi.org/10.3758/ 
BF03194102
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 946-958.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Sutton, J. (2010). Carelessness and inattention: Mind­
wandering and the physiology of fantasy from Locke
to Hume. In C. T. Wolfe & O. Gal (Eds.), The body as 
object and instrument of knowledge (pp. 243—263). New 
York: Springer.
Thompson, E. (2015). Waking, dreaming, being: New light on the 
self and consciousness from neuroscience, meditation, and phi­
losophy. New York: Columbia University Press.
Todd, R. M., Cunningham, W. A., Anderson, A. K., & 
Thompson, E. (2012). Affect-biased attention as emo­
tion regulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(7), 
365-372.
Whitmer, A. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2013). An attentional scope model 
of rumination. Psychological Bulletin, 139(5), 1036-1061. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0030923
Zetsche, U., & Joormann, J. (2011). Components of inter­
ference 
control 
predict 
depressive 
symptoms 
and 
rumination cross-sectionally and at six months follow­
up. Journal of Behavior 
Therapy and Experimental 
Psychiatry, 42( 1), 65-73. http://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.jbtep. 
2010.06.001
96
T H E  P H I L O S O P H Y  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

C H A P T E R
9
Why Is Mind-Wandering Interesting 
for Philosophers?
Thomas Metzinger
Abstract
This chapter explores points of contact between philosophy of mind and scientific approaches to 
spontaneous thought. While offering a series of conceptual instruments that might prove helpful for 
researchers on the empirical research frontier, it begins by asking what the explanandum for theories 
of mind-wandering is, how one can conceptually individuate single occurrences of this specific target 
phenomenon, and how one might arrive at a more fine-grained taxonomy. The second half of this 
contribution sketches some positive proposals as to how one might understand mind-wandering on 
a conceptual level, namely, as a loss of mental autonomy resulting in involuntary mental behavior, as 
a highly specific epistemic deficit relating to self-knowledge, and as a discontinuous phenomenological 
process in which one’s conscious “unit of identification” is switched.
Key Words: mental autonomy, mind-wandering, philosophy of mind, self-knowledge, consciousness, 
mental behavior, unit of identification
The main goal of this chapter is to isolate and 
draw attention to a number of conceptual issues 
in the now burgeoning empirical literature on 
mind-wandering. This is only a first outline of such 
issues and is not intended to be an exhaustive list. 
However, I am convinced that such philosophical 
questions are not only relevant, but that— on a dif­
ferent level of analysis— they may reveal potentially 
rewarding targets for future research. One way to 
view philosophy of mind is as a meta-theoretical 
enterprise: While first-order experimental work tries 
to get as close as possible to the target phenomenon 
itself, the second-order theoretical work of philoso­
phers focuses on methodological issues and the con­
ceptual structure of first-order, data-driven theories. 
A philosophical approach will therefore mostly be 
not about mind-wandering itself, but rather about 
the concepts that we use and develop to understand 
it. In practice, of course, both levels of investiga­
tion are deeply intertwined; empirical researchers 
have a strong interest in methodological issues and
a tendency to make implicit conceptual background 
assumptions, while philosophers may not only offer 
novel conceptual instruments to experimentalists, 
but also formulate empirical hypotheses themselves.
Philosophers of mind often try to contribute to a 
more comprehensive and unified general framework 
that can guide and inspire empirical research, and of 
course they always have their own, more abstract, 
questions in the back of their minds. From a philo­
sophical perspective, it has proven to be interesting 
and fruitful to select specific, increasingly well- 
researched target phenomena and to see what can 
be learned about them from the empirical literature. 
By always keeping an eye on the value of findings as 
“bottom-up constraints” for a more general, com­
prehensive model of the human mind, while at the 
same time, in a critical vein, trying to uncover con­
ceptual inconsistencies or unwarranted background 
assumptions that may block further progress, the 
philosopher can make important contributions to 
the field. Interdisciplinary cooperation works best
9 7

when focused on a specific target phenomenon like 
conscious experience in virtual reality (Metzinger, 
forthcoming), dreaming (Metzinger, 2013b), out- 
of-body experiences (Metzinger, 2009), or identity 
disorders (Metzinger, 2004), and this short chap­
ter can be seen as another installment in a series of 
attempts to lay some conceptual foundations for an 
empirically grounded theory of self-consciousness.
In the first three sections of this chapter I will 
ask many questions. In doing this, my aim is to 
flag some epistemic targets of potential interest for 
an interdisciplinary readership. I will ask what the 
explanandum for theories of mind-wandering is, 
how we can conceptually individuate single occur­
rences of our target phenomenon, and how we 
might arrive at a more fine-grained taxonomy. In the 
three subsequent sections (constituting the second 
half of the chapter), I will suggest some answers, 
sketching a series of positive proposals as to how 
we might understand mind-wandering on a con­
ceptual level: as a loss of m ental autonomy resulting 
in involuntary mental behavior; as a highly specific 
epistemic deficit relating to self-knowledge; and as 
a phenomenological process in which our conscious 
“unit of identification” is switched (“Ul-switching” 
is a new technical term I will introduce in the final 
section).1
The Explanandum
What, exactly, is it that we want to explain in 
scientific research on mind-wandering? Is the tar­
get phenomenon really a unitary phenomenon, for 
instance a distinct type or class of mental processes? 
And what would therefore count as an explanation 
of the phenomenon in its entirety?
Let us take the widespread notion of “spon­
taneous, stimulus-independent or task-unrelated 
thought” (Antrobus, 1968; Giambra, 1989) as a 
starting point. It is important to note how, in its ori­
gin, “spontaneity” is an exclusively phenomenologi­
cal concept, because it is based on the introspective 
experience of an apparently uncaused, subjectively 
unexpected, and sudden onset of conscious thought. 
“Spontaneity” is therefore not an objective prop­
erty, but rather an entirely subjective characteristic 
of certain thoughts. It therefore cannot function 
as an empirical demarcation criterion to define 
the boundaries of our target domain. Empirically, 
it is plausible to assume that there will always be 
unconscious neural precursors of mind-wandering. 
These could, for example, be specific introspectively 
inaccessible goal representations that drive the high- 
level phenomenology of mind-wandering (Klinger,
2013), such as postponed goal-states that have 
been environmentally cued by goal-related stimuli 
under high cognitive load (Cohen, 2013; McVay & 
Kane, 2009). To understand the overall process, we 
may have to adopt the “dolphin model of cogni­
tion”: Just as dolphins cross the boundary between 
water and air, thought processes often cross the bor­
der between conscious and unconscious processing, 
and in both directions. For example, “spontane­
ously occurring” chains of cognitive states may have 
their origin in unconscious goal-commitments trig­
gered by external stimuli, then transiently become 
integrated into the conscious self-model for intro­
spective availability and selective control, only to 
disappear into another unconscious “swimming 
bout” below the surface. Conversely, information 
available in the conscious self-model may become 
repressed into an unconscious, modularized form 
of self-representation where it does not endan­
ger self-esteem or overall integrity (Pliushch & 
Metzinger, 2015).
Conceptually, to take the “spontaneity” charac­
terizing the onset of a mind-wandering episode seri­
ously as an objective property of the human mind 
would mean to accept it as causally indeterminate—  
and therefore inaccessible to standard experimen­
tal methods.2 On a physical or functional level of 
description, to call something “spontaneous” means 
to describe it as “uncaused” and “lawless”— and 
doing so could even be seen as a form of hand- 
waving. For this reason, the first semantic element 
in “spontaneous, task-unrelated thought” will not 
help us in isolating the explanandum.
A more moderate and nuanced account could 
attempt to describe degrees of spontaneity and ana­
lyze them as degrees of constraint satisfaction on 
different levels of analysis. For example, one tra­
ditional philosophical distinction is between the 
“content” and the “vehicle” of a mental process. We 
could then separately investigate constraints govern­
ing the content of thought, as well as the constraints 
determining the dynamic neural carriers (i.e., the 
“vehicles”) of this content, and we could accord­
ingly distinguish different degrees of constraint- 
satisfaction. As Christoff et al. (2016, p. 719) have 
proposed, “spontaneous thought” could then be 
characterized by the absence of strong content- 
constraints imposed either by deliberate cognitive 
control and/or “automatic” constraints. Automatic 
constraints would presumably influence the neural 
carriers in a functionally more direct way, for exam­
ple by mechanisms implicitly processing affective or 
sensory salience.
98
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

Importantly, however, fundamental method­
ological issues remain, because one has to distin­
guish between the representational content of a 
given neurodynamical state as ascribed from a third- 
person perspective and as introspectively reported 
from a first-person perspective. First, the content 
of a mind-wandering episode might be described 
as “unconstrained” relative to some theory of men­
tal representation or under a specific mathematical 
model of neural computation; it would then be a 
property ascribed by an external observer. On the 
other hand, if the “content” is what can be intro­
spectively accessed and reported by experimental 
subjects— for example, by asking, “Was your mind 
moving about freely?”— then subjectivity is back in. 
Researchers get a statistical measure of self-reports 
and can fruitfully and legitimately employ what 
Daniel Dennett calls the “heterophenomenologi- 
cal method” (Dennett, 1991, pp. 72-81), but are 
ultimately still dealing with a phenomenological 
construct.
One path toward a solution may consist in ana­
lyzing “spontaneity” not as a phenomenological or a 
metaphysical property of certain thought processes, 
but as an epistemic feature: Perhaps it is a systematic 
lack of knowledge, a specific form of introspective 
blindness characterizing a very large portion of con­
scious thought. As Smallwood and Schooler (2015, 
p. 491) put it, “the spontaneous occurrence of mind 
wandering means that the causal path that links the 
experience to ongoing processes and outcomes is 
opaque.” If this is correct, then one way to trans­
form “spontaneity” into a proper, experimentally 
tractable explanandum for research would be to 
isolate exactly those causal conditions in the brain 
that make the causal precursors of a given cogni­
tive event functionally available for introspective 
attention and verbal report. “Opaque” then means 
that there is no internal model of the causal path 
that can be introspectively accessed, and this would 
also give us a first functional-level notion of “spon­
taneity.” We could then ask what exactly the neural 
mechanisms creating an internal model of what phi­
losophers call “horizontal mental causation” (i.e., 
the linear causation of one mental event by another) 
are. What is the domain or the subset of cognitive 
processes on which these mechanisms operate? How 
do they break down? Can they be experimentally 
modulated?
Perhaps it is never the case that what one ascribes 
or introspectively reports as the “content” of an 
episode actually causes the “content” of the next 
episode. Alternatively, perhaps it is only sometimes
the case; possibly our internal, introspectively acces­
sible model of horizontal mental causation simply 
is a misrepresentation most of the time— a high- 
level confabulation that has proved to be adap­
tive? It is important to understand that all we can 
ever introspectively attend to is a m odel of our own 
cognitive processing. We never have a mysterious 
“direct” form of access to the cognitive processes in 
our heads, because all knowledge— including self- 
knowledge— always is knowledge under a represen­
tation. Therefore, the core target for research may 
actually be the way in which our brains model the 
causal relations between their own inner states, the 
way the system creates an internal model of itself by 
trying to predict and “explain away” its own men­
tal behavior. A brain that was functionally unable 
to generate dynamic models of horizontal mental 
causation could only support a phenomenology of 
one “spontaneously occurring” mental content after 
another. An organism with such a brain could expe­
rience mental causation together with a high degree 
of “freedom,” subjective unpredictability, or a lack 
of cognitive control in terms of rational connec­
tion between content elements, but in the complete 
absence of an internal self-model explicitly portray­
ing horizontal causal chains connecting mental 
events, the cognitive first-person perspective would 
simply dissolve. For such an organism, there would 
never be a coherent train of thoughts, only events, 
and never a unified process in terms of a temporally 
extended cognitive Gestalt. The self-conscious mind 
would be largely unintelligible to itself, a constant 
source of surprise and uncertainty— it would be 
hard for the organism harboring it to experience it 
as its own mind. It could therefore never develop an 
inner image of the system carrying it as an embod­
ied “thinker of thoughts,” as an entity that is not 
only a bodily, but also a cognitive agent. Perhaps 
some animals have a cognitive phenomenology 
of exactly this kind, unfolding on a more robust 
and stable platform of bodily and emotional self- 
consciousness. Our brains are different.
Now take the second semantic element, “task- 
unrelatedness.” Philosophers will immediately see 
that there is a very strong implicit background 
assumption hiding behind this idea: that human 
beings pursue one and only one task at a time. But 
we know that this is false. A biological organism 
has multiple tasks and many problems to be solved 
at the same time— it is continuously faced with a 
multitude of challenges that have to be met. Any 
higher biological organism is a paradigmatic exam­
ple of parallel processing, and there are many levels
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
9 9

of functional granularity on which it must continu­
ously operate— sustaining its existence; preserving 
homeostatic stability; continuous prediction error 
minimization relative to the dynamic, internal self­
model created by the brain; successfully achieving 
procreation; rising in a social dominance hierarchy 
by effectively deceiving self and others (Pliushch 
& Metzinger, 2015; von Hippel & Trivers, 2011). 
At any given point in time, in the organism’s cen­
tral nervous system, there will be multiple goal- 
representations competing for the control of overt 
behavior, for the focus of attention, and for high- 
level cognitive. In addition, for embodied agents 
like ourselves who constantly refine and update the 
interoceptive layers of their self-model, there never 
really is anything like an absence of internal con­
straints {pace Andrews-Hanna, Irving, Fox, Spreng, 
& Christoff, Chapter 13 in this volume).
An analogous point holds for the notion of 
“stimulus-unrelated thought.” As the human self­
model is functionally anchored in elementary pro­
cesses of bioregulation (Metzinger, 2003a, 2014), 
no form of cognitive processing is ever fully dis­
embodied or independent of the continuous bom­
bardment by stimuli originating in the interior of 
the body. Interoceptive input, proprioception, 
the continuous flow of vestibular information, or 
the “background buzz” generated by autonomous 
activity in the input-independent layers of the 
body-schema are examples of permanent sources of 
stimulation. These internal sources of stimulation 
and constant perturbation influence not only bodily 
self-awareness, but also our emotional self-model, 
thereby setting an internal context. We may not be 
subjectively aware of this context at all times, and we 
may be even less aware of the detailed causal path­
ways by which it shapes and relates to the contents 
of our thoughts, but it certainly exists. Upon closer 
inspection, the notion of “stimulus-unrelatedness” 
really relates to a phenomenal property: the con­
scious experience of our ongoing thoughts as not 
being caused by something subjectively represented 
as belonging to the extracorporeal environment—  
to an external stimulus. In order to bridge the gap 
between an implicitly phenomenological concept 
and a productive functional analysis, we could pro­
ceed from looking at the content to focusing on the 
physical dynamics on which this content “rides”—  
for example, by looking at the way in which the 
brain predicts incoming stimuli by “canceling out” 
sensory input.
Similarly, “task-unrelatedness” may also ulti­
mately only be a phenomenological property, one
that is derived from the high-level introspective 
experience of only being able to solve one problem 
at a time. A strong metaphysical interpretation of 
the second element of “task-unrelatedness” would 
have to say that a large portion of human cogni­
tion is actually aimless— an arbitrary process that in 
a fundamental way cannot count as goal-directed, 
perhaps not even as a form of intelligence. This 
would make task-unrelatedness difficult to under­
stand from an evolutionary perspective, because it 
would involve paying a high metabolic price for a 
ubiquitous dynamic feature that ultimately doesn’t 
serve any of the organism’s needs (but see Simonton, 
Chapter 10 in this volume).
Again, 
an epistemological perspective may 
prove to be fruitful in defining the explanandum 
more clearly: Mind-wandering is an inner process 
experienced by an organism for which the organ­
ism possesses no conscious knowledge of the goals 
the process serves, simply because there is no intro- 
spectively available model of the goal-state. In the 
generation of intelligent behavior, when exactly is 
it necessary to have an internal model of the goal- 
state? When is it a superfluous waste of resources? 
Is there a specific functional advantage of explicit 
goal-representation (e.g., veto control or the cre­
ation of an illusion of trans-temporal identity)? 
Elsewhere (Metzinger, 2013a, 2015) I have argued 
that mind-wandering is an unintentional form of 
mental behavior.3 Unintentional mental behaviors 
may surprise the organism in which they emerge and 
may be basically inexplicable to it from its limited 
inward perspective, while still being a very efficient 
and adaptive form of intelligence. For example, one 
speculative but perhaps novel hypothesis is that a 
considerable portion of mind-wandering actually 
is “mental avoidance behavior”: an attempt to cope 
with adverse internal stimuli or to protect one­
self from a deeper processing of information that 
threatens self-esteem. There is nothing wrong with 
the idea of a cognitive system whose behavior is 
driven by a multiplicity of goal-representations, the 
content (and the continuous hierarchical restruc­
turation) of which it does not consciously know 
or understand. Before claiming the existence of an 
objective property like “task-unrelatedness,” it may 
therefore be more interesting to look at the dynamic 
mechanisms of task -representation first. This leads to 
genuinely philosophical questions: How are “goal- 
states” or “tasks” individuated in the first place? 
What is different for exclusively m ental forms of 
goal-relatedness, and are there specific sets of satis­
faction conditions characterizing cognitive actions,
ioo
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

and only cognitive actions? Such questions provide 
further reasons why mind-wandering can be inter­
esting for philosophers, especially as one of the 
many reasons why mind-wandering is interesting 
for philosophers is that it directs our attention to 
the problem of mental action (the “contrast class,” 
if you will); mind-wandering poses the interesting 
challenge of describing the deeper principles of 
goal-state selection and action initiation while sub­
tracting the non-neural body and abstracting from 
issues of motor implementation (Metzinger, 2017).
“Thought” is the third semantic element in our 
notion of “spontaneous, task-unrelated thought.” 
On the one hand, it is difficult to define what 
“thought” is in the first place; on the other hand, 
one of the greatest contributions of the field of 
mind-wandering research to cognitive science may 
exactly lie in finally introducing a massive and 
empirically grounded taxonomical differentiation 
for the term “cognition.” Philosophers have, of 
course, thought about this third semantic element 
characterizing mind-wandering for centuries. I will 
not even begin to sketch the theoretical landscape. 
Instead, I will confine myself to pointing out that 
terms like “cognition” or “cognitive” have long 
become empty buzzwords in neuroscience and 
empirical psychology, and that this problem has to 
be solved in a principled manner— at least if a con­
ceptual construct like “spontaneous, task-unrelated 
thought” is to be used by serious people wishing to 
treat it as referring to a potential explanandum for 
rigorous empirical research.
But here are some questions one might ask to 
get started: Is “conscious thought” simply a folk- 
psychological term that should be eliminated in 
favor of a fine-grained neuroscientific theory? Are 
there necessary conditions, such as agentive direc­
tion, for verbally reportable types of mental activity 
to count as “thought”? Is the target phenomenon tied 
to the wakeful state, or does conscious cognition in 
the dream state similarly present us with an example 
of “thought”? Philosophers individuate thoughts by 
their contents, by what they are about. Can mind­
wandering be about anything, or are there specific 
forms of content characterizing the target phenom­
enon? The problem to be solved is that in developing 
a systematic catalogue of explananda, we might end 
up with a very long disjunction (“Mind-wandering 
is a or b or c or . . .”) and risk the danger of wide­
spread fallacies of equivocation. In informal logic, 
the “fallacy of equivocation” refers to the misleading 
use of a term with more than one meaning or sense. 
Therefore, one needs to be able to say clearly what
one single and what one a n d  the same occurrence of 
the target phenomenon are. As I will explain in the 
next section, in order to do proper science, mind­
wandering episodes have to be turned into count­
able entities, and we need criteria to determine their 
identity. I take it that empirical researchers currently 
are unable to do this.
Individuation
What are the temporal boundaries of a given, 
single episode of mind-wandering or a specific 
period of “spontaneous, task-unrelated thought”? 
When exactly does such an episode begin, and when 
does it end? Putting the question slightly differently, 
if we conceive of an individual episode as a chain 
of mental events, what counts as the first event in 
this chain and what is the last? Such questions raise 
further important issues. For example, could there 
be episodes constituted by one single mental event 
only? Or is there a minimal number of events— say, 
the attentional lapse, the appearance of the first ret­
rospectively reportable (e.g., “task-unrelated”) con­
tent, plus the terminal moment of meta-awareness?
To 
“individuate” 
episodes 
means 
to 
turn 
them into single, countable entities. To turn 
mind-wandering into a proper target for empiri­
cal research, we do not want to ask, “How much 
mind-wandering was there, during a given period 
of time?” but rather “How many individual occur­
rences of our target phenomenon could we experi­
mentally detect?” In principle, it must be possible to 
say, “During the last 300 seconds, subject s had 14 
distinct episodes of mind-wandering, namely, epi­
sode a, which lasted 2,834 milliseconds and began 
just after 5,398 milliseconds, episode b, [. . . ], and 
finally episode n> which lasted 4,793 milliseconds 
and ended precisely 2.5 seconds before the end of 
the experimental period.” In order to achieve this, 
one needs not just testable, objectively viable crite­
ria marking the onset and the end of each episode, 
but also a criterion for counting psychological items 
of this newly introduced kind, as well as a criterion 
helping us to decide on identity or non-identity 
among items of that kind. For example, would 
our future theory of mind-wandering allow that 
a patient has one a n d  the same recurring negative 
thought pattern again, at multiple points or inter­
vals in time? Are there context-invariant “cognitive 
atoms,” distinct units of mental content that can be 
activated in the subjects conscious mind, again and 
again? There are deep and complex conceptual ques­
tions lurking in the background. Here is another 
one: We do not want individual mental episodes to
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
IOI

possess proper parts that themselves are of that psy­
chological kind we call “mind-wandering” or “spon­
taneous, task-unrelated thought”— else we may 
have problems counting them. What, then, is the 
smallest explanatory unit? Perhaps most of all, some 
of us may also want to know what the “essence” of 
our target phenomenon actually is, w hat that kind 
of phenomenon is.
In earlier work, I have made some positive pro­
posals. One proposal is that the essence or inner 
nature of mind-wandering is “Ul-switching,” a sud­
den, subjectively unpredicted, and often unnoticed 
change in the phenomenological unit of identifica­
tion (see the last section of this chapter). Recall that 
a unit of identification simply is whatever is cur­
rently experienced as the conscious self, whatever 
conscious content would give rise to reports of the 
type “I am this!” I have grave doubts that “essences” 
in a strong metaphysical sense really exist, but fram­
ing an answer in this more modest manner could 
perhaps help us to specify what, in our world and 
under the laws of nature that hold in it, is com­
mon to all occurrences of mind-wandering— what 
constitutes their inner nature. If I am correct, mind­
wandering occurrences can be characterized by a 
single UI on the level of their content, and in time 
they are “bracketed” by shifts in the UI (again, see 
the last section). Second, I have also formulated an 
empirical hypothesis saying that the onset of every 
single episode must be characterized by a discon­
tinuity in phenomenal self-awareness— an experi­
mentally detectable “self-representational blink” 
(SRB; Metzinger, 2013a, p. 9). Third, I have pro­
posed that the end of every single episode that leads 
to a regaining of cognitive self-control is marked by 
another shift in the self-model involving the reap­
pearance of an explicit representation of the abil­
ity for mental veto control, typically accompanied 
by a voluntary termination of the ongoing mental 
chain of events. This creates a new unit of identifi­
cation, namely, the “meta-aware self”— an internal 
model of an active entity that has the ability to end 
an ongoing chain of task-unrelated thought and to 
return the focus of attention to what is now con­
sciously remembered as “the” original task.
Taxonomy
Imagine you are sitting in a boring lecture 
and have drifted off into a pleasant erotic fantasy. 
After you become aware of the fact that you have 
just completely zoned out, you carefully tune back 
into the fantasy while paying some attention to the 
lecture. Whenever you notice that you have had
another full attentional lapse and completely zoned 
out (the lecture still hasn’t got any better), you delib­
erately tune back into the fantasy again, afterward 
“letting it go,” observing it as it unfolds by itself. Is 
this interplay between mental action and the ensu­
ing loss of cognitive control, the recurring cycle 
between “zoning out,” “coming to,” and “tuning 
out” again a form of mind-wandering? Only one- 
half to two-thirds of it can really be characterized 
as “task-unrelated thought.” Perhaps the real “task” 
here is not actually listening to the lecture. Maybe 
the highest-priority task consists in keeping up the 
outer appearance of being an interested listener and 
in being a well-rested and relaxed conversant at the 
conference dinner afterward, remembering just 
a minimally sufficient number of keywords to (in 
a social emergency) be able to fake an intelligent 
question or two? How much of the contents of your 
erotic fantasy was “spontaneous” in the sense that 
there really was a strong introspective experience of 
sudden onset, novelty, and unexpectedness? Was it 
caused by unconscious interoceptive stimuli? Was 
its introspectively available content really “concep­
tual” in the sense of high-level symbolic cognition, 
something that can be called “thought” in a stricter 
and narrower sense, or was the experiential content 
rather one constituted by visual and motor imagery, 
an embodied and increasingly complex simulation 
of the tactile, kinesthetic, or interoceptive stimuli 
to be expected and of the emotional arousal they 
would cause?
From a traditional philosophical perspective, 
a systematic taxonomy would have to individuate 
mind-wandering episodes by their verbally report- 
able content and by the functional context in which 
they occur. This may already lead to helpful taxo- 
nomical differentiations. It also draws attention to 
another methodological constraint that empirical 
research has to satisfy: namely, always clearly dis­
tinguishing between “content” as experienced and 
ascribed from a first-person perspective (1PP) and 
“content” as ascribed from the scientists third- 
person perspective (3PP). For example, there are 
highly developed and centuries-old 1PP approaches 
to what, today, we like to call “online experience 
sampling” (namely, classical mindfulness medita­
tion of the “open monitoring” type), and there are 
much more recent 3PP approaches involving exter­
nal cueing and a statistical analysis of the results 
related to whole groups of individuals (see Andrews- 
Hanna et al., Chapter 13 in this volume). These 
approaches lead to diverging results, as 3PP content 
is a much more abstract theoretical construct than
1 0 2
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

1PP content. However, intuitions anchored in 1PP 
content may contaminate theory formation on the 
level of science, and scientifically informed subjects 
will at some point re-import 3PP content into their 
individual phenomenological reports.
Take the example of depressive rumination. 
Is it really “task-independent”? What about the 
diminished attentional control caused by worry 
and self-referential negative thoughts in anxiety 
disorders (Forster et al., 2015)? Maybe it actually 
reflects, from a neurocomputational perspective, a 
close-to-optimal form of processing, just as many 
visual illusions can count as “optimal percepts” if 
analyzed mathematically. We must never forget that 
first-person description and third-person functional 
analysis may greatly diverge. For example, for cer­
tain taxonomical categories, there may be hidden 
epistemic benefits that are “invisible” from a subjec­
tive, first-person perspective.
Here is another example of a philosophical 
concept that I think might possess great heuristic 
fecundity for future research on “stimulus-inde­
pendent, task-unrelated thought”: “epistemic inno­
cence.” Philosopher Lisa Bortolotti (Bortolotti, 
2015a, 2015b) has recently introduced this concept 
to articulate the idea that certain mental processes 
such as delusion and confabulation (which may 
count as suboptimal from an epistemological per­
spective) may actually have not just psychological, 
but also epistemic benefits. Their psychological ben­
efits may not simply be purchased with epistemic 
costs— what superficially appears as an imperfect 
cognitive process may actually be epistemically 
innocent, causally enabling not only coherence, 
but also mental knowledge acquisition. I believe 
this philosophical idea can be fruitfully applied in 
the domain of mind-wandering. For example, does 
depressive rumination perhaps serve the interests 
of the individual or its group, fulfilling a task that 
is introspectively inaccessible to the patient and 
which, scientifically, we simply haven’t understood 
yet? Are the comparably perseverative forms of 
thinking happening during NREM sleep (including 
slow-wave sleep) a form of conscious thought, too? 
In what sense are they “task-unrelated”? Are there 
perhaps hidden epistemic benefits to dreamless sleep 
experience? Mentation during sleep as well as cogni­
tion during ordinary and lucid dreams are examples 
of candidates for our taxonomy of states of mind­
wandering, which are characterized by a special 
functional context (shallow levels of embodiment 
and situatedness) and, with the exception of lucid 
dreams, are generally absent cognitive self-control
(Metzinger & Windt, 2007). Interestingly, there is a 
strong overlap between theoretical issues in empiri­
cal research on dreaming and mind-wandering (Fox 
et al., 2013; Metzinger, 2013b; Windt, 2015; see 
also Windt & Voss, Chapter 29 in this volume). 
Again, here are some examples: What exactly is the 
relationship between mental self-control, the occur­
rence of dream lucidity, and what researchers in 
mind-wandering call “meta-awareness”? Can both 
lucid lapses and mind-wandering lapses plausibly 
be interpreted as the disintegration of an internal 
epistemic agent model (see later discussion in this 
chapter)? Are there common positive functional­
ities connecting dreaming and mind-wandering 
during wake states, such as the encoding of long­
term memory, complex, preparatory motor plan­
ning, or creative incubation? Philosophically, it is 
also interesting to look at “false lucidity” and the 
phenomenology of insight (Kiihle, 2015; Voss & 
Hobson, 2015): in becoming lucid at night and 
during daytime mind-wandering, is the experience 
of oneself having actively regained meta-awareness 
(and thereby mental autonomy) an illusion of con­
trol over a mental event that was really triggered by 
an unconscious process? Currently, this is only a 
conceptual possibility; What kind of experimental 
design could settle the issue?
An even more radical approach could take the 
step from a content-taxonomy to a vehicle-taxon­
omy. We could stop speaking of the “content” of 
mind-wandering episodes altogether, for example by 
exclusively focusing on dynamical properties of its 
minimally sufficient neural correlates. Is depressive 
rumination “spontaneous, task-unrelated thought”? 
Kalina Christoff and colleagues arrive at a negative 
answer (cf. Christoff et al., 2016, p. 725), by pro­
posing a wider dynamicist framework for under­
standing mind-wandering under which depressive 
rumination would be understood as a member 
of a family of spontaneous-thought phenomena. 
Drawing on Ludwig Wittgenstein (e.g., Philosophical 
Investigations I: 66), a philosophical analysis of this 
point could say that “mind-wandering” actually is 
a cluster concept (i.e., a term that is defined by a 
weighted list of criteria, such that no one of these cri­
teria is either necessary or sufficient for membership). 
Recall how a more nuanced account of mind-wan­
dering could attempt to describe degrees of spon­
taneity and analyze them as degrees of constraint 
satisfaction at different levels of analysis. For depres­
sion, we clearly find rigidity and an involuntary fixa­
tion on symptoms of distress at the content level. In 
addition, one level of description below, there is a
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
103

diminished degree of constraint satisfaction for the 
functional property of M-autonomy (Metzinger, 
2015; see later discussion in this chapter), because in 
depressive rumination patients have great difficulties 
in disengaging from their own involuntary behavior, 
as their capacity for veto control on the mental level 
is weakened. Here, the overall functional context 
would be a clinical one, with a local microfunctional 
correlate on the molecular level (e.g., a dysbalance 
of certain neurotransmitter systems characterizing 
the “vehicle” or carrier), while the content might be 
redundant, repetitive, and characterized by negative 
affective valence. This opens the radical possibility 
of increasingly proceeding without the ascription of 
“content” at all, semantically enriching our initial 
cluster concept of “mind-wandering” by exclusively 
defining it by criteria on the vehicle level. In their 
synthesis of the new interdisciplinary field of spon­
taneous thought, Jessica Andrews-Hanna and col­
leagues (Chapter 13 in this volume) propose exactly 
this— breaking out of the “flashlight” of 1PP con­
tent into the rich darkness of lower levels of descrip­
tion. But what exactly is it that we are trying to find 
in the dark, and is it something that should still be 
called “thought”?
I hope that my readers will agree that more than 
enough new questions have been asked in the three 
preceding sections— it is now time to offer some 
answers. The general point I have been trying to 
make should be clear by now: to sustain its great 
initial success, experimental research on spontane­
ous thought needs a much more systematic and 
fine-grained taxonomy of its research targets. Such 
a taxonomy cannot be constructed in a purely 
data-driven, bottom-up manner, because it rests on 
implicit conceptual assumptions and on our epis- 
temic interests. What exactly is it that we want to 
knouP I will not discuss any further examples in the 
remainder of this chapter. Instead I will present a 
series of positive proposals for developing a con­
ceptual framework, plus some first conceptual tools 
that empirical researchers could operationalize and 
apply in the design of experiments. I will begin with 
the subjective sense of agency and the possibility of 
illusions of control on the mental level.
Losing and Regaining Mental 
Autonomy: Mental Action Versus 
Unintentional Mental Behavior
Philosophers have thought long and hard about 
what distinguishes “actions” from other kinds of 
events in the physical world (Davidson, 1988/2001; 
Dretske, 1988; Wilson & Shpall, 2016). Indeed,
“action theory” can be considered a small sub­
field within the discipline of academic philosophy. 
There are, however, also m ental actions— and this 
is another point of contact where mind-wandering 
becomes interesting to philosophers (Metzinger, 
2017; O ’Brien & Soteriou, 2009; Pezzulo, 2017). 
Perhaps some elements of the philosophical tool­
kit can prove to be interesting for experimentalists 
as well.
Deliberately focusing one’s attention on a per­
ceptual object and consciously drawing a logical 
conclusion are examples of mental actions. Just 
like physical actions, mental actions possess satis­
faction conditions (i.e., they are directed at a goal 
state). Although they mostly lack overt behavioral 
correlates, they can be intentionally inhibited, sus­
pended, or terminated, just like bodily actions can. 
Additionally, they are interestingly characterized 
by their temporally extended phenomenology of 
ownership, goal-directedness, a subjective sense of 
effort, and the concomitant conscious experience of 
agency and m ental self-control.
Let me distinguish the two most important types 
of mental action:
• A ttentional agency (AA): the ability to control 
one’s focus of attention;
• Cognitive agency (CA): the ability to control 
goal/task-related, deliberate thought.
AA and CA are functional properties that are 
gradually acquired in childhood, can be lost in old 
age or due to brain lesions, and whose incidence, 
variance, robustness, and so on, can be scientifi­
cally investigated. However, they also have a sub­
jective side. Attentional agency (Metzinger, 2003a, 
6.4.3; 2006, Section 4; 2013a; 2013b; 2015) also 
possesses a phenomenal signature, as is the case for 
other forms of subjective experience, like pain or 
the subjective quality of “blueness” in a visual color 
experience. For this reason, AA also has a phenom­
enological reading: as the conscious experience of 
actually initiating a shift of attention, and of con­
trolling and fixing its focus on a certain aspect of 
reality. AA involves a sense of effort, and it is the 
phenomenal signature of our functional ability to 
actively influence what we will come to know, and 
what, for now, we will ignore.
Consciously experienced AA is theoretically 
important because it is probably the earliest and 
simplest form of experiencing oneself as a know­
ing self, as an epistemic agent. Human beings learn 
to control the focus of their attention long before 
they can control symbolic, high-level cognition.
104
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

Research into animal intelligence and human phe­
nomenology shows that AA can and does exist with­
out cognitive control, but modern dream research 
and various psychiatric syndromes demonstrate 
that cognitive agency causally depends on and 
might actually be a functional derivative of atten- 
tional agency (e.g., Windt, 2015). To consciously 
enjoy AA means that you (the cognitive system as 
a whole) currently identify with the content of a 
particular and highly specific type of mental self­
representation, an “epistemic agent model” (EAM; 
Metzinger, 2013a, 2013b, 2015, 2017). Whenever 
such an EAM is active in your brain, you experi­
ence yourself as a knowing self, an agent searching 
to improve its knowledge about the world. AA is 
fully transparent:4 The content of your conscious 
experience is not one of self-representation or of 
an ongoing process of self-modeling, of depicting 
yourself as a causal agent in certain shifts of “zoom 
factor,” “resolving power,” or “resource allocation,” 
in actively “optimizing precision expectations” or 
engaging in a “selective sampling of sensory data 
that have high precision (signal to noise) in relation 
to the models predictions” (Feldman & Friston, 
2010, p. 17). Rather, you directly experience your­
self zs, for example, actively selecting a new object 
for attention or trying to “see things more clearly.” 
This is interesting because although during many 
types of mind-wandering episodes we do not have 
AA, these episodes can of course be about having 
been an attentional agent in the past, or about plan­
ning to control one’s attention in the future.
Analogously, a closely related point can be 
made for CA. Conceptually, cognitive agency is 
not just a complex set of functional abilities such 
as the capacities for mental calculation; consciously 
drawing logical conclusions; engaging in rational, 
symbolic thought; and actively constructing new 
arguments. Again, there is a distinct phenomenol­
ogy of currently being a cognitive agent, which can 
lead to experiential self-reports like “I am a think­
ing self in the act of grasping a concept,” “I have 
just actively arrived at a specific conclusion,” and 
“I am attempting to build an argument.” There is 
a functional analysis (“autonomous cognitive self- 
control”) and a phenomenological reading, based 
on verbal self-reports. The classical meta-theoretical 
issue, of course, is in what sense autophenomeno- 
logical reports can or should inform the process of 
functional analysis and decomposition. But most 
important, what AA and CA have in common is 
that in both cases, we consciously represent our­
selves as epistemic agents: According to subjective
experience, we are entities that actively construct 
and search for new epistemic relations to the world 
and ourselves. We are information-hungry, and 
there is something we want to know.
Empirical research programs on spontaneous, 
apparently task-unrelated thought are interesting 
for philosophers, because they demonstrate (a) that 
epistemic mental agency is a much more vulner­
able and much rarer phenomenon than many phi­
losophers of mind may have intuitively assumed, 
and (b) that what we traditionally call “conscious 
thought” or “high-level symbolic cognition” may, 
more often than not, be a subpersonal process (as 
I have argued elsewhere; see Metzinger, 2013a,
2015). Such programs raise the need for concep­
tual demarcation criteria allowing us to distinguish 
between intentional mental action and uninten­
tional mental behavior, as well as between personal- 
level thought, and forms of conscious cognitive 
processing that are better described as automatic, 
sub-personal chains of events. Nevertheless, the 
wealth of existing philosophical literature on action 
and thought may provide many helpful conceptual 
tools for empirical researchers to use to sharpen 
their hypotheses and predictions. For example, it 
would be excellent if empirical investigators always 
carefully distinguished between personal-level men­
tation and subpersonal processes, between proper­
ties of the person as a whole and properties of his or 
her brain. My own more specific positive proposal 
is this: the beginning of every mind-wandering epi­
sode is marked exactly by the collapse of our epis­
temic agent model (a conscious self-representation 
of now possessing the ability for epistemic self- 
control), and the end of every episode is marked by 
the re-emergence of a new epistemic agent model 
(the “meta-aware self”). How can we spell this point 
out on the functional level?
I think it could be heuristically fruitful to ana­
lyze mind-wandering as a loss o f  m ental autonom y. 
The topic of mental autonomy (M-Autonomy 
hereafter; cf. Metzinger, 2015) is an excellent 
example of an area in which empirical research 
into mind-wandering makes a contribution to 
issues possessing great relevance in other fields, 
not only philosophy, but also law and psychiatry.5 
Very generally speaking, autonomy is the capac­
ity for rational self-control, whereas the term 
“mental autonomy” refers to the specific ability 
to control one’s own mental functions, like atten­
tion, episodic memory, planning, concept forma­
tion, rational deliberation, and decision-making. 
Mental autonomy includes the capacity to impose
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
105

rules on one’s own mental behavior and to explic­
itly select goals for mental action, as well as the 
ability for rational guidance and, most important, 
the intentional inhibition, suspension, or termina­
tion of an ongoing mental process. M-autonomy 
is a functional property,6 which any given self- 
conscious system can either possess or lack. Its 
instantiation goes along with new epistemic abili­
ties, a specific phenomenological profile, and the 
appearance of a new layer of representational con­
tent in the phenomenal self-model (Metzinger, 
2003a). In humans, first insights into its neuronal 
realization are now beginning to emerge. From a 
philosophical perspective, this functional property 
is interesting for a whole range of different rea­
sons. One of them is that it is directly relevant to 
both our traditional notions of a “first-person per­
spective” (1PP) and of “personhood” (Metzinger, 
2015). If one cannot control the focus of one’s 
attention, then one cannot sustain a stable first- 
person perspective, and for as long as one cannot 
control one’s own thoughts, one cannot count as 
a rational individual. In other words, spontaneous 
thought is a subpersonal process, like respiration 
or heartbeat.
Biological systems produce different kinds of 
observable output, which can in turn be charac­
terized by different degrees of autonomy and self- 
control. There are actions and behaviors, and both 
kinds of output are conceptually individuated 
by their satisfaction conditions— that is, they are 
directed at goal states. However, for actions, con­
scious goal-representation plays a central causal 
role: actions are typically preceded by a selection 
process; they can be terminated, suspended, or 
intentionally inhibited; and they exhibit a distinct 
phenomenological profile involving subjective qual­
ities like agency, a sense of effort, goal-directedness, 
global self-control, and ownership. Behaviors, 
on the other hand, are purposeful, but possess no 
explicit form of conscious goal-representation. 
They are functionally characterized by automaticity, 
decreased context-sensitivity, and low self-control; 
we may not even notice their initiation, but they 
can be faster than actions. While their phenomeno­
logical profile can at times be completely absent, 
behaviors typically involve the subjective experi­
ence of ownership without agency, the introspective 
availability of goal-directedness varies, and there is 
frequently a complete lack of meta-awareness.
We find a parallel situation if we look at our 
inner life; some mental activities are not deliber­
ately controllable, because one centrally important
defining characteristic does not hold: they cannot 
be inhibited, suspended, or terminated. Let us call 
these activities “unintentional mental behaviors.” 
Mind-wandering can therefore be conceptualized as 
a form of unintentional behavior, as an involuntary 
form of mental activity. Viewed in this way, research 
on mind-wandering is a subfield of human ethol­
ogy; it belongs within the field of cognitive ethology 
for Homo sapiens (Allen & Bekoff, 1999; Marler & 
Ristau, 2013).
O f course, the fact that a given mental or bodily 
behavior is unintentional in no way implies that 
this behavior is unintelligent or even maladaptive. 
It is plausible to assume that many animals’ minds 
wander, perhaps a lot of the time. For example, low- 
level, saliency-driven shifts in attentional focus are 
unintentional mental behaviors, not inner actions, 
and in standard situations, they cannot be inhib­
ited. They are initiated by unconscious mecha­
nisms, but may well result in a stable, perceptually 
coupled first-person perspective as their final stage. 
Stimulus-independent, task-independent thought, 
however, normally begins as a form of uncontrolled 
mental behavior, a breakdown of consciously guided 
epistemic autoregulation (the active control of one’s 
own epistemic states on the level of high-level cog­
nition). Just like an automatic, saliency-driven shift 
in the focus of attention, stimulus-independent, 
task-independent thought may be caused by uncon­
scious factors like introspectively inaccessible goal 
representations that drive the high-level phenom­
enology of mind-wandering (Klinger, 2013), for 
example representations of postponed goal-states 
that have been environmentally cued by goal-related 
stimuli under high cognitive load (Cohen, 2013; 
McVay & Kane, 2009). O f course, quite often an 
episode of spontaneous thought will be in itiated in a 
deliberate manner (see later discussion in this chap­
ter and Seli et al., 2016), but as it unfolds it turns 
into unintentional mental behavior. Both low-level 
attention and uncontrolled, automatic thinking will 
frequently count as an intelligent and adaptive type 
of inner behavior. Nevertheless, as long as it is tak­
ing place, we seem to lack the ability to terminate or 
suspend it— we are fully immersed in an inner nar­
rative and cannot deliberately “snap out of it.” This 
highlights that perhaps the most relevant and hith­
erto neglected phenomenological constraint for a 
theory of mental autonomy is that, subjectively, we 
do not notice this fact. Therefore, on the functional 
level of analysis, my positive proposal is that mind­
wandering is the graded loss of the ability for veto 
control on the mental level, which can be described
106
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

as a graded loss of mental autonomy and epistemic 
self-control.
Epistemology of Mental Self-Knowledge
Mind-wandering is interesting for philosophers 
because it has important implications for theo­
ries of self-knowledge. First, every philosophical 
account of conscious self-knowledge now needs to 
do justice to the discovery that it is a highly dis­
continuous process, and that this discontinuity 
is only weakly reflected on the level of conscious 
experience itself. Second, unnoticed rationality def­
icits and self-deception from cognitive corruption 
are possible at any point in time (see Metzinger, 
2013b, Example 4; Windt, 2015, p. 479). Clearly, 
we can have a specific epistemic ability, but we can 
also temporarily lose our knowledge of possessing 
this ability. In mind-wandering, the relevant abil­
ity is our potential for cognitive self-control, most 
importantly the very basic and fundamental capac­
ity for what I have called “mental veto control.” If 
this ability is not explicitly represented in our phe­
nomenal self-model, then we— as a whole person—  
are not able to exert it. We suffer from an epistemic 
deficit, an absence of representation that is not 
represented as an absence— and the ensuing lack 
of conscious self-knowledge has well-documented 
causal consequences.
Recall the notion of having an internal model 
of “horizontal mental causation.” For philosophers 
this means that one mental event causes another 
mental event. Closely related to this is the idea of 
“vertical mental causation,” which typically means 
that a mental event could cause a physical event—  
say, a bodily movement— in a top-down fashion. 
Many contemporary philosophers think that some­
thing like this is not possible (we sometimes call this 
“the causal closure of the physical,” assuming that 
every physical event that has a cause has a physical 
cause; see, e.g., Kim, 1993, 2000). But if we take 
our own phenomenology seriously, we discover that 
the human brain models mind-body interactions 
very differently, giving rise to Cartesian intuitions 
(Metzinger, 2003a, Section 6.4.1). However, there 
is a third possibility: intram ental vertical causation, 
and this term may be another example of a poten­
tially useful and heuristically fecund conceptual 
instrument for the mind-wandering community. 
Intramental vertical causation would be the case 
where one mental event causally influences another 
mental event, but not— as in the case of horizontal 
causation within the domain of mental events, as 
discussed earlier— in terms of continuing a chain
of such events, but in terms of terminating such a 
chain, by top-down control. Let us ignore the phil­
osophical metaphysics of the mind-body problem 
for now, and just look at the necessary functional 
architecture in our minds. My point is that in order 
to know about our ability for mental veto control 
(i.e., our capacity to terminate or suspend an ongo­
ing train of thought or other mental process), we 
would first need an inner model of the possibility 
of top-down intramental causation, of one mental 
event terminating or modulating a chain of events 
on a lower level. A speculative empirical hypothesis 
would say that exactly this model disappears in our 
brains after the onset of a mind-wandering episode.
What makes this phenomenon interesting is that 
it does not seem to bother us very much, to the 
point that many of us initially doubt the empiri­
cal data on the frequency of attentional lapses and 
spontaneous, task-unrelated thought. There seems 
to be a widespread form of “introspective neglect,” 
resembling a form of anosognosia or anosodiapho- 
ria, related to the frequent losses of cognitive self- 
control characterizing our inner life. Obviously, 
“widespread” does not mean that a ll instances 
of task-unrelated thought involve introspective 
neglect— we know that there is intentional “tun­
ing out” as well as “zoning out,” as discussed earlier, 
that up to 41% of reported mind-wandering can be 
engaged with intention (Seli et al., 2016, p. 606), 
and that in certain memory, learning, and problem­
solving contexts, reduced cognitive control can even 
provide a benefit (Amer et al., 2016, p. 907). That 
said, the phenomenon of mind-wandering is also 
clearly related to denial, confabulation, and self- 
deception. I once gave a talk about mind-wandering 
to a group of truly excellent philosophers, pointing 
out the frequent, brief discontinuities in our men­
tal model of ourselves as epistemic agents, and one 
participant interestingly remarked, “I think only 
ordinary people have this. As philosophers, we 
just don’t have this because we are intellectual ath­
letes!” I think the truth of the matter may be just 
the opposite: high-performing intellectuals are par­
ticularly unaware of their own spontaneous, task- 
unrelated thoughts. The introspective experience 
and the corresponding verbal reports of one’s own 
mind-wandering seem to be strongly distorted by 
overconfidence bias, illusions of superiority, and the 
introspection illusion (in which we falsely assume 
direct insight into the origins of our mental states, 
while treating others’ introspections as unreliable). 
It is probably also influenced (and not only for phi­
losophers of mind) by confirmation bias related to
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
107

one’s own theoretical preconceptions and culturally 
entrenched notions of “autonomous subjectivity,” 
by self-serving bias, and possibly by frequent illu­
sions of control on the mental level. This interest­
ingly relates the field of spontaneous thought to 
other burgeoning and increasingly active areas of 
research like self-deception (Pliushch & Metzinger, 
2015). One positive empirical prediction resulting 
from this discussion is that at least all of the biases 
I have listed as examples in the preceding should be 
considerably weakened in long-term practitioners 
of mindfulness meditation (Holzel et al., 2011).
What Exactly Is a “Unit of Identification”?
On the level of content, every onset and every 
ending of an episode of mind-wandering are char­
acterized by an unexpected shift: or sudden switch in 
the phenomenal “unit of identification” (UI). Here 
is an example. Let us say that at first you identify 
with the conscious content of an internal model of 
the self as currently standing at a red traffic light, 
waiting for it to turn green. Then an internal simu­
lation of yourself as buying tofu and bananas pops 
up, as you “remember” that you need to buy tofu 
and bananas. Now you identify with the protago­
nist of this inner narrative, with the virtual self that 
constitutes the center of an automatic inner action 
simulation. Phenomenologically, and for a short 
moment only, you literally “become someone else.” 
For a brief moment you “zone out” completely, 
and this constitutes an involuntary and unex­
pected shift in the UI. Then perceptual coupling 
may quickly be restored and you re-identify with 
the “driver,” a model of the self as an attentional 
agent, quickly checking if the lights have turned 
green. This is the end of your mind-wandering epi­
sode. Phenomenologically, the driver is real again, 
and the shopper is only virtual— the shopper is 
now not the UI any more, but just the retrospective 
content of a sudden memory leading to a decision 
and an action plan. Now you may decide to “tune 
out” again, perhaps to see if an active inner simula­
tion of yourself as buying tofu and bananas “makes 
other things come to mind.” In initiating this, you 
are an autonomous mental agent. However, in the 
very moment you “remember” that you also wanted 
to buy almond butter and raisins, the UI switches 
again and you quickly “zone out” for a fast update, 
an enriched mental simulation of the shopper and 
its now extended task list. This is the beginning 
of mind-wandering episode number two, and it is 
functionally characterized by another brief loss of 
mental autonomy— another bout of “involuntary
mental time travel” (Song et al., 2012). This second 
episode may take less than a second to unfold, and 
as the light suddenly turns green you “snap back” 
into the driver model, hastily shifting gears. The 
“snapping back” is the shifting of the UI, and it is 
the end of your second mind-wandering episode. 
There have been two episodes and four switches in 
the UI.
Mind-wandering is interesting for philoso­
phers because it has great potential for illumi­
nating a deeper understanding of phenomenal 
self-consciousness and the supra-bodily mecha­
nisms of phenomenal self-identification (Blanke & 
Metzinger, 2009). Furthermore, if the model I have 
sketched in the preceding is correct, then progress 
in empirical research into mind-wandering and the 
computational modeling of neuroscientific data 
decisively depend on a better understanding of what 
exactly a UI is.
Let us say that for every self-conscious system S 
there exists a phenom enal u n it o f  identification (UI), 
such that
• S possesses a single, conscious model of 
reality;
• the UI is a part of this model;
• at any given point in time t, the UI can 
be characterized by a specific and determinate 
representational content C;
• such that C  constitutes the systems 
phenomenal self-model (PSM; Metzinger,
2003) at t.
If we assume a “predictive processing” model 
of human brain activity (Clark, 2016; Friston, 
2010; Hohwy, 2013), then, for all human beings, 
C  is always counterfactual content. The UI ulti­
mately represents the best hypothesis the system 
has about its own global state. For human beings, 
C  is dynamic and highly variable, and it does not 
have to coincide with the physical body as repre­
sented (for an example, see de Ridder, van Laere, 
Dupont, Menovsky, & van de Heyning, 2007). 
There exists a minimal UI, which likely is con­
stituted by pure spatiotemporal self-location 
(Blanke & Metzinger, 2009; Metzinger, 2013a, 
2013b; Windt, 2010); and there is also a maxi­
mal UI, likely constituted by the most general 
phenomenal property available to S at any point 
t, namely, the integrated nature of phenomenal- 
ity per se (Metzinger, 2013a, 2013b, 2016). C  is 
phenomenally transparent. Internally, S models 
the representational content constituting the UI 
as neither counterfactual nor veridical, but simply
108
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

real. Phenomenally experienced realness is empir­
ical Bayes-optimality; it is an expression of suc­
cessful prediction error minimization, high model 
evidence, and counterfactual richness (e.g., invari­
ance under counterfactual manipulation). The UI 
is the transparent partition of the PSM.
Self-consciousness and the possession of a UI are 
what make verbal self-reports possible. For some 5, 
if S has functionally adequate linguistic abilities, it 
can indirectly refer to itself by referring to C, and 
so generating autophenomenological reports of the 
type “I am this!” Mastery of the first-person pronoun 
“I” consists in successful linguistic self-reference via 
the UI. It is a form of displaced reference, because 
it only directly refers to C  without S being able to 
experience this fact consciously at t. The possession 
of a UI is the central causally enabling factor for 
all forms of intelligent behavior, bodily or men­
tal, which presuppose the ability for self-reference. 
The possession of a UI is conceptually necessary 
for self-consciousness because self-consciousness is 
phenomenally represented identification, based on 
counterfactual content, via transparency. Biological 
systems sustain organismic integrity by preserving 
the integrity of their UI, constantly trying to mini­
mize PSM-related uncertainty. Thus confabulation, 
delusion, and functionally adequate forms of self- 
deception are attempts to sustain the integrity and 
stability of the UI across time, under exceptionally 
high degrees of uncertainty.
My last positive proposal for developing a novel 
conceptual framework is the following: mind­
wandering 
and 
“spontaneous 
task-unrelated 
thought” can be conceived of as an unintentional 
form of mental behavior, centrally involving invol­
untary and initially unnoticed shifts in the UI. It 
is presently unknown whether such shifts serve 
a biological purpose in all or only in some cases, 
let alone if there is one general function or specific 
neurodynamical signature under which all instances 
of Ul-switching can be subsumed. But the general 
principle would be that distinct episodes of mind­
wandering, whether separated by a period of meta­
awareness and a regaining of M-Autonomy or not, 
are always “bracketed” by Ul-shifts. Isolating the 
neural correlates and the dynamic functional mech­
anisms constituting such “brackets” would consti­
tute an important step forward in describing the 
temporal boundaries and conceptually individuat­
ing single occurrences of our research target. If this 
is correct, then the more fundamental conceptual 
insight is that phenomenal self-consciousness is a 
highly discontinuous process.
Notes
1. Some sections of this chapter strongly draw on Metzinger 
(2013a and 2013). I want to thank Kalina Christoff and 
Kieran Fox for helpful comments on an earlier version of this 
chapter, and Lucy Mayne for equally helpful comments plus 
excellent editorial help with the English version of this text.
2. The term “spontaneity” plays a role in a number of classical 
philosophical theories of mind, perhaps most prominendy 
in the theory of Immanuel Kant. Unfortunately, this point 
would lead beyond the scope of the present contribution. Let 
me point, however, to an interesting link connecting Kant 
to our currendy best mathematical models of brain func­
tion: Presupposing a predictive-processing framework, mind­
wandering might also be seen as the expression of a very deep 
form of “neurocomputational creativity” inherent in the very 
generative model of reality, which our brains continuously 
create and update by minimizing free energy (Friston, 2010). 
Continuous free-energy minimization would then be the cre­
ative mechanism that implements what Kant had in mind, 
when he spoke of “spontaneity.” As Robert Hanna writes 
about spontaneity in Kant, “A cognitive faculty is spontaneous 
in that whenever it is externally stimulated by raw unstruc­
tured sensory data as inputs, it then automatically organizes 
or ‘synthesizes’ those data in an unprecedented way relative to 
those inputs, thereby yielding novel structured cognitions as 
outputs (B1—2, A50/B74, B132, B152). So cognitive sponta­
neity is a structural creativity of the mind with respect to its rep­
resentations. [. . . ] Kant also uses the term ‘spontaneity’ in a 
somewhat different sense in a metaphysical context, to refer to 
a mental cause that can sufficiently determine an effect in time 
while also lacking any temporally prior sufficient cause of itself 
(A445/B473). Call this practical spontaneity. What is shared 
between the two senses of spontaneity, practical and cognitive, 
is the unprecedented, creative character of the mind’s opera­
tions” (Hanna, 2016, Section 1.1) Free energy minimization 
would then be the transcendental condition of possibility for 
both knowledge and action (see Metzinger & Wiese, 2017).
3. Metzinger (2013a) was the first empirically informed sketch 
of an explicit, positive model of mind-wandering from the 
philosopher’s camp. A substantial and careful criticism of this 
model can be found in Irving (2016).
4. “Transparency” is a property of conscious representations, 
namely, that they are not experienced as representations. 
Therefore, the subject of experience has the feeling of being in 
direct and immediate contact with their content. Transparent 
conscious representations create the phenomenology of naive 
realism. An opaque phenomenal representation is one that 
is experienced as a representation, for example in pseudo­
hallucinations or lucid dreams. Importantly, a transparent 
self-model creates the phenomenology of identification 
(Metzinger 2003a, 2008). There exists a graded spectrum 
between transparency and opacity, determining the vari­
able phenomenology of “mind-independence” or “realness.” 
Unconscious representations are neither transparent nor 
opaque. See Metzinger (2003b) for a concise introduction.
5. This section strongly draws on Metzinger (2015).
6. Functional properties are abstract properties referring to the 
causal role of a state (the set of its causal relations to input, 
output, and other internal states), without implying anything 
about the properties of its physical realization. Just like states 
described in a Turing machine table or computer software, they 
are multi-realizable. Since M-autonomy is a functional prop­
erty, it could in principle also be implemented in a machine.
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
109

References
Allen, C., & Bekoff, M. (1999). Species of mind: The phi­
losophy and biology of cognitive ethology. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Amer, T., Campbell, K. L., & Hasher, L. (2016). Cognitive con­
trol as a double-edged sword. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
20{ 12), 905-915. doi: 10.10l6/j.tics.20l6.10.002.
Antrobus, J. S. (1968). Information theory and stimulus- 
independent thought. British Journal of Psychology, 59(4), 
423-430.
Blanke, O., & Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-body illusions and 
minimal phenomenal selfhood. Trends in Cognitive Science, 
13(1), 7-13. doi: 10.10l6/j.tics.2008.10.003
Bortolotti, L. (2015a). The epistemic innocence of motivated 
delusions. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 490—499.
Bortolotti, L. (2015b). Epistemic benefits of elaborated and 
systematized delusions in schizophrenia. British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science, 67(3), 879-900. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1093/bjps/axv024.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731. doi: 10.1038/nrn.20l6.113
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the 
embodied mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, A.-L. (2013). Attentional decoupling while pursu­
ing intentions: A form of mind wandering? Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 1-9. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00693
Davidson, D. (1988/2001). Essays on actions and events: 
Philosophical essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Ridder, D., van Laere, K., Dupont, P., Menovsky, T., & van 
de Heyning, P. (2007). Visualizing out-of-body experience 
in the brain. New England Journal of Medicine, 357(18), 
1829-1833.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Little, Brown
Dretske, F. I. (1988). Explaining behavior: Reasons in a world of 
causes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and 
free-energy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, 215.
Forster, S., Nunez Elizalde, A. O., Castle, E., & Bishop, S. J. 
(2015). Unraveling the anxious mind: Anxiety, worry, and 
frontal engagement in sustained attention versus off-task 
processing. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991), 25(3), 
609-618. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht248.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., 
& Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: evi­
dence from functional neuroimaging and first-person con­
tent reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 1—18. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Giambra, L. M. (1989). Task-unrelated thought frequency as 
a function of age: A laboratory study. Psychology and Aging, 
4(2), 136.
Hanna, R. (2016). Kant’s theory of judgment. In E. N. Zalta 
(Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, https:// 
plato.stanford.edu/archives/win20l6/entries/kant-judg- 
ment/.
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Holzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., Schuman-Olivier, Z., Vago, 
D. R., & Ott, U. (2011). How does mindfulness meditation 
work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual 
and neural perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
6(6), 537-559.
Irving, Z. C. (2016). Mind-wandering is unguided atten­
tion: Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 173(2), 547-571.
Kim, J. (1993). Supervenience and mind: Selected philosophical 
essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. (2000). Mind in a physical world: An essay on the mind-body 
problem and mental causation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klinger, E. (2013). Goal commitments and the content of 
thoughts and dreams: Basic principles. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 1-17. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00415
Kiihle, L. (2015). Insight: What is it, exactly? InT. K. Metzinger 
& J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND. Frankfurt am 
Main: MIND Group.
Marler, P., 
& Ristau, C. A. 
(2013). 
Cognitive ethol­
ogy: Essays in honor of Donald R. Griffin. New York and 
London: Psychology Press.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train 
of thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and 
mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
35(1), 196-204. doi: 10.1037/a00l4l04.
Metzinger, T. (2003a). Being no one: The self-model theory of sub­
jectivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2003b). Phenomenal transparency and cognitive 
self-reference. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 2(4), 
353-393. doi: 10.1023/B:PHEN.0000007366.42918.eb
Metzinger, T. (2004). Why are identity disorders interest­
ing for philosophers? In T. Schramme, & J. Thome (Eds.), 
Philosophy and Psychiatry (pp. 311—325). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Metzinger, T. (2006). Conscious volition and mental rep­
resentation: Toward a more fine-grained analysis. In N. 
Sebanz & W. Prinz (Eds.), Disorders of volition. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2008). Empirical perspectives from the self-model 
theory of subjectivity: A brief summary with examples. 
Progress in Brain Research, 168, 215—278.
Metzinger, T. (2009). Why are out-of-body experiences inter­
esting for philosophers? The theoretical relevance of 
OBE research. Cortex, 45(2), 256-258. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.cortex.2008.09.004
Metzinger, T. (2013a). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1—19.
Metzinger, T. (2013b). Why are dreams interesting for philoso­
phers? The example of minimal phenomenal selfhood, plus 
an agenda for future research. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1— 
17. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00746.
Metzinger, T. (2014). First-order embodiment, second-order 
embodiment, third-order embodiment. In L. Shapiro 
(Ed.), The Routledge handbook of embodied cognition. 
New York: Routledge.
Metzinger, T. (2015). M-Autonomy. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 22(11-12), 270-302.
Metzinger, T. (2017). The problem of mental action. In T. 
Metzinger and W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive 
processing (pp. 1—26). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Metzinger, T. (forthcoming). Why is virtual reality interesting for 
philosophers? Frontiers in Robotics andAI (Research Topic: The 
Impact of Virtual and Augmented Reality on Individuals and 
Society).
Metzinger, T., & Windt, J. M. (2007). The philosophy of 
dreaming and self-consciousness: What happens to the 
experiential subject during the dream state? In D. Barrett
n o
WHY IS M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  I N T E R E S T I N G  FOR P H I L O S O P H E R S ?

& P. McNamara (Eds.), The new science of dreaming, Vol 
3: Cultural and theoretical perspectives (pp. 193—247). 
Westport, CT: Praeger.
O’Brien, L., & Soteriou, M. (Eds.) (2009). Mental actions. 
Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Pezzulo, Giovanni (2017): Tracing the Roots of Cognition 
in Predictive Processing. In: Thomas K. Metzinger und 
Wanja Wiese (Hg.): Philosophy and Predictive Processing. 
Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, https://predictive-mind, 
net / papers/tracing-the-roots-of-cognition-in-predictive- 
processing.
Pliushch, I., & Metzinger, T. (2013). Self-deception and 
the dolphin model of cognition. In R. J. Gennaro (Ed.), 
Disturbed consciousness: New essays on psychopathology and 
theories of consciousness (pp. 167-208). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Seli, P, Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). 
Mind-wandering with and without intention. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 20(8), 603-617. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.tics.2016.05.010.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Song, X., Wang, X., & Krueger, F. (2012). Mind wandering 
in Chinese daily lives: An experience sampling study. PLoS 
ONE, 7(9), e44423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044423
von Hippel, W., & Trivers, R. (2011). The evolution and psy­
chology of self-deception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
3^(01), 1-16.
Voss, U., & Hobson, A. (2015). What is the state-of-the-art on lucid 
dreaming? In: T. K. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open 
MIND, 1-20. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. http://open- 
mind.net/papers/what-is-the-state-of-the-art-on-lucid-dream- 
ing-recent-advances-and-questions-for-future-research.
Wilson, G., & Shpall, S. (2016). Action. In E.N. Zalta (Ed.), The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.Stanford, 
edu/archives/win2016/entries/action/.
Windt, J. M., & Metzinger, T. (2007). The philosophy of 
dreaming and self-consciousness: What happens to the expe­
riential subject during the dream state? In D. Barrett & P. 
McNamara (Eds.), The new science of dreaming, Vol 3: Cultural 
and theoretical perspectives (pp. 193—247). Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
Windt, J. M. (2015). Dreaming: A conceptual framework for 
philosophy of mind and empirical research. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
T H O MA S M E T Z I N G E R
III


C H A P T E R
10
Spontaneity in Evolution, Learning, 
Creativity, and Free Will: Spontaneous 
Variation in Four Selectionist Phenomena
Dean Keith Simonton
Abstract
This chapter proposes that spontaneous variation has a central role in biological evolution, operant 
conditioning, creative thinking, and personal agency. But to support these advantageous outcomes, 
this spontaneity must be joined with some selection process or procedure that decides which alleles, 
behaviors, ideas, or choices are most adaptive or useful. The argument begins with spontaneous 
variations in evolutionary theory, and then turns to operant conditioning, with emphasis on the origins 
of spontaneous behaviors. That analysis leads directly to a discussion that introduces a three-parameter 
definition of both creativity and sightedness, two concepts that provide the foundation for the blind- 
variation and selective-retention model of creativity. The latter is then linked with the chance-then- 
choice theory of free will, a linkage that makes spontaneous choice generation the first of two steps 
leading to personal agency. In all four phenomena, spontaneity is defined as the production of variants in 
ignorance of their actual utilities.
Key Words: spontaneity, biological evolution, operant conditioning, creative thinking, free will
In this chapter I will argue that spontaneity, 
especially in the form of “spontaneous variations,” 
plays an essential role in the acquisition of new 
adaptations and knowledge. Without such sponta­
neity, species never would have evolved, organisms 
would never learn, and new knowledge would never 
have been discovered or created. I will even go so 
far as to argue, toward the end of this chapter, that 
spontaneity has a critical role to play in personal 
agency or “free will.” However, it will also become 
clear that spontaneity is a necessary but not suffi­
cient basis for attaining all of these highly valued 
ends. By itself, spontaneous variation goes nowhere 
beyond the transient act of generating original and 
surprising alleles, behaviors, thoughts, or choices. 
To take the next step, the products of spontaneity 
must be subject to selection, a process or procedure 
that chooses a small subset of emitted effects— often 
only a single variant— to become a more enduring
trait. Indeed, selection operates to construct a reper­
toire of non-spontaneous adaptations to the world, 
as well as established knowledge about the world 
(see also Cziko, 2001; Dennett, 1995).
Admittedly, I might have used other terms 
besides “spontaneous variation” and “environmental 
selection” to get this point across. Examples include 
“trial and error,” “generate and test,” “selection by 
consequences,” “bold conjecture and refutation,” 
or “blind variation and selective retention” (e.g., 
Bain, 1855/1977; Campbell, 1960; Nickles, 2003; 
Popper, 1963; Skinner, 1981). But I will retain the 
term “spontaneity” for three reasons. First, and 
most obviously, by using that term I can more eas­
ily justify my chapters inclusion in this Handbook. 
Second, the concept of spontaneous variation has 
a pedigree going back more than 150 years, as will 
be discussed shortly. Third and last, even though 
the term “spontaneity” will briefly recede into the

background in the middle portion of this chapter, 
it will again come in most handy toward the end by 
serving as an integrative concept. By then it will also 
become obvious why spontaneity probably provides 
a superior concept than “randomness,” a some­
what related but distinct concept that is sometimes 
applied to the same phenomena.
I begin the chapter with a treatment of the selec­
tionist theory of biological evolution. I next turn 
to a discussion of learning, with a special focus on 
Skinnerian operant conditioning. That discussion 
leads seamlessly to a more extended analysis of cre­
ativity, an analysis that will then be extended to a 
treatment of free will.
Evolution
The central thesis of Darwins (1860/1952) the­
ory of evolution by natural selection is that mem­
bers of a species exhibit variation on a host of traits 
and that this variation is subject to selection, so 
that only the fittest variants survive and reproduce. 
For Darwin, this variability was an inevitable fea­
ture of organisms representing almost any species. 
One particular source of this variability was what he 
styled “spontaneous variation,” a term used about a 
half dozen times in his Origin o f Species. However, 
his usage is somewhat restricted to what could also 
be called “sudden” variations or “sports” (cf. “hope­
ful monsters” discussed in Johnson & Bouchard,
2014). Insofar as such variants could contribute to 
evolution by adding to the general variability of spe­
cies subjected to natural selection, Darwin admitted 
that they had some place in evolution, an admis­
sion that increased over the course of his career. 
Nonetheless, Darwin emphasized that spontaneous 
variations were not uncaused, but rather that we 
did not have a complete understanding of how such 
variants came about. The essential point remains 
that all variations were generated without regard to 
their inherent fitness. Instead, their fitness had to 
be determined by each variant s interaction with the 
environment. If otherwise, selection would not be 
necessary because all organisms would be equally fit. 
The fact that not all or even most variants will sur­
vive “the struggle for existence” (the title of O rigins 
third chapter) is ample evidence that variation is not 
prescient. Post hoc validation is mandatory.
From a contemporary perspective, Darwins 
theory of evolution proves inadequate. Two major 
flaws stand out. First, he lacked a modern theory 
of inheritance. Although nearly contemporary, 
Mendels genetics did not become well known 
until long after Darwins death. Indeed, Darwin
114
advocated a version of the now discredited theory 
of acquired characteristics, a version known as 
pangenesis. Second, Darwin could not possess a 
modern theory of how variations originate, sponta­
neous or otherwise. He certainly could not appreci­
ate that these two inadequacies in his theory were 
closely related: Only after obtaining a valid theory 
of genetic inheritance could evolutionary theory 
obtain an adequate theory of variation.
O f course, these problems with evolutionary 
theory were resolved in the middle decades of the 
twentieth century with the advent of the move­
ment variably styled as the New Synthesis, Modern 
Evolutionary Synthesis, or, somewhat inaccurately, 
Neo-Darwinism (see Mayer & Provine, 1998). Not 
only was inheritance rooted in the genes, but these 
genes could undergo unexpected mutations as well 
as genetic recombinations. The mutations could 
thus be said to provide the basis for the spontaneous 
variations mentioned in Origin. That is, new genetic 
traits could appear out of the blue. Although these 
genetic mutations were most often deleterious and 
thus quickly vanished from the gene pool, other 
mutations might confer superior fitness on the 
lucky organism. Natural selection can then oper­
ate to increase the relative frequency of these novel 
traits in the population. Selection remains necessary 
because, according to contemporary Darwinian 
theory, the mutations emerge without any fore­
sight regarding their fitness values. That said, not 
all biologists accepted this view, some believing that 
mutations can be “directed” or “guided” to maxi­
mize fitness in advance (Lenski & Mittler, 1993). 
This dissenting position has inspired considerable 
debate. This controversy compels me to close this 
discussion by defining what it means for a muta­
tion to be directed or guided rather than strictly 
“spontaneous.”
A reasonable formal definition was provided by 
Sober (1992): “Let u be the probability of mutat­
ing from A to a and v be the probability of mutat­
ing from a to A. Mutation is directed if (i) u>v 
and (ii) u>v because w(a)>w(A), where w(X) is the 
fitness of X” (p. 39). The “because” in condition 
(ii) is critical as it indicates that the relative prob­
abilities are caused by the relative fitness values of a 
and A. The organism somehow knows in advance 
that one trait has higher fitness than the other and 
adjusts the probabilities accordingly. In contrast, if 
condition (ii) proves invalid, then we can infer that 
variation and selection are “decoupled,” meaning 
that the “twin sub-processes of variation and selec­
tion . . . take place quite independently, so that the
S P O N T A N E IT Y  IN E V O L U T I O N ,  L E A R N I N G ,  CR EATIV ITY, AND FREE  WILL

factors responsible for the selective perpetuation of 
variants are entirely unrelated to those responsible 
for the original generation of those same variants” 
(Toulmin, 1981, p. 337). Stated yet differently, 
when a mutation fails to meet Sobers requirements 
for directedness, we can claim that the mutation 
is completely spontaneous in the precise sense that 
it occurs without any prior information about 
its adaptive value. The variant was not generated 
because it was already known to bestow higher fit­
ness. The last possibility then requires that selection 
be introduced.
Notice that Sobers definition has two major 
features. First, it makes no reference whatsoever to 
chance or randomness. That is, it does not specify 
how variation and selection are decoupled, but 
rather just affirms what is required for the two 
processes to be considered decoupled, unguided, 
or undirected. This omission is important because 
chance and randomness are extremely difficult 
constructs to define precisely (Simonton, 2007). 
Indeed, given that computers routinely produce 
perfectly random numbers using deterministic algo­
rithms (a.k.a. “pseudorandom number generators”), 
the distinction between determinism and indeter­
minism can become a bit fuzzy. To be sure, random 
variations would be expected to be undirected, yet 
undirected variations need not be random at all. 
The same holds for spontaneous variations.
Second, Sobers definition yields a discrete 
outcome. A mutation-based variation is either 
undirected or directed, spontaneous or not. This 
dichotomous outcome is consistent with stan­
dard Darwinian theory, which demands that 
variations always be undirected. Even so, as will 
become evident in the next section, not all varia­
tion mechanisms must impose this requirement. As 
a consequence, this attribute of variations can just as 
well be quantitative rather than qualitative. In par­
ticular, for certain phenomena, spontaneity may be 
a continuous variable ranging from totally sponta­
neous to perfectly unspontaneous (cf. Kronfeldner,
2010). This provision provides another reason to 
prefer “spontaneous variations” over “random varia­
tions.” Unlike the concept of spontaneity, the dis­
tinction between random and determined events 
is most often viewed as qualitative rather than 
quantitative.1
Learning
Edward L. Thorndike was perhaps the first major 
psychologist to introduce selectionist principles into 
learning theory: his law  o f  effect says that emitted
behaviors will be either strengthened or weakened 
according to whether the environmental conse­
quences are either positive or negative. He demon­
strated this law using his puzzle boxes in which cats 
had to learn to escape. At first the trapped animals 
would just spontaneously emit seemingly random 
behaviors until by chance they pressed a lever that 
opened the door to the outside. As the poor cats 
endured repetitions of the experiment, the amount 
of time taken to escape would decrease until they 
eventually wasted no time getting out. One com­
mon criticism of these experiments is that the cat 
had no opportunity to display intelligent behav­
ior. The situation was so novel, and the solution so 
arbitrary, that the cat had no other option but to 
engage in unintelligent trial and error: the cat could 
only emit spontaneous responses until it received a 
reward, after which the law of effect would take over 
until only the single adaptive behavior remained. 
Put differently, spontaneity was systematically 
extinguished until it totally disappeared. The cat 
had learned the one action that worked.
B. 
F. Skinner took over where Thorndike left 
off and vastly improved and expanded the experi­
mental paradigm under the overall label of operant 
conditioning. At first his research had some of the 
same limitations as Thorndike s. A rat or pigeon in a 
Skinner box had a similarly restricted range of adap­
tive responses to acquire, such as pressing a lever or 
pecking at a disk. Yet he eventually expanded his 
research to incorporate shaping, in which ever closer 
approximations to a desired behavior were induced 
by a systematic application of reinforcement and 
extinction. Pretty soon he had conditioned pigeons 
to play a toy piano or compete at ping pong, among 
other amazing achievements. Whatever the par­
ticular end result, operant conditioning was again 
used to whittle a broad repertoire of spontaneous 
behaviors down to a well-defined and highly specific 
behavior or set of behaviors. The selectionist basis 
for this winnowing procedure was made explicit 
when he termed it “selection by consequences” 
(Skinner, 1981; see also Smith, 1983). Even so, 
Skinner devoted insufficient attention to the origins 
of the spontaneous behaviors on which selection 
had to operate.
This last deficiency was remedied by one of his 
students and collaborators, Robert Epstein (1991), 
who had earlier conducted experiments in which a 
pigeon displayed insight behavior very similar to 
that displayed by chimpanzees in Kohler’s (1925) 
classic studies (Epstein, Kirshnit, Lanza, & Rubin, 
1984). He then devised a formal explanation
ii5
DEAN K E I T H  S I M O N T O N

known as generativity theory, which he developed 
as a sophisticated computer model (Epstein, 1990,
2015). In simple terms, his theory offers a com­
binatorial model in which spontaneous behaviors 
entail recombinations of established behaviors. 
When faced with a routine situation in which the 
response with the highest probability is also the one 
most likely to receive reinforcement, the organism 
has no need to resort to behavioral spontaneity. Yet 
when the organism encounters a novel situation and 
quickly learns that the most probable responses do 
not work, then the probabilities are appropriately 
adjusted. Ineffective prior responses are eventually 
replaced with combinations of prior responses until 
one particular unforeseen combination emerges 
that would receive reinforcement. Spontaneity is 
then dramatically reduced for that situation, but the 
organism has also acquired an adaptation that it did 
not have before— such as a pigeon moving a small 
box under a “banana” hanging from above and then 
standing on the box to peck at the object to obtain 
a food pellet. Unlike standard learning, where the 
curves are gradual, the pigeons switch to this new 
behavioral combination is quite abrupt, looking like 
a genuine insight— a Eureka experience!
Note that evolution also depends on combina­
torial processes. Besides genetic recombination, 
which is explicitly combinatorial, spontaneous 
mutations most often depend upon the various 
ways that genetic material can recombine at the 
molecular level.
Creativity
Epsteins 1991 paper was entitled “Skinner, 
Creativity, 
and the Problem of Spontaneous 
Behavior” and his generativity theory was explicitly 
labeled a theory of creativity (Epstein, 1990, 2015), 
which allows a smooth segue into the topic of this 
section. Moreover, a strong case can be made that 
all forms of creativity are inherently combinatorial 
(Simonton, 2017). For example, Thagard (2012) 
showed that 100 top discoveries and 100 top inven­
tions can each be identified as combinatorial prod­
ucts of various kinds. Furthermore, combinatorial 
models, both mathematical and computational, 
have provided effective simulations of key phenom­
ena associated with creativity (Simonton, 1997, 
2010; Thagard & Stewart, 2011). Yet it must be rec­
ognized that not all combinations are creative. On 
the contrary, highly creative combinations are very 
rare (Simonton, 2012a). Hence, we must devise a 
metric that assesses the creativity associated with 
any given combination. Before we can do so, we
first must define three parameters. These definitions 
then permit us not only to define creativity, but also 
to define a second construct that can be considered 
the absolute inverse of spontaneity. Although the 
definitions are somewhat formal, the formalities 
have higher payoffs than trying to define the same 
concepts in more informal terms. Sometimes pre­
cision really is better than vagueness. Fortunately, 
the mathematics does not exceed that found in any 
introductory probability course.
The Three Parameters
Suppose 
someone 
generates 
k 
ideational 
or 
behavioral 
combinations, 
namely, 
x , 
x , 
x  , . . . x . . . . Xp where k > 1 (e.g., k potential solu­
tions to a given problem). These combinations can 
then be described by the following three parameters 
(cf. Simonton, 2013a, 2016):
1. The in itial probability p . (where 0 < p  < 1). 
This parameter can also be considered a response 
strength at the onset of an episode in which the 
combination may be generated.
2. The fin a l utility u. (where again 0 < u < 1). 
Although technically a continuous variable, u 
can sometimes assume discrete all or none values, 
where 1 = useful and 0 = useless. The adjective 
“final” means that the combinatorial evaluations 
have been finalized.
3. The prior knowledge v of the utility (where 
once more 0 < v. < 1). If v. = 0, the value of u. is 
not known in advance of evaluation process or 
procedure, whereas if v = 1, the utility value is 
already known perfectly. If the prior knowledge 
value falls somewhere between the two outer 
values, such as v = .5, then the individual may 
only experience a “hunch” or a vague “feeling of 
knowing” state, lacking absolute confidence in the 
actual value of u..l
The values of these three parameters are inde­
pendent when any given pair is considered. For 
instance, the prior knowledge of the utility is 
orthogonal to the value of the utility. One might 
know with utter confidence that the combination 
is useful or useless; or one may be completely igno­
rant of whether the combination is useful or useless. 
Nevertheless, the specific parameter values assigned 
u and v taken together strongly constrain the most 
plausible parameter values for p  . In particular, if 
u = v = 1, then a rational being would set p  = 1, 
whereas if u. = 0 but v. = 1, then the same rational
/ 
z
being would set p  -  0. Indeed, these two constraints 
can be taken as a definition of rationality! Moreover,
i i 6
S P O N T A N E IT Y  IN E V O L U T I O N ,  L E A R N I N G ,  CR EATIV ITY, AND FREE  WILL

operant conditioning can be described as the phe­
nomenon where p. goes to 1 because u = 1 and v 
goes to 1. In other words, as an organism learns 
which response is most useful, the probability of the 
most adaptive response increases.
We can now define not just creativity, but also 
another important construct called sightedness (cf. 
Simonton, 2012b, 2013a, 2016).
Creativity and Sightedness
The creativity of any combination x is given by 
the following three-factor product:
ci = (l — p {) ui (l — vi,), 
where 0 < r.<  1
Here (1 -  p )  defines the originality of combina­
tion x (i.e., the inverse of its probability) and (1 -  v) 
represents the combinations surprise (i.e., the 
inverse of the utility’s prior knowledge value). The 
combinations that most surprise are those that give 
us knowledge that we didn’t have before. This third 
factor functions like the “non-obvious” criterion 
used as the third benchmark of the US Patent Office 
(Simonton, 2012c). According to this multiplicative 
integration, a combination’s creativity must be zero 
if any one of the three factors is zero: Unoriginal, 
useless, and/or obvious combinations cannot be 
creative no matter what. Interestingly, if utility and 
surprise are held constant at unity values, then cre­
ativity will only approach unity if the initial prob­
ability approaches zero, where (1 -/>.) = 1 implies 
that p  = 0. Hence, the maximally creative combina­
tions are those that cannot be generated right away, 
but rather require an incubation period before they 
flash to mind in a brilliant insight!
Besides a combination’s creativity, we must also 
define its sightedness, which is given as:
si =  p.u.vn 
where 0 < si < 1
In words, highly sighted combinations have 
high initial probabilities, are highly useful, and that 
usefulness is already known in advance. Indeed, for 
rational beings, as u v —► 1 then p  
1, as noted 
earlier. The combination is then diametrically 
opposed to spontaneity; the combination is elic­
ited precisely to accomplish some useful outcome. 
Significantly, as s —► 1 then c 
0, indicating that 
highly sighted combinations cannot be creative 
because they represent routine, habitual, or repro­
ductive thinking. But what happens as sightedness 
goes to zero? Does that mean that creativity goes to
unity? No, not at all. The combination might have 
low sightedness because u = v = 0, which would 
make c = 0 as well. In short, low sightedness also 
applies to all combinations with low but unknown 
utilities.2
To get a better idea of what is happening here, 
Figure 10.1 provides a scatterplot describing the 
hypothesized relation between creativity and sight­
edness (Simonton, 2012a). Observe that as we 
advance from the most sighted to the least sighted 
combinations, we get the following outcomes: (a) 
the maximum possible creativity increases in an 
accelerated function; (b) the minimum possible 
creativity stays constant at zero; and (c) the con­
ditional distribution of creativity for a given level 
of sightedness becomes more skewed, with uncre- 
ative combinations vastly outnumbering creative 
combinations— meaning that the most creative 
combinations are located where the most uncreative 
combinations are found. This paradox raises the 
question: How does one separate the wheat from 
the chaff, especially when the biggest kernels are 
hidden among the most chaff?
Blind Variation and Selective Retention
Donald Campbell (1960) put forward a solution 
to the last problem: the blin d variation a n d  selective
‘o.o 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Sightedness
Figure 10.1. Scatter plot showing the relation between 
sightedness and creativity for Monte Carlo generated 
combinations, where sightedness is just the inverse of blindness 
(viz. b = 1 -  s). The most creative combinations are found 
on the left side of the graph, where the most uncreative ideas 
are also located, thus requiring the implementation of BVSR, 
generation and test, or trial and error. The graph is adapted from 
Figure 4 in D. K. Simonton (2012a), Combinatorial creativity and 
sightedness: Monte Carlo simulations using three-criterion definitions, 
The International Journal of Creativity & Problem Solving,
22, 5-17.
117
DEAN K E I T H  S I M O N T O N

retention theory of creative thought and “other knowl­
edge processes.” Often abbreviated BVSR, this the­
ory says that creativity and the acquisition of new 
knowledge requires that the person generate blind 
variants that are then tested against the real world 
(whether in the environment directly or via inter­
nal representations of that reality). Unfortunately, 
Campbells presentation of this theory was a bit too 
informal and anecdotal, with little attention given 
to defining the key constructs (Martindale, 2009). 
These communication issues have led to numerous 
misunderstandings, such as thinking that BVSR 
required combinations to be produced randomly or 
that the combinations be equiprobable, neither of 
which is true (Campbell, 1960; Simonton, 2011b). 
Instead, the combinations only have to be generated 
blindly, which most often just means that the per­
son spontaneously conceives the combination with­
out complete prior knowledge of its utility, and thus 
requiring a subsequent test. Expressed in terms of 
our current formalisms, high blindness is equivalent 
to low sightedness because any combination’s blind­
ness h. = 1 — s.. In other words, the creator must
i
i
produce “spontaneous variations” and then subject 
them to evaluation, retaining only those that sat­
isfy the given utility criterion. BVSR operates at the 
left “blind” side of Figure 10.1 because that is the 
only place where the most creative combinations are 
located.
It should be obvious that BVSR operates approx­
imately the same way as operant conditioning, as 
argued by Epsteins (2015) generativity theory. At 
the same time, BVSR and operant conditioning 
work somewhat differently from the combinato­
rial processes seen in biological evolution. Although 
blindness and sightedness define two ends of a con­
tinuum for both learning and creativity (Simonton, 
2011a), natural selection only operates with totally 
blind genetic combinations and mutations. That is, 
if biological variants are undirected, according to 
Sobers (1992) definition, then it necessarily follows 
that v = 0 and hence s = 0. Only operant condi­
tioning and creativity can function somewhere in 
the middle of the bipolar continuum defining the 
horizontal axis in Figure 10.1.
Free Will
This updated BVSR theory of creativity is largely 
isomorphic with a major theory of free will: the chance 
then choice theory (Simonton, 2013b; cf. Doyle,
2011). The latter theory attempts to find a solution 
to the fundamental problem that both determin­
ism and indeterminism are antithetical to genuine
free will (Dennett, 1984). Choices are obviously not 
free if they are utterly determined, but they are also 
not free if they are generated randomly because they 
would no longer indicate anything representative 
of the person making a bona fide choice (cf. James, 
1884). The theory’s solution is to conceive free will 
as a two-step process, just as BVSR entails a two-step 
operation. More specifically, the “two-stage model 
effectively separates chance (the indeterministic free 
element) from choice (an arguably determinate deci­
sion that follows causally from one’s character, values, 
and especially feelings and desires at the moment of 
decision)” (Doyle, 2010, p. 8). Saying that the deci­
sion is “determinate” just means that the individual 
determines the choice, rather than the decision 
being imposed from outside the person, by extrane­
ous forces, and thereby not representing a genuine 
choice. The individual thus remains an agent.
Admittedly, the BVSR theory of creativity and 
the chance-choice theory of free will have some dif­
ferences, too. Yet while some of these differences 
are essential, others are peripheral and can thus be 
modified. In the former category is the fact that 
BVSR aims at identifying the most creative combi­
nation, whereas chance-choice endeavors to identify 
the most useful one, at least in the sense of fitting 
the individual’s personal disposition at the time the 
choice is made. Only in the case of highly creative 
persons might the most favored choice also prove 
less useful. For instance, an avant-garde artist might 
deliberately sacrifice some utility for originality, 
producing a highly shocking work that only appeals 
to a tiny group of cognoscente.
In the category of peripheral differences is the 
contrast between the “blindness” of BVSR theory 
and the “chance” of the chance-choice theory. 
Because this contrast is superficial, it can easily be 
removed. Just as BVSR does not require the random 
generation of combinations, free will really should 
not demand that choices be generated by chance. 
Instead, the choices only need to be produced 
blindly, meaning that they are produced without 
prior knowledge of their utility values (i.e., v = 0), 
thereby requiring the second stage in the process, 
the selection or decision stage. For example, if a per­
son contrives a grid containing all possible options 
using combinatorial procedures, then those choices 
are blind without being random. The second step is 
still required to separate the wheat from the chaff, 
just as in BVSR. Expressed differently, choices must 
be spontaneously generated, without regard to 
potential utilities, and then the utilities evaluated 
at a later stage.
i i 8
S P O N T A N E IT Y  IN E V O L U T I O N ,  L E A R N I N G ,  CR EATIV ITY, AND FREE  WILL

The preceding argument implies that free will 
might itself be viewed as often involving a combina­
torial process or procedure, just like creativity and 
operant conditioning (Simonton, 2013b). Indeed, 
this particular theory has been called “Valerian free 
will” (Doyle, 2011; cf. Dennett, 1978) after the 
words of the French poet, Paul Valery: “It takes 
two to invent anything. The one makes up combi­
nations; the other one chooses, recognizes what is 
important to him in the mass of things which the 
former has imparted to him” (Hadamard, 1945, 
p. 30). Yet Valery’s assertion concerns creativity 
(“invention”), not free will per se. By implication, 
creativity can be used to make people freer by using 
combinatorial processes or procedures to generate 
more choices. Personal freedom or agency depends 
on the capacity for spontaneity, that is, the capacity 
for generating options without prior knowledge of 
which will later be considered most useful (i.e., the 
final utility «).
One remarkable feature of this new version of 
the chance-choice theory is that it provides new 
insights into the nature of free will. These insights 
all ensue from the fact that choices that come from 
the blind end of the choice combinations in Figure 
10.1 will operate to increase personal freedom 
(Simonton, 2013b). Already this leads to the strik­
ing implication that free will itself is not an all-or- 
nothing psychological event, but rather is situated 
on a continuous dimension from minimally to max­
imally free. In addition, any factors that enable the 
individual to operate at the blind end will enable 
the person to be freer. For example, as the number 
of choices increases (i.e., as k increases), so will free­
dom, all other factors held constant. Moreover, as 
the choices become more equal in their initial prob­
abilities (i.e., as p . —► \!k  for all /), free will corre­
spondingly increases in a nonlinear but monotonic 
fashion, again with all other factors held constant.
Besides those logical implications, I can also 
argue that factors that empirical research has found 
to enhance creativity would also serve to increase 
free will. Given that argument, we can say that per­
sonal agency or autonomy will be higher for those 
individuals for whom certain cognitive processes, 
personality traits, developmental experiences, and 
environmental conditions support the generation 
of highly unsighted ideational or behavioral com­
binations (Simonton & Damian, 2013; Simonton,
2003). These supportive factors include openness to 
experience (McCrae & Greenberg, 2014); reduced 
latent inhibition, defocused attention, or cogni­
tive disinhibition (Carson, 2014); psychoticism
(Eysenck, 1994; Stavridou & Furnham, 1996; cf. 
Acar & Runco, 2012) or schizotypy (Nettle, 2006; 
cf. Acar & Sen, 2013); divergent thinking and 
remote or rare associations (Gough, 1976; Guilford, 
1967; Mednick, 1962; Rothenberg, 2015); multi­
cultural experiences (Godart, Maddux, Shipilov, 
& Galinsky, 2015; Leung & Chiu, 2008; Leung, 
Maddux, Galinsky, & Chiu, 2008; Maddux, Adam, 
& Galinsky, 2010; Saad, Damian, Benet-Martinez, 
Moons, & Robins, 2013); and varied kinds of novel, 
incongruous, random, or chaotic environmental 
stimuli (Damian & Simonton, 2014; e.g., Ritter 
et al., 2012; Rothenberg, 2015; Vohs, Redden, & 
Rahinel, 2013). Both separately and together, these 
factors enable the individual to conceive combina­
tions located toward the left: side of the scatter plot 
shown in Figure 10.1. Because these spontaneous 
combinations are generated without prior knowl­
edge of their utilities, and hence without awareness 
of whether the choices will be selected, the resulting 
decision enjoys far less psychological predictability.
Conclusion
I have just discussed biological evolution, oper­
ant conditioning, BVSR creativity, and a modified 
version of the chance-then-choice theory of free 
will. Permeating all four sections was the concept 
of spontaneity, although that concepts explicit 
involvement was not uniform. I started with spon­
taneous variation in Darwin’s theory of evolution. 
Although this concept had a more limited role in 
his theory, its importance was expanded in the New 
Evolutionary Synthesis with the advent of sponta­
neous genetic mutations. I then turned to learning, 
and especially operant conditioning, ending with a 
treatment of the origins of spontaneous behavioral 
variants. The latter discussion led quite naturally 
to the section on creativity, and its concentration 
on the blind variation and selective retention the­
ory (BVSR). I argued that “blind” variation might 
just as well be called “spontaneous” variation. That 
notion was then carried over to the final analysis 
of free will, a phenomenon that can be analyzed in 
BVSR terms. Spontaneity then becomes a source of 
personal autonomy.
The use of the noun “spontaneity” or the adjec­
tive “spontaneous” may seem highly variable across 
these four contexts. But they do share a single con­
ceptual basis. The words were used in all four situ­
ations to describe when variants— whether alleles, 
behaviors, thoughts, or choices— are emitted 
without prior knowledge about their ultimate fit­
ness or utility values. Hence, the outcomes cannot
ii 9
DEAN K E I T H  S I M O N T O N

possibly be generated because they are useful. That 
prior ignorance then requires the imposition of a 
second selection stage, whether evolutions natu­
ral selection, operant conditionings selection by 
consequences, BVSR’s selection and retention, or 
free choice’s decision phase. Naturally, the latter 
necessity implies that many, if not most, of these 
variants will feature no fitness or utility whatso­
ever. Many mutations will be maladaptive; many 
behaviors initially emitted in a Skinner box will 
yield no food pellet; many combinations pro­
duced during creative thought will end up being 
rejected; and many options pondered in life will 
not be chosen. In that respect, spontaneous vari­
ants are awfully wasteful. Yet without the capac­
ity for such spontaneity, species could not evolve, 
organisms would never learn, individuals could 
not be creative, and persons could not construct 
their own lives. Those four adverse consequences 
should suffice to explain why spontaneity per­
vades such diverse phenomena!
Notes
1. In truth, one can argue that randomness and determinism 
represent opposite ends of a quantitative bipolar dimen­
sion. To provide an everyday illustration, if I put a wad­
ded up piece of paper into the wastebasket right next to 
my desk chair, the event can be considered totally deter­
ministic. It was inevitable that the event would happen. 
But if I toss the same ball of paper into a wastebasket at 
the other end of my large office, and it goes straight in 
without even touching the rim, most observers, including 
me, would attribute that perfect toss to pure luck. Yet if 
I decided to move the target closer to my desk to avoid the 
accumulation of failed shots on the surrounding floor, it 
would be absurd to specify that precise distance between 
me and the wastebasket where this event switches from 
random to deterministic. If an NBA player makes 80% 
of his free throws but 20% of his 3-point attempts, is the 
former deterministic but the latter random?
2. I am deliberately oversimplifying here. If a blind combina­
tion is defined as one in which s. = 0, then there are seven 
different types of blind combinations, only four having 
v = 0 (viz., creative ideas or responses, fortuitous response 
bias, problem finding, and blissful ignorance, discussed in 
Simonton, 2016). Excluding creative combinations, six of 
these seven types are represented by the data points in the 
lower left-hand corner of Figure 10.1 (albeit not all types are 
equally probable, at least for rational creatures). Discussing 
these complications would take us too far from the current 
goal of formally representing spontaneity.
References
Acar, S., & Runco, M. A. (2012). Psychoticism and creativity: A 
meta-analytic review. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts, 6, 341-350.
Acar, S., & Sen, S. (2013). A multilevel meta-analysis of the 
relationship between creativity and schizotypy. Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 7, 214-228.
Bain, A. (1855/1977). The senses and the intellect (D. N. 
Robinson, Ed.). Washington, DC: University Publications 
of America. (Original work published 1855).
Campbell, D. T. (I960). Blind variation and selective reten­
tion in creative thought as in other knowledge processes. 
Psychological Review, 67, 380-400.
Carson, S. H. (2014). Cognitive disinhibition, creativity, and 
psychopathology. In D. K. Simonton (Ed.), The Wiley 
handbook of genius (pp. 198—221). Oxford: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Cziko, G. A. (2001). Universal selection theory and the comple­
mentarity of different types of blind variation and selective 
retention. In C. Heyes & D. L. Hull (Eds.), Selection theory 
and social construction: The evolutionary naturalistic episte­
mology of Donald T. Campbell (pp. 15-34). Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Damian, R. I., & Simonton, D. K. (2014). Diversifying expe­
riences in the development of genius and their impact on 
creative cognition. In D. K. Simonton (Ed.), The Wiley hand­
book of genius (pp. 375-393). Oxford: John Wiley & Sons.
Darwin, C. (1860/1952). The origin of species by means of 
natural selection. In R. M. Hutchins (Ed.), Great books of the 
Western world (Vol. 49, pp. 1—251). Chicago: Encyclopedia 
Britannica. (Original second edition published 1860).
Dennett, D. C. (1978). Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind 
and psychology. Hassocks, UK: Harvester Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1984). Elbow room: The varieties of free will 
worth wanting. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1995). Darwins dangerous idea: Evolution and 
the meanings of life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Doyle, B. (2010). Jamesian free will, the two-stage model of 
William James. William James Studies, 5, 1—28. http://wil- 
liamjamesstudies.org/5.1 /doyle.pdf
Doyle, B. (2011). Free will: The scandal in philosophy. Cambridge, 
MA: I-Phi Press, http://informationphilosopher.com/books/ 
Free_Will_Scandal.pdf
Epstein, R. (1990). Generativity theory and creativity. In M. 
Runco & R. Albert (Eds.), Theories of creativity (pp. 116- 
140). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Epstein, R. (1991). Skinner, creativity, and the problem of spon­
taneous behavior. Psychological Science, 2, 362-370.
Epstein, R. (2015). Of course animals are creative: Insights from 
generativity theory. In A. B. Kaufman & J. C. Kaufman 
(Eds.). Animal creativity and innovation (pp. 375—390). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Epstein, R., Kirshnit, C. E., Lanza, R. P., & Rubin, L. C. (1984). 
“Insight” in the pigeon: Antecedents and determinants of an 
intelligent performance. Nature, 308 (5954), 61-62.
Eysenck, H. J. (1994). Creativity and personality: Word associa­
tion, origence, and Psychoticism. Creativity Research Journal, 
7, 209-216.
Godart, F., Maddux, W. W., Shipilov, A., & Galinsky, A. D. 
(2015). Fashion with a foreign flair: Professional experiences 
abroad facilitate the creative innovations of organizations. 
Academy of Management Journal, 58, 195—220.
Gough, H. G. (1976). Studying creativity by means of word 
association tests. Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, 348-353.
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
1 2 0
S P O N T A N E IT Y  IN E V O L U T I O N ,  L E A R N I N G ,  CR EATIV ITY, AND FREE  WILL

Hadamard, J. (1945). The psychology of invention in the math­
ematical field. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
James, W. (1884). The dilemma of determinism. Unitarian 
Review and Religious Magazine, 22, 193—224.
Johnson, W., & Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (2014). Genetics of intel­
lectual and personality traits associated with creative 
genius: Could geniuses be Cosmobian Dragon Kings? In D. 
K. Simonton (Ed.), The Wiley handbook of genius (pp. 269— 
296). Oxford: Wiley.
Kohler, W. (1925). The mentality of apes (E. Winter, Trans.). 
New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Kronfeldner, M. E. (2010). Darwinian “blind” hypothesis for­
mation revisited. Synthese, 175, 193-218.
Lenski, R. E., & Mittler, J. E. (1993). The directed mutation 
controversy and neo-Darwinism. Science, 259, 188—194.
Leung, A. K., & Chiu, C. (2008). Interactive effects of multi­
cultural experiences and openness to experience on creative 
potential. Creativity Research Journal, 20, 376—382.
Leung, A. K., Maddux, W. W., Galinsky, A. D., & Chiu, C. 
(2008). Multicultural experience enhances creativity: The 
when and how. American Psychologist, 63, 169—181.
Maddux, W. W., Adam, H., & Galinsky, A. D. (2010). When in 
Rome ... learn why the Romans do what they do: How mul­
ticultural learning experiences facilitate creativity. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 731-741.
Martindale, C. (2009). Evolutionary models of innovation and 
creativity. In T. Rickards, M. Runco & S. Moger (Eds.), 
Routledge companion to creativity (pp. 109—118). London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Mayer, E., & Provine, W. B. (Eds.). (1998). The evolutionary 
synthesis: Perspectives on the unification of biology (paperback 
edition). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Greenberg, D. M. (2014). Openness to expe­
rience. In D. K. Simonton (Ed.), The Wiley handbook of 
genius (pp. 222-243). Oxford: John Wiley & Sons.
Mednick, S. A. (1962). The associative basis of the creative pro­
cess. Psychological Review, 69, 220-232.
Nettle, D. (2006). Schizotypy and mental health amongst poets, 
visual artists, and mathematicians. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 40, 876-890.
Nickles, T. (2003). Evolutionary models of innovation and the 
Meno problem. In L. V. Shavinina (Ed.), The international 
handbook on innovation (pp. 54—78). New York: Elsevier 
Science.
Popper, K. (1963). Conjectures and Refutations. London: 
Routledge.
Ritter, S. M., Damian, R. I., Simonton, D. K., van Baaren, R. B., 
Strick, M., Derks, J. & Dijksterhuis, A. (2012). Diversifying 
experiences 
enhance 
cognitive 
flexibility. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 961—964.
Rothenberg, A. (2015). Flight from wonder: An investigation of 
scientific creativity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Saad, C. S., Damian, R. I., Benet-Martinez, V., Moons, W. 
G., & Robins, R. W. (2013). Multiculturalism and creativ­
ity: Effects of cultural context, bicultural identity, and cog­
nitive fluency. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 
36-374.
Simonton, D. K. (1997). Creative productivity: A predictive 
and explanatory model of career trajectories and landmarks. 
Psychological Review, 104, 66-89.
Simonton, D. K. (2003). Scientific creativity as constrained sto­
chastic behavior: The integration of product, process, and 
person perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 475—494.
Simonton, D. K. (2007). Chance. In N. J. Salkind (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of measurement and statistics (Vol. 1, pp. 129— 
133). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Simonton, D. K. (2010). Creativity as blind-variation and 
selective-retention: Constrained combinatorial models of 
exceptional creativity. Physics of Life Reviews, 7, 156-179.
Simonton, D. K. (2011a). Creativity and discovery as blind 
variation and selective retention: Multiple-variant defini­
tions and blind-sighted integration. Psychology of Aesthetics, 
Creativity, and the Arts, 5, 222-228.
Simonton, D. K. (201 lb). Creativity and discovery as blind vari­
ation: Campbell’s (I960) BVSR model after the half-century 
mark. Review of General Psychology, 15, 158—174.
Simonton, D. K. (2012a). Combinatorial creativity and sighted­
ness: Monte Carlo simulations using three-criterion defini­
tions. International Journal of Creativity & Problem Solving, 
22(2), 5-17.
Simonton, D. K. (2012b). Creativity, problem solving, and solu­
tion set sightedness: Radically reformulating BVSR. Journal 
of Creative Behavior, 46, 48-65.
Simonton, D. K. (2012c). Taking the US Patent Office creativ­
ity criteria seriously: A quantitative three-criterion definition 
and its implications. Creativity Research Journal, 24, 97—106.
Simonton, D. K. (2013a). Creative thought as blind varia­
tion and selective retention: Why sightedness is inversely 
related to creativity. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical 
Psychology, 33, 253-266.
Simonton, D. K. (2013b). Creative thoughts as acts of free 
will: A two-stage formal integration. Review of General 
Psychology, 17, 374-383.
Simonton, D. K. (2016). Defining creativity: Don’t we also need 
to define what is not creative? Journal of Creative Behavior. 
doi: 10.1002/jocb.l3 7
Simonton, D. K. (2017). Domain-general creativity: On pro­
ducing original, useful, and surprising combinations. In J. 
C. Kaufman, V. P. Glaveanu, & J. Baer (Eds.), Cambridge 
handbook of creativity across different domains (pp. 41—60). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Simonton, D. K., & Damian, R. I. (2013). Creativity. In D. 
Reisberg (Ed.), Oxford handbook of cognitive psychology (pp. 
795-807). New York: Oxford University Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1981, July 31). Selection by consequences. 
Science, 213, 5015-504.
Smith, T. L. (1983). Skinner’s environmentalism: The analogy 
with natural selection. Behaviorism, 11, 133—153.
Sober, E. (1992). Models of cultural evolution. In P. Griffiths 
(Ed.), Trees of life: Essays in philosophy of biology (pp. 17-39). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stavridou, A., & Furnham, A. (1996). The relationship between 
psychoticism, trait-creativity and the attentional mechanism 
of cognitive inhibition. Personality and Individual Differences, 
21, 143-153.
Thagard, P. (2012). Creative combination of representa­
tions: Scientific discovery and technological invention. 
In R. Proctor & E. J. Capaldi (Eds.), Psychology of sci­
ence: Implicit and explicit processes. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
DEAN K E I T H  S I M O N T O N
121

Thagard, P., & Stewart, T. C. (2011). The AHA! experi­
ence: Creativity through emergent binding in neural 
networks. C ognitive Science: A  M ultidisciplinary Journal, 
3 5 , 1-33.
Toulmin, S. (1981). Evolution, adaptation, and human 
understanding. In M. B. Brewer & B. E. Collins (Eds.),
Scientific inquiry an d the social sciences (pp. 18—36). San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Vohs, K., Redden, J., & Rahinel, R. (2013). Physical order pro­
duces healthy choices, generosity, conventionality, whereas 
disorder produces creativity. 
Psychological Science, 
24, 
1860-1867.
1 2 2
S P O N T A N E IT Y  IN E V O L U T I O N ,  L E A R N I N G ,  CR EATIV ITY, AND FREE  WILL

How Does the Waking and Sleeping Brain 
Produce Spontaneous Thought and Imagery, 
and Why?
John S. Antrobus
C H A P T E R
11
Abstract
Although mind-wandering and dreaming often appear as trivial or distracting cognitive processes, this 
chapter suggests that they may also contribute to the evaluation, sorting, and saving of representations 
of recent events of future value to an individual. But 50 years after spontaneous imagery—night 
dreaming—was first compared to concurrent cortical EEG, there is limited hard evidence on the neural 
processes that produce either visual dreaming imagery or the speech imagery of waking spontaneous 
thought. The authors propose here an outline of a neurocognitive model of such processes with 
suggestions for future research that may contribute to a better understanding of their utility.
Key Words: mind-wandering, dreaming, imagery, neural process, cognition, neurocognition
Cognitive Utility
Whether daydreaming and mind-wandering are 
a cognitive disability or whether they have some 
value for an individual has been hotly debated over 
the past century. Given that spontaneous imagery 
and thought occupy a substantial part of every­
one’s waking day and sleeping night, the question 
deserves attention. Industrial psychologists in the 
service of assembly-line efficiency continue to see 
daydreaming as the enemy of productivity— which 
Charlie Chaplin hilariously parodied in M odern 
Times (1936). And the factory ethic has been vig­
orously carried over into school classrooms, where 
teachers see mind-wandering as inattention, incom­
patible with learning. Woodworth (1921, pp. 496, 
499) suggested that a person lacking in “the per­
sonal force needed in dealing with other people, 
may take refuge in daydreams as a substitute for 
real thing.” Indeed, the very words “daydreaming” 
and “mind-wandering” have a pejorative quality 
that is incompatible with any positive function. 
Expanding this negative viewpoint, some moralists
associated dreaming and daydreaming to sexual and 
other taboo ideation. But Jerome L. Singer saw the 
positive side of daydreaming. Although profession­
ally trained as a clinical psychologist, his liberal arts 
background constantly reminded him of the value 
of a rich inner life described by novelists and poets. 
His argument for that positive value persuaded 
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) 
in 1958 to award him the first research grant to 
study the “Dimensions of Fantasy: Imagination 
Aspects of Internally-Produced Cognitive Processes 
Production.” Starting as his first graduate assistant, 
we actively collaborated for many years as we moved 
from Teachers College, Columbia University, to 
City College, City University of New York, and 
Jerome moved on to Yale University. To distinguish 
imaginal thought from perceptual cognition, we 
called it “stimulus-independent thought” which 
had the convenient acronym “SIT.” However, as we 
show in the following, the neurocognitive processes 
that generate the speech portion of thought are 
significantly different from those that produce the
123

visual image portion. So we now prefer “spontane­
ous thought and imagery (STI) to represent their 
collective production.1
“IVe got to . . . wash the dishes, . . . call 
my mother, . . .  go to the bank, . . .  gas up the 
car,. . .  make a date for Friday night,. . .  pick up the 
groceries,. . .  finish the paper,.. .” illustrate the pos­
itive contribution of STI to personal planning and 
personal concern (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & 
Spreng, 2014; Klinger, 1971, 1999, 2009; Singer, 
1966, 1970; Spreng & Andrews-Hanna, 2015). 
But note that the external perceptual processes that 
compete with STI (reading this text, listening to the 
teacher, watching the car in front of yours, check­
ing the output on the assembly line, etc.) are also 
of personal concern. The personal concerns of STI 
and external sensory perception are in continuous 
competition. Whether the cognitive system pro­
duces STI or attends to external stimuli requires the 
comparison of the relative estimated value of the 
two, and this comparison is continuous across time 
and space. If processing current visual or auditory 
stimuli is of greater value than STI, STI produc­
tion should stop. But if the external world holds 
little interest, one may switch to his or her private 
thoughts, whether for entertainment or personal 
concerns. In the framework of utility theory (pay­
off minus cost), the utility of sensory perception 
is continuously weighed against the utility of STI 
(Antrobus, 1999; Antrobus, Singer, & Greenberg, 
1966). The ideal cognitive system maximizes util­
ity by estimating the utility of each and choosing 
the alternative that offers the best payoff minus cost. 
And since STI can be generated while one is brush­
ing ones teeth, walking down a crowded street, driv­
ing to work, and even in a drowsy or sleep state, the 
cost of generating STI may be so small that it is eas­
ily offset by the value of generating the small every­
day reminders that we scarcely notice, such as “turn 
on the kettle, . . . where is my cell phone, . . . time 
to go to class.”
This competition between STI and sensory per­
ception provides a convenient way to determine 
how the interacting networks of executive pro­
cesses within the cognitive system compare with 
the value of STI versus sensory perception and how 
they accomplish the deft switching back and forth 
between the two. In order to measure the conditions 
under which the cognitive system chooses STI, 
we employed a one-hour STI versus information­
processing task in which subjects, sitting in a light- 
and sound-attenuated room, were cued every 15 
seconds to indicate (Yes/No with a toggle switch)
whether any STI occurred in that prior interval (15- 
sec intervals were optimally sensitive to STI because 
the probability of STI in longer intervals was close 
to 1; Antrobus, Singer & Greenberg, 1966). To our 
surprise, we found that, unlike the popular stereo­
type, daydreaming, i.e., STI, is not limited to inter­
vals of extended boredom. When we systematically 
varied the “free time” interval between response and 
next sensory stimulus within 15-second trials, STI 
was reported in “free” (inter-response-stimulus) 
intervals as short as 1 second! Perhaps we never 
notice these brief moments of STI in our everyday 
life, but they may nevertheless have a useful func­
tion. As William James noted, the mind never goes 
blank: “. . .w e must simply say that thought goes 
on” (1890, Vol. l,p . 225).
The 1966 experiments support the basic STI 
utility model. As predicted, increasing the payoff 
for processing the task stimuli significantly increases 
task performance and does so at the expense of 
decreasing STI production. But note that the cogni­
tive system does not wait until its sensory-processing 
resources are idle to produce STI. In order to ensure 
that task performance and STI production do not 
compete for the processing resources that they 
share, the cognitive system learns to anticipate 
when cognitive resources may be free, even if for a 
second, to produce STI. As evidence, holding task 
information rate per 15-second interval constant, 
Drucker showed that STI production was substan­
tially higher when task stimuli were presented at a 
constant and therefore predictable inter-stimulus 
intervals, compared to variable and therefore unpre­
dictable inter-stimulus intervals (see Antrobus, 
Singer, Goldstein, & Fortgang, 1970).
The personal concerns that dominate such a 
large part of STI are represented in the continu­
ous evaluation of memories of recent events. This 
evaluation process functions to identify memories 
that are, indeed, of personal concern or threat, and 
should be saved for further attention, or consoli­
dated in a more stable frontal cortex memory, ver­
sus those which can be safely ignored and discarded. 
In order to determine whether the STI increases 
in response to real threat, we exposed subjects, in 
1965, to a (fake) radio broadcast reporting a major 
escalation in the Vietnam War and a likely draft: call 
of all college-age males. As predicted, relative to the 
control group, subjects exposed to the fake broad­
cast produced significantly more STI throughout 
the entire hour. Although the war threat broadcast 
slightly decreased task performance, as predicted 
by the utility model, the decrease was short of
124
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  AND IMAGERY

statistical significance. We suggest that the different 
time distributions of the task and STI payoff saved 
task performance from being sacrificed to STI. 
The cognitive system had only 1 second to recog­
nize each task stimulus, but the response to the war 
threat could be postponed for at least an hour. Now, 
like Woodward, you might ask, what is the utility of 
STI regarding an impending war if there is nothing 
you can do about it?
I suggest that the first job of the cognitive system 
is to compute and “read out” STI— in this case, the 
implicit threats in the radio war broadcast and the 
names of friends vulnerable to the draft:— so the cog­
nitive system can determine if the STI does indeed 
describe a potential threat. If so, the cognitive sys­
tem may move out of the STI mode and activate 
deliberate thought to determine the utility of pos­
sible overt alternative responses to the threat. And 
many of our subjects started to do just that! In the 
experiment debriefing session, prior to telling them 
it was a fake broadcast, many subjects described 
vivid images of being cruelly tortured by enemy 
soldiers. Until we intervened by telling them that 
the war threat broadcast was a fake, they planned 
to immediately notify all their friends who were 
vulnerable to the draft, and some recommended 
leaving for safety in Canada (Antrobus, Singer, & 
Greenberg, 1966). Note how the cognitive system 
simultaneously maximizes the utility of the task and 
STI production. It weighs the benefit minus cost 
of the information-processing task, STI production, 
and an overt response to threat to maximize over­
all utility. Since subjects were penalized at differ­
ent rates for information-processing errors and STI 
is produced in the “free time” between successive 
responses and next stimuli, utility for task and STI 
were in conflict. So as we increased the financial cost 
of a task error, the rate of generating STI decreased. 
Since the danger of one’s friends who might be 
drafted would not be affected by a one-hour delay, 
the utility of overt response to the draft threat, the 
utility of task performance, and the utility of STI 
production appear to be jointly maximized.
The role of the STI response in initiating overt 
responses to the war threat does not imply that 
the utility of STI is limited to eliciting behavioral 
solutions to personal concerns. I suggest that the 
cognitive system continually scans through recent 
memories to determine which require more delib­
erate problem-solving attention, which need to 
be saved in a more permanent form, which sug­
gest revision of earlier memories, and of equal 
importance given the finite storage capacity of
our brains, which are of such little personal con­
cern that they can be discarded. These rather dif­
ferent values are illustrated when we systematically 
sample STI in waking individuals over an extended 
time, as described in the preceding. STI is initially 
concerned exclusively with recent novel external 
events— thinking about the purpose of the study, 
whether they are performing well, and whether 
they are liked by the experimenter. But over the 
course of an hour, STI progressively turns almost 
entirely to prior familiar matters— college and fam­
ily issues that had been thought about many times 
before (Reinsel et al., 1992). Novel current events, 
such as participating in the experiment, top the list, 
but over time the value of continued “rehashing” of 
the same information decreases (Andrews-Hanna, 
Reidler, Huang, & Buckner, 2010). These processes 
may include problem-solving, planning, sorting 
out trivial information, and consolidating useful 
information (a cortical-hippocampus process) of 
personal value (as represented in the medial pre­
frontal cortex) into long-term memory (see Brokaw, 
Tishler, Manceior, & Wamsley, 2016; Spreng, & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2015).
Absent a serious threat, each STI topic is soon 
replaced by the “readout” of another concern. 
What accounts for these shifts in STI? In neural 
networks such as the emergent model of O ’Reilly 
and Munakata (2010, 2014), competition plays 
on until the networks “settle” into a solution—  
the neural representation of an object or event 
sequence (a state where further interaction pro­
duces little further change— the neural network 
version of boredom). At that point, other issues—  
mismatches among existing person, object, event, 
and goal representations— that had been suppressed 
(inhibited) by production of the prior STI produc­
tion may begin to dominate the personal concern 
arena and initiate competition for the production 
of the next STI. Indeed, one STI (e.g., “I’ve got to 
study for tomorrow’s math test”) may cue associ­
ated concerns, “I’ve got to get groceries for dinner
tonight. . .  I should leave here by 5___ ” The process
never ends because there is no limit on the size of 
the personal concern arena. Note that the so-called 
executive management of this process is widely dis­
tributed across competing neural networks within 
competing cortical regions, most with ultimate con­
nections to the medial prefrontal cortex.
We assume that spontaneous subvocal speech 
is the dominant part of STI. Nevertheless, subvo­
cal speech itself represents only a fraction of the 
complex interrelated meanings and competing
J O H N  S. A N T R O B U S
125

concerns, plans, and values associated with the 
production of each subvocal speech STI. What, 
then, is the particular function of the spontaneous 
subvocal speech “read out” itself? We suggest that 
because fluent speech production and recognition 
are the most effective way one has of communicat­
ing with other people, it is also the most effective 
way of communicating with oneself, for example, 
for different memories, intentions, and values repre­
sented in different cortical locations to be compared 
(see Spreng & Andrews-Hanna, 2015). Perhaps 
transforming a complex abstract representation 
into subvocal speech enables the frontal cortex to 
save the representation in a more simplified form, 
and also one that shares features (i.e., words) with 
other memories. That’s a hard one to test! It may be 
helpful to compare the pattern and magnitude of 
activation in the temporal, parietal, and dorsome- 
dial frontal cortices that is produced by spontaneous 
subvocal speech with deliberate subvocal speech as a 
reference (see Amunts & Catani, 2014; Horikawa, 
Tamaki, Miyawaki, & Kamitani, 2013; Spreng & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2015).
Spontaneous Subvocal Speech Versus 
Spontaneous Visual Imagery I
By discussing STI as though it consists exclu­
sively of spontaneous subvocal speech, we ignore 
the quite different process by which spontaneous 
visual imagery, possibly a minor part of waking STI 
and the primary part of dreaming STI, is produced. 
Given that we have no visual image generator com­
parable to our vocal speech generator, the processes 
that produce spontaneous visual imagery may vary 
considerably from those that generate spontaneous 
subvocal speech. Frontal and prefrontal default cor­
tical processes may play a large part in generating 
both, but those cortical processes must be distin­
guished from the quite different processes that cre­
ate visual imagery and subvocal speech. And since 
the utility of spontaneous subvocal speech may 
differ substantially from that of spontaneous visual 
imagery, understanding those differences may help 
us determine their utility.
We assume that spontaneous subvocal speech 
is produced by many of the same cortical vocal 
production circuits as vocal speech, especially the 
temporal, parietal, and dorsomedial frontal cortices. 
Note that waking speech production is closely tied 
to auditory feedback from vocal speech. If normal 
auditory feedback from one’s speech is suppressed, 
the speaker begins to stutter in the attempt to 
recover the expected auditory feedback. Indeed, the
production and recognition portions of spontane­
ous subvocal speech are so closely interrelated that 
people often find it difficult to distinguish acoustic 
speech imagery from the meaning of the thought 
that it expresses. They can’t confidently distinguish 
between whether they “heard” themselves speak, or 
simply that they knew what they were saying.
One reason for the apparently weaker role of 
visual imagery in STI production is that the visual 
recognition cortex lacks the interacting production- 
recognition system of the auditory brain. While 
spontaneous subvocal speech is produced by many 
of the same structures and processes as vocal speech, 
the processes that produce spontaneous visual imag­
ery are not well known. Although we seem to have 
little difficulty generating the spontaneous subvo­
cal speech of STI while simultaneous listening to 
the radio, or to a friend or classroom teacher (see 
Wammes, Seli, Cheyne, Boucher, & Smilek, 2016), 
spontaneous visual imagery seems unable to sur­
vive the illumination in normal waking environ­
ments. Supporting this assumption, we found that 
increasing the task information rate suppressed 
spontaneous visual imagery much more severely 
than spontaneous subvocal speech. Nevertheless, 
both STI imagery modalities are weaker when task 
stimuli are presented in the same sensory modality; 
that is, even spontaneous subvocal speech is weaker 
when the task stimuli are auditory rather than visual 
(Antrobus, Singer, Goldstein, & Fortgang, 1970).
Spontaneous Visual Imagery
Given the modest role of spontaneous visual 
imagery in waking STI, we might have dropped 
it from further consideration but for the discov­
ery by Aserinsky of the association of rapid eye 
movements (REM) in sleep with reported visual 
dream imagery (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953). 
No experimental psychologists had ever dared to 
publish verbal reports of subject’s private experi­
ence, and the solid/stolid behavioral American 
Psychological Association journal, Experim ental 
Psychology, refused to publish Aserinsky’s findings 
because reports of mental activity were not the 
stuff of science! Hailed as the strongest cognitive- 
neurophysiological association ever discovered, the 
REM-dream imagery association initiated a flood 
of research designed to find out if the REMs were 
actually scanning a visual image of the dream. No 
definitive evidence was ever found! Oddly enough, 
no one proposed a brain model of how and where 
in the brain the visual dream image was produced. 
Instead, the research focus turned on an observation
126
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  AND IMAGERY

by Jouvet (1962) that pontine neurons in the rat fire 
randomly in REM sleep, and this phasic activity is 
transmitted via the lateral geniculate to the occipi­
tal cortex (PGO spikes), and coincides with the eye 
movements of REM sleep. Hobson and McCarley 
(1977) then proposed that in the absence of sensory 
input, the brain reads this PGO input as though 
it is sensory input, and its random distribution in 
time and neural space accounts for the bizarreness 
of REM dream imagery! Their model of how the 
visual dream image is produced was limited to the 
single word “modulation,” and their subcortical 
brain model for the generation of REM versus non- 
REM (NREM) sleep was later found to be built on 
flawed data (Foulkes, 1985; Foulkes & Domhoff, 
2014; Reinsel, Antrobus, & Wollman, 1992). 
Nevertheless, their detailed subcortical account 
of the basis of bizarre visual imagery as a process 
unique to REM sleep again distracted many of us 
from realizing that we still had no model for the 
generation of the visual image itself.
Our own evaluation of the REM-PGO model 
was based on the analysis of bizarreness in the 
dream reports (Reinsel et al., 1992). Contrary to 
the PGO model, we found that imagery reports 
were not more bizarre after active REM than after 
ocular quiescence. And while Stage 1 REM reports 
were significantly more bizarre than Stage 2 reports, 
we also found that bizarreness is closely associated 
with the length of the mentation report. When 
report length was partialled out, REM reports were 
no more bizarre than Stage 2 mentation reports. In 
other words, the longer the mentation report, the 
more likely it included a bizarre element. REM 
reports were more bizarre than Stage 2 reports sim­
ply because the longer the report, the more likely 
that some elements will be inconsistent with earlier 
elements (Wollman & Antrobus, 1984).
That bizarreness is not unique to REM sleep 
prodded us to examine the widely held, but untested, 
claim that w aking STI is free of bizarre, vivid wak­
ing mentation (Reinsel, Antrobus & Wollman,
1992). And that required that we sample STI in 
the identical dark bedroom environment used for 
sleep research, while monitoring EEG to ensure 
wakefulness. STI samples were obtained at random 
intervals (mean, 9 min.; N  reports = 257) over a 
one-hour period. On the assumption that normal 
college environment ambient sound might attenu­
ate remote fantasy, we established two acoustic 
environments: one with intermittent environmental 
sounds and one with minimal environmental sound 
except for a low amplitude white noise mask— both
with low illumination. Given the high-sensory 
thresholds of REM sleep, that state should be 
simulated more closely by minimal environmental 
sound and illumination. For each mentation report, 
we estimated a global bizarre score and three sub­
classes of bizarreness: discontinuities in the report 
sequence narrative; improbable combinations; and 
improbable identities.
Much to our surprise, STI reports from both 
conditions were even more bizarre than those 
reported from REM sleep! Improbable continuities 
was the largest subclass of bizarreness, and reports 
from the intermittent sound condition had twice as 
many bizarre reports as those from REM sleep—  
with the minimal sound condition reports coming 
in a close second. Improbable identities were rare—  
accounting for only 7% of the bizarreness of REM 
dreams. In short, despite the widespread reputation 
of dreams, dreams reported directly from REM 
sleep are not particularly bizarre. The primary dis­
tinction between waking STI and REM dreams is 
that daydreamers always know that that the bizarre 
feature of their STI is fantasy, whereas in REM sleep 
the high sensory thresholds pretty much compel the 
dreamers to assume that every bizarre element in 
their imagery is real.
Despite these minor differences, their common 
features suggest that both waking and sleep STI 
must be produced by similar brain structures and 
processes. Further, given that the synapses in the 
neural networks that execute these processes must 
be learned primarily in the waking state, these struc­
tures and processes must be a subpart of those that 
accomplish waking perception and speech, but are 
also active in the absence of sensory input and motor 
output. Those regions, now called the default net­
work (actually default mega-networkf), consist of 
multiple interacting networks located throughout 
the prefrontal, frontal, and medial temporal corti­
ces and the posterior cingulate cortex (Buckner & 
Carroll, 2007). Their role in both active planning 
and passive anticipation of future events is the sub­
ject of active research by Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, 
and Schacter (2008), Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, and 
Buckner (2010), and Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
and Spreng (2014). Given the enormous complex­
ity of the default mega-networks and the assump­
tion that they must operate somewhat differently to 
produce spontaneous visual imagery and spontane­
ous subvocal speech, our goal here is to exploit our 
knowledge of waking visual recognition, to suggest 
how default mega-networks might produce dream­
ing and waking spontaneous visual imagery.
J O H N  S. A N T R O B U S
127

As noted earlier, the features of spontaneous sub­
vocal speech are so similar to those of vocal speech 
that we may assume that they are produced by many 
of the same brain structures and very similar pro­
cesses. But lacking a visual projection facility com­
parable to vocal speech, spontaneous visual imagery 
is clearly produced by a somewhat different process. 
We start with the assumption that the neural struc­
tures and processes that produce spontaneous visual 
imagery are accomplished by neural network path­
ways that have been previously well-learned in the 
course of prior visual perception. The traditional 
visual object recognition model assumed that rec­
ognition is accomplished in a bottom-up sequence 
of recognition-processing structures, moving the 
retinal image through the optic tract, thalamus, 
and primary visual cortex to high-level recognition 
locations such as the infero-temporal and temporal 
cortices. The representation of the recognized object 
is then passed on through recurrent hub connec­
tions to a wide array of interactive frontal cortical 
networks that represent the multiple meanings of 
the object and, by their interactions with medial 
prefrontal networks, linked to the amygdala, also 
represent the value of the recognized object in its 
particular context. That is, the representation of the 
visual image of an object or person is represented 
in closely related temporal and/or parietal neural 
networks, while its more abstract meanings, names, 
and values are represented in an array of temporal 
and frontal cortex networks.
But visual perception is a two-way process! 
Bottom-up activation of the parietal image of a 
visual object (e.g., house, face, car, or tree) activates 
the temporal and frontal representations associ­
ated with that object in that particular context (see 
Klingers meaning complex, 1971). But these tempo­
ral and frontal context networks also act back, “top- 
down” on the parietal networks that are competing 
to recognize the image. This reciprocal bottom-up- 
top-down interaction may occur many times in a 
fraction of a second until the two representations 
settle on a winner. The top-down context activation 
part of this largely bottom-up recognition process so 
greatly facilitates the activation of the parietal object 
activation that sometimes only a fraction of the 
bottom-up input is needed to complete recognition 
of the parietal image. For example, the context of the 
preceding sentence so strongly anticipates the final 
word “image” that the bottom-up recognition of the 
first letter “i” is sufficient to “see” the full word.
Given that spontaneous visual imagery is pro­
duced when bottom-up input to the parietal
representation is absent, as in sleep, or minimal, as 
in reduced stimuli waking environments, the top- 
down frontal cortex context networks may be the 
primary, if not only, input to the parietal visual 
image representations that produce spontaneous 
visual imagery. In short, this frontal, top-down 
source of activation is available to the visual image 
representations in the parietal cortex because it was 
previously learned as part of the “bottom-up” visual 
perception process.
This activation source has been ignored for sev­
eral reasons. First, there is the widely held belief 
that the multiple steps in waking perception from 
line detectors to object recognition are exclusively 
bottom-up, and therefore that STI must also origi­
nate from a bottom-up input source (i.e., retina 
—► lateral geniculate —► VI). If we use temporal 
windows as long as 1 second, and large cortical 
regions to view this perceptual process, visual per­
ception does indeed appear to be a bottom-up pro­
cess. But at the fine-grain level of neural networks 
in millisecond intervals, there is no such thing as 
the classical bottom-up process. Stepping from one 
macro-cortical region up to the next in the visual 
recognition pathways is accomplished by extremely 
fast, recurrently interactive neuronal interactions, 
often with more top-down and lateral input than 
bottom-up.
Another impediment to building an STI model 
is the im plicit assumption that the visual image is the 
fin a l step in perceptual object!image ‘recognition. ” But 
it is only the penultim ate step. As a result of visual 
perception learning over the course of ones child­
hood (see Foulkes, 1985), visual “recognition” in the 
parietal cortex is capable of activating a large array of 
frontal and temporal circuits that represent an enor­
mous array of abstract meanings, contexts, names, 
and appropriate responses to each image. Complete 
recognition of the visual object or event is therefore 
represented by the joint collaborative activation of 
all context-appropriate temporal, parietal, and fron­
tal representations. By means of the connections 
of these representations with the medial prefrontal 
cortex, they also represent the personal significance, 
and the utility, of various responses to a perception. 
In contrast to the local visual object identity recog­
nition in the parietal cortex, this larger, distributed 
collaborative representation represents conscious rec­
ognition of the visual representation (as implied by 
the Latin con, meaning “together,” and scio, meaning 
“I know, understand”). By extension, spontaneous 
thought and imagery are conscious neurocogni- 
tive processes produced by the same collaboration,
128
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  AND IMAGERY

but minus sensory bottom-up input. (For a similar 
model of consciousness, see Flanagan, 1996.)
Spontaneous Subvocal Speech Versus 
Spontaneous Visual Imagery II
As suggested earlier, the similarity of vocal 
speech production to subvocal speech suggests that 
spontaneous subvocal speech has strong frontal 
cortex speech production sources that are unavail­
able to spontaneous visual imagery production. In 
addition, spontaneous subvocal speech may have a 
frontal-to-temporal cortex activation source simi­
lar to the frontal-to-parietal input for spontane­
ous visual imagery. So, while we have located the 
one source of input for spontaneous visual imag­
ery, there are at least two for spontaneous subvocal 
speech, which implies that spontaneous subvocal 
speech is a more resourceful generator of STI than 
spontaneous visual imagery.
On the assumption that a comparison of a threat, 
like our fake war threat, with a control condition 
will facilitate identification of its cortical and cogni­
tive processes and our understanding of STI utility, 
I strongly recommend that future experiments
1. include a stress threat condition, and
2. systematically evaluate the effect of time since 
introduction of the stressor.
Recall that STI reports are significantly more 
bizarre in both waking conditions than in REM 
dream reports! The reason is that the cortical EEG 
indicates higher cortical activation in the waking 
condition, associating bizarreness with higher corti­
cal activation. The class of bizarreness accounting for 
this difference is discontinuities— discrete changes 
in topic units— in the STI reports. Discontinuities 
increased with report length and were more com­
mon in the intermittent environmental sounds than 
the minimal environmental stimuli STI environ­
ment (Reinsel et al., 1992; Wollman & Antrobus, 
1984). The data are consistent with several assump­
tions. Greater frontal activation supports longer STI 
sequences, but the lower sensory thresholds associ­
ated with increased cortical activation allow exter­
nal sensory stimuli, whether associated with higher 
personal concern (i.e., utility) or not, to interrupt 
the current train of STI. In addition, the higher 
frontal cortical activation could support faster, more 
efficient review of trivial STI topics so they are dis­
carded more quickly, producing more frequent topic 
change. However, more precise research is needed. 
Wollman and Antrobus (1987) found no associa­
tion of STI report length with any EEG index of
cortical activation, so the role of frontal networks 
in determining STI duration and consistency over 
time remains undefined.
3. Although the magnitude of auditory and 
visual stimuli in the STI environment may have 
a major effect on STI, it is often unreported. We 
cant draw inferences about the differences between 
visual imagery and subvocal speech within waking 
STI and REM if the data are obtained in different 
sensory and temporal environments.
4. I recommend that we attempt to get much 
more information from our verbal reports of 
SIT— specifically, that we attempt to distinguish 
different subclasses within conventional STI labels:
a. 
Bizarreness: Given that the large array of 
frontal networks that produce STI are acquired 
over a lifetime of visual perception learning, 
their participation in STI should reflect a very 
accurate representation of expected bottom-up 
visual perception. And indeed, despite popular 
assumptions to the contrary, even dream STI 
features are largely consistent with the features 
of waking perception. Nevertheless, infrequent 
bizarre features may tell us more about how 
STI is generated than those features that are 
consistent with waking perception. For example, 
bizarre combinations of objects or people, 
such as “it was my brother, but he was a girl 
in my dream . . ” could never occur in waking 
perception. As a dream STI, it suggests that the 
parietal^>frontal (<=> symbolizes recurrent two- 
way connections) cortex gender representations 
that strongly inhibit one another in waking 
may be weaker during STI production. The 
gender confusion might be influenced by some 
feminine characteristics associated with her 
brothers waking behavior, but that hypothesis 
would need independent evidence. The 
brother-girl STI is an example of improbable 
identities. That they are more common in REM 
sleep (7% of bizarre REM reports) than in in 
minimal environmental stimuli waking STI 
(2% of bizarre reports) supports the assumption 
that parietal-frontal cortex neural networks 
are less activate in REM sleep than minimal 
environmental stimuli waking.
However, a weakening of familiar inter-network 
connections learned during waking does not eas­
ily account for bizarre combinations (see preceding 
discussion) of objects or people, such as “. . . nuns 
wildly driving in red cars . . .” because waking 
experience may never have included anyone wildly
J O H N  S. A N T R O B U S
129

driving in red cars, let alone nuns. Bizarre combina­
tions make up about 16% of all bizarre STI) events. 
They imply competing parietak»frontal^»parietal 
cortex biases that are incompatible in normal wak­
ing, but neither of which is able to suppress the 
other in sleep or low-sensory waking STI. Future 
research needs to examine the prior STI context of 
such bizarre combinations to determine if either is a 
carry-over lag from an earlier STI context.
b. Visual imagery a n d  subvocal speech: We 
need to estimate the relative am ount o f 
information in visual versus speech imagery and 
the extent to which one acts as the context of 
the other. Note that our estimate of the relative 
strength and utility of spontaneous subvocal 
speech and spontaneous visual imagery is 
based on our convenient study pool of college 
students. But the utility of spontaneous visual 
imagery may be much larger for carpenters, 
architects, and painters, and if we include 
motor imagery, for choreographers and 
dancers. If we distinguish words from music, 
the ratio might go differently for singers versus 
musical instrumentalists. To the extent that an 
individuals vocation is differentially dependent 
on visual versus verbal fluency, comparison of 
these ratios across vocations might inform us 
about their utility in SIT.
c. Thought, or “knowing” versus sensory 
features of speech: STI reporters rarely 
distinguish knowing what the imaged speaker 
means from the sensory features of speech 
image. Making that distinction will help us 
identify the different cortical regions that 
generate the two.
d. Visual image brightness a n d  clarity: If 
scaled relative to waking vision, we may be able 
to estimate the contribution of parietal image 
to that of the frontal cortex to the creation of 
the image.
e. Rate o f S T I production: STI rate should 
increase with the utility of STI. It may be 
possible to insert real-time markers, such as a 
click, to help estimate the amount of STI per 
unit time. I assume that it is much slower in 
REM sleep than waking.
f. Effect o f report latency: Difference between 
the initial STI and that made by the fully awake 
cortex will inform us about the difference 
between the STI-producing networks of the 
default cortex and those of the fully engaged 
brain. The assumption that the frontal
cortex is somewhat deactivated during sleep 
is supported by comments made by dream 
reporters as they move toward full awakening. 
For example, “. . . he must have been my uncle 
Henry because (in the dream) we were at his 
summer boat dock . . .” implies that recurrent 
connections between the frontal networks that 
generated the original spontaneous visual image 
and those that represented the identity of the 
uncle were weak while dreaming, but became 
re-engaged upon awakening.
The Promise and Limits of Functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
Introducing these experimental treatments and 
improved STI measures will greatly enhance the 
value of information we obtain from cortical activa­
tion fMRI blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) 
measures. Although I have emphasized the role of 
interacting frontal and prefrontal cortex neural net­
works and pathways, we have at this point in time 
only a vague understanding of the mega-neural 
networks within those massively complex cortical 
regions. As Fox et al. (2015) have demonstrated in 
their meta-analysis of the literature, functional neu­
roimaging, whether by MRI or fMRI, are the most 
promising procedures available for estimating the 
cortical regions that generate STI. But they note that 
in MRI and fMRI, magnet noise is extremely dis­
tracting and bound to interfere with the production 
of STI and dreams. However, using substantial ear 
plugs, Horikawa, Tamaki, Miyawaki, and Kamitani
(2013) have reported successful links between fMRI 
and waking and sleeping visual imagery. And one of 
my fMRI colleagues says that he has been under the 
magnet so many times that he doesn’t even notice 
the noise. But as noted earlier, environmental noise 
does affect STI (Reinsel et al., 1992). So at this 
point we do need a careful measure of the effects 
of magnet noise on the verbal and visual compo­
nents of both STI and sleeping dream reports, per­
haps on novice and seasoned magnet users. I also 
recommend that we assess the effect of the magnet 
and EEG sleep stage on subjects’ report of whether 
they judged they were actually asleep or awake when 
called to make a report.
My other suggestion is that STI cognitive data 
implies that STI production is normally a low 
neuronal energy process. Therefore, we should 
not interpret low cortical energy (e.g., BOLD sig­
nal) as the absence of STI (see Buckner, Koutstaal, 
Schacter, & Rosen, 2000; Szpunar, St. Jacques,
130
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  AND IMAGERY

Robbins, Wig, & Schacter, 2014). The process 
of recognizing novel words or pictures activates 
the parietal, temporal, and frontal cortices. The 
particular cortical regions activated depend on 
the properties of the stimulus and the character­
istics of the required recognition response (Wig, 
Buckner, & Schacter, 2009). Recognition of suc­
cessive repetitions of the same stimulus gradually 
decreases the levels of activation, particularly in 
the parietal and temporal cortices as well as in the 
frontoparietal control system regions. It follows 
that low frontal activation is not necessarily evi­
dence of a lack of cognitive processing in the fron­
tal cortex. F am iliar sustained frontal-supported 
spontaneous visual imagery may be sustained 
for short intervals with no detectable increase in 
regional cortical activation, while the more pari­
etal BOLD fMRI signal found by Horikawa et al.
(2013) may be produced by more novel parietal 
spontaneous visual imagery sequences initiated by 
a more stable frontal network activity.
Neural Network Modeling
Perhaps the greatest challenge to understanding 
spontaneous subvocal speech and visual imagery 
is the sheer magnitude of the frontal and prefron­
tal neural networks that represent the expression 
of personal concerns. The massive size, complex­
ity, and long learning history represented in the 
frontal and prefrontal cortices defy any attempt 
at comprehensive description. Nevertheless, we 
may begin to model some of their salient proper­
ties. The most interesting of these are the processes 
that continuously activate representations of recent 
events, estimating their value, discarding those of 
little value, and saving those of value (by means of 
hippocampus-cortex interactions). I recommend 
modeling STI with the neural network emergent 
model of O ’Reilly and Munakata (2010, 2014). An 
STI model must be based on a recognition model, 
which in turn requires a high-dimensional learning 
model. Consider a multilayered object or word rec­
ognition model starting with features represented 
in dot matrices, going on to successive interacting 
layers— lines, angles, object features, to letters, to 
words or objects (represented in the temporal or 
parietal cortex). It then moves on to dorsolateral 
frontal cortex layers representing more abstract 
features such as the properties and characteristics 
dog, cat, mother, teacher, money, gun, and so on. 
Finally, after all that, it makes value representations 
(in the medial prefrontal) such as friendly people
and dangerous people. One of the many merits of 
the emergent model is that it allows the model to be 
trained (i.e., externally reinforced by the program­
mer), simultaneously at several levels (e.g., letters, 
words, object category, value category). The effect 
of high value on recognition, whether positive or 
negative, therefore, can be simulated by biasing the 
resting activation of selected items in the prefrontal 
cortex layer. But even the outline of that project is 
beyond the scope of this chapter.
The publication of The Oxford H andbook o f 
Spontaneous Thought marks a landmark in research 
that describes STI and its many possible functions 
in our lives. Describing that research in one volume 
provides all of us with a well-informed base from 
which to create better models of STI and design 
even better research in the future.
Note
1. We have also used the term “task-unrelated imagery and 
thought” (TUIT).
References
Amunts, K., & Catani, M. (2014). Cytoarchitectonics, recep- 
torarchitectonic, and network topology of language. In 
M. S. Gazzaniga & G. R. Mangun (Eds.). The Cognitive 
Neurosciences 
(5 th 
ed., 
pp. 
619-628). 
Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in sponta­
neous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 322-335. 
doi: 10.1152/jn.00830.2009.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J. & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control and clinical relevance. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences— Year in Cognitive 
Neuroscience Special Issue, 1316, 29-52.
Antrobus, J. (1999). Toward a neurocognitive processing model 
of imaginal thought. In P. Salovey & Jefferson Singer (Eds.), 
At play in the fields of consciousness: Essays in honor of Jerome 
L. Singer (pp. 1-28). Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., Goldstein, S., &Fortgang,M. (1970). 
Mind-wandering and cognitive structure. Transactions of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 32, 242-252.
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L, & Greenberg, S. (1966). Studies 
in the stream of consciousness: Experimental suppression of 
spontaneous cognitive processes. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 
23, 399-417.
Aserinsky, E. & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring peri­
ods of eye motility and concomitant phenomena during 
sleep. Science, 118, 273-274.
Brokaw, K., Tishler, W., Manceior, S., & Wamsley, E. (2016). 
Resting state EEG correlates of memory consolidation. 
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 130, 17-25.
Buckner, R. L. (2010). Human functional connectivity: New 
tools, unresolved questions. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 107(24) ,10769-10770.
131
J O H N  S. A N T R O B U S

Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function and rel­
evance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 
1125, 1-38.
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the 
brain. Trends Cognitive Science, Elsevier, 11(2), 49-57.
Buckner, R. L., Koutstaal, W., Schacter, D. L., &Rosen, B. R. 
(2000). Functional MRI evidence for a role of frontal and 
inferior temporal cortex in a modal components of priming. 
Brain, 123, 620-640.
Flanagan, O. (1996). Self expression: Mind, moral and the mean- 
ing of life. New York: Oxford University Press.
Foulkes, D. (1985). Dreaming: A cognitive-psychological analysis. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Foulkes, D., & Domhoff, G. W. (2014). Bottom-up or top-down 
in dream neuroscience? A top-down critique of two bottom- 
up studies. Consciousness and Cognition, 27, 168-171.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R N., Ellamil, M, Andrews-Hanna, J. R, & 
Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis of 
functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and related 
spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 7(111), 611-21.
Hobson, J., & McCarley R (1977). The brain as a dream state 
generator: An activation-synthesis hypothesis of the dream 
process. American Journal of Psychiatry, 134, 1335-1348.
Horikawa, T., Tamaki, M., Miyawaki, Y. & Kamitani, Y. (2013). 
Neural decoding of visual imagery during sleep. Science, 
340(6132), 639-642.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: 
Henry Holt.
Jouvet, M. (1962). Research on the neural structures and respon­
sible mechanisms in different phases of physiological sleep. 
Archives Italiennes de Biologie, 100, 125-206.
Klinger, E. (1971). Structure and functions of fantasy. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Klinger, E. (1999). Thought flow: Shifts in thought content. In 
P. Salovey & Jefferson Singer (Eds.), At play in the fields of 
consciousness: Essay in honor of Jerome E Singer (pp. 29-50). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, & J. A.
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
O’Reilly, R. C., Munakata, Y., Frank, M. J., Hazy, T. E., et al. 
(2014). Computational cognitive neuroscience, http://grey. 
colorado.edu/CompCog/Reader.
Reinsel, R., Antrobus, J., & Wollman, M. (1992). Bizarreness 
in sleep and waking mentation. In J. S. Antrobus, & 
M. Bertini, (Eds.), The neuropsychology of dreaming sleep. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming. New York: Random House.
Singer, J. L. (1970). Drives, affects, and daydreams: The adap­
tive role of spontaneous imagery or stimulus-independent 
thought. In J. S. Antrobus (Ed.), Cognition and affect (pp. 
131-158). Boston: Little, Brown.
Spreng, R. N., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2015). Social cogni­
tion and the brain’s default network. In A.W. Toga (Ed.), 
Brain mapping: An encyclopedic reference (pp. 165-169). 
London: Academic Press.
Szpunar, K. K., St. Jacques, P. L., Robbins, C. A., Wig, G. S., 
& Schacter, D. L. (2014). Repetition-related reductions 
in neural activity reveal component processes of mental 
simulation. Social, Cognitive, and Affective Neuroscience, 9, 
712-722.
Wammes, J. D., Seli, P, Cheyne, J. A., Boucher, P. O., & Smilek, 
D. (2016, February 15). Mind wandering during lectures 
II: Relation to academic performance. Scholarship of Teaching 
and Learning in Psychology, 2(1), 33-48.
Wig, G. S., Buckner, R. L. & Schacter, D. L. (2009). Repetition 
priming influences distinct brain systems: Evidence from 
task-evoked data and resting-state correlations. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 101(5), 2632-2648.
Woodworth, R. S. (1921). Psychology: A study of mental life. 
New York: Henry Holt.
Wollman, M., & Antrobus, J. S. (1984). The effect of external 
stimulation on length of thematic segments in mentation 
reports from sleeping and waking subjects. Sleep Research, 
13, 107.
Wollman, M. C., & Antrobus, J. S. (1987). Cortical arousal 
and mentation in sleeping and waking subjects. Brain and 
Cognition, 6(3), 334-346.
132
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  AND IMAGERY

Spontaneous Thinking in Creative Lives: 
Building Connections Between Science 
and History
Alex Soojung-Kim Pang
C H A P T E R
12
Abstract
Scientists have only recently begun to explore spontaneous thinking. It might appear that as elusive a 
phenomenon as it is in the laboratory, it would be impossible to detect in the historical record. This 
essay argues that it is possible to make space for accounts of spontaneous thinking in historical accounts 
of creativity and discovery. It argues that historians can use scientific work on daydreaming, mind­
wandering, and other forms of spontaneous thought to illuminate the history of ideas. It explains how 
historical research informed by science could generate new insights in the history of writing and thinking, 
the history of attitudes towards reason and inspiration, the daily practices of creative thinkers, and even 
elusive phenomena like sensory perception and sleep. With diligence and imagination, it will be possible 
to reconstruct the place of spontaneous thinking in the history of ideas.
Key Words: spontaneous thinking, creativity, insight, work, history, psychology
Historians of ideas and cognitive psychologists 
have long shared a common interest in creativity, 
but little else. Historians interested in the genesis of 
new ideas and scientific theories have been divided 
on efforts to apply psychoanalysis or cognitive psy­
chology to intellectual history. Cognitive psycholo­
gists, meanwhile, have preferred to develop rigorous 
studies of creative activity in the laboratory, and 
have largely avoided the richer but more ambiguous 
data offered by the lives of noted scientists, artists, 
and inventors. Both fields, however, have shared a 
common focus on conscious cognition over spon­
taneous thought. Intellectual history has been the 
history of conscious cognition, of directed effort. 
Likewise, psychologists interested in studying con­
vergent or divergent thinking have generally been 
interested in conscious efforts to solve problems, see 
associations, or generate novelty.
The recent rise of interest in spontaneous think­
ing, the recognition of the importance of mind­
wandering in creative thinking, and the discovery
of the default mode network have renewed inter­
est in the role of unconscious cognition in creative 
activity; likewise, the development of tools like 
positron emission tomography (PET) and func­
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have 
raised the prospect that we can begin to identify 
the brain mechanisms at work during moments of 
insight. These discoveries present an opportunity to 
build new bridges between historical and scientific 
research. Historians should take up the challenge of 
expanding our accounts of creative lives by explain­
ing the role of spontaneous thinking in the lives 
of famous thinkers and the history of ideas. At the 
same time, scientists interested in creativity could 
make good use of archival and other primary histor­
ical materials to better understand how spontaneous 
thinking operates.
In this chapter I explore how historians of 
ideas and cognitive psychologists might draw on 
and inform each other’s work. I show how his­
torians can use scientific work on daydreaming,
133

mind-wandering, and other forms of spontaneous 
thought to illuminate the history of ideas, and in 
particular to understand how creative thinkers con­
struct the relationship between conscious and spon­
taneous thinking.
History and the Problems of Spontaneous 
Thought
Traditionally, historians have ignored mind­
wandering and spontaneous thought. Why? The 
simple answer is that everyone has underrated its 
importance, including psychologists. But that 
doesn’t mean that recent work on mind-wandering 
and spontaneous thinking will automatically find 
its way into historians’ agendas. We need to look a 
little deeper into why spontaneous thinking would 
receive little attention, and how to build a case for 
paying attention to it.
Previous efforts to use psychology to inform 
history and biography have had a mixed recep­
tion. “Psychohistory” has never reached the status 
of other historical specialties, and works like Erik 
Erikson’s Young M an Luther (1958), Peter Gay’s 
biography of Sigmund Freud (1998), and Lloyd de 
Mause’s (1995) studies of child-rearing and national 
culture have remained controversial. Most biogra­
phies avoid explicit psychological explanation and 
theorizing; even those that offer nuanced and per­
ceptive views of a subject’s personality, motivations, 
and fears tend not to invoke psychology. Adrian 
Desmond and Jim Moore’s (1991) magnificent 
biography of Charles Darwin, for example, provides 
a wealth of detail about Darwin’s health problems, 
his agony over the death of his beloved daughter, 
and his blend of outward modesty and ferocious, 
ambitious curiosity. Yet D arw in avoids explicit 
reference to psychology: instead, Desmond and 
Moore build a “defiantly social” account that draws 
on sociology and social studies of science to explain 
how Darwin’s work and thinking developed.
Another source of reluctance is that stories of 
“aha!” moments, or sudden inspiration, have an 
uncomfortable echo of “Great Man” history, or 
sound too much like an invocation of D eux Ex 
M achina. The hard-to-fathom character of these 
moments sits uneasily with scholars intent on 
explaining, rather than mystifying, their subjects. 
This aversion is reinforced by a deep-seated belief 
that insights apparently arrived at through sponta­
neous thinking must by definition be less trustwor­
thy than those that come at the end of hard work. 
Josef Pieper (1952) argued in Leisure, The Basis o f 
Culture that since the 1800s we have downplayed
the role of spontaneous thinking in the creation of 
new ideas, have distrusted ideas that aren’t clearly 
the result of labor, and have eliminated revelation as 
a source of new knowledge. Ancient and medieval 
European philosophers had argued that knowledge 
required the marriage of ratio, logical and discur­
sive methods, and intellectus, described by Pieper as 
“an attitude of non-activity, of inward calm” that 
allowed the philosopher to perceive the world’s 
deep truths. During the Enlightenment and the 
Industrial Revolution, however, this organic vision 
was upended. The German philosopher Immanuel 
Kant argued that “reason acquires its possessions 
through work,” and that “herculean labor” was nec­
essary to arrive at the truth (Kant, quoted in Pieper 
[1952], p. 26).
For scholars, then, the history of ideas has been 
the history of laboring over ideas. Many biogra­
phies, for example, describe themselves as studies 
of the “life and work” of their subjects, a framing 
that subtly directs their attention away from rest 
and spontaneous thinking. An illustrative exam­
ple is Roy Jenkins’s (1995) brilliant biography of 
William Gladstone. Gladstone was a tireless writer 
and the towering political figure of the Victorian 
era, and Jenkins does a masterful job of explain­
ing Gladstone’s rise, work, and legacy. Gladstone 
also spent long weekends at his country estate at 
Hawarden, took long vacations on the Continent, 
and relaxed by reading Greek and Latin (indeed, he 
was the first to note that the Iliad and the Odyssey 
never use the word “blue,” but instead use terms like 
“wine-dark” to describe the sea). Yet Jenkins treats 
these episodes as a break in the main narrative, not 
as factors that help explain Gladstone’s success; a 
four-week tour of Italy, for example, is dispatched 
in a short paragraph between long accounts of par­
liamentary debates or cabinet maneuvers.
This is not to say that Gladstone is a bad book. 
Far from it; it’s easily one of the best English- 
language biographies published in the last 20 years. 
But it illustrates how biographers gloss over their 
subjects’ vacations and downtime, and don’t con­
sider that how their subjects rested could be as inter­
esting a topic as how they worked. Instead, they 
treat the daily habits or annual vacations of their 
subjects as narrative interruptions to be dealt with 
quickly and dismissed (an impatience that reflects 
modern assumptions about the irrelevance of leisure 
to productivity).
Finally, and most important, it feels like sponta­
neous thinking doesn’t have a history. A psychologi­
cal activity doesn’t change over time in the way that
134
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H I N K I N G  IN CREATIVE LIVES

political structure, ideas, or civilizations do; there is 
no rise and fall in spontaneous thinking. The prob­
lem is reinforced by the absence of primary sources, 
which makes writing the history of spontaneous 
thought impossible. Spontaneous thought leaves no 
direct records, even in the memories of individuals. 
Much of the time it’s difficult for people to remem­
ber the contents of their wandering minds even sec­
onds later, and only a vanishingly small number of 
people have bothered to record the contents of their 
spontaneous thoughts, or have described the role 
of spontaneous thinking in their creative processes. 
While instances of spontaneous thought have been 
connected to the production of significant works 
of art, scientific theories, and religious epiphanies, 
accounts of such “aha!” moments are usually ret­
rospective, published in memoirs and biographies, 
recounted in commemorative addresses, or recorded 
by students or followers. As compelling as they are, 
these retellings are shaped by cultural norms, reli­
gious precepts, or ideas about genius; they tell us as 
much— perhaps more— about the era that produces 
them as the people and ideas that are their subject.
An Outline of Spontaneous Thinking 
in History
I contend that spontaneous thinking has a his­
tory; it can be told; and both history and science 
would benefit from telling it.
While historians interested in spontaneous 
thinking cannot work with the directness of military 
or political historians, they should not give up all 
hope. Several generations of historians and anthro­
pologists have shown how to use previously over­
looked but conventional materials, as well as novel 
materials— for example, court documents, medi­
cal and police files, property records, welfare case 
records, photographs, provincial archives, and many 
other kinds of material— to illuminate the lives of 
women, the working classes, children, servants and 
slaves, minorities, dispossessed groups, and others 
(see, for example, Boyer and Nissenbaum, 1974; 
Darnton, 1985; Scott, 1974; Thompson, 1963). 
Scholars working with either overlooked records 
or applying new methods to familiar sources have 
reconstructed the histories of everyday senses 
and emotional experiences, like smell, noise, and 
silence; friendship and family ties; and informa­
tion overload (Boyarin, 1993; Classen et al, 1994; 
Kern, 1983; MacCulloch, 2013; Martin, 1995; 
Schivelbusch, 1986).
Other experiences that were long thought to be 
biologically determined and unchanging turn out to
have a history, or to contribute decisively to human 
history. Sleep, Roger Ekirch argues, became a single 
uninterrupted break in consciousness only relatively 
recently; for centuries, it turns out, Europeans were 
biphasic sleepers, regularly waking in the middle of 
the night to read, pray, or engage in other activi­
ties (Ekirch, 2005, 2015). Evolutionary biologists 
David Samson and Charles Nunn (2015) argue 
that the unique properties of human sleep may have 
helped give rise to human society, intelligence, and 
culture. Compared to other primates, humans sleep 
less, but their sleep is richer in slow-wave and REM 
sleep, a combination that supported the growth 
of “enhanced cognitive abilities in early humans,” 
gave them more time to develop complex social ties 
and culture, and encouraged nocturnal innovations 
like beds, shelters, controlled fires, and larger social 
groups.
One can begin by using recent intellectual his­
tories, and studies of intellectual practices, as a scaf­
fold for building a history of spontaneous thinking. 
In order to understand how spontaneous thought 
might have been used or harnessed by thinkers in 
earlier centuries, or how everyday life presented 
opportunities for spontaneous thinking, its neces­
sary to have a sense of what other kinds of cognitive 
challenges people faced. In fact, the history of spon­
taneous thought probably cannot be written with­
out contextualizing it in the history of intellectual 
practices and cognitive activities.
Work
Studies of the cognitive load required by work 
and workplaces provide an obvious starting point. 
According to archaeologist Lyn Wadley (Wadley 
et al., 2009), 70,000 years ago or earlier, our 
humanoid ancestors cooked ingredients into adhe­
sives to secure sharpened flints to spears and arrows, 
a process that required careful planning, attention, 
and a capacity for multitasking. Monica Smith
(2010) argues that many ancient complex activities, 
such as farming, weaving, and pottery, required a 
capacity for keeping in short-term memory several 
simultaneous activities. Cognitive archaeologists 
Colin Renfrew and Lambros Malafouris (Renfrew 
& Zubrow, 1994; Malafouris, 2009) have recon­
structed ancient Mycenaean mental states of ancient 
peoples from burial chambers, holy sites, and arti­
facts. The more recent efforts of scientists like Gloria 
Mark (Mark, Voida, & Cardello, 2012) and Larry 
Rosen (2012) to measure levels of distraction in the 
workplace, classroom, or daily life, and of technol­
ogy writers and critics like Sherry Turkle (2011),
ALEX  S O O J U N G - K I M  PANG
135

Nicholas Carr (2011), and Andrew Keen (2015) 
to assess the impact of technologies on thinking, 
distraction, and mind-wandering, all provide a 
basis for mapping how conscious and unconscious 
thought would be harnessed to solve problems and 
complete tasks.
Writing and Cognition
Studies of the relationship between writing and 
cognition offer another foundation for a history 
of spontaneous thinking. A host of historians and 
anthropologists have traced the impact of alphabets 
and writing on ancient Greek thought, starting with 
Albert Lord’s (2000) and Milman Parry’s (1987) 
work on Homeric epics and the shift from oral to 
literate culture, to the work of Jack Goody and Ian 
Watt (1963), Eric Havelock (1986), and Walter Ong 
(1982). Paul Saenger’s (1997) work on word spacing 
in ancient and medieval Latin offers an especially 
stimulating study that could inform work on medi­
eval conscious and spontaneous cognition. Saenger 
argues that the adoption of word spacing from the 
1100s to 1400s had titanic effects on the ease with 
which people could read, and by implication the 
cognitive resources available for spontaneous think­
ing. Ancient Romans read books without punctua­
tion, upper or lowercase letters, or word separation. 
This meant that readers had to labor to sound out 
words, and had to focus hard to make sense of an 
author’s argument. Early Christians, particularly 
those in non-Latin speaking lands, struggled with 
this regime. For Saxon and Celtic priests, word 
spacing was a necessary innovation to make reading 
from Latin easier. Arabic texts translated into Latin 
also adopted word spacing (borrowed from Arabic 
itself). But what began as an aid to reading aloud 
soon gave rise to new practices, most notably silent 
transcription and silent reading. Scribes who copied 
texts worked in silence, and had developed means of 
copying in silence, such as breaking texts into lines 
of 10-15 characters, which could be remembered in 
their entirety. Adding word spacing allowed scribes 
to abandon these methods, and instead to copy out 
texts word by separated word.
The rise of silent reading drove changes in the 
design of spaces for reading, particularly a shift 
from providing monks with cubicles where they 
could sound out texts without disturbing others, 
to central halls that brought all readers together in 
silence. Books that were meant to be read silently 
differed from those meant to be read aloud: they 
were more visually complex, and their design could 
incorporate metadata and visual cross-references
that wouldn’t make sense in books that were read 
aloud. But the most interesting and elusive conse­
quences of silent reading were psychological. Silent 
reading changed the ways in which both heresy and 
devotion were practiced, making challenges and 
obedience to heterodoxy more of a personal matter. 
Earlier heretical movements had been social move­
ments that spoke to collective spiritual needs; by 
the thirteenth century, heretical thought was more 
personal and individual. Spiritual literature in the 
fourteenth century was read alone, turning reading 
itself into a kind of meditation. Silent reading made 
easier the cultivation of individual opinions and 
subversive thoughts. It also made religious feeling 
into a more private matter— an essential foundation 
for the Renaissance and the Reformation.
Physical Spaces
The design of physical spaces, particularly spaces 
intended to support creative activity and deep 
thinking, is another source for reconstructing the 
history of spontaneous thought. Spaces enable cer­
tain kinds of social and intellectual activity, and 
discourage others; they bring people together or 
keep them apart, encourage sociability or support 
solitude. Several works illustrate how these histori­
cal studies can throw light on the history of spon­
taneous thinking. Gadi Algazi’s (2003) study of the 
medieval and early modern scholarly habitus exam­
ines how changes in scholarly life in Europe affected 
the design of private spaces for scholarly work and 
contemplation, and how the location of those spaces 
in larger enterprises— households, lecture halls, 
and so on— reflect the evolving social and profes­
sional identity of the scholar. The private office or 
chamber for scholarly study, it turns out, became an 
important part of scholarly work and identity in the 
thirteenth century, as scholars moved from monas­
teries and scriptoria, and the scholarly production 
shifted from a highly communal to a more private 
mode. In a now-classic article, Owen Hannaway 
(1986) showed how ideas about the powerful and 
secret nature of scientific knowledge are reflected 
in the design of Tycho Brahe’s Uraniborg, built in 
1576 to support Brahe’s astronomical and alchemi­
cal research.
More recently, the rise of the contemporary open 
office reflects a re-socialization of creative work and 
spontaneous thinking. The open office is often 
defended on the grounds that it encourages a partic­
ularly social form of spontaneous thought. Workers 
who might keep to themselves in traditional offices 
or sealed in their laboratories are encouraged by the
136
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H I N K I N G  IN CREATIVE LIVES

space to mix at the cafe or water cooler, generating 
a series of random social collisions and interactions 
that yield new collaborations, projects, or products 
(Saval, 2014). How well such spaces work is a matter 
of debate, but these offices are notable for reflecting 
a notion of creativity as an essentially social and sto­
chastic phenomenon, as the product of a collision 
of people with different perspectives and expertise, 
rather than the result of long periods of individual, 
solitary thinking (Brown & Duguid, 2000).
Attitudes Toward Spontaneous Cognition
Another factor affecting spontaneous cognition 
and its use are ideas about the benefits or dangers 
of spontaneous thinking. As Pierre Hadot argued, 
ancient Greek philosophy constituted a set of prac­
tices aimed at sharpening perception and focus, 
an enterprise that simultaneously improved a stu­
dents intellectual and moral character (Hadot,
2004). Inbar Graiver argues that early Christian 
monastics cultivated a state of “continual attentive­
ness” that saw mind-wandering as morally suspect 
(2016). Likewise, Buddhist contemplative prac­
tices that aim to calm the jittery, undisciplined 
“monkey mind,” replacing it with a more placid, 
self-controlled mind, downplay the value of mind­
wandering (for a detailed discussion of various con­
templative attitudes toward spontaneous thought, 
see Eifring, Chapter 38 in this volume). In contrast, 
medieval thinkers came to see insights generated in 
moments of leisure as divinely inspired. However, 
as Pieper argued, in the eighteenth century philoso­
phers came to see real knowledge as the product of 
“an active, discursive labor of the ratio* alone, and 
banished intellectus and leisure from philosophi­
cal life (Pieper, 1952, p. 28). The rise of industry 
and technology, growth of the modern bureaucratic 
state, emergence of the modern office, rise of the 
labor movement, and triumph of the marketplace 
completed the transformation of knowledge from 
a product of leisure to a product of routinized 
production. By the mid-twentieth century, Pieper 
lamented, “intellectual activity [has been] over­
whelmed by the modern ideal of work and is at the 
mercy of its totalitarian claims,” he wrote, while 
space for contemplation and leisure had been elimi­
nated in the name of “planned diligence and total 
labor.’” (Pieper, 1952, p. 20)
The Discovery of Deliberate Rest
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century sources are 
detailed and plentiful enough to allow historians to 
reconstruct the relationship between spontaneous
thinking and creativity in greater detail, and to map 
how ideas about creativity, culture, and work shape 
how people organize their days, and manage the 
relationship between formal, structured work and 
unruly, unpredictable inspiration.
In my book Rest (Pang, 2016), I argue that some 
of history’s most prolific writers, artists, and sci­
entists developed daily practices that allow them 
to exploit the creative benefits of spontaneous 
thinking. By looking at autobiographies, diaries, 
recollections from family and servants, and other 
sources, I found it was possible to reconstruct the 
daily lives and schedules of figures as diverse as 
naturalist Charles Darwin, composer Ludwig von 
Beethoven, artist Salvador Dali, neurologist Charles 
Sherrington, and author Raymond Chandler. The 
first notable feature of their lives was a paradox. 
While they organized their lives around their work, 
they didn’t seem to work as long or as hard as we 
do: most spent about four or five hours a day work­
ing. The second was that they had common patterns 
in what they did in their ample leisure time: lots of 
walks, afternoon naps, and unstructured time each 
day, atop which they layered serious hobbies and 
lengthy vacations. Indeed, many would literally 
stop in mid-sentence to go outdoors, and take up 
again early the next morning.
So how did they manage to get so much done 
while apparently working so little? For those of us 
living in an era in which overwork is treated as a vir­
tue, and long hours are assumed to be a prerequisite 
for success (and increasingly, are necessary simply 
to stay competitive in the job market), four hours 
seems entirely inadequate to do a day’s work, much 
less write The Origin o f Species.
The route to understanding how they got so 
much done while working comparatively few 
hours, I argue in Rest, runs through the scientific 
literature on mind-wandering and the psychology 
of creativity. The discovery of the default mode 
network (DMN) opened a new era of research on 
unconscious, undirected thought. At the very least, 
the discovery that the brain maintains high levels 
of activity during periods of apparent inactivity 
suggests that there is a reserve of cognitive capacity 
that can be accessed by the mind during rest, lei­
sure, and periods of undirected mental activity. At 
its best, work on the DM N offers a way to observe 
the brain’s activity when we’re apparently “doing 
nothing,” and to begin to see how new ideas are 
assembled, tested, and made visible to the conscious 
mind— in other words, to understand the processes 
that lead to “aha!” moments when new ideas seem
ALEX  S O O J U N G - K I M  PANG
137

to spontaneously appear. Likewise, scientists inter­
ested in mind-wandering have made a compelling 
case that there are significant psychological benefits 
to spontaneous, undirected thought. Far from being 
wasted or psychologically damaging, it offers the 
mind opportunities to reflect on past experiences, 
explore future scenarios, and work unconsciously 
on problems. Scientists examining the role of 
breaks in creative thinking have conducted experi­
ments that show that when participants know they 
will return to a particular type of problem (a diver­
gence thinking test, for example), their unconscious 
minds continue working on it, even as they work 
consciously on other tasks. Others have shown that 
people appear to benefit from a creative boost when 
they work against their chronotype. Mareike Wieth 
and Rose Zacks, for example, found that night owls 
perform best on insight problem-solving tests in 
the early morning, while early birds turned in their 
best performances late at night (Weith & Zacks,
2011). Another body of research has documented 
the positive effects of exercise on creativity. In the 
short run, activities like walking and swimming 
can provide opportunities for mind-wandering and 
put the mind in a state where it’s more receptive 
to new ideas; in the long run, exercise and other 
activities that are both physically strenuous and 
mentally absorbing provide an essential respite from 
work, and help people deal better with the (usually 
underappreciated) physical challenges of working at 
a high creative level.
In other words, if you use insights from the 
latest neuroscience and psychology to design a 
daily schedule, habits, and routines that allowed 
the creative mind to exploit both conscious and 
spontaneous cognition, maximized time for mind­
wandering, and improved the odds that your cre­
ative career would last for decades, the result would 
look like Charles Darwins life, or Ray Bradbury’s, 
or Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky’s.
What Scientists Have to Learn from History
What can scientist learn from more attention to 
the history of spontaneous thinking? First, there are 
many understudied accounts of moments of insight 
that could deepen our understanding of the role of 
spontaneous thinking as a catalyst for creative think­
ing. Historians have tended to focus on a few famous 
cases: among scholars, Kekule’s account of danc­
ing snakes revealing the structure of benzene and 
Henri Poincare’s sudden insights into Fustian func­
tions are nearly as famous as Archimedes’ “eureka” 
moment. But there are many other accounts that
are more detailed and less well-examined, and there 
is a great deal to be learned by looking at things like 
diaries, letters, appointment books, and so on—  the 
primary documents that record the ebb and flow of 
creative lives, and can help us piece together the role 
of spontaneous thought in creative work. Making 
good use of these materials, however, requires the 
scholar to know what she’s looking for, to have an 
awareness of the traces that spontaneous thinking 
might leave behind, and to be able to see the clues 
of its operation in the stories people tell about their 
work. Here is where scientific work like Mihalyi 
Czikszentmihalyi’s interviews on flow and creativ­
ity (2002), or Edouard Toulouse’s (1897) survey of 
French scientists and artists, can be helpful in help­
ing scholars spot the signals of spontaneous think­
ing drawn into the creative process.
Second, historical studies could help scientists 
interested in the role of spontaneous thinking in 
other important human activities. In particular, 
historical accounts of contemplative practices, of 
efforts to tame the monkey mind or fight distrac­
tion, and to cultivate states of mental quiet, could 
greatly enhance our understanding of the cogni­
tive dimensions of religious experiences. For all 
their theological differences, a comparative study 
of contemplative practices across religions reveals 
a number of tantalizing similarities, and since at 
least the Axial Age, almost all the world’s major reli­
gions have struggled to construct a place for spon­
taneous thinking in monastic practices and worship 
(Pang, 2013).
Finally, historical studies can help us see how cre­
ative people learn to harness spontaneous thought 
to be more creative. While it sounds contradictory 
to argue that spontaneous thinking can be treated as 
a skill that we can learn, and learn to harness more 
effectively, the fact that many creative people orga­
nize their days in similar ways, mixing periods of 
work and leisure, as well as that they rest in similar 
ways, suggests that we can. The experience of genet­
icist Barbara McClintock (Keller, 1983) provides 
a vivid example of this ability becoming suddenly 
accessible to one of the twentieth century’s most 
noted scientists. In the early 1940s, McClintock 
was a visitor at Stanford University, trying to iden­
tify the chromosomes in the bread mold Neurospora. 
After a few fruitless days in the lab, McClintock 
went for a walk. “I sat out there, and I must have 
done this very intense, subconscious thinking” on 
the problem for half an hour. Then, suddenly, she 
literally saw the solution: she visualized how to 
identify the chromosomes and follow them through
138
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H I N K I N G  IN CREATIVE LIVES

Neurospora s life cycle. “I jumped up, I couldn’t wait 
to get back to the laboratory. I knew I was going 
to solve it— everything was going to be all right.” 
According to a colleague, McClintock’s insight “did 
more to clean up the cytology of Neurospora than all 
other cytological geneticists had done in all previ­
ous time,” and made it possible for Neurospora to 
join Drosophila melanogaster and Escherichia coli as a 
model organism in genetics research. What’s inter­
esting is that McClintock had taken walks when 
working on tricky problems for years; but after her 
walk at Stanford, she reported being able to regu­
larly use walking to get out of the lab and clear her 
head, confident that part of her mind would con­
tinue working on a problem— and often would 
come up with an answer.
This suggests that while it may be difficult to 
teach, techniques for harnessing spontaneous think­
ing for creative purposes can in fact be learned. Just 
as we learn language or how to walk, the process of 
learning how to use spontaneous thinking proceeds 
slowly and fitfully, through lots of experiments and 
trial and error. Even if we never learn to “summon 
it when needed,” as Barbara McClintock claimed 
she learned to do after her Stanford experience, we 
can learn what practices or conditions are likely to 
support spontaneous thinking and yield creative 
insights.
Conclusion
The “history of spontaneous thinking” may 
sound at first like an oxymoron. How can a neu­
rological function have a history, and how can its 
history be told? But as histories of walking (Gros, 
2015; Solnit, 2001), sleep (Ekirch, 2005), and child­
birth (Leavitt, 1988) have shown, natural activities 
are often influenced by culture and society, and 
the ways we practice them, think about them, or 
integrate them into our daily lives may change. For 
historians, paying attention to the role of spontane­
ous thinking in creativity would enliven and enrich 
the history of ideas. It would throw new light on 
the ways designed spaces like studies, laboratories, 
and libraries have supported both formal cognitive 
activity, and contemplation and reflection. It would 
encourage scholars to be more attuned to the role 
everyday practices like walks play in creating space 
for spontaneous thinking. It would provide a richer 
view of the lives of significant thinkers. And it would 
help us reconstruct the history of attitudes toward 
hard-to-control but highly creative mental states 
like dreams, visions, and hypnagogic and hypno- 
pompic states. For neuroscientists, historical studies
of spontaneous thinking could deepen our under­
standing of the role of spontaneous thinking as a 
catalyst for creative thinking, help scientists chart 
the role of spontaneous thinking in other impor­
tant human activities, and help us see how creative 
people learn to harness spontaneous thinking,
References
Algazi, G. (2003). Scholars in households: Refiguring the learned 
habitus, 1480-1550. Science in Context, 76(1-2), 9-42. 
Boyarin, J. 
(Ed.). 
(1993). 
The ethnography of reading
(Berkeley: University of California Press.
Boyer, P, &Nissenbaum, S. (1974). Salem possessed: The social ori­
gins of witchcraft Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2000). The social life of information.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Carr, N. (2011). The shallows: What the internet is doing to our 
brains. New York: W. W. Norton.
Classen, C., Howes, D., & Synnott, A. (1994). Aroma: The cul­
tural history of smell London: Routledge.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1992/2002). Flow: The psychology of opti­
mal experience (rev. ed.).
Darnton, R. (1985). The literary underground of the old regime.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
de Mause, L. 
(Ed.). 
(1995). 
The history of childhood. 
New York: Jason Aronson.
Desmond, A., & Moore, J. (1991). Darwin. London: Michael 
Joseph.
Ekirch, A. R. (2005). At days close: Night in times past. 
New York: W. W. Norton.
Ekirch, A. R. (2015). The modernization of Western sleep: Or, 
does insomnia have a history? Past and Present, 226(1), 
149-192.
Erikson, E. (1958/1993). Young man Luther: A study in psycho­
analysis and history. Repr. New York: W. W. Norton.
Gay, P. (1998). Freud: A life for our time. New York: W. 
W. Norton.
Goody, J., & Watt, I. (1963). The consequences of literacy.
Comparative Studies in Society and History, 5(3), 304-345. 
Graiver, I. (2016). The paradoxical effects of attentiveness.
Journal of Early Christian Studies, 24(2), 199-227.
Gros, F. (2015). A philosophy of walking (C. Harper, Trans.). 
London: Verso.
Hadot, P. (2004). What is ancient philosophy? Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press.
Hannaway, O. (1986). Laboratory design and the aim of sci­
ence: Andreas Libavius versus Tycho Brahe, Isis, 77(4), 
584-610.
Havelock, E. (1986). The muse learns to write. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Jenkins, R. (1995). Gladstone: A biography. New York: Random 
House.
Keen, A. (2015). The internet is not the answer. New York: Atlantic 
Monthly Press.
Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism. New York: W.H. 
Freeman.
Kern, S. (1983). The culture of time and space, 1880—1918.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leavitt, J. W. (1988/2016). Brought to bed: Childbearing in 
America, 1750—1950. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lord, A. 
(1960/2000). 
The singer of tales. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
ALEX S O O J U N G - K I M  PANG
139

MacCulloch, D. (2013). Silence: A Christian history. London: 
Viking.
Malafouris, L. (2009). Is it ‘me’ or is it ‘mine’? The Mycenaean 
sword as a body-part. In J. Robb and D. Boric (Eds.), Past 
bodies (pp. 115-123). Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Mark, G. J., Voida, S., & Cardello, A. V. (2012). “A pace not 
dictated by electrons”: An empirical study of work without 
email. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI T2). Austin, TX: May 5-10.
Martin, H.-J. (1995). The history and power of writing. (L. G. 
Cochrane, Trans.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ong, W. (1982/2002). Orality and literacy: The technologizing 
of the word (rev. ed.). London: Routledge.
Pang, 
A. 
S.-K. 
(2013). 
The 
distraction 
addiction.
New York: Little, Brown.
Pang, A. S.-K. (2016). Rest: Why You get more done when you work 
less. New York: Basic Books.
Parry, A. (Ed.) (1987). The making of Homeric verse: The collected 
papers ofMilman Parry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pieper, J. (1952). Leisure, the Basis of Culture. (A. Dru, Trans.). 
New York: Pantheon.
Renfrew, C., & Zubrow, E. B. W. (1994). The ancient mind: 
Elements of cognitive archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Rosen, L. D. (2012). iDisorder: Understanding our obsession 
with technology and overcoming its hold on us. London: 
Macmillan.
Saenger, P. (1997). Space between words: The origins of silent read­
ing. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Samson, D. R., & Nunn, C. L. (2015). Sleep intensity 
and the evolution of human cognition. Evolutionary 
Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews, 24(6), 225-237.
Saval, N. (2014). Cubed: A secret history of the workplace. 
New York: Doubleday.
Schivelbusch, W. (1986). The railway journey: The industrializa­
tion of time and space in the 19th century. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Scott, J. W. (1974). The glassworkers of Carmaux. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, 
M. 
(2010). 
A 
prehistory 
of ordinary people. 
Phoenix: University of Arizona Press.
Solnit, 
R. 
(2001). 
Wanderlust: A 
history 
of walking. 
New York: Penguin.
Thompson, E. P. (1963). The making of the English working class. 
London: Victor Gollancz.
Turkle, S. (2011). Alone together: Why we expect more from tech­
nology and less from each other. New York: Basic Books.
Wadley, L., Hodgskiss, T., & Grant, G. (2009). Implications for 
complex cognition from the hafting of tools with compound 
adhesives in the Middle Stone Age, South Africa. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(24): 9590-9594.
Wieth, M. B., & Zacks, R. T. (2011). Time of day effects on 
problem solving: When the non-optimal is optimal. Thinking 
& Reasoning, 17(4), 387-401.
140
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H I N K I N G  IN CREATIVE LIVES

P A R T
Mind-Wandering 
and Daydreaming


C H A P T E R
13
The Neuroscience of Spontaneous Thought: 
An Evolving Interdisciplinary Field
Jessica R. Andrews-Hanna, Zachary C. Irving, Kieran C. R. Fox, R. Nathan Spreng, and Kalina Christoff
Abstract
An often-overlooked characteristic of the human mind is its propensity to wander. Despite growing 
interest in the science of mind-wandering, most studies operationalize mind-wandering by its task- 
unrelated contents, which may be orthogonal to the processes constraining how thoughts are evoked and 
unfold over time. This chapter emphasizes the importance of incorporating such processes into current 
definitions of mind-wandering, and proposes that mind-wandering and other forms of spontaneous 
thought (such as dreaming and creativity) are mental states that arise and transition relatively freely due 
to an absence of constraints on cognition. The chapter reviews existing psychological, philosophical, 
and neuroscientific research on spontaneous thought through the lens of this framework, and calls for 
additional research into the dynamic properties of the mind and brain.
Key Words: spontaneous thought, mind-wandering, task-unrelated, dreaming, creativity
An Introduction to an Evolving 
Interdisciplinary Field
A mere 10 years ago, the idea of an edited volume 
on spontaneous thought might have seemed far­
fetched. Yet fast-forward to 2018, and the topic—  
once considered a “fringe” or “pseudo” science— has 
begun to thrive in mainstream research. This grow­
ing scientific interest in spontaneous mental activity 
was sparked by several independent findings from 
psychology and neuroscience research that have 
recently been synthesized under the heading of a 
new field: the neuroscience of spontaneous thought (see 
Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 
2016, for a recent review).
Beginning in the 1960s, findings from the 
psychology literature demonstrated that cogni­
tion often unfolds independent from the here and 
now (Singer & McCraven, 1961; Kane, Brown, 
& McVay, 2007; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Klinger & Cox, 1987), and subsequent studies 
have shown that these task-unrelated or stimulus- 
independent thoughts exhibit complex relationships
with attention (Antrobus, Singer, & Greenberg, 
1966; McVay & Kane, 2010; Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2006; Teasdale et al., 1995) and well-being 
(Giambra & Traynor, 1978; McMillan, Kaufman, 
& Singer, 2013; Watkins, 2008). In parallel, neu­
roscientists discovered that a set of regions known 
as the default network becomes more active when 
participants disengage from a wide variety of tasks 
(Raichle et al., 2001; Shulman et al., 1997a), lead­
ing to a plethora of studies attempting to uncover 
the networks functional roles (reviewed in Buckner, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). Subsequently, 
the introduction of resting state functional connectiv­
ity (RSFC) into mainstream neuroscience research 
(i.e., Fox et al., 2005; Greicius, Krasnow, Reiss, & 
Menon, 2003) demonstrated that intricate maps of 
the brains functional network architecture could be 
derived from an fMRI scan while individuals rested 
quietly in the scanner (reviewed in Fox & Raichle, 
2007). Collectively, these findings revealed that a set 
of brain regions becomes engaged in coordinated 
ways when individuals are left alone undisturbed.
143

Neuroscientists therefore started to question: “What 
is so special about periods of rest?”
In this chapter, we highlight how our under­
standing of the neuroscience of spontaneous 
thought has benefited greatly from integrating these 
parallel findings across psychological and neurosci­
entific levels of analysis, as well as related fields such 
as the philosophy of mind-wandering (Carruthers, 
2015; Dorsch, 2015; Irving, 2016; Irving & 
Thompson, Chapter 8 in this volume; Metzinger, 
2013; Metzinger, 2015; Sripada, Chapter 3 in this 
volume; Sripada, 2016). Realizing that the mind 
is always active— spontaneously associating, simu­
lating, remembering, predicting, mentalizing, and 
evaluating— suggests that the default networks 
coordinated activity during periods of wakeful rest 
may be neither a coincidence nor indicative of a 
state of idleness. Similarly, the recent discovery that 
regions associated with executive control become 
engaged 
during 
mind-wandering1 
(Christoff,
Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; 
Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 
2015) sheds important light on the complex behav­
ioral relationships between mind-wandering and 
executive function. Here we discuss how interdis­
ciplinary cross-talk led to evolving views on how to 
define, measure, and understand the significance of 
spontaneous thought, and how these inquiries con­
tinue to spark new questions for future research on 
this elusive phenomenon.
Evolving Definitions of Spontaneous 
Thought
Although the phrase “spontaneous thought” is 
often equated with “mind-wandering” throughout 
the literature, we recently proposed that mind­
wandering is but one member of a larger class of 
spontaneous processes that also includes nighttime 
dreaming, as well as aspects of creativity (Christoff 
et al., 2016; Figure 13.1). We defined spontaneous
!I
sI
r.........................................................
Rumination and Obse! 
Thought
sisive
Spontaneous Thought 
j
.1° 
.1° 
- i
p. 
5S
& 
§ 
ft 
: 
Q 
1 
$
i
l
l
 
^  
^  
0
• 
Goal- 
! Directed 
; Thought
■< — •
Weak
Strong
Deliberate Constraints
Highly Dynamic 
Stream of Thought
Highly Rigid Thoughts/ 
Little Dynamic “Flow”
V
Time
:___i
Time
Figure 13.1. A dynamic model of spontaneous thought. Spontaneous thought spans a conceptual space, inclusive of night dreaming, 
mind-wandering, and creative thought, that is relatively free from two kinds of constraints: (1) deliberate constraints (x-axis), and 
(2) automatic constraints (jy-axis). According to this model, adapted and extended from Christoff and colleagues (2016), ruminative 
and obsessive thought are not truly spontaneous in nature due to strong bottom-up, “automatic” constraints that bias their 
content. The dynamics of thought—the way thoughts unfold and flow over time—represent an important element of this model.
As shown in the bottom left box, thoughts that are free from both kinds of constraints should transition relatively quickly and span 
different phenomenological content (represented by different gray colors). Conversely, excessively constrained thoughts should have 
longer durations with similar content (bottom right box). (See Color Insert)
144
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

thought as “a mental state, or a sequence of mental 
states, that arise relatively freely due to an absence of 
strong constraints on the contents of each state and 
on the transitions from one mental state to another” 
(p. 719). Three key components of this definition are 
largely overlooked by prior research (see also Irving, 
2016, for a philosophical theory that incorporates 
similar developments). First, the definition suggests 
that thoughts arising in a spontaneous or uninten­
tional fashion should not be equated with thoughts 
arising deliberately, even when such thoughts have 
similar (e.g., task-unrelated) contents. Second, 
this definition contrasts thoughts that arise spon­
taneously from those that are constrained through 
automatic sources, such as perceptual and affective 
salience. Third, if spontaneous thoughts unfold rel­
atively free from constraints, they should flow in a 
flexible and dynamic manner.
Although these principles may seem inherent 
to the term “spontaneity,” the bulk of the mind­
wandering literature characterizes the phenomenon 
by its contents, rather than the processes by which 
thoughts are evoked (i.e., Smallwood & Schooler,
2006). For years, mind-wandering has been defined 
as being either unrelated to the task at hand (as a 
task-unrelated thought) (e.g., Giambra, 1989), or as 
independent from external stimuli (as a stimulus- 
independent thought) (e.g., Teasdale et al., 1995). 
While more recent taxonomies suggest that true 
episodes of mind-wandering are thoughts that are 
both 
task-unrelated 
an d stimulus-independent 
(Stawarczyk et al., 2011a), such definitions do not 
consider the manner in which thoughts are evoked, 
nor how they unfold over time (but see Christoff, 
2012; Irving, 2016; Irving & Thompson, Chapter 8 
in this volume; Klinger, 1971; McMillan et al., 
2013; Seli, Carriere, & Smilek, 2015a; Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015; Stan & Christoff, Chapter 5 in 
this volume).
The distinction between spontaneous versus 
deliberate thought is critical in many respects. For 
one, recent research suggests that unintentional 
versus intentional task-unrelated thoughts show 
dissociable effects across a variety of behavioral and 
clinical contexts (Seli, Risko, Purdon, & Smilek, 
2016a). For example, intentional task-unrelated 
thoughts are most frequent in easy compared to dif­
ficult tasks, while unintentional thoughts are most 
frequent in difficult compared to easy tasks (Seli, 
Risko, & Smilek, 2016b). Further, greater endorse­
ment of unintentional thinking, as measured with 
a trait questionnaire, positively predicts symptoms 
of both deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD;
Seli, Smallwood, Cheyne, & Smilek, 2015b) and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD; Seli, Risko, 
Smilek, & Schacter, 2016c), despite the finding that 
intentional task-unrelated thoughts do not show 
significant relationships with symptoms of these 
disorders. 
Moreover, 
intentional task-unrelated 
thoughts positively predict aspects of trait mind­
fulness, while unintentional thoughts negatively 
predict the same mindfulness construct (Seli et al., 
2015a). The distinction between unintentional and 
intentional task-unrelated thinking may also prove 
important when interpreting existing neuroscience 
research, as discussed later in this chapter.
Another key dimension of spontaneous thought, 
foreshadowed by William James as the flowing 
“stream” in the stream o f  consciousness (James, 1890), 
is the manner in which thoughts unfold over time. 
According to the definition of Christoff and col­
leagues (2016), thoughts that concern a narrow 
topic, and remain fixated on this narrow topic over 
time, are not spontaneous in nature because of the 
excessive constraints that influence how one tran­
sitions from one thought to another. As discussed 
earlier, a train of thought can be constrained in two 
ways (Christoff et al., 2016; Irving, 2016). One 
type of constraint that can limit the flow of thought 
is deliberate in nature— that is, evoked intention­
ally using top-down control, as when one chooses 
to remain focused on a particular topic for an 
extended period of time. Another type of constraint 
is automatic in nature— as when a habitual thought 
pattern or salient perceptual stimulus biases ones 
thoughts toward a specific topic in a bottom-up 
manner. This temporal variability, largely over­
looked by prior research, has important clinical rele­
vance. For example, excessive automatic constraints 
could characterize ruminative thoughts (see DuPre 
& Spreng, Chapter 36 in this volume)— a com­
mon symptom of depression and anxiety (Nolen- 
Hoeksema, Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008; Watkins, 
2008). In contrast, thoughts with excessive variabil­
ity may characterize ADHD or aspects of psychosis 
(Christoff et al., 2016). The dynamics of spontane­
ous thoughts may have additional implications for 
recent neuroscientific findings (see discussion later 
in this chapter).
Although this section has given much weight 
to process models of spontaneous thought, the 
content of spontaneous thought is also key, and 
variability in thought content over time is an 
important manifestation of its dynamic flow. 
Additionally, 
numerous 
studies 
have 
shown 
that task-unrelated thoughts can have a diverse
J ESS ICA R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
145

array of content, including emotional, tempo­
ral, and social content that may differ within 
and between individuals in ways that relate to 
well-being (Klinger, 2009; Singer & Antrobus, 
1966; Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 2013). For 
example, although meta-analyses of behavioral 
studies show that task-unrelated thoughts have a 
slightly positive bias on average (Fox et ah, 2014; 
Fox et ah, in preparation), symptoms of depres­
sion have been linked to more negative and self- 
focused thoughts (Andrews-Hanna et ah, 2013; 
Giambra & Traynor, 1978). Additionally, while 
task-unrelated thoughts can sometimes predict 
worse subsequent mood (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 
2010, but see Mason, Brown, Mar, & Smallwood, 
2013; Poerio, Totterdell, & Miles, 2013), task- 
unrelated thoughts pertaining to the future pre­
dict better subsequent mood (Ruby, Smallwood, 
Engen, & Singer, 2013). According to the content 
regulation hypothesis proposed by Smallwood and 
Andrews-Hanna (Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 
2013; Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng,
2014), an ability to limit one’s task-unrelated 
thoughts to largely positive, constructive content 
is thought to be a critical factor governing its costs 
and benefits.
Evolving Approaches to Measuring 
the Neuroscience of Spontaneous Thought
Thus far, this chapter has introduced a new 
field— the neuroscience of spontaneous thought—  
and has discussed how the definition of spontane­
ous thought (and mind-wandering, in particular) 
has evolved in recent years. Before synthesizing 
findings from research on this topic, it is worth 
discussing how the neural underpinnings of spon­
taneous thought are commonly measured. The 
element of spontaneity poses a unique challenge 
inherent to its experimental study. How can one 
measure a process that, by definition, cannot be 
directly experimentally induced, as doing so would 
introduce deliberate constraints on cognition that 
conflict with spontaneity? And how can one isolate 
stretches of spontaneous thought, when they arise 
at unpredictable times, independently of immedi­
ate perceptual input and experimental demands, 
and often unbeknownst to the person having those 
thoughts? This section reviews evolving approaches 
to measuring the neural underpinnings of sponta­
neous thought, and evaluates such approaches in 
light of the definitions discussed in the previous 
section.
Early Neuroscience Research Measured 
Spontaneous Thoughts Accidentally 
and Indirectly
Although the field of psychology had begun to 
address the challenges inherent to the measure­
ment of spontaneous thought by the 1990s, histori­
cal biases and demands for rigorous experimental 
control pressured the neuroscience field to focus 
on externally-oriented processes with measurable 
behavioral manifestations (Callard, Smallwood, & 
Margulies, 2012). As a result, the neuroscience of 
spontaneous thought trailed behind for decades 
(but see early efforts by Ingvar, 1979; Andreasen 
et al., 1995; McGuire et al., 1996; Binder et al.,
1999). Given these biases, it may not seem surpris­
ing that the default network, a brain system now 
widely appreciated for its role in internally directed 
thought 
(Buckner, 
Andrews-Hanna, 
Schacter,
2008), was discovered entirely accidentally. This 
groundbreaking discovery followed a meta-analysis 
of nine different positron emission tomography 
(PET) studies of “human visual information pro­
cessing,” each with passive control conditions in 
which participants fixated on a crosshair or passively 
viewed the same stimuli (Shulman et al., 1997a, 
1997b). To the surprise of the researchers, relatively 
few regions would exhibit common patterns of 
blood flow increases across the experimental tasks 
(Shulman et al., 1997b), while a robust set of regions 
would show the opposite contrast of passive fixation 
> active tasks (Shulman et al., 1997a). The network 
that emerged in this second comparison was coined 
the “default mode of brain function” by Raichle and 
colleagues in 2001 (Raichle et al., 2001).
Although these two manuscripts brought ini­
tial attention to the default mode and introduced 
several hypotheses regarding the default networks 
functional significance during periods of awake 
rest, including the generation of “unconstrained 
verbally-mediated thoughts” 
(Shulman et al., 
1997a), the studies did not assess the frequency 
or nature of ongoing thoughts during periods of 
rest. Despite the efforts of these groups, many sub­
sequent studies assumed the default network and 
the resting state reflected an idle state with little 
contribution to active forms of cognition. This 
assumption was perhaps most apparent throughout 
the literature on resting state functional connec­
tivity MRI (rs-fcMRI), a technique that exam­
ines temporally correlated fMRI activity patterns 
during extended periods of awake rest (reviewed 
in Fox & Raichle, 2007). In 2003, fMRI activ­
ity time courses from key regions of the default
146
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

mode were shown to temporally correlate at low 
frequencies during the resting state, forming a 
brain system known as the default mode network, 
or default network (Greicius et al., 2003; Greicius, 
Srivastava, Reiss, & Menon, 2004). Several other 
large-scale brain systems have been subsequently 
identified using principles of rs-fcMRI (Yeo et al., 
2011; Power et al., 2011; Doucet et al., 2011). 
A commonly held assumption of rs-fcMRI was 
that patterns of connectivity are intrinsic in nature, 
reflecting a long history of firing and wiring (Fox 
& Raichle, 2007). Periods of awake rest were used 
to evoke resting state correlations because cogni­
tion was assumed to be at a minimum during this 
unconstrained state, and low temporal frequencies 
were isolated partially to ensure that task-related 
activity was filtered out, despite later findings that 
unconstrained thoughts unfold at similar frequen­
cies (Klinger, 2009; Vanhaudenhuyse et al., 2010).
Thus, groundbreaking discoveries from neu­
roscience research in the first decade of the 2000s 
revealed that periods of awake rest were associated 
with increased activity in a set of regions that came 
to be known as the default mode network. Scientists 
became curious about periods of rest, prompting a 
synthesis of the psychological literature on uncon­
strained cognition and mind-wandering. These ini­
tial efforts revealed that the absence of experimental 
tasks should not be equated with the absence of 
cognition (Andreasen et al., 1995; Binder et al.,
1999; Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; 
Christoff, Ream, & Gabrieli, 2004), and set the 
stage for an explosion of research to come.
Measuring the Neuroscience of Spontaneous 
Thought in the Modem Age
The appreciation that thoughts frequently unfold 
in the absence of internal and external constraints 
on cognition led to a plethora of neuroimaging and 
electrophysiological studies attempting to more pre­
cisely characterize their neural underpinnings. Here 
we review mainstream methods to measure the neu­
roscience of spontaneous thought (Figure 13.2).
One common method examines individual 
difference relationships between covert neurocog- 
nitive measures (such as fMRI activity, strength 
of rs-fcMRI correlations between brain regions, 
structural MRI, neurophysiological/occulometric 
measures, electroencephalography [EEG] and event 
related potentials [ERP]) and participant scores 
on trait questionnaires assessing the typical nature 
of spontaneous thoughts in daily life. Examples of 
such questionnaires include the Imaginal Process 
Inventory (Singer & Antrobus, 1966), the Mind- 
Wandering Questionnaire (Mrazek et al., 2013), 
and the recent Mind Excessively Wandering Scale 
(Mowlem et al., 2016). Scores on these and other 
trait questionnaires are correlated across partici­
pants with individual differences in brain activity 
or connectivity during experimental tasks (Mason
First-Person Self-Report 
Assessments
Trait
Questionnaires
Retrospective
Questionnaires
Experience 
. 
Sampling
^ Self-Caught Online 
Experience
^ 
Sampling_____  ,
Assessing frequency, content 
or dynamics of typical, trait-like 
thought patterns
Participants recall what they 
thought about during prior 
tasks or periods of rest.
Participants are asked about 
their ongoing thoughts at 
random times during a task.
Participants self-monitor their 
conscious experience and 
indicate spontaneous thoughts 
with a button press.
Neurobiological Assessments
Physiological/
Occulometry
f  
\
Structural MRI
V _________________
Functional MRI
V _________________
f  
'\
EEG/ERP/iEEG 
V____________
Neurostimulation
V______________/
Assessments of white matter integrity, 
or gray matter volume I thickness
fMRI "activity" or functional 
connectivity during experimentally 
directed tasks or periods of rest
Electrophysiological brain signals 
(scalp or intracranial) analyzed as 
oscillations or trial-averaged responses
Pupil dilation, eye position, blink rate, 
skin conductance, or other 
physiological signals
Using tDCS, TMS, or implanted devices 
to temporally activate or de-activate a 
part of the brain
Figure 13.2. Methods to assess the neuroscience of spontaneous thought in humans. Left panel: Many different first-person 
approaches are used to assess the nature of trait- or state-like thought patterns, although most existing studies do not differentiate 
between spontaneous and constrained forms of thinking. Right panel: Neuroimaging, psychophysiological, and occulometric 
approaches are increasingly being employed to covertly assess the neurocognitive correlates of spontaneous thought. MRI = magnetic 
resonance imaging; EEG = electroencephalography; ERP = event-related potential; iEEG = intracranial EEG; tDCS = transcranial 
direct current stimulation; TMS: transcranial magnetic stimulation.
J ESS ICA R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
147

et al., 2007) or periods of rest (Kucyi & Davis,
2014). O f particular interest given evolving defi­
nitions of spontaneous thought are two additional 
scales that separately assess the tendency for indi­
viduals to engage in intentional and unintentional 
forms of thought: the Mind-Wandering Deliberate 
Scale and the Mind-Wandering Spontaneous Scale 
(Carriere et al., 2013; Seli, Carriere, & Smilek, 
2015a). Additionally, the “Mentation Rate” and 
“Absorption in Daydreams” subscales of the Imaginal 
Process Inventory (Singer & Antrobus, 1966) focus 
on the dynamics of spontaneous and deliberate 
thought (e.g., how quickly ones thoughts transi­
tion from topic to topic versus how likely thoughts 
are to remain focused on a specific topic). Several 
clinically oriented questionnaires may indirectly 
measure the dynamics of thought, insofar as they 
plausibly measure automatic constraints on thought 
processes. These inventories include the Ruminative 
Response Scale (Roberts, Gilboa, & Gotlib, 1998; 
Treynor, Gonzalez, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2003), the 
Rumination-Reflection 
Questionnaire 
(Trapnell 
& Campbell, 1999), the Cognitive Intrusions 
Questionnaire (Freeston, 1991), and the Intrusive 
Thoughts Questionnaires (Edwards & Dickerson, 
1987). Recent studies have begun to examine rela­
tionships between these clinically focused traits and 
individual differences in brain activity or connec­
tivity (Hamilton et al., 2011; Kaiser et al., 2015; 
Ordaz et al., 2017).
Relating neurobiological measures to trait ques­
tionnaires has the advantage of allowing researchers 
to assess more stable properties of mind-wandering, 
but may not provide an accurate assessment of par­
ticipants’ thoughts during the tasks or rest periods 
for which neurobiological measures are derived. For 
example, Berman et al. (2014) found that group 
differences in functional connectivity between 
depressed and non-depressed individuals were much 
more substantial following a rumination induction 
period than during a baseline resting state, suggest­
ing that spontaneous cognition may not always 
track trait measures. To overcome this limitation, 
researchers commonly administer retrospective ques­
tionnaires after task paradigms or periods of rest in 
which neurobiological measures are simultaneously 
recorded. 
Retrospective 
questionnaires 
require 
participants to retrospectively reflect on their phe­
nomenological experience during those paradigms, 
and answer a series of self-report questions char­
acterizing the nature of their thoughts during that 
time. This approach was originally implemented 
in conjunction with neuroimaging on an informal
verbal basis, prompting Andreasen and colleagues 
to coin the ironic acronym Random Episodic Silent 
Thought (REST) to emphasize that periods of rest 
often involve autobiographical memory recall 
and future thought (Andreasen et al., 1995). In 
1996, McGuire and colleagues (McGuire et al.,
1996) used a retrospective questionnaire to assess 
participants’ frequency of task-unrelated thoughts 
following task and rest conditions, and examined 
which brain regions tracked individual differences 
in the frequency of task-unrelated thoughts (see 
also Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Huang, Randy, & 
Buckner, 2010a). More than a decade later, a retro­
spective Resting State Questionnaire was developed 
to quantify the content and form of thoughts dur­
ing resting state scans (Delamillieure et al., 2010), 
and a similar questionnaire was administered in a 
different study that linked individual differences 
in thought content to individual differences in 
functional connectivity during rest (Andrews- 
Hanna et al., 2010a; see also Doucet et al., 2012; 
Gorgolewski et al., 2014). Across these studies, par­
ticipants reported spending a large proportion of 
time engaging in stimulus-independent thoughts, 
with thoughts about the future being especially 
frequent. Retrospective questionnaires have also 
been used in conjunction with methods assess­
ing pupillometry (Smallwood, Brown, Baird, & 
Schooler, 2012a) and EEG (Barron, Riby, Greer, & 
Smallwood, 2011). Collectively, retrospective ques­
tionnaires have the potential to reveal the frequency 
and content of spontaneous thoughts without dis­
rupting ongoing cognition or biasing subsequent 
attention. A drawback of this approach is that par­
ticipants may not remember the contents of their 
thoughts when assessed minutes later, and reported 
thoughts might be influenced by biases in memory. 
Additionally, 
since retrospective questionnaires 
often ask participants to average multiple thoughts 
across extended periods of time, they are not ideal 
approaches to examine the way in which thoughts 
precisely unfold over time.
O nline experience sam pling approaches have the 
potential to overcome many of the limitations of 
retrospective questionnaires by assessing the nature 
of thoughts at different moments throughout a task. 
This approach had gained popularity in psychology 
(Giambra, 1989; Teasdale et al., 1995), and had 
initially been adopted for use in simulated scan­
ning environments to approximate the frequency 
of task-unrelated thoughts in identical paradigms 
conducted in the scanner (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
2010a; Binder et al., 1999; McKiernan, D ’Angelo,
148
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Kaufman, & Binder, 2006). It was not until 2009, 
however, that experience sampling probes were 
incorporated directly into neuroimaging paradigms, 
allowing researchers to compare patterns of brain 
activity associated with epochs of on-task versus off- 
task thought, and examine correspondences with 
disruptions in behavioral performance (Christoff, 
Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009a). 
Since then, additional studies have adopted similar 
online experience sampling approaches during peri­
ods of rest (Tusche, Smallwood, Bernhardt, & Singer, 
2014; Van Calster et al., 2016; Vanhaudenhuyse 
et al., 2010) or external tasks (Kucyi, Salomons, 
& Davis, 2013; Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maquet, & 
D ’Argembeau, 2011b), and the approach has also 
gained popularity in the EEG (Baird et al., 2014; 
Kam et al., 2011; Kam et al., 2013; Kirschner 
et al., 2012; Smallwood et al., 2008) and struc­
tural MRI literature (Bernhardt et al., 2014). Note, 
however, that while most studies ask participants 
whether they characterized their thoughts as on- 
task or off-task, some studies have additionally 
asked about participants’ meta-awareness of their 
thoughts (i.e., Christoff et al., 2009a), or whether 
their thoughts were dependent or independent of 
external stimuli (Kucyi, Salomons, & Davis, 2013; 
Stawarczyk et al., 2011b). These questions, as well 
as questions assessing other measures of phenom­
enological content, are important because partici­
pants are often unaware of their ongoing mental 
activity (Fox & Christoff, 2015; Schooler et al.,
2011). Furthermore, a sizable proportion of off- 
task thoughts pertain to external distractions and 
involve unique neural underpinnings (Stawarczyk 
et al., 2011b). Critically, to our knowledge, no 
neuroscientific study has directly assessed, using 
online experience sampling approaches, whether 
participants’ thoughts arose in a spontaneous or 
constrained fashion. Thus, as discussed in the next 
section, existing neuroimaging research may present 
an incomplete picture, and resolving the neurosci­
ence of spontaneous versus deliberate (and auto­
matically constrained) thought marks an important 
direction for future research.
One twist on the online experience sampling 
approach allows participants to press a button 
the moment they become aware of a spontaneous 
thought arising. Participants then answer questions 
characterizing their thought, and subsequently 
return their attention back to the ongoing task 
(e.g., focusing on one’s breath). This self-caught 
online thought sam pling approach gives researchers 
the opportunity to analyze patterns of brain activity
before, during, and after moments of awareness 
of thought, differentiating brain regions involved 
in the generation and awareness of task-unrelated 
and/or spontaneous thoughts (Ellamil et al., 2016; 
see also Hasenkamp et al., 2012, and Hasenkamp, 
Chapter 39 in this volume). Related approaches 
have been adopted for non-meditators as well 
(Vanhaudenhuyse et al., 2010), offering additional 
insight into the dynamics of thinking.
Evolving Insight into the Neurobiological 
Basis of Spontaneous Thought
As discussed in the previous section, neurocogni- 
tive research over the last several years has witnessed 
evolving methodological approaches to characteriz­
ing brain systems and tracking the frequency and 
phenomenology of spontaneous thought. Indirect 
or inferential approaches have begun to be comple­
mented by real-time assessments that are less influ­
enced by biases and failures of memory. Avenues for 
future research include novel approaches that could 
assess spontaneous thoughts covertly without inter­
rupting the participant or relying on self-report, as 
well as methods that could examine the causal role 
of brain regions in the generation or dynamics of 
spontaneous thought (see discussion later in this 
chapter). In this section, we ask what can be gleaned 
from the research outlined in the preceding on the 
neuroscience of spontaneous thought (see also Kam 
& Handy, Chapter 19 in this volume, for a sum­
mary of ERP research).
The Role of the Brain’s Default Network 
in Mind-Wandering
As discussed previously, early neuroimaging stud­
ies observed that short breaks in between blocks of 
externally directed tasks led to blood flow increases 
in brain regions that would be come to be known 
as the default network.2 Subsequent rs-fcMRI stud­
ies determined that activity fluctuations within 
these structures are temporally correlated during 
rest (i.e., Fox et al., 2005; Greicius et al., 2003). 
Clustering the magnitude of interregional associa­
tions during rest and tasks revealed that the default 
network can be further parceled into two subsystems 
that converge on core hubs (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
2010b; Yeo et al., 2011). A ventrally positioned 
medial temporal subsystem includes the hippocam­
pal formation and parahippocampal cortex, as well 
as two cortical regions that exhibit direct anatomi­
cal connections with the medial temporal lobe: ven­
tral angular gyrus and retrosplenial cortex. A dorsal 
medial subsystem includes structures spanning the
J ESS ICA R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
149

dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), the tempo­
roparietal junction, the lateral superior and inferior 
prefrontal gyrus, and the middle temporal gyrus 
extending into the temporal pole. These subsys­
tems are strongly interconnected with a set of core 
hubs centered on the anterior mPFC, the poste­
rior cingulate cortex, the dorsal angular gyrus, the 
superior frontal sulcus, and right anterior temporal 
cortex. The default network also includes aspects of 
Crus I and II of the cerebellum (Buckner, Krienen, 
Castellanos, Diaz, & Yeo, 2011), and subcortical 
regions such as aspects of the dorsal and ventral stri­
atum (Choi, Yeo, & Buckner, 2012). Thus, struc­
tural and functional MRI research suggests that the 
default network is a large brain system with inter­
acting components that converge on key association 
cortices.
Although early neuroimaging studies did not 
explicitly assess participants’ mental states during 
periods of “rest” that give rise to default network 
activity, links between unconstrained thinking and 
the default network were observed across several 
subsequent studies employing a variety of meth­
odological approaches (but see Raichle, 2016). For 
example, retrospective questionnaires and online 
experience sampling approaches revealed that con­
ditions in which participants reported high frequen­
cies of task-unrelated thought were associated with 
greater default network activity (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010a; Mason et al., 2007; McKieran et al.,
2006), that off-task trials activated the default net­
work to a greater degree than on-task trials (Christoff 
et al., 2009a; Stawarczyk et al., 2011b), and that 
stimulus-independent thoughts during the resting 
state activated the default network to a greater degree 
than epochs in which participants were focused 
on external perceptions (Preminger, Harmelech, 
& Malach, 2011; Stawarczyk et al., 2011b; Van 
Calster et al., 2016; Vanhaudenhuyse et al., 2010). 
Additionally, individual difference analyses revealed 
positive associations between default network activ­
ity during ongoing tasks and mind-wandering as 
assessed with trait questionnaires and retrospective 
measures (Mason et al., 2007). Conversely, experi­
enced meditators, as compared to novices, show less 
default network activity and experience fewer task- 
unrelated thoughts while meditating (Brewer et al.,
2011). Links between task-unrelated thinking and 
the default network also extend to individual differ­
ences in rs-fcMRI measures (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
2010a; Doucet et al., 2012; Gorgolewski et al., 
2014; O ’Callaghan, Shine, Lewis, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Irish, 2015; Smallwood et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2009), and structural MRI measures such as cor­
tical thickness (Bernhardt et al., 2014; Golchert 
et al., 2017). In 2015, much of the work outlined in 
the preceding was synthesized in two formal fMRI 
meta-analyses of mind-wandering (Fox et al., 2015; 
Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 2015). These meta­
analyses revealed that several regions throughout the 
default network— particularly regions associated 
with the default network core— were reliably associ­
ated with mind-wandering across studies employing 
diverse populations and methodological approaches 
(Figure 13.3), but also regions outside the D N  (see 
the following).
Although the default network is now widely 
appreciated for its role in spontaneous thought, 
the precise functional contributions of the spe­
cific regions involved remain unclear, particularly 
because the studies included in the meta-analysis 
defined mind-wandering by its task-unrelated and/ 
or stimulus-independent nature, rather than by its 
spontaneous dynamic processes. One intriguing 
possibility is that different regions, subsystems, or 
multivariate patterns within the default network 
support the conceptual content and/or form char­
acterizing spontaneous thoughts (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010; Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & 
Spreng, 2014; Gorgolweski et al., 2014; Smallwood 
et al., 2016; Tusche et al., 2014). For instance, 
specific patterns of default network activity might 
differentiate a positive spontaneous thought about 
one’s upcoming wedding from a negative memory 
about an ex-partner, or a thought of any other con­
ceptual nature. This possibility is supported by evi­
dence from a variety of task-related and rs-fcMRI 
studies suggesting that the medial temporal sub­
system might support contextual, visuospatial, and 
temporal aspects of memory and imagination—  
important for constructing a mental scene (Addis, 
Pan, Vu, Laiser, & Schacter, 2009; Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010b; Bar, 2007; Bar, Aminoff, Mason, 
& Fenske, 2007; Hassabis & Maguire, 2009)—  
whereas the dorsal medial subsystem may support 
a variety of socio-emotional content (Andrews- 
Hanna, Saxe, & Yarkoni, 2014; Hyatt, Calhoun, 
Pearlson, & Assaf, 2015; Lieberman, 2007; Spreng 
& Andrews-Hanna, 2014). The widespread con­
nectivity of core hub regions, combined with their 
involvement in a variety of self-generated processes, 
well position these regions to integrate disparate 
conceptual information when computing the over­
arching significance or importance of a particular 
thought (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 
2014; Smallwood et al., 2016)— a process that may
150
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Figure 13.3. Meta-analytic findings reveal neuroimaging correlates of task-unrelated and/or stimulus-independent thought. A 
meta-analysis of 10 fMRI studies demonstrates that many regions within the brains default network (outlined in light gray, using 7- 
network parcellations from Yeo et al., 2011) and the frontoparietal control network (outlined in dark gray) are reliably engaged across 
studies of task-unrelated and/or stimulus-independent thought. Regions within the default network include: medial prefrontal cortex 
(mPFC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC, a part of the medial temporal subsystem; see Yeo et al., 
2011), inferior parietal lobule (IPL), angular gyrus (AngG), superior temporal sulcus (STS), and ventral lateral PFC (vlPFC). Regions 
within the frontoparietal control network include: rostral lateral prefrontal cortex (rlPFC), dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), 
and precuneus (preC). Regions spanning other networks include mid insula (mid-ins), somatosensory cortex (SS), and temporal pole 
(TP, extending into the dorsal medial subsystem of the default network). Note that the fMRI studies included in the meta-analysis do 
not differentiate between spontaneous and constrained forms of thinking, so it is unclear which regions are involved in spontaneous 
thought, and which are involved in exerting constraints on those thoughts (see text). (See Color Insert)
partly determine the thoughts dynamics, or the way 
in which it unfolds over time.
It is also possible that specific components of 
the default network directly contribute to the gen­
eration of spontaneous thoughts in a more domain- 
general manner, yet interact with other default 
regions, such as the lateral temporal cortex, to elabo­
rate thoughts with specific conceptual content (e.g., 
Szpunar, Jing, Benoit, & Schacter, 2015). Evidence 
from human neuroimaging, intracranial record­
ings, rodent neurophysiology, and lesion work 
suggests that the hippocampus and nearby medial 
temporal structures may be prime candidates for 
such components (for reviews, see Christoff et al., 
2016; Fox, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2016). 
In particular, activity in the hippocampus, parahip­
pocampal cortex, and other aspects of the medial 
temporal subsystem emerge early in the dynamics 
of spontaneous thought— just prior to the moment 
of subjective awareness— consistent with a role in 
the initiation, as opposed to the elaboration and/or 
evaluation, of spontaneous thought (Ellamil et al.,
2016; Gelbard-Sagiv, Mukamel, Harel, Malach, & 
Fried, 2008). Additionally, reviews of human intra­
cranial recording studies suggest that spontaneous 
thoughts, memories, and other dreamlike experi­
ences are elicited more than half the time following 
electrical stimulation of regions within the medial 
temporal lobe— considerably more than any other 
cortical region assessed (reviewed in Selimbeyoglu 
& Parvizi, 2010; Fox et al., 2016). In rats, hippo­
campal place cells— neurons with spatial receptive 
fields that track where a rat is in its environment 
(O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978)— also spontaneously 
fire independent of immediate perceptual input, 
including during brief epochs of “rest” when the rat 
stops navigating its environment (Foster & Wilson, 
2006). This spontaneous hippocampal firing has 
been linked to replay of prior experiences (Diba & 
Buzsaki, 2007; Foster & Wilson, 2006), pre-play of 
upcoming experiences (Dragoi & Tonegawa, 2011, 
2013), and even to patterns suggestive of simula­
tions of entirely novel experiences (Gupta, van der 
Meer, Touretzky, & Redish, 2010). In humans,
151
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.

spontaneous hippocampal activity and connectivity 
during periods of rest following periods of learn­
ing predict the degree to which studied material is 
encoded into long-term memory (Tambini, Ketz, 
& Davachi, 2010), and periods of rest as well as 
sleep are considered critical for memory consolida­
tion and problem-solving (Dewar, Alber, Butler, 
Cowan, & Della Sala, 2012; Dewar, Alber, Cowan, 
& Della Sala, 2014; Stickgold, 2005; Wagner, Gais, 
Haider, Verleger, & Born, 2004). Finally, damage to 
the medial temporal lobe in hippocampal amnesia 
and Alzheimer’s disease is associated with profound 
deficits in both memory and imagination (Hassabis, 
Kumaran, Vann, & Maguire, 2007; Irish & Piolino,
2016), although the effect of such lesions on spon­
taneous thought has yet to be investigated, to our 
knowledge. In sum, multiple sources of evidence 
from human and nonhuman animals suggest that 
the medial temporal lobe may play a key role in the 
initiation of a spontaneous thought. The medial 
temporal lobe is densely interconnected with cor­
tical structures throughout the medial temporal 
subsystem as well as several core default network 
regions such as the lateral temporal cortex (Lavenex 
& Amaral, 2000; Suzuki & Amaral, 1994), thought 
to play an important role in conceptual knowledge 
and elaboration (Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007; 
Rice, Lambon Ralph, & Hoffman, 2015). Thus, 
it is likely that the medial temporal lobe does not 
operate in isolation, and we suspect its connectivity 
with distant cortical regions within and outside the 
default network are important determinants of the 
phenomenological content, form, dynamics, and 
conscious awareness of spontaneous thought.
The Role of the Frontoparietal Control 
Network in Mind- Wandering
Although the role of the default network in 
spontaneous thought has now gained support 
from a considerable body of research, neuroimag­
ing meta-analyses of mind-wandering also reveal 
reliable involvement of several regions outside the 
default network (Figure 13.3) (Fox et al., 2015; 
but see Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 2015). Most 
notable are aspects of the frontoparietal control net­
work (FPCN), a set of regions spanning association 
cortices such as the lateral prefrontal cortex, dorsal 
anterior cingulate/pre-supplementary motor area, 
and anterior inferior parietal lobe (Vincent, Kahn, 
Snyder, Raichle, & Buckner, 2008; Yeo et al., 2011). 
The FPCN is thought to allow individuals to flexibly 
allocate attentional resources toward external stim­
uli and/or internal representations (i.e., thoughts,
memories, and emotions), and to integrate relevant 
information from external and internal sources of 
information in the service of immediate and long­
term goals (Cole et al., 2013; Spreng, Sepulcre, 
Turner, Stevens, & Schacter, 2013; Vincent et al.,
2008). While the involvement of the FPCN in task- 
unrelated and/or stimulus-independent thought 
may seem surprising given that mind-wandering is 
often assumed to reflect a failure of control (Kane & 
McVay, 2012; McVay & Kane, 2010), a closer look 
at the data points to many possible explanations 
that mark important avenues for future research.
First, the majority of studies define mind­
wandering by its task-unrelated and/or stimulus- 
independent contents, and consequently lump 
spontaneous and deliberate thoughts together 
when conducting analyses. It is therefore possible 
that the FPCN comes online only when individu­
als experience deliberate task-unrelated thoughts. 
There are two ways to interpret this claim, which 
arise from the two ways to distinguish spontaneous 
from deliberate thoughts. First, it is possible that 
the FPCN comes online only when participants 
deliberately disengage from ongoing tasks, and that 
thoughts arising without intention may not involve 
the FPCN at all (Seli et al., 2016b). Second, it is 
possible that the FPCN comes online only when 
participants deliberately constrain the course that 
their thoughts take as they unfold over time. In 
this sense, transient FPCN activity may reflect the 
deliberate re-allocation of attention away from the 
task at hand and/or the sustained pursuit of inter­
nal goals that are irrelevant to the task at hand. 
Similarly, sustained patterns of FPCN activity may 
help participants shield their internal thoughts 
from less personally-significant distractions, includ­
ing the sounds of the scanning environment, other 
thoughts deemed less important, or even the task 
itself. Despite the injunctions to participants to stay 
alert and focused on external stimuli in paradigms, 
such as the Sustained Attention to Response Task 
(SART), participants may consider real-world issues 
such as an upcoming exam, a weekend trip, or an 
unresolved conflict with a friend as more pressing 
“tasks,” which may therefore vie for attention in 
potentially adaptive ways (Andrews-Hanna, 2012; 
Baars, 2010; McMillan et al., 2013). Nevertheless, 
recent findings provide support for the idea that 
the FPCN might play an important role in delib­
erate (but not necessarily spontaneous) task-unre­
lated thinking. Golchert and colleagues (2017) 
used a trait questionnaire to assess the frequency 
with which participants engaged in deliberate and
152
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

spontaneous forms of task-unrelated thought. 
Participants who engaged in more frequent deliber­
ate thinking exhibited greater functional integration 
between the FPCN and the DN, and greater corti­
cal thickness in aspects of the FPCN.
Another explanation for the FPCNs involve­
ment in spontaneous and/or deliberate task- 
unrelated thought concerns the phenomenological 
content characterizing periods of spontaneous or 
deliberate thought. Behavioral and neuroimag­
ing studies exploring the content of task-unrelated 
thoughts suggest that adults spend a considerable 
proportion of time engaged in prospectively ori­
ented thoughts, including thoughts about future 
goals, and in planning how to achieve those goals 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010a; Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2013; Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; 
Song & Wang, 2012; Stawarczyk et al., 2011a; 
Stawarczyk et al., 2013). Support for this idea comes 
from neuroimaging studies using task paradigms in 
which participants are explicitly asked to plan for 
their future. In these autobiographical planning 
contexts, both the default network and the FPCN 
become engaged in a tightly coordinated man­
ner (Gerlach, Spreng, Gilmore, & Schacter, 2011; 
Gerlach, Spreng, Madore, & Schacter, 2014; Spreng 
& Andrews-Hanna, 2015; Spreng, Stevens, W. D., 
Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, A. W., & Schacter,
2010). One intriguing question is whether thoughts 
pertaining to upcoming goals can occur and/or 
unfold in a spontaneous fashion, as suggested by 
Klingers current concern hypothesis (Klinger, 1971,
2009). If so, would such thoughts recruit activity 
within the FPCN?
The nature of the task paradigms employed in 
mind-wandering studies may also partly explain 
why activity within the FPCN is often associated 
with task-unrelated thoughts. Most neuroscience 
research assesses mind-wandering retrospectively 
or with online experience sampling probes during 
easy behavioral paradigms in which participants 
can maintain a minimal level of performance while 
simultaneously allocating their attention toward the 
task at hand and their (potentially) spontaneous 
thoughts. Thus, easy tasks— including resting state 
paradigms and the SART task— may encourage 
dual-task situations where participants simultane­
ously direct their attention externally and internally, 
or rapidly switch between internal and external 
modes of attention. Both types of processes may 
recruit the FPCN in a regulatory manner to help 
coordinate attention across tasks. Conversely, main­
taining reasonable levels of performance during
difficult behavioral paradigms may require that 
participants be continuously focused on the task 
at hand. In these scenarios, occasional off-task tri­
als may be more likely to manifest as decreases in 
FPCN activity, reflecting lapses in attention marked 
by a failure of control. Paralleling these findings, 
behavioral studies of mind-wandering reveal com­
plex relationships between mind-wandering and 
executive function that appear to partly depend on 
the difficulty of the ongoing task (Smallwood & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2013). For example, participants 
who frequently experience task-unrelated thoughts 
during easy tasks have higher working memory 
capacity (Levinson, 
Smallwood, 
& Davidson,
2012), suggesting that they are simultaneously able 
to have task-unrelated thoughts while maintaining 
acceptable performance on the task. Conversely, par­
ticipants who frequently experience task-unrelated 
thoughts during difficult tasks tend to exhibit 
poorer working memory capacity (Kane & McVay, 
2012; Unsworth & McMillan, 2013). These find­
ings prompted Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna to 
propose the context regulation hypothesis, suggest­
ing that the costs and benefits of mind-wandering 
partly depend on an individuals ability to constrain 
task-unrelated thoughts to easy or unimportant 
contexts (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 
2014; Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 2013). In 
light of these observations, future studies could 
consider examining patterns of activity associated 
with task-unrelated thoughts across tasks that vary 
in difficulty.
Finally, it is important to note that not all 
regions within the FPCN are reliably engaged across 
studies of mind-wandering: Whereas rostral lateral 
PFC (rlPFC) and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex 
(dACC)/pre-SMA are among those present, meta­
analyses of mind-wandering show that the dorso­
lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), posterior PFC, 
and anterior inferior parietal lobe are not reliably 
engaged across studies (Fox et al., 2015). The rlPFC 
has been linked to metacognitive awareness of ones 
thoughts, attention, and performance (Fleming & 
Dolan, 2012; McCaig, Dixon, Keramatian, Liu, 
& Christoff, 2011), so activity in the rlPFC could 
reflect the monitoring processes encouraged by 
online experience sampling tasks (but see Christoff 
et al., 2009a). Furthermore, dACC/pre-SMA may 
play an important role in the detection of internal 
conflict elicited when mind-wandering during the 
presence of an ongoing task, or in computing trade­
offs in the expected values of being on-task versus 
off-task.
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
153

Intriguingly, according to some theories of pre­
frontal cortex function, the prefrontal cortex is orga­
nized along a rostro-caudal gradient, where more 
anterior regions become engaged by more abstract 
or temporally extended conditions that often rely 
on internal processes such as episodic memory 
and maintenance of long-term goals (Badre & 
D ’Esposito, 2009; Christoff & Gabrieli, 2000; 
Christoff, Keramatian, Gordon, Smith, & Madler, 
2009b; Christoff, Ream, Geddes, & Gabrieli, 
2003; Dixon, Fox, & Christoff, 2014; O ’Reilly,
2010). Conversely, posterior PFC regions tend to 
respond to more specific task demands, such as 
learning specific stimulus-response contingencies, 
biasing attention toward one stimulus attribute 
and away from another, or flexibly adjusting one’s 
attention following errors in performance (Badre & 
D ’Esposito, 2009; Christoff et ah, 2009b; O ’Reilly,
2010). It is therefore possible that the FPCN acti­
vation during mind-wandering represents a form 
of abstract control that is compatible with a con­
siderable degree of dynamic spontaneity. Because 
abstract goals (e.g., “do well as an academic”) place 
few constraints on how one is to achieve or think 
about them, one’s thoughts may be directed toward 
such a goal, while still spontaneously wander­
ing to a broad range of ideas (Irving, 2016). This 
hypothesis makes testable predictions: Periods of 
spontaneous task-unrelated thought (measured 
through online thought sampling) that are loosely 
constrained to an abstract goal should be associ­
ated with more anterior PFC activation, whereas 
periods of task-unrelated thought that are delib­
erately constrained to a specific goal should be 
associated with more posterior PFC activation. In 
sum, although the functional contributions of the 
FPCN are unclear, different regions or patterns 
within and across regions likely play different roles 
and are likely influenced by a variety of factors (see 
Christoff et al., 2016, for a similar point).
The Role of Additional Brain Regions
A synthesis of existing neuroscience research 
on mind-wandering would be incomplete without 
discussing the involvement of additional regions 
outside the default and frontoparietal networks, 
including the lingual gyrus, somatosensory cortex, 
and posterior insula (Figure 13.3). Collectively, 
these regions may be associated with the sensory and 
embodied perception of task-unrelated thoughts. 
Many individuals characterize their thoughts during 
awake rest as unfolding in the form of mental images 
(Delamillieure et al., 2010), and the lingual gyrus
may support the visual nature of such thoughts. 
The lingual gyrus is reliably observed during a vari­
ety of visual and mental imagery tasks— includ­
ing when individuals are dreaming (Fox, Nijeboer, 
Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013), or asked 
to recall their past and imagine their future (Addis 
et al., 2009)— and lesions to this region are asso­
ciated with an impaired ability to engage in visual 
imagery and reduced levels of dreaming (Solms, 
1997, 2000). Similarly, the somatosensory cortex 
and posterior insula, associated with tactile sensa­
tion, tactile imagery, and interoceptive awareness 
(Craig, 2003; Critchley, Wiens, Rotshtein, Ohman, 
& Dolan, 2004; Yoo et al., 2003), could relate to 
the frequently reported thoughts about the body 
(Delamillieure et al., 2010; Diaz et al., 2013) and/ 
or distracting external sensations. Interestingly, 
there is some evidence from rs-fcMRI that individu­
als who characterize their thoughts as having more 
visual imagery during periods of rest show height­
ened connectivity between visual regions, including 
the lingual gyrus, somatosensory cortices, and pos­
terior insula (Doucet et al., 2012), perhaps reflect­
ing attention toward sensorimotor and perceptual 
characteristics of unconstrained thinking.
The Role of Default and Frontoparietal 
Networks in Dreaming and Creative 
Thought
In this section, we have synthesized research inves­
tigating the neuroscience of spontaneous thought, 
focusing on studies defining mind-wandering 
largely by its contents (since studies defining mind­
wandering by its spontaneity are scarce). Whereas 
some expected findings have emerged from this 
synthesis— namely, the involvement of the default 
network— other findings— namely, the involvement 
of the FPCN— are more surprising, inviting several 
distinct hypotheses regarding their precise role in 
spontaneous thought. We now turn to neuroscience 
research examining two cognitive processes closely 
related to spontaneous thought— namely, dreaming 
and creative thinking— and ask whether our knowl­
edge of these mental states can shed light on the role 
of the FPCN in mind-wandering and spontaneous 
thought more broadly.
According to the dynamic process model of 
spontaneous thought illustrated in Figure 13.1, 
dreaming is considered more spontaneous than 
mind-wandering due to an absence of many 
constraints on the contents and flow of mental 
states during this period, resulting in the bizarre, 
improbable, and highly dynamic characteristics of
154
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

dreams (Hobson, Pace-Schott, & Stickgold, 2000). 
Conversely, creative thought is considered less 
spontaneous than mind-wandering because it usu­
ally unfolds in the service of a specific goal (e.g., 
to generate a creative idea, solution, or product), 
and involves more deliberate processes of selecting 
a creative solution, evaluating its utility, and revis­
ing it if necessary (Beaty, Benedek, Kaufman, & 
Silvia, 2015). Creative insight also involves aspects 
of metacognitive awareness (Armbruster, 1989), as 
individuals who lack awareness of their creative ideas 
may be unable to benefit from them. Consequently, 
assuming that activity within the FPCN during 
mind-wandering at least partially reflects the delib­
erate nature of task-unrelated thoughts, and/or the 
metacognitive awareness that often accompanies
them, one might expect that dreams would show 
activity reductions in the FPCN (consistent with 
lack of cognitive control and metacognitive aware­
ness), while creative thinking might evoke increases 
in FPCN activity, particularly during later evalua­
tive stages of the creative process.
A synthesis of neuroimaging literature on dream­
ing supports the role of the FPCN in deliberate 
constraints and metacognitive awareness (Fox et al.,
2013). Compared to periods of relaxed wakefulness, 
REM sleep is associated with enhanced activity 
throughout the default networks medial temporal 
subsystem, and reductions in activity throughout the 
FPCN, consistent with the bizarre nature of dreams 
and a lack of awareness while dreaming (Figure 
13.4A). Interestingly, lucid dreamers— individuals
A
REM Sleep (Likely Dreaming ) > Awake Rest
B 
Creative Idea Generation > Evaluation
Creative Idea Evaluation > Generation
Figure 13.4. Neural underpinnings of night dreaming and creative thought. (A) A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on REM 
sleep (a sleep stage characterized by dreaming) reveals greater activity in a number of brain regions compared to awake rest. Among 
others, these include medial temporal and medial prefrontal regions within the default network, and visual cortex. (B) Creative 
thinking is associated with distinct temporal activity dynamics. The medial temporal lobe becomes engaged to a greater degree early 
in the creative process while generating a creative idea. Other regions within the default network, as well as key frontoparietal control 
network regions, become engaged to a greater degree during later stages of creative thinking, when evaluating creative ideas.
A-INS = anterior insula; dACC = dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC = dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex; CBL = cerebellum; H PC = hippocampus; 
IPL = inferior parietal lobule; M PFC = medial prefrontal cortex; PHC = parahippocampus; PMA = premotor area (PMA); PCC = posterior cingulate 
cortex; PREC = precuneus; TPC = temporopolar cortex; TPJ = temporoparietal junction. Figures adapted from Fox et al., 2015 (A), and Ellamil et al., 
2011 (B). (See Color Insert)
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
155

who are aware of their dreams while dreaming, 
and are often able to deliberately control how their 
dreams unfold— have enhanced gray matter volume 
throughout rostrolateral and medial PFC (Filevich, 
Dresler, Brick, & Kuhn, 2015), and also exhibit 
enhanced rlPFC activity during tasks in which par­
ticipants are explicitly asked to monitor the con­
tents of their thoughts (Filevich et ah, 2015). The 
FPCN is also widely recruited during lucid REM 
sleep as compared to non-lucid REM sleep (Dresler 
et ah, 2012).
Conversely, many creative tasks, including tasks 
of divergent thinking, poetry generation, and cre­
ative idea generation, show initial activity within 
the medial temporal subsystem and the posterior 
cingulate cortex, followed by enhanced activity and 
connectivity of FPCN regions when deliberate con­
straints must be implemented to hone in on cre­
ative ideas, or evaluate and revise creative products 
(Figure 13.4B) (Beaty et ah, 2015; Beaty, Benedek, 
Silvia, & Schacter, 2016; Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, 
& Christoff, 2011; Liu et al., 2015). Thus, evidence 
from neuroscience research on dreaming and cre­
ative thinking suggests that the involvement of 
the FPCN in mind-wandering— and spontaneous 
forms of thinking more broadly— might reflect 
deliberate control processes that serve to constrain 
the content and flow of mental states by guiding 
and suppressing their spontaneity (Fox & Christoff,
2014). In short, the growing body of neuroscience 
findings on mind-wandering may reflect an intri­
cate balance of spontaneous and deliberate cognitive 
processes, and it remains a task for future research 
to unravel the common or distinct neural underpin­
nings of each.
New Promises for Future Inquiry into the 
Neuroscience of Spontaneous Thought
In this chapter, we have synthesized an interdisci­
plinary field of inquiry— the neuroscience o f  sponta­
neous thought—and have discussed how definitions 
of spontaneous thought, approaches to measure 
spontaneous thought, and knowledge of brain sys­
tems supporting such thoughts have rapidly evolved 
in a few short years. New definitions rely less on 
the task-unrelated and stimulus-independent con­
tent that had long dominated the literature, and 
more on the processes that govern their initiation, 
as well as the temporal dynamics that characterize 
their flow; measurement approaches have shifted 
from indirect to more direct approaches in which 
thoughts are assessed much closer to the time at 
which they occur; and recent neuroscience findings
emphasize the importance of regions outside the 
default network— such as the FPCN, sensorimotor 
networks, and posterior insula.
With exciting theoretical and methodological 
progress come many new questions and avenues 
for future research. One timely research direction 
regards assessing the forgotten dynamics of sponta­
neous thought (Christoff et al., 2016; Irving, 2016). 
To this end, online experience sampling approaches 
could be used in conjunction with dynamic rs- 
fcMRI 
(Calhoun, Miller, 
Pearlson, 
& Adah, 
2014) to elucidate how spontaneous thoughts and 
their corresponding neural underpinnings unfold 
and change over time (Zabelina & Andrews-Hanna,
2016). These approaches may also shed light on key 
mechanisms underlying a variety of mental health 
disorders (e.g., Kaiser et al., 2015).
Another direction for future research includes 
differentiating between spontaneous and deliber­
ate thoughts at both the behavioral and neural 
level, and re-synthesizing existing research in light 
of subsequent findings. Relatedly, there is some 
suggestion that spontaneous thoughts can be fur­
ther characterized by the unintentional manner in 
which they are initiated (i.e., Seli et al., 2016b), 
as well as the unconstrained nature in which they 
unfold over time (Christoff et al., 2016; Irving, 
2016; see also Stan & Christoff, Chapter 34 in this 
volume). Although the initiation and dynamics 
of spontaneous thought are likely correlated, they 
are conceptually distinct (Smallwood, 2013). They 
are likely correlated because top-down constraints 
on thought are typically (perhaps always) initiated 
with deliberate intent. Yet they are conceptually 
distinct for two reasons. For one, it seems possible 
to unintentionally initiate automatic constraints on 
the spontaneous dynamics of thought. For example, 
a depressed patient might unintentionally begin to 
ruminate. Furthermore, it seems possible to inten­
tionally initiate a thought process with spontaneous 
dynamics. During a boring lecture, for example, 
one might intentionally let ones mind wander in an 
unconstrained manner. To help determine the rela­
tionship between these two ways of characterizing 
spontaneous thought, future research could design 
questionnaires that directly assess the tendency to 
have thoughts whose dynamics are unconstrained, 
compared to the tendency to initiate thoughts 
unintentionally. Researchers could then relate both 
forms of spontaneity to individual differences in 
brain activity and connectivity.
Additionally, although this chapter has largely 
focused on the role of deliberate constraints in
156
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

restricting the contents and flow of thought, 
another type of constraint can also limit its spon­
taneity. Affective and perceptual biases in attention 
are examples of autom atic constraints that serve to 
capture and hold one’s attention on specific sources 
of information (see earlier discussion in this chap­
ter; Christoff et al., 2016; Irving, 2016; Irving 
& Thompson, Chapter 8 in this volume; Todd 
et al., 2012). Although little is known about the 
relationship between automatic constraints and 
spontaneous thought, preliminary evidence from 
clinical literature on depression and anxiety impli­
cates an important role of the brains salience net­
work (McMenamin, Langeslag, Sirbu, Padmala, & 
Pessoa, 2014; Ordaz et al., 2017; Seeley et al., 2007; 
reviewed in Christoff et al., 2016).
Future research would also benefit from devel­
oping new methods to covertly assess spontaneous 
thoughts without relying on self-report. Despite the 
usefulness of the introspective approaches discussed 
in the preceding, self-report assessments come with 
several limitations. Participants are sometimes 
unaware of their own mental activity, and most 
studies do not assess participants’ subjective level of 
awareness. Participants may also interpret questions 
and use self-report scales in different ways, some­
times being sensitive to perceived experimenter 
expectations. Additionally, the act of requiring par­
ticipants to introspect about their mental activity 
may interfere with the natural course of cognition, 
and may bias participants to think in particular 
ways. To overcome some of these limitations, analy­
sis methods such as machine learning algorithms 
could be applied in future work to covertly predict 
the nature of mental activity based on voxelwise 
patterns of brain activity (i.e., with m ultivoxel p a t­
tern analysis', Kragel, Knodt, Hariri, & LaBar, 2016; 
Tusche et al., 2014), and/or concurrent behavioral, 
occulometric, 
neurophysiological, 
or 
neuroen­
docrine measures. Additionally, these approaches 
could eventually be used in conjunction with real­
time fMRI to train people to become more aware of 
their thinking patterns (e.g., McCaig et al., 2011; 
McDonald et al., 2017; see also Garrison et al., 
2013a; Garrison et al., 2013b), and improve their 
ability to stay on task, or engage in productive 
forms of spontaneous thought.
Finally, although neuroimaging and behavioral 
approaches can offer insight into the neural under­
pinnings of spontaneous thought, these approaches 
are correlational at best, and are unable to reveal 
whether patterns of brain activity play a causal 
role in the initiation or dynamics of spontaneous
thought. Future research should therefore make use 
of methods such as transcranial magnetic stimula­
tion (TMS) or transcranial direct current stimu­
lation (TDCS) to transiently disrupt or enhance 
activity in certain brain regions (Axelrod, Rees, 
Lavidor, & Bar, 2015), and neuropsychological 
studies should consider assessing if and how spon­
taneous thoughts become altered in patients with 
focal cortical or subcortical lesions. Toward this 
end, intracranial electroencephalography also marks 
a promising area of future research (reviewed in 
Selimbeyoglu and Parvizi, 2010; Fox et al., 2016).
An old sufi parable attributed to Mulla Nasrudin 
might serve as an analogy for the history of research 
on spontaneous thought. A police officer approaches 
a drunk man who’s searching for something beneath 
a lamppost, “What are you looking for?” “My keys, 
Sir,” the drunk man replies. The police officer helps 
to look for a few minutes. Finding nothing, the 
officer asks, “Are you sure you lost them under the 
lamppost?” “No,” says the drunk, “I lost them in 
the park.” “Then why are you searching here?!?” 
“Because there’s a light.” Like the drunk man, the 
field of psychology may have neglected spontaneous 
thought for over a century because it is shrouded in 
darkness. From Behaviorism through the Cognitive 
Revolution, the field looked for psychological 
processes under the light of experimental tasks. 
Methodological innovations in neuroscience and 
psychology moved our gaze a little further, but still 
we look only at those forms of “mind-wandering” 
that can be illuminated by their contents. Now it’s 
time to break out the flashlights, to step into the 
darkness wherein lies the dynamics of spontaneous 
thought.
Acknowledgments
We extend our gratitude to Evan Thompson, 
Randy Buckner, Jonathan Smallwood, Matt Dixon, 
Rebecca Todd, Chandra Sripada, and Dasha 
Zabelina for helpful feedback and scholarly dis­
cussion on our teams’ recently published manu­
scripts featured in the present chapter. A Brain and 
Behavioral Research Foundation Grant supported
J. R. A.-H. while preparing this chapter. K. C. was 
supported by grants from the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) (RGPIN 
327317-11) and the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research (CIHR) (MOP-115197). Z. C. I. was 
supported by a Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) postdoctoral 
fellowship, the Balzan Styles of Reasoning Project, 
and a Templeton Integrated Philosophy and Self
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
157

Control grant. R. N. S. was supported by an 
Alzheimer’s Association grant (NIRG-14-320049).
K. C. R. F. was supported by a Vanier Canada 
Graduate Scholarship.
Notes
1. In the first section, we discuss how the definition of mind­
wandering varies throughout the literature, leading to dispa­
rate interpretations of existing experimental findings. Note 
that while we use the term “mind-wandering” loosely in this 
chapter, we are sensitive to these different interpretations and 
discuss them at length when possible.
2. Strictly speaking, we have argued that mind-wandering is 
a form of spontaneous thought, and so we cannot be sure 
that these studies are measuring mind-wandering properly 
defined (as we discuss throughout this section when inter­
preting current findings).
References
Addis, D. R., Pan, L., Vu, M.-A., Laiser, N., & Schacter, D. 
L. (2009). Constructive episodic simulation of the future 
and the past: Distinct subsystems of a core brain network 
mediate imagining and remembering. Neuropsychologia, 47, 
2222-2238.
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Cizadlo, T., Arndt, S., Rezai,
K., Watkins, G. L.,... Hichwa, R. D. (1995). Remembering 
the past: Two facets of episodic memory explored with posi­
tron emission tomography. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152, 1576-1585.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and 
its adaptive role in internal mentation. The Neuroscientist: A 
Review Journal Bringing Neurobiology, Neurology and 
Psychiatry, 18, 251—270.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E. J., Reineberg, 
A. E., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. T. (2013). 
A penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated 
thought content and relationships with individual differences 
in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1—13.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., Randy, L., & 
Buckner, R. L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s 
role in spontaneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
104, 322-335.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., & 
Buckner, R. L. (2010). Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network. Neuron, 65, 550-562.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Saxe, R., & Yarkoni, T. (2014). 
Contributions of episodic retrieval and mentalizing to auto­
biographical thought: Evidence from functional neuroim­
aging, resting-state connectivity, and fMRI meta-analyses. 
Neuroimage, 91C, 324-335.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29—52.
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., & Greenberg, S. (1966). Studies in 
the stream of consciousness: Experimental enhancement and 
suppression of spontaneous cognitive processes. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 23, 399-417.
Armbruster, B. B. (1989). Metacognition in creativity. In J. A. 
Glover, R. R. Ronning, & C. Reynolds (Eds.), Handbook 
of creativity (pp. 177—182). New York, NY: Springer 
Science+Business Media.
Axelrod, V., Rees, G., Lavidor, M., & Bar, M. (2015). Increasing 
propensity to mind-wander with transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the U SA, 772(11), 3314-3319.
Baars, B. J. (2010). Spontaneous repetitive thoughts can be adap­
tive: Postscript on “mind wandering.” Psychological Bulletin, 
136, 208-210.
Badre, D., & Esposito, M. D. (2009). Is the rostro-caudal axis 
of the frontal lobe hierarchical?, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
70(9), 659-669.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Lutz, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). 
The decoupled mind: Mind-wandering disrupts cortical 
phase-locking to perceptual events. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 26, 2596—2607.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 
1604-1611.
Bar, M. (2007). The proactive brain: Using analogies and asso­
ciations to generate predictions. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
11, 280-289.
Bar, M., Aminoff, E., Mason, M., & Fenske, M. (2007). The 
units of thought. Hippocampus, 17(6), 420-428.
Barron, E., Riby, L. M., Greer, J., & Smallwood, J. (2011). 
Absorbed in thought: The effect of mind wandering on the 
processing of relevant and irrelevant events. Psychological 
Science, 22(5), 596-601.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Kaufman, S. B., & Silvia, P. J. (2015). 
Default and executive network coupling supports creative 
idea production. Scientific Reports, 5, 10964.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(2), 87-95.
Berman, M. G., Misic, B., Buschkuehl, M., Kross, E., Deldin, P.
J., Peltier, S., . . . Jonides, J. (2014). Does resting-state con­
nectivity reflect depressive rumination? A tale of two analy­
ses. Neuroimage, 103, 267—279.
Bernhardt, B. C., Smallwood, J., Tusche, A., Ruby, F. J. M., 
Engen, H. G., Steinbeis, N., & Singer, T. (2014). Medial 
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortical thickness pre­
dicts shared individual differences in self-generated 
thought and temporal discounting. Neuroimage, 90, 
290-297.
Binder, J. R., Frost, J. A., Hammeke, T. A., Bellgowan, P. S. F., 
Rao, S. M., & Cox, R. W. (1999). Conceptual processing 
during the conscious resting state: A functional MRI study. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 77(1), 80—95.
Braboszcz, C., & Delorme, A. (2011). Lost in thoughts: Neural 
markers 
of low alertness 
during mind wandering. 
Neuroimage, 54, 3040—3047.
Brewer, J. A., Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, 
J., & Kober, H. (2011). Meditation experience is associated 
with differences in default mode network activity and con­
nectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
U SA, 108(56), 20254-20259.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and rel­
evance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1124, 1-38.
Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J. C., & 
Yeo, B. T. T. (2011). The organization of the human cerebel­
lum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 106, 2322—2345.
i 58
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Calhoun, V. D., Miller, R., Pearlson, G., & Adah, T. (2014). 
The chronnectome: Time-varying connectivity networks 
as the next frontier in fMRI data discovery. Neuron, 84, 
262-274.
Callard, F., Smallwood, J., & Margulies, D. S. (2012). Default 
positions: How neuroscience’s historical legacy has hampered 
investigation of the resting mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 
3, 321.
Carriere, J. S. A., Seli, R, & Smilek, D. (2013). Wandering in 
both mind and body: Individual differences in mind wan­
dering and inattention predict fidgeting. Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology/Revue Canadienne de Psychologie 
Experimental*, 67, 19—31.
Carruthers, R (2015). The centered mind: What the science of 
working memory shows us about the nature of human thought. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Choi, E. Y., Yeo, B. T. T., & Buckner, R. L. (2012). The organiza­
tion of the human striatum estimated by intrinsic functional 
connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 108, 2242—2263.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51—59.
Christoff, K., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2000). The frontopolar cor­
tex and human cognition: Evidence for a rostrocaudal hier­
archical organization within the human prefrontal cortex. 
Psychobiology, 28(2), 168-186.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009a). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the U SA, 106, 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 77(11), 718-731.
Christoff, K., Keramatian, K., Gordon, A. M., Smith, R., & 
Madler, B. (2009b). Prefrontal organization of cognitive 
control according to levels of abstraction. Brain Research,
1286, 94-105.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Unit, B. S. 
(2004). Neural basis of spontaneous thought process. Cortex, 
40, 623-630.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., Geddes, L. P. T., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. 
(2003). Evaluating self-generated information: Anterior 
prefrontal contributions to human cognition. Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 117, 1161—1168.
Cole, M. W., Reynolds, J. R., Power, J. D., Repovs, G., Anticevic, 
A., & Braver, T. S. (2013). Multi-task connectivity reveals 
flexible hubs for adaptive task control. Nature Neuroscience, 
16, 1348-1355.
Craig, A. (Bud). (2003). Interoception: The sense of the 
physiological condition of the body. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 13, 500-505.
Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., & Dolan, 
R. J. (2004). Neural systems supporting interoceptive aware­
ness. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 189—195.
Delamillieure, P., Doucet, G., Mazoyer, B., Turbelin, M., 
Delcroix, N., Mellet, E., . . . Joliot, M. (2010). The resting 
state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evalu­
ation of inner experience during the conscious resting state. 
Brain Research Bulletin, 81, 565—573.
Dewar, M., Alber, J., Butler, C., Cowan, N., & Della Sala, S.
(2012). Brief wakeful resting boosts new memories over the 
long term. Psychological Science, 23, 955-960.
Dewar, M., Alber, J., Cowan, N., & Della Sala, S. (2014). 
Boosting long-term memory via wakeful rest: intentional 
rehearsal is not necessary, consolidation is sufficient. PloS 
One, 9, el09542.
Diaz, B. A., Van Der Sluis, S., Moens, S., Benjamins, J. S., 
Migliorati, F., Stoffers, D., . . . Linkenkaer-Hansen, K.
(2013). The Amsterdam Resting-State Questionnaire reveals 
multiple phenotypes of resting-state cognition. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 7, 1—15.
Diba, K., & Buzsaki, G. (2007). Forward and reverse hippocam­
pal place-cell sequences during ripples. Nature Neuroscience, 
10, 1241-1242.
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). A frame­
work for understanding the relationship between externally 
and internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 62, 
321-330.
Dorsch, F. (2015). Focused daydreaming and mind-wandering. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 6, 791—813.
Doucet, G., Naveau, M., Petit, L., Delcroix, N., Zago, L., 
Crivello, F., . . . Joliot, M. (2011). Brain activity at rest: A 
multiscale hierarchical functional organization. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 105(6), 2753-2763.
Doucet, G., Naveau, M., Petit, L., Zago, L., Crivello, F., Jobard, 
G., . . . Joliot, M. (2012). Patterns of hemodynamic low- 
frequency oscillations in the brain are modulated by the nature 
of free thought during rest. Neuroimage, 59, 3194—200.
Dragoi, G., & Tonegawa, S. (2011). Preplay of future place cell 
sequences by hippocampal cellular assemblies. Nature, 469, 
397-401.
Dragoi, G., & Tonegawa, S. (2013). Distinct preplay of multiple 
novel spatial experiences in the rat. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the U SA, 110, 9100—5.
Dresler, M., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Koch, S. P., Holsboer, 
F., Steiger, A., . . . Czisch, M. (2012). Neural correlates of 
dream lucidity obtained from contrasting lucid versus non- 
lucid REM sleep: A combined EEG/fMRI case study. Sleep, 
35, 1017-20.
Edwards, S., & Dickerson, M. (1987). Intrusive unwanted 
thoughts: A two-stage model of control. British Journal of 
Medical Psychology, 60, 317-328.
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2011). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59, 1783—1794.
Ellamil, M., Fox, K. C. R., Dixon, M. L., Pritchard, S., Todd, 
R. M., Thompson, E., & Christoff, K. (2016). Dynamics 
of neural recruitment surrounding the spontaneous aris­
ing of thoughts in experienced mindfulness practitioners. 
Neuroimage, 136, 186—196.
Filevich, E., Dresler, M., Brick, T. R., & Kuhn, S. (2015). 
Metacognitive mechanisms underlying lucid dreaming. The 
Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience, 35, 1082-1088.
Fleming, S. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2012). The neural basis of meta­
cognitive ability. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 367, 1338-1349.
Foster, D. J., & Wilson, M. A. (2006). Reverse replay of behav­
ioral sequences in hippocampal place cells during the awake 
state. Nature, 440, 680-683.
Fox, K. C. R., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
The neurobiology of self-generated thought from cells to 
systems: Integrating evidence from lesion studies, human 
intracranial electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and neuroen­
docrinology. Neuroscience, 335, 134-150.
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
159

Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilita­
tion of spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition 
helps the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & 
C. D. Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience o f metacognition 
(pp. 293—319). New York: Springer.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Dixon, M. L., Floman, J. L., Ellamil, 
M., Rumak, S. R, . . . Christoff, K. (2014). Is meditation 
associated with altered brain structure? A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of morphometric neuroimaging in medi­
tation practitioners. Neuroscience &  Biobehavioral Reviews, 
43, 48-73.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first- 
person content reports. Frontiers in H um an Neuroscience, 
7, 1-18.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C. R., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & 
Christoff, K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commen­
tary on Wilson et al.’s “Just think: the challenges of the dis­
engaged mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1427.
Fox, M. D., & Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluc­
tuations in brain activity observed with functional mag­
netic resonance imaging. N ature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 
700-711.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van 
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain 
is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated func­
tional networks. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy o f 
Sciences o f  the U S A ,  102, 9673-9678.
Freeston, M. H., Ladouceur, R., Thibodeau, N., & Gagnon, 
F. (1991). Cognitive intrusions in a non-clinical popula­
tion. I. Response style, subjective experience, and appraisal. 
Behavior Research a n d  Therapy, 29 , 585—597.
Garrison, K. A., Scheinost, D., Worhunsky, R D., Elwafi, H. M., 
Thornhill, T. A, Thompson, E., . . . Brewer, J. A. (2013a). 
Real-time fMRI links subjective experience with brain activ­
ity during focused attention. Neuroimage, 81, 110-118.
Garrison, K. A., Santoyo, J. F., Davis, J. H., Thornhill IV, T. A., 
Kerr, C. E., & Brewer, J. A. (2013b). Effortless aware­
ness: Using real time neurofeedback to investigate correlates 
of posterior cingulate cortex activity in meditators’ self- 
report. Frontiers in H um an Neuroscience, 7, 1—9.
Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mukamel, R., Harel, M., Malach, R., & 
Fried, I. (2008). Internally generated reactivation of single 
neurons in human hippocampus during free recall. Science, 
322(5898), 96-101.
Gerlach, K. D., Spreng, R. N., Gilmore, A. W., & Schacter, D.
L. (2011). Solving future problems: Default network and 
executive activity associated with goal-directed mental simu­
lations. Neuroimage, 55, 1816—1824.
Gerlach, K. D., Spreng, R. N., Madore, K. P., & Schacter, D. L.
(2014). Future planning: Default network activity couples 
with frontoparietal control network and reward-processing 
regions during process and outcome simulations. Social 
Cognitive a n d  Affective Neuroscience, 9, 1942—1951.
Giambra, L. M. (1989). Task-unrelated-thought frequency as a 
function of age: A laboratory study. Psychology a n d  Aging, 4, 
136-143.
Giambra, L. M., & Traynor, T. D. (1978). Depression and 
daydreaming: An analysis based on self-ratings. Journal o f 
C linical Psychology, 34 , 14—25.
Golchert, J., Smallwood, J., Jefferies, E., Seli, P., Huntenburg, J.
M., Liem, F., . . . Margulies, D. S. (2017). Individual varia­
tion in intentionality in the mind-wandering state is reflected 
in the integration of the default-mode, fronto-parietal, and 
limbic networks. Neuroimage, 146, 226—235.
Gorgolewski, K. J., Lurie, D., Urchs, S., Kipping, J. a, Craddock, 
R. C., Milham, M. P., . . . Smallwood, J. (2014). A corre­
spondence between individual differences in the brain’s 
intrinsic functional architecture and the content and form of 
self-generated thoughts. PloS One, 9, e97176.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2003). 
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A network 
analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings o f the 
N ational Academy o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  100, 253-258.
Greicius, M. D., Srivastava, G., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2004). 
Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s 
disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. 
Proceedings o f the N ational Academy o f Sciences o f the U S A ,  
101, 4637-4642.
Gupta, A. S., van der Meer, M. A. A., Touretzky, D. S., & 
Redish, A. D. (2010). Hippocampal replay is not a simple 
function of experience. Neuron, 65, 695—705.
Hamilton, J. P., Furman, D. J., Chang, C., Thomason, M. E., 
Dennis, E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Default-mode and 
task-positive network activity in major depressive disor­
der: Implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination. 
Biological Psychiatry, 70, 327-333.
Hasenkamp, W., Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Duncan, E., & 
Barsalou, L. W. (2012). Mind wandering and attention dur­
ing focused meditation: A fine-grained temporal analysis of 
fluctuating cognitive states. Neuroimage, 59, 750-760.
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., Vann, S. D., & Maguire, E. A. 
(2007). Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imag­
ine new experiences. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy o f 
Sciences o f the U S A ,  104, 1726-1731.
Hassabis, D., & Maguire, E. a. (2009). The construction system 
of the brain. Philosophical Transactions o f the Royal Society o f 
London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 36 4 , 1263—1271.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000). 
Dreaming and the brain : Toward a cognitive neurosci­
ence of conscious states. Behavioral an d Brain Sciences, 23, 
793-1121.
Hyatt, C. J., Calhoun, V. D., Pearlson, G. D., & Assaf, M.
(2015). Specific default mode subnetworks support mental- 
izing as revealed through opposing network recruitment by 
social and semantic FMRI tasks. H um an Brain M apping, 36, 
3047-63.
Ingvar, D. H. (1979). “Hyperfrontal” distribution of the cere­
bral grey matter flow in resting wakefulness: on the func­
tional anatomy of the conscious state. Acta Neurologica 
Scandinavica, 6 0 {\), 12-25.
Irish, M., & Piolino, P. (2016). Impaired capacity for prospection 
in the dementias: Theoretical and clinical implications. The 
British Journal o f C linical Psychology/Ihe British Psychological 
Society, 55, 49-68.
Irving, Z. C. (2016). Mind-wandering is unguided atten­
tion: Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 173, 547.
Kaiser, R. H., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Dillon, D. G., Goer, F., 
Beltzer, M., Minkel, J.,... Pizzagalli, D. A. (2015). Dynamic
160
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

resting-state functional connectivity in major depression. 
Neuropsychopharmacology., 1—9.
Kam, J. W. Y., Dao, E., Farley, J., Fitzpatrick, K., Smallwood, J., 
Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2011). Slow fluctuations 
in attentional control of sensory cortex. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 23, 460—470.
Kam, J. W. Y., Dao, E., Stanciulescu, M., Tildesley, H., & Handy, 
T. C. (2013). Mind wandering and the adaptive control of 
attentional resources. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 
952-960.
Kane, M. J., Brown, E. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18, 614-621.
Kane, M. J., & McVay, J. C. (2012). What mind wandering 
reveals about executive-control abilities and failures. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 348—354.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330, 932.
Kirschner, A., Kam, J. W. Y., Handy, T. C., & Ward, L. M. 
(2012). Differential synchronization in default and task- 
specific networks of the human brain. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6, 139.
Klinger, E. (1971). Structure and functions of fantasy. Bognor 
Regis, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: thought 
flow and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, 
& J. A. Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of Imagination and Mental 
Stimulation (pp. 225—239). New York: Psychology Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition & Personality, 7, 
105-128.
Kragel, P. A, Knodt, A. R., Hariri, A. R., & LaBar, K. S. (2016). 
Decoding spontaneous emotional states in the human brain. 
PLoS Biology, 14, e2000106.
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2014). Dynamic functional con­
nectivity of the default mode network tracks daydreaming. 
Neuroimage, 100, 471—480.
Kucyi, A., Salomons, T. V, & Davis, K. D. (2013). Mind wan­
dering away from pain dynamically engages antinociceptive 
and default mode brain networks. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the U SA, 110(46), 18692-18697.
Lavenex, P., & Amaral, D. G. (2000). Hippocampal- neocortical 
interaction: A hierarchy of associativity. Hippocampus, 10(4), 
420-430.
Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). 
The persistence of thought: Evidence for a role of working 
memory in the maintenance of task-unrelated thinking. 
Psychological Science, 23(4), 375-380.
Lieberman, M. D. (2007). Social cognitive neuroscience: A 
review of core processes. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 
259-289.
Liu, S., Erkkinen, M. G., Healey, M. L., Xu, Y., Swett, K. E., 
Chow, H. M., & Braun, A. R. (2015). Brain activity and 
connectivity during poetry composition: Toward a mul­
tidimensional model of the creative process. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36, 3351-3372.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science (New York, N.Y), 315, 393-395.
Mason, M. F., Brown, K., Mar, R. A., & Smallwood, J. (2013). 
Driver of discontent or escape vehicle: the affective conse­
quences of mindwandering. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 477.
McCaig, R. G., Dixon, M., Keramatian, K., Liu, I., & Christoff,
K. (2011). Improved modulation of rostrolateral prefrontal 
cortex using real-time fMRI training and meta-cognitive 
awareness. Neuroimage, 55, 1298—1305.
McDonald, A. et al., (2017). The real-time fMRI neurofeedback 
based stratification of default network regulation neuroimag­
ing data repository. Neuroimage, 146, 157—170.
McGuire, P. K., Paulesu, E., Frackowiak, R. S., & Frith, C. D. 
(1996). Brain activity during stimulus independent thought. 
Neuroreport, 7, 2095—2099.
McKiernan, K. A., D’Angelo, B. R., Kaufman, J. N., & Binder,
J. R. (2006). Interrupting the “stream of consciousness”: An 
fMRI investigation. Neuroimage, 29, 1185—1191.
McMenamin, B. W., Langeslag, S. J. E., Sirbu, M., Padmala, 
S., & Pessoa, L. (2014). Network organization unfolds 
over time during periods of anxious anticipation. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 34(34), 11261—11273.
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode 
to positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 626.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering 
reflect executive function or executive failure? Comment 
on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and Watkins (2008). 
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 188-197; discussion 198-207.
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 931.
Metzinger, T. (2015). M-Autonomy. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 22, 270-302.
Mowlem, F. D., Skirrow, C., Reid, P., Maltezos, S., Nijjar, S.
K. , Merwood, A., . . . Asherson, P. (2016). Validation of the 
Mind Excessively Wandering Scale and the relationship of 
mind wandering to impairment in adult ADHD. Journal of 
Attention Disorders, doi: 10.1177/1087054716651927
Mrazek, M. D., Phillips, D. T., Franklin, M. S., Broadway, J. 
M., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). Young and restless: Validation 
of the mind-wandering questionnaire (MWQ) reveals dis­
ruptive impact of mind-wandering for youth. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 560.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). 
Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
3, 400-424.
O’Callaghan, C., Shine, J. M., Lewis, S. J. G., Andrews-Hanna, 
J. R., & Irish, M. (2015). Shaped by our thoughts: A new 
task to assess spontaneous cognition and its associated neu­
ral correlates in the default network. Brain and Cognition, 
93, 1-10.
O’Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a cognitive 
map. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Reilly, R. C. (2010). The what and how of prefrontal cortical 
organization. Trends in Neurosciences, 33, 355—361.
Ordaz, S. J., Lemoult, J., Colich, N. L., Prasad, G., Poliak, M., 
Price, A., . . . Gotlib, I. H. (2017). Ruminative brooding is 
associated with salience network coherence in early puber­
tal youth. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(2), 
298-310.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do 
you know what you know? The representation of semantic 
knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
8, 976-987.
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
161

Preminger, S., Harmelech, T., & Malach, R. (2011). Stimulus- 
free thoughts induce differential activation in the human 
default network. Neuroimage, 54, 1692—1702.
Poerio, G. L.,Totterdell, P., & Miles, E. (2013). Mind-wandering 
and negative mood: Does one thing really lead to another? 
Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4), 1412—1421.
Power, J. D., Cohen, A. L., Nelson, S. M., Wig, G. S., Barnes, 
K. A., Church, J. A., . . . Petersen, S. E. (2011). Functional 
network organization of the human brain. Neuron, 72(4), 
665-678.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the U SA, 98, 676-682.
Rice, G. E., Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Hoffman, P. (2015). The 
roles of left versus right anterior temporal lobes in conceptual 
knowledge: An ALE meta-analysis of 97 functional neuroim­
aging studies. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 25, 
4374-4391.
Roberts, J. E., Gilboa, E., & Gotlib, I. H. (1998). Ruminative 
response style and vulnerability to episodes of dyspho­
ria: Gender, neuroticism, and episode duration. Therapy, 22,
401-423.
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). 
How self-generated thought shapes mood—the relation 
between mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio­
temporal content of thoughts. PLoS ONE, 5(10), e77554.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 15, 319—326.
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, 
G. H., Kenna, H., . . . Greicius, M. D. (2007). Dissociable 
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and 
executive control networks. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(9), 
2349-2356.
Seli, P., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, D. (2015a). Not all mind 
wandering is created equal: Dissociating deliberate from 
spontaneous mind wandering. Psychological Research, 79, 
750-758.
Seli, P, Risko, E. F., Purdon, C., & Smilek, D. (2016a). Intrusive 
thoughts: Linking spontaneous mind wandering and OCD 
symptomatology. Psychological Research, doi: 
10.1007/
s00426-016-0756-3
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., & Smilek, D. (2016b). On the necessity of 
distinguishing between unintentional and intentional mind 
wandering. Psychological Science, 27, 685-691.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016c). 
Mind-wandering with and without intention. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20, 605-617.
Seli, P., Smallwood, J., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2015b). On 
the relation of mind wandering and ADHD symptomatol­
ogy. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22, 629—636.
Selimbeyoglu, A., & Parvizi, J. (2010). Electrical stimulation 
of the human brain: Perceptual and behavioral phenomena 
reported in the old and new literature. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 4, 46.
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezen, 
F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1997a). Common 
blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in cere­
bral cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(5), 648-663.
Shulman, G. L., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Fiez, J. A., 
Miezin, F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1997b).
Common blood flow changes across visual tasks: I. Increases 
in subcortical structures and cerebellum but not in nonvisual 
cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(5), 624—647.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (n.d.). Imaginalprocesses inven­
tory. New York: Center for Research in Cognition and Affect 
Graduate Center, City University of New York.
Singer, J. L., & McCraven, V. G. (1961). Some characteristics of 
adult daydreaming. The Journal of Psychology, 51, 151-164.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1—6.
Smallwood, J., Beach, E., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2008). 
Going AWOL in the brain: Mind wandering reduces cortical 
analysis of external events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
20, 458-469.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K., Baird, B., & Schooler, J. W. (2012a). 
Cooperation between the default mode network and the 
frontal-parietal network in the production of an internal 
train of thought. Brain Research, 1428, 60—70.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K. S., Baird, B., Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, 
M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012b). Insulation for day­
dreams: A role for tonic norepinephrine in the facilitation of 
internally guided thought. PloS One, 7, 1-5.
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the 
mind wanders: A process—occurrence framework for self­
generated mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139(5), 
519-535.
Smallwood, J., Karapanagiotidis, T., Ruby, F., Medea, B., de 
Caso, I., Konishi, M., . . . Jefferies, E. (2016). Representing 
representation: Integration between the temporal lobe and 
the posterior cingulate influences the content and form of 
spontaneous thought. PloS One, 11, eO 152272.
Smallwood, J. & Schooler, J.W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6): 946-958.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Solms, M. (1997). The Neuropsychology of Dreams: A Clinico- 
anatomical Study. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Solms, M. (2000). Dreaming and REM sleep are controlled by 
different brain mechanisms. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
23(6), 843-850.
Song, X., & Wang, X. (2012). Mind wandering in Chinese daily 
lives: An experience sampling study. PloS One, 7, e44423.
Spreng, R. N., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2015). The default 
network and social cognition. In A. W. Toga (Ed.), Brain 
mapping: An encyclopedic reference (Vol. 1316, pp. 165—169). 
Amsterdam: Academic Press, Elsevier.
Spreng, R. N., Sepulcre, J., Turner, G. R., Stevens, W. D., & 
Schacter, D. L. (2013). Intrinsic architecture underlying 
the relations among the default, dorsal attention, and fron­
toparietal control networks of the human brain. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 74—86.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. NeuroImage, 53, 303-17.
Sripada, C. 
(2016). Imaginative guidance: A mind forever 
wandering. In Homo Prospectus. New York City: Oxford 
University Press.
Stawarczyk, D., Cassol, H., & D’Argembeau, A. (2013). 
Phenomenology of future-oriented mind-wandering epi­
sodes. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1—12.
162
T H E  N E U R O S C I E N C E  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Stawarczyk, D., & D’Argembeau, A. (2015). Neural correlates 
of personal goal processing during episodic future thinking 
and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. H um an Brain 
M apping,, 3 6, 2928—2947.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., Van der Linden, M., & 
D’Argembeau, A. (2011a). Mind-wandering: Phenomenology 
and function as assessed with a novel experience sampling 
method. Acta Psychologica, 136, 370-381.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D ’Argembeau, A. 
(2011b). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PloS One, 6, 
el6997.
Stickgold, R. (2005). Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. 
Nature, 437, 1272-1278.
Suzuki, W. A., & Amaral, D. G. (1994). Perirhinal and parahip­
pocampal cortices of the macaque monkey: Cortical affer- 
ents. Journal o f Comparative Neurology, 35 0 , 497—533.
Szpunar, K. K., Jing, H. G., Benoit, R. G., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2015). Repetition-related reductions in neural activity dur­
ing emotional simulations of future events. PloS One, 10, 
e0138354.
Tambini, A., Ketz, N., & Davachi, L. (2010). Enhanced brain 
correlations during rest are related to memory for recent 
experiences. Neuron, 65, 280—290.
Teasdale, J. D., Dritschel, B. H., Taylor, M. J., Proctor, L., 
Lloyd, C. A., Nimmo-Smith, I., & Baddeley, A. D. (1995). 
Stimulus-independent thought depends on central executive 
resources. M em ory &  Cognition, 23 , 551—559.
Todd, R.M., Cunningham, W.A., Anderson, A.K., & Thompson, 
E. (2012). Affect-biased attention as emotion regulation. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(7): 365-372.
Trapnell, P D., & Campbell, J. D. (1999). Private self- 
consciousness and the five-factor model of personality: 
Distinguishing rumination from reflection. Journal o f 
Personality a n d  Social Psychology, 76, 284-304.
Treynor, W., Gonzalez, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). 
Rumination reconsidered: A psychometric analysis. Therapy, 
2 7 , 247-259.
Tusche, A., Smallwood, J., Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. (2014). 
Classifying the wandering mind: Revealing the affective
content of thoughts during task-free rest periods. Neuroimage, 
97, 107-16.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2013). Mind wandering 
and reading comprehension: Examining the roles of working 
memory capacity, interest, motivation, and topic experience. 
Journal o f Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, an d 
Cognition, 39, 832-842.
Van Calster, L. Van, Argembeau, A. D., Salmon, E., Peters, F., 
& Majerus, S. (2016). Fluctuations of attentional networks 
and default mode network during the resting state reflect 
variations in cognitive states: Evidence from a novel resting- 
state experience sampling method. Journal o f Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 29(1), 95-113.
Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Noirhomme, Q., Tshibanda, L. J.-F., 
Bruno, M.-A., Boveroux, P, Schnakers, C., . . . Boly, M. 
(2010). Default network connectivity reflects the level 
of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged 
patients. Brain, 133, 161—171.
Vincent, J. L., Kahn, I., Snyder, A. Z., Raichle, M. E., & 
Buckner, R. L. (2008). Evidence for a frontoparietal control 
system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal 
o f Neurophysiology, 100, 3328-3342.
Wagner, U., Gais, S., Haider, H., Verleger, R., & Born, J. (2004). 
Sleep inspires insight. Nature, 427, 21—24.
Wang, K., Yu, C., Xu, L., Qin, W., Li, K., Xu, L., & Jiang, T. 
(2009). Offline memory reprocessing: Involvement of the 
brain’s default network in spontaneous thought processes. 
PloS One, 4, e4867.
Watkins, E. R. (2008). Constructive and unconstructive repeti­
tive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 163—206.
Yeo, B. T. T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., 
Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., . . . Buckner, R. L. (2011). 
The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by 
intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal o f  Neurophysiology, 
106, 1125-1165.
Yoo, S.S., Freeman, D.K., McCarthy III, J.J., & Jolesz, F.A. 
(2003). Neural substrates of tactile imagery: a functional 
MRI study. Neuroreport, 14(4): 581-585.
Zabelina, D. L., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Dynamic net­
work interactions supporting internally-oriented cognition. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 40, 86—93.
J E S S I C A  R. A N D R E W S - H A N N A  ET AL.
163


C H A P T E R
14
Neural Origins of Self-Generated Thought: 
Insights from Intracranial Electrical 
Stimulation and Recordings in Humans
Kieran C. R. Fox
Abstract
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has begun to narrow down the neural correlates of 
self-generated forms of thought, with current evidence pointing toward central roles for the default, 
frontoparietal, and visual networks. Recent work has linked the arising of thoughts more specifically 
to default network activity, but the limited temporal resolution of fMRI has precluded more detailed 
conclusions about where in the brain self-created mental content is generated and how this is achieved. 
This chapter argues that the unparalleled spatiotemporal resolution of intracranial electrophysiology 
(iEEG) in human epilepsy patients can begin to provide answers to questions about the specific neural 
origins of self-generated thought. The chapter reviews the extensive body of literature from iEEG studies 
over the past few decades and shows that many studies involving passive recording or direct electrical 
stimulation throughout the brain point to the medial temporal lobe as a key site of thought-generation.
Key Words: self-generated thought, functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, medial temporal lobe, 
default network, intracranial electrophysiology, iEEG
An enormous amount of scientific interest has 
recently begun to focus on spontaneous and self­
generated forms of thought (Andrews-Hanna, 
Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014; Christoff, 2012; 
Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 
2016; Seli, Risko, Smilek, & Schacter, 2016). 
As experience sampling studies (see Stawarczyk, 
Chapter 16 in this volume) and questionnaires 
develop an understanding of the associated subjec­
tive content (Delamillieure et ah, 2010; Diaz et al., 
2013; Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & 
Christoff, 2013; Fox, Thompson, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Christoff, 2014; Stawarczyk, Chapter 16 in 
this volume; Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, Van der 
Linden, & D ’Argembeau, 2011), functional neu­
roimaging research over the past two decades 
has delineated a rough but increasingly refined 
picture of general brain recruitment associated
with these self-generated forms of thought (Fox, 
Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff,
2015). Throughout this chapter, by “self-generated 
thought” I will simply mean mental content that 
is relatively independent of and unrelated to 
the immediate sensory environment (Andrews- 
Hanna et al., 2014; Fox, Andrews-Hanna, & 
Christoff, 2016); taken broadly, self-generated 
thought 
includes 
mental 
processes 
such 
as 
stimulus-independent thought (McGuire, Paulesu, 
Frackowiak, & Frith, 1996), task-unrelated thought 
(Dumontheil, Gilbert, Frith, & Burgess, 2010), 
spontaneous thought (Spiers & Maguire, 2006), 
mind-wandering (Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, 
Smith, & Schooler, 2009), creative thinking and 
insight (Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & Christoff,
2012), and dreaming (Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, 
Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013).

Now that a general picture of the subjective con­
tent and neural correlates of self-generated thought 
is emerging, deeper and subtler questions are being 
posed: for instance, whether specific neural corre­
lates are associated with specific self-generated con­
tent (Gorgolewski et al., 2014; Tusche, Smallwood, 
Bernhardt, & Singer, 2014); whether differences in 
brain morphology are associated with individual ten­
dencies toward certain types of self-generated think­
ing (Bernhardt et al., 2014; Golchert et al., 2017); 
what the relationship of self-generated thought is to 
various psychiatric and neurodegenerative condi­
tions (Christoff et al., 2016); and whether specific 
neural origin sites of self-generated thought can be 
identified (Fox et al., 2016). It is this final question 
that I will focus on throughout this chapter: What 
brain structures are the primary initiators, drivers, 
and creators when the brain decouples from its sen­
sory environment and self-generates its own experi­
ences? Is this question even valid? Can there be a 
specific answer?
First, I will very briefly review what is known 
about the broad neural correlates of self-generated 
thought from functional neuroimaging investi­
gations. These studies point to the primacy of 
the default network in initiating self-generated 
thought, but cannot seem to go beyond this level 
of specificity and offer a more detailed answer 
due to their inherently poor temporal resolution. 
Next, I will delve into the relatively smaller (but 
fast-growing) human intracranial electrophysiol­
ogy literature to explore the neural origins of self­
generated thought in more detail. Starting with 
the broad set of regions identified by functional 
neuroimaging as being involved in self-generating 
thought, I synthesize data from human electro­
physiology to hone in on the most likely origin/ini- 
tiation sites and to tentatively exclude other areas 
from a primary generative role.
Functional Neuroimaging of Self-Generated 
Thought: The Importance of Default 
Network Regions
Noninvasive neuroimaging modalities, particu­
larly functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 
have been instrumental in exploring the broad 
neural correlates and large-scale network dynam­
ics associated with self-generated forms of thought 
(Christoff et al., 2016; Ellamil et al., 2016; Fox 
et al., 2013; Fox et al., 2015; Wise, Ide, Poulin, & 
Tracey, 2004; Zabelina & Andrews-Hanna, 2016). 
A recent quantitative meta-analysis of neuroimaging 
studies investigating various forms of self-generated
thought 
(including mind-wandering, 
stimulus- 
independent thought, and spontaneous mentalizing) 
found that a wide variety of brain regions appear to 
be recruited by these processes, including multiple 
nodes of the default, frontoparietal, and visual net­
works (Fox et al., 2015; Figure 14.1). Although this 
meta-analysis demonstrated the importance of brain 
regions and networks beyond the default network to 
self-generated thought, it was unable to answer more 
specific questions about the functional roles of each 
network, or of their temporal primacy in initiating 
self-generated forms of thinking.
Two specific neuroimaging studies of the ori­
gins of self-generated thought are interesting not 
only for the light they shed on this problem, but 
also because they exemplify the limitations of fMRI 
when it comes to identifying specific neural origin 
sites. Briefly, these studies point to the involve­
ment of default network regions in the initial self- 
generation of thought, but have not been able to 
identify which specific components of the network 
are most important.
First, a study by Ellamil and colleagues in 2012 
recruited visual artists at a local fine arts university 
to create visual art while in the scanner using an 
MRI-compatible drawing tablet and pen (Ellamil 
et al., 2012). The artists were then asked to reflect 
on and evaluate the quality of the artwork they had 
created. The “generation” phase of artwork creation 
was contrasted with a control condition where the 
artists simply traced the pen around the drawing 
tablet, therefore controlling for motor effects asso­
ciated with the act of drawing itself. Among the 
residual activations associated with the process of 
generating the artistic ideas themselves, recruitment 
was observed in the medial temporal lobe (includ­
ing hippocampus and parahippocampus), inferior 
and superior parietal lobule, premotor areas, and 
other regions (Figure 14.2). This study helped nar­
row down the possible regions implicated in self- 
generation of creative ideas, but nonetheless the 
widespread recruitment observed made it difficult 
to determine which regions, if any, were specifically 
involved in generating creative thoughts, as opposed 
to being recruited shortly thereafter to participate 
in this generation process or its communication to 
other brain regions. (Note that a similar emphasis 
on the role of the default network in creative gen­
eration has been found in a recent study involving 
participants generating poetry, as opposed to visual 
artwork; Liu et al., 2015.)
A related study examined brain activation sur­
rounding the spontaneous arising of everyday
1 66
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

Figure 14.1. Meta-analysis of brain areas consistently recruited by self-generated forms of thought. Meta-analytic clusters indicating 
brain regions consistently recruited across various forms of spontaneous and self-generated thought. Outline of the frontoparietal 
(black) and default (blue) networks are shown for comparison. Reproduced with permission from Fox et al. (2015). (See Color Insert)
thoughts when participants’ minds wandered while 
in the MRI scanner (Ellamil et al., 2016). The par­
ticipants were highly experienced mindfulness med­
itation practitioners accustomed to monitoring the 
arising of distracting thoughts and identifying their 
contents. While they practiced mindful attention to 
their breathing, they indicated with a button press 
when they noticed the arising of a spontaneous, 
unbidden thought into consciousness. The time- 
course of brain recruitment before, during, and after 
this button press was then examined in detail. When 
these time-courses were explored, it was found that 
certain brain regions showed peaks of activation
slightly before the subjective awareness of a thought 
(as indicated by the button press; see Figure 14.3). 
Various other regions showed peak activations that 
either coincided with the button press, or followed 
it (only figures for peak activations prior to arising 
thoughts are shown here; for details of later activa­
tion peaks, see the original figures in Ellamil et al.,
2016). Regions showing peak activation antecedent 
to the arising of thought included the medial tem­
poral lobe bilaterally, the inferior parietal lobule, the 
posterior cingulate cortex, and others (Figure 14.3).
Notably, almost all of these regions are con­
sidered components of a broadly defined default
m  
a
k 
\
y j g g N
w 
'
PMA PMA
p,2c 
PHC
HPC
/  
\  
0
HPC
1
#
,pL* 
TpL
-20
-12
+8
+28
+44
Figure 14.2. Brain regions recruited during the self-generation of creative ideas. Activations throughout the brain during 
the generation of visual artwork. Numbers indicate z-coordinates in MNI space. HPC: hippocampus; IPL: inferior parietal lobule; 
PHC: parahippocampus; PMA: premotor area. Reproduced with permission from Ellamil et al. (2012). (See Color Insert)
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX
1 6 7

A. Left hippocampus
B. Right hippocampus
C. Left parahippocampus
o
E. Posterior cingulate cortex
0.15
f  °-10
V  
0.05
I  0.00
% -0.05
O'"
- 0.10
%
-4  -2  0 
2 
4 
6 
8 10 
Time (s)
G. Rostral anterior cingulate
Time (s)
D. Right parahippocampus
0
F. Inferior parietal lobule
0.15
I °-10
U 
0.05 
|  0.00 
^  -0.05 
- 0.10
-4  -2  0 
2 
4 
6 
8 10 
Time (s)
H. Posterior insula
Time (s)
Figure 14.3. Time-course of brain regions where activation peaks just prior to awareness of spontaneously arising of thoughts. Brain 
regions where activation peaked prior to the conscious awareness of a spontaneous thought arising are indicated by the button-press 
icon. Note that although the results suggest an important role for the medial temporal lobe, the temporal resolution of fMRI could 
not distinguish these early activations from those in other brain regions, such as the posterior cingulate cortex and rostral anterior 
cingulate. Reproduced with permission from Ellamil et al. (2016). (See Color Insert)
network (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 
2008; Raichle et al., 2001), which (as noted earlier) 
is widely agreed to be essential to self-generated and 
self-referential cognitive activity (Fox et al., 2015; 
Northoff et al., 2006; Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau,
2015). Beyond this focus on the default network, 
however, the coarse temporal resolution of fMRI 
was unable to differentiate between the regions 
showing antecedent activations, leaving important 
questions unanswered. Are these various default 
network or other regions equally involved in gen­
erating mental content— or might their dispersed 
but synchronized activity (functional connectivity) 
be the explanation? Or are specific areas preferen­
tially involved in generating novel patterns of brain
activity corresponding to self-generated mental 
content?
Where Are Thoughts Generated in the 
Brain? Insights from Human Intracranial 
Electrophysiology
Direct recording of the electrical activity pro­
duced by single neurons and neuronal popula­
tions provides unparalleled spatial and temporal 
resolution (at the scale of single neurons and in 
the millisecond range) (Fried, Rutishauser, Cerf, 
& Kreiman, 2014; Suthana & Fried, 2012). By 
directly recording the brains electrical activity—  
be it summation of input signals (potentials in the 
dendrites and soma), or action potentials carrying a
16 8
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

neurons output signals (“spikes”)— many of the pit- 
falls and uncertainties of the indirect measures used 
in functional neuroimaging, such as blood-oxygen- 
level-dependent (BOLD) signal, can be avoided 
(Logothetis, 2008). An additional advantage is 
that current can also be “injected” (passed through 
electrodes on the cortical surface or at depth in the 
brain), allowing direct electrical stimulation of tis­
sue throughout the central nervous system. Instead 
of aiming to evoke brain activity (and then record 
it) using particular tasks, sensory stimuli, or behav­
iors, the brain can be directly stimulated and the 
resulting sensory, cognitive, motor, or emotional 
effects can be observed and correlated with the pre­
cise site of stimulation (Penfield & Boldrey, 1937; 
Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi, 2010). Additionally, with 
multiple simultaneous electrode sites, responses 
evoked in response to stimulation at a given site 
can also be investigated (Fransson, 2005; Golland, 
Golland, Bentin, & Malach, 2008).
Because of the invasiveness of implanted elec­
trodes, such research cannot be conducted in healthy 
human participants. In some cases of serious neuro­
logical conditions, however, including medication- 
resistant epilepsy and Parkinsons disease (Bechtereva 
& Abdullaev, 2000; Lachaux, Rudrauf, & Kahane,
2003), electrical stimulation of the cortical surface 
or implantation of depth electrodes into deeper cor­
tical and subcortical structures may be indicated in 
human patients by clinical criteria and protocols 
(Engel, Moll, Fried, & Ojemann, 2005; Suthana 
& Fried, 2012). In addition to providing ever- 
improving clinical benefits for these various condi­
tions (Birn, Murphy, & Bandettini, 2008; Dixon 
et al., 2017; Foster & Parvizi, 2017), intracranial 
electrodes provide an unparalleled opportunity to 
investigate human brain function at very high spa- 
tiotemporal resolution.
In many ways, human cognitive electrophysiol­
ogy remains in its infancy. Nonetheless, the collective 
results of such investigations in humans have pro­
vided unprecedented insights into the understand­
ing of somatosensory and motor systems (Penfield 
& Boldrey, 1937; Penfield & Welch, 1951), visual 
perception (Fried, MacDonald, & Wilson, 1997; 
Kreiman, Koch, & Fried, 2000a; Quiroga, Reddy, 
Kreiman, Koch, & Fried, 2005), memory (Burke 
et al., 2014; Gelbard-Sagiv, Mukamel, Harel, 
Malach, & Fried, 2008; Lega, Jacobs, & Kahana,
2012), spatial mapping and navigation (Ekstrom 
et al., 2003; Jacobs, Kahana, Ekstrom, Mollison, 
& Fried, 2010), mathematical cognition (Daitch 
et al., 2016), visual imagery (Kreiman, Koch, &
Fried, 2000b), and even consciousness (Quiroga, 
Mukamel, Isham, Malach, & Fried, 2008).
This seminal work has only touched on what 
is possible, however— particularly with respect to 
higher-order cognitive-affective processes that are 
difficult, if not impossible, to study in animal mod­
els. One such process is the self-generation of men­
tal content by the human brain, the central concern 
of this Handbook. Although no known human 
electrophysiology has 
directly explored mental 
states such as mind-wandering, nonetheless many 
investigations have explored related phenomena, 
for instance spontaneous memory recall (Gelbard- 
Sagiv et al., 2008) and immersive, dream-like expe­
riences (Vignal, Maillard, McGonigal, & Chauvel,
2007). Moreover, an increasing number of such 
studies have investigated default network hubs; 
given this networks acknowledged importance for 
self-generated thought (Fox et al., 2015), electro- 
physiological studies of these areas in humans are 
of great interest. As we shall see, stimulation and 
recording experiments in default network hubs can 
also be very informative, even when null results are 
obtained.
In attempting to discern origin sites responsible 
for creating self-generated mental content, both 
“positive” and “negative” evidence is valuable. By 
“positive” evidence we mean that which directly 
links activity in a given brain area to the subjective 
experience of self-generated mental content: for 
instance, electrical stimulation of the medial tem­
poral lobe, as well as spontaneous electrical dis­
charges therein, are both frequently associated with 
dream-like, hallucinated experiences (Fox et al., 
2016; Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi, 2010; Vignal et al.,
2007), and spontaneous recall of episodic memories 
is directly preceded by elevated firing rates in medial 
temporal lobe neurons (Gelbard-Sagiv et al., 2008). 
Conversely, “negative” evidence accrues when stimu­
lation and/or spontaneous discharges fail to result in 
such subjective experiences, or sometimes any expe­
riences whatsoever (null results): for instance, hun­
dreds of stimulations to the posteromedial cortex in 
humans have failed to reliably elicit any noticeable 
subjective effects, including self-generated thought 
(Foster & Parvizi, 2017), despite the importance of 
this area to the default network (Greicius, Krasnow, 
Reiss, & Menon, 2003; Raichle et al., 2001; Yeo 
et al., 2011) and self-generated thought (Fox et al., 
2015; Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 2015). In the 
following sections, we summarize what has been 
learned from human electrical brain stimulation 
studies about which regions appear to be likely
169
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX

thought-generation or -initiation sites, and which 
regions do not.
Positive Evidence: The Importance of the 
Medial Temporal Lobe and Temporopolar 
Cortex in Initiating Self-Generated Thought 
Medial Temporal Lobe
The most substantial evidence to date points to 
the medial temporal lobe as a primary (if not the only) 
origin site for self-generating mental content of var­
ious kinds. Electrical brain stimulation to both the 
hippocampus (Bancaud, Brunet-Bourgin, Chauvel, 
& Halgren, 1994; Fish, Gloor, Quesney, & Oliver, 
1993; Halgren, Walter, Cherlow, & Crandall, 1978; 
Kahane, Hoffmann, Minotti, & Berthoz, 2003; 
Mulak, Kahane, Hoffmann, Minotti, & Bonaz, 
2008; Vignal et al., 2007) and the parahippocampal 
region (Feindel & Penfield, 1954; Penfield & Perot, 
1963; Vignal et al., 2007) elicit subjective experi­
ences akin to self-generated thought more than half 
of the time (according to reports in the existing lit­
erature) (Table 14.1; Figure 14.4)— considerably 
more often than any other area studied to date, with 
the possible exception of the temporopolar cortex 
(discussed in the next section). These experiences 
include memory recall (Penfield & Perot, 1963), 
visual hallucinations (Halgren et al., 1978; Kahane 
et al., 2003; Penfield & Perot, 1963; Vignal et al.,
2007), and dreaming (Halgren et al., 1978; Vignal 
et al., 2007).
Stimulation of the amygdala also elicits such 
subjective experiences in about one-third of cases 
(Table 14.1; Figure 14.4). This fact is intrigu­
ing because the amygdala is the only subcortical 
structure reported to regularly elicit self-generated 
thought (Figure 14.4). Stimulation of other sub­
cortical structures, such as the thalamus, globus 
pallidus, and subthalamic nucleus, results in a vari­
ety of interesting effects, but none of them bears 
much resemblance to self-generated thought the 
way we have defined it (Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi,
2010). Similar to the cortical medial temporal 
lobe structures, stimulation of amygdala can elicit 
long-term memory recall (Fish et al., 1993; Vignal 
et al., 2007), out-of-body experiences (Vignal et al.,
2007), visual hallucinations (Fish et al., 1993), and 
dreams (Vignal et al., 2007).
Temporopolar Cortex
Although reports of stimulation to the tempo­
ropolar cortex are relatively rare, about half of these 
stimulations have resulted in subjective experi­
ences resembling self-generated thought (Bancaud
170
et al., 1994; Halgren et al., 1978; Mulak et al., 
2008; Ostrowsky et al., 2002; Penfield & Perot, 
1963). As with the medial temporal lobe, stimu­
lation can elicit visual hallucinations (Bancaud 
et al., 1994; Halgren et al., 1978; Penfield & Perot, 
1963), memories (Bancaud et al., 1994), and other 
thoughts (Ostrowsky, Desestret, Ryvlin, Coste, & 
Mauguiere, 2002). Although this high rate of elici­
tation of self-generated mental content is sugges­
tive, far too few stimulations have been conducted 
for any firm conclusions to be drawn. Further stim­
ulations of temporopolar cortex alongside reports of 
subjective experiences would be highly valuable to 
a deeper understanding of its role in self-generated 
thought (see also “Discussion,” later in this chapter).
Other Regions
There is also limited evidence for the importance 
of other regions, most notably the middle tempo­
ral gyrus (Kahane et al., 2003; Mullan & Penfield, 
1959; Penfield, 1958; Penfield & Perot, 1963), supe­
rior temporal gyrus (Morris, Luders, Lesser, Dinner, 
& Hahn, 1984; Mullan & Penfield, 1959; Penfield 
& Perot, 1963), and temporo-occipital junction 
(Lee, Hong, Seo, Tae, & Hong, 2000; Morris et al., 
1984; Penfield & Perot, 1963). Isolated reports of 
experiences such as complex visual hallucinations 
elicited by stimulation of the frontal lobe are also 
interesting (Blanke, Landis, & Seeck, 2000; Blanke, 
Perrig, Thut, Landis, & Seeck, 2000). Because the 
evidence in these cases is much more marginal, we 
do not discuss them further here, but suffice to say 
that the book is hardly closed on the involvement 
of other brain areas in self-generating mental con­
tent. Further details of these isolated reports can be 
found in Table 14.1 and Figure 14.4.
Also important is the general dearth of stimu­
lation to subcortical areas reported in the litera­
ture; more information about subjective effects of 
stimulation to the brainstem, cerebellum, and other 
subcortical regions would be a welcome addition 
to the literature. For a comprehensive overview of 
subjective effects elicited by stimulation of subcorti­
cal structures, see the review by Selimbeyoglu and 
Parvizi (2010).
Negative Evidence: Marginal Roles for the 
Posteromedial Cortex and Inferior Parietal 
Lobule in Initiating Self-Generated 
Thought
Posteromedial Cortex
The broad area designated as the posterome­
dial cortex (Parvizi, Van Hoesen, Buckwalter, &
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

Table 14.1. Summary of Human Electrophysiology Studies Demonstrating Elicitation of Memories, Thoughts, or 
Hallucinatory, Dream-Like Experiences
Brain Region
Stimulations/
Total
Percentage 
References
Discharges
Stimulations/
Eliciting
Eliciting
Discharges
Temporal Lobe
Hippocampus
25
46
54%
Bancaud, Brunet-Bourgin, Chauvel, & 
Halgren, 1994; Fish, Gloor, Quesney, & 
Oliver, 1993; Halgren, Walter, Cherlow, & 
Crandall, 1978; Kahane, Hoffmann, Minotti, 
& Berthoz, 2003; Mulak, Kahane, Hoffmann, 
Minotti, & Bonaz, 2008; Vignal et al., 2007
Amygdala
13
36
36%
Ferguson et al., 1969; Fish et al., 1993; 
Halgren et al., 1978; Vignal et al., 2007
Parahippocampal
region
9
16
56%
Feindel & Penfield, 1954; Penfield & Perot, 
1963; Vignal et al., 2007
Temporopolar
cortex
5
11
45%
Bancaud et al., 1994; Halgren et al., 1978; 
Mulak et al., 2008; Ostrowsky, Desestret, 
Ryvlin, Coste, & Mauguiere, 2002; Penfield & 
Perot, 1963
Inferior temporal 
gyrus
1
21
5%
Penfield & Perot, 1963
Middle temporal 
gyrus
7
42
17%
Kahane et al., 2003; Mullan & Penfield, 1959; 
Penfield, 1958; Penfield & Perot, 1963
Superior temporal 
gyrus
24
99
24%
Morris, Luders, Lesser, Dinner, & Hahn, 1984; 
Mullan & Penfield, 1959; Penfield & Perot, 
1963
Temporo-occipital
junction
4
17
24%
Lee, Hong, Seo, Tae, & Hong, 2000; Morris 
et al., 1984; Penfield & Perot, 1963
Frontal Lobe
Inferior frontal 
gyrus
1
7
14%
Blanke, Landis, & Seeck, 2000
Middle frontal 
gyrus
2
8
25%
Blanke, Landis, et al., 2000
Orbitofrontal
cortex
1
4
25%
Mahl, Rothenberg, Delgado, & Hamlin, 1964
Supplementary 
motor area
1
6
17%
Beauvais, Biraben, Seigneuret, SaTkali, & 
Scarabin, 2005
Parietal Lobe
Inferior parietal 
lobule
2
42
5%
Blanke, Perrig, Thut, Landis, & Seeck, 2000; 
Schulz, Woermann, & Ebner, 2007
Posteromedial cortex 
(including posterior 
cingulate cortex)
0
248
0%
Foster & Parvizi, 2017
Based on data in Supplementary Table 1 in the comprehensive review conducted by Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi (2010). Updated from a 
previously published table (Fox et al., 2016). Data for brain areas with >10 stimulations/discharges reported in the literature are visualized in
Figure 14.4. The null effects in the posteromedial cortex are included because of its inherent interest as a major default network hub.

60
10 -
54
56
50
45
40 -
36
30 -
24 
24
20 -
17
❖ 
^
<£*
Figure 14.4. Preferential involvement of medial temporal lobe structures and the temporopolar cortex in electrophysiological 
stimulations (or spontaneous discharges) eliciting memories, thoughts, mental imagery, or hallucinatory, dream-like experiences.
Percentage of stimulations or spontaneous discharges that elicited a first-person experience of memories, thoughts, or hallucinatory, 
dream-like experiences, based on more than 100 independent investigations. Not shown are data for hundreds of other stimulations 
throughout the brain, for which no such thought- or dream-like experiences have ever been reported. Only brain areas with >10 
stimulations or discharges reported in the literature are visualized. HPC: hippocampus; IPL: inferior parietal lobule; ITG: inferior temporal 
gyrus; MTG: middle temporal gyrus; PHC: parahippocampal cortex; PMC: posteromedial cortex; STG: superior temporal gyrus; TOJ: temporo- 
occipital junction; TPC: temporopolar cortex. Drawn from data in our Table 14.1, based on data in Supplementary Table 1 of the comprehensive review 
of Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi (2010); updated and modified based on my previously published figure (Fox et al., 2016). (See Color Insert)
Damasio, 2006), including the posterior cingulate 
cortex (BA 23/31), precuneus (BA 7), and retro- 
splenial cortex (BA 29/30), is another likely candi­
date area for initial generation of thought content. 
The posteromedial cortex is hypothesized to play a 
key role in initiating or facilitating memory recall 
(Shannon & Buckner, 2004), and memory recall 
and recombination represent a considerable propor­
tion of self-generated thought (Andrews-Hanna, 
Reidler, Huang, & Buckner, 2010; Fox et al., 2013; 
Stawarczyk, Chapter 16 in this volume). The pos­
terior cingulate cortex is consistently recruited dur­
ing various forms of self-generated thought (Fox 
et al., 2015; Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 2015), 
and there is evidence from fMRI that activity there 
peaks in the 2-second time window during which 
spontaneous thoughts appear to be arising (Ellamil 
et al., 2016; Figure 14.3). Moreover, intracranial 
electrophysiological studies in humans have shown 
that distinct neuronal populations in the posterior 
cingulate show elevated high-gamma-band activ­
ity both at rest and during self-referential thinking 
(Dastjerdi et al., 2011).
Despite these promising features, however, the 
evidence to date from intracranial electrophysi­
ological investigations in humans argues against 
any causal role for the posterior cingulate cortex,
as well as adjacent retrosplenial cortex, in generat­
ing or initiating mental content. The most compre­
hensive study of this region to date was published 
only recently (Foster & Parvizi, 2017). Exhaustively 
cataloguing more than 800 electrical stimulations 
throughout medial posterior brain regions across 25 
epilepsy patients, Foster and Parvizi (2017) found 
that stimulation to centrally located posteromedial 
brain regions never yielded subjective experiences 
or disturbances of any kind, unless stimulations 
were executed on dorsal or ventral border regions 
(Figure 14.5).
A possible exception to these results should be 
mentioned: a single-patient case study recently 
reported that electrical stimulation of the posterior 
cingulate cortex disconnects consciousness from 
the external environment and results in subjective 
experiences of “dreaming” (Herbet et al., 2014). If 
correct, these findings could suggest that posterior 
cingulate cortex, too, could be considered a pow­
erful initiatory/generative site for self-generated 
thought (the authors’ interpretation of their find­
ings, conversely, is that electrical stimulation “dis­
rupts” posterior cingulate cortex connectivity, which 
underlies conscious attention to the external world, 
thus making room for internally generated, dream­
like experiences). There are important limitations to
172
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

Figure 14.5. Null effects of electrical brain stimulation in the posteromedial cortex default network hub. Summary figure showing 
subjective effects produced by electrical brain stimulation of various regions of the medial posterior portions of cerebral cortex. More 
dorsal stimulations preferentially evoke motor effects (black circles), and more ventral stimulations largely evoke visual effects (gray 
circles). Some 248 stimulations of more central regions, however (white circles), corresponding closely to a major hub of the default 
network and overlapping with numerous regions known to be recruited by self-generated thought (see Figure 14.1), resulted in no 
discernible subjective effects of any kind. Reproduced with permission from Foster & Parvizi (2017). (See Color Insert)
this study, however, that render either interpreta­
tion unlikely. The central concern is that electrical 
brain stimulation was delivered not to the gray mat­
ter of the posterior cingulate cortex, but instead to 
the underlying white matter (in the posterior part 
of the cingulum; see Fig.l in Herbet et al., 2014). 
The authors’ interpretations of their findings, which 
focus on discussion of the posterior cingulate cor­
tex, are problematic given that stimulation was in 
fact delivered to a white matter pathway known to 
project widely throughout the brain (Schmahmann 
et al., 2007; Wakana, Jiang, Nagae-Poetscher, Van 
Zijl, & Mori, 2004). Indeed, the cingulum is espe­
cially problematic in this respect because two of its 
main projections are to the medial prefrontal cor­
tex and medial temporal lobe, both of which are 
strongly recruited during waking mind-wandering 
or “daydreaming” (Ellamil et al., 2016; Fox et al.,
2015) and REM sleep, where dreaming usually 
occurs (Domhoff & Fox, 2015; Fox et al., 2013). 
Although the authors argue that the partial excision 
of the cingulum in their patient makes downstream 
stimulation an unlikely explanation (Herbet et al., 
2014), nonetheless their results are very reminis­
cent of studies that delivered current directly to the 
medial temporal lobe and elicited dream-like expe­
riences and dreamy states (Bancaud et al., 1994; 
Halgren et al., 1978; Penfield & Perot, 1963; Vignal 
et al., 2007). To summarize, the authors interpret 
their findings as related to posterior cingulate
cortex function, whereas their paradigm involved 
the stimulation of a major fiber pathway also con­
nected to the medial prefrontal cortex and medial 
temporal lobe, both of which appear to be directly 
involved in the creation of dreamy states and other 
forms of self-generated thought (Domhoff & Fox, 
2015; Ellamil et al., 2016; Fox et al., 2013, 2015). 
Moreover, their localization of the stimulation elec­
trodes appears to have been based on visual assess­
ment during surgery, as opposed to a more reliable 
localization based on CT or MRI scans in patients. 
Given these limitations, this single-subject case 
study is insufficient to outweigh the results of some 
25 patients where hundreds of stimulations to the 
posteromedial cortex yielded no such effects (Foster 
& Parvizi, 2017).
Inferior Parietal Lobule
Despite its consistent recruitment during various 
forms of self-generated thought (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2014; Fox et al., 2015; Figure 14.1) and its 
undisputed role in the default network (Buckner 
et al., 2008; Yeo et al., 2011), the inferior parietal 
lobule does not appear to be a critical origin site 
for self-generated thought. Two studies have under­
taken fairly extensive stimulations to the inferior 
parietal lobule (Blanke, Perrig, et al., 2000; Schulz 
Woermann, & Ebner, 2007); of more than 40 stim­
ulations to this region, only two (5%) elicited some 
subjective experience reminiscent of self-generated
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX
173

thought: whereas most stimulations elicited simple 
sensorimotor phenomena, one elicited visual hallu­
cinations (Schulz et al., 2007) and another a self- 
described “out-of-body” experience reminiscent of 
dreaming (Blanke, Perrig, et al., 2000). Although 
these exceptions are intriguing, given that some 
95% of stimulations to inferior parietal lobule have 
yielded no such effects (Figure 14.4), the safest con­
clusion at present is that it should not be consid­
ered as a primary thought generation center. It is 
important to note, however, that “inferior parietal 
lobule” designates a large swath of cortex where sev­
eral networks meet one another (Yeo et al., 2011), 
and clearly not all of the stimulations reported here 
would fall within the boundaries of the default net­
work. A more fine-grained approach might find 
that stimulation specifically to the default network 
subsection of the inferior parietal lobule results in 
higher rates of elicitation of self-generated thought.
Discussion
Caveat: The Varieties of Electrical Brain 
Stimulation
An important caveat to all the aforementioned 
results and conclusions is that electrical brain stimu­
lation is not uniform: voltage, frequency, duration, 
and other parameters can differ markedly across 
experiments, and sometimes even within the same 
patient. Despite this wide variety of stimulation 
parameters, there is also a fair degree of consis­
tency in some respects— for instance, the majority 
of studies used 50-60 Hz stimulation— but other 
factors, such as the current and duration of stimu­
lation, are more variable (Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi,
2010). These facts are most relevant to our discus­
sion of the posteromedial cortex, where null results 
appear to be the rule (Foster & Parvizi, 2017). The 
apparent “silence” of the posteromedial cortex may 
not be definitive: varying stimulation parameters 
(e.g., increasing its duration and/or strength) in 
future studies could conceivably lead to different 
(and positive) results in both the posteromedial cor­
tex (Foster & Parvizi, 2017) and other brain areas.
What Is the Role of the Medial 
Prefrontal Cortex?
A major lacuna in our knowledge is the role 
played by the medial prefrontal cortex, which 
has been relatively rarely investigated in terms of 
subjective effects in human intracranial patients 
(Selimbeyoglu & Parvizi, 2010). The medial pre­
frontal cortex is one of the major hubs of the default
network (Buckner et al., 2008; Raichle et al., 
2001; Yeo et al., 2011) and is strongly recruited 
by essentially every form of self-generated thought 
examined to date, including mind-wandering/day- 
dreaming (Fox et al., 2015), creative thinking (Liu 
et al., 2015), and dreaming (Domhoff & Fox, 2015; 
Fox et al., 2013). Future studies elucidating the role 
of this region are therefore critical to a more com­
plete understanding of the neural origins of self­
generated thought.
The Enigmatic Temporopolar Cortex
The high rate of self-generated thought elicited 
by stimulation of the temporal pole (Figure 14.4) 
is an intriguing finding that should be followed 
up with further research. The temporopolar cortex 
remains a relatively little-studied and poorly under­
stood region, as reflected in the title of a recent com­
prehensive review: “The Enigmatic Temporal Pole” 
(Olson, Plotzker, & Ezzyat, 2007). However, anato­
mists have noted that its pattern of connectivity with 
other brain regions is strikingly similar to that of the 
amygdala— another region that appears central to 
thought generation (Figure 14.4; Fox et al., 2016). 
This connectivity includes dense interconnections 
with the orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala, and insula 
(Gloor, 1997; Kondo, Saleem, & Price, 2003; Olson 
et al., 2007; Stefanacci, Suzuki, & Amaral, 1996), 
often leading to its grouping with the medial tempo­
ral lobe and orbitofrontal/medial prefrontal cortex as 
a limbic or paralimbic area (Mesulam, 2000; Olson 
et al., 2007). Large-scale investigations of intrinsic 
resting state functional connectivity substantially 
agree with this conclusion, grouping the tempo­
ropolar cortex with medial temporal areas and the 
orbitofrontal/medial prefrontal cortex in a putative 
“limbic” network (Yeo et al., 2011).
Anatomical, electrophysiological, and self-report 
data therefore all point toward the temporopolar 
cortex as functionally and anatomically related to 
deeper medial temporal lobe structures. It should 
therefore come as little surprise that stimulation 
of this region likewise elicits various kinds of self­
generated thought. Task-based functional neuro­
imaging further supports these links: temporopolar 
cortex recruitment has been reported in numerous 
independent fMRI and positron emission tomogra­
phy (PET) investigations of self-generated thought 
(Christoff et al., 2009; Christoff, Ream, & Gabrieli, 
2004; Dumontheil et al., 2010; Ellamil et al., 2016; 
McGuire et al., 1996), as well as our recent meta­
analysis of these forms of cognition (Fox et al., 
2015; Figure 14.1).
1 7 4
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

More detailed explanations of the temporopo- 
lar cortex’s function have also been proposed: for 
instance, a large number of fMRI studies inves­
tigating mentalizing and “theory of mind” tasks 
have observed recruitment of temporopolar cortex 
(Binder, Desai, Graves, & Conant, 2009; Olson 
et al., 2007), prompting the recent proposal that 
this area may flexibly couple with other default net­
work components to facilitate these and other social 
cognitive processes (Spreng & Andrews-Hanna, 
2015). One possibility, therefore, is a role in medi­
ating the large amount of social cognition known 
to take place during self-generated thought (Diaz 
et al., 2013; Klinger, 2008). Given the poor con­
temporary understanding of the temporopolar cor­
tex, however, and other proposed functional roles 
(for instance, binding visceral-affective assessments 
with highly processed perceptual information; 
Olson et al., 2007), the door should be kept open 
to any number of other possibilities.
What Is Special about the Medial 
Temporal Lobe?
The possibility that the medial temporal lobe 
(especially the hippocampus) plays a crucial role in 
the “ignition” or initiation of self-generated thought 
has been previously suggested by other researchers 
(Buckner, 2010; Smallwood, 2013). Although a 
detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this chap­
ter, some features of medial temporal lobe circuitry 
may help in explaining the important role played 
by this region (Fox et al., 2016). Whereas typical 
neocortical circuitry involves a preponderance of 
local (short-distance) and a corresponding paucity 
of long-distance connections (Douglas & Martin, 
2004; Markram et al., 2004; Thomson & Bannister,
2003), hippocampal neurons appear equally likely 
to contact near and distant neighbors (Buzsaki, 
2006; Li, Somogyi, Tepper, & Buzsaki, 1992; Li, 
Somogyi, Ylinen, & Buzsaki, 1994). Given that 
single neurons in the medial temporal lobe can 
encode very high-level, invariant representations of 
the world (for instance, highly specific famous faces 
or landmarks; Quiroga et al., 2005), this specialized 
and densely interconnected microcircuitry might 
provide a flexible substrate for encoding novel and 
arbitrary associations between one percept or idea 
and another. In the hippocampus’s role as a spatial 
map, this capacity is thought to be critical in that 
it allows the mapping of “anything” to “anywhere” 
(Eichenbaum, Dudchenko, Wood, Shapiro, & 
Tanila, 1999; Ekstrom et al., 2003)— in principle, 
any known object or person could be set in any
known space in the world, and the medial temporal 
lobe needs to be able not only to represent these 
arbitrary associations of object and place in per­
ception, but also to consolidate them to long-term 
memory.
If a specialized microcircuitry indeed evolved in 
the hippocampus allowing for the arbitrary combi­
nation of neural activity encoding high-level per­
cepts (in principle, allowing the matching of any 
object or person to any spatiotemporal locus), this 
capacity could also be “hijacked” via a process of 
exaptation— that is, the recruitment or involve­
ment of a given structure in some function other 
than that for which it originally evolved (Gould, 
1991; Gould & Vrba, 1982)— and utilized for the 
self-generation of novel/arbitrary combinations of 
memory traces. From the subjective perspective, the 
result of this process would be experienced as the 
spontaneous arising of thoughts, sudden insights 
and creative ideas, visual imagery and simulations, 
and even entirely sui generis spatiotemporal land­
scapes during what we call “dreaming” (Domhoff & 
Fox, 2015; Fox et al., 2013; Windt, 2010).
On this view, specific patterns of activity initi­
ated in the medial temporal lobe would then recruit 
(or spread to) regions throughout the brain, likely in 
a content-dependent manner. There is some prelim­
inary evidence for this kind of association between 
medial temporal lobe activity and that of other brain 
regions during self-generated thought. For instance, 
in an fMRI study of mind-wandering, both over­
all functional connectivity, as well as fluctuations 
(variability) in functional connectivity, between 
the medial temporal lobe subsystem of the default 
network and the posterior cingulate cortex tracked 
self-reports of daydreaming frequency (Kucyi & 
Davis, 2014). On a finer timescale, a study using 
intracranial EEG investigating spontaneous mem­
ory recall found that medial temporal lobe struc­
tures showed the earliest peaks in high gamma-band 
activity, whereas gamma-band peaks were observed 
slightly later in other areas throughout the tempo­
ral, parietal, and frontal lobes (Burke et al., 2014). 
The medial temporal lobe was not the only area to 
show high-frequency activity peaking prior to spon­
taneous recall, but it was the only area where this 
high gamma-band activity successfully predicted 
subsequent memory recall, highlighting its impor­
tance both in initiating and predicting the success 
of spontaneous memory recall (Burke et al., 2014). 
These findings suggest that spontaneous memory 
recall might be primarily initiated or generated in 
the medial temporal lobe, followed by a slightly
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX
17 5

delayed but much more widespread recruitment of 
other regions throughout the brain— similar to our 
hypothesis for spontaneous self-generation of men­
tal content other than memory.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Functional 
neuroimaging 
has 
highlighted 
the importance of several brain networks to self­
generated thought, most notably the default, visual, 
and frontoparietal networks (Fox et al., 2015), and 
has narrowed down the most likely initiation/gen- 
eration sites to somewhere within the default net­
work (Ellamil et al., 2012; Ellamil et al., 2016). 
Ultimately, however, all existing noninvasive neuro­
imaging modalities lack the spatiotemporal resolu­
tion to answer subtle questions about where in the 
brain self-created content is actually generated, as 
well as how and where this initial self-generated 
activity subsequently spreads (Fox et al., 2016). 
Human 
intracranial 
electrophysiology, 
despite 
being confined to clinical contexts, has helped to 
again narrow our focus, pointing toward the medial 
temporal lobe and temporopolar cortex as especially 
relevant to thought generation, while simultane­
ously pointing to an only marginal role (if any) for 
other default network hubs, including the posterior 
cingulate cortex (Foster & Parvizi, 2017) and infe­
rior parietal lobule (Fox et al., 2016). Future work 
will need to corroborate, contest, and further refine 
these coarse generalizations, and understudied 
but potentially important regions, such as medial 
prefrontal cortex, will need to be more heavily 
investigated.
References
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104{\), 322- 
335. doi: 10.1152/jn.00830.2009 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes and dynamic control. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1316(1), 29-52.
Bancaud, J., Brunet-Bourgin, F., Chauvel, P., & Halgren, E. 
(1994). Anatomical origin of deja vu and vivid “memories” 
in human temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain, 117, 71-90. 
Beauvais, K., Biraben, A., Seigneuret, E., Sai'kali, S., & 
Scarabin, J.-M. (2005). Subjective signs in premotor epi­
lepsy: 
Confirmation 
by 
stereo-electroencephalography.
Epileptic Disorders, 7(4), 347-354.
Bechtereva, N. P., & Abdullaev, Y. G. (2000). Depth electrodes 
in clinical neurophysiology: Neuronal activity and human 
cognitive function. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 
37(1), 11-29.
Bernhardt, B. C., Smallwood, J., Tusche, A., Ruby, F. J., Engen, 
H. G., Steinbeis, N., & Singer, T. (2014). Medial prefrontal
and anterior cingulate cortical thickness predicts shared indi­
vidual differences in self-generated thought and temporal 
discounting. Neuroimage, 90, 290-297.
Binder, J. R., Desai, R. H., Graves, W. W., & Conant, L. L.
(2009). Where is the semantic system? A critical review 
and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. 
Cerebral Cortex, 19(12), 2767-2796.
Birn, R. M., Murphy, K., & Bandettini, P. A. (2008). The effect 
of respiration variations on independent component analysis 
results of resting state functional connectivity. Human Brain 
Mapping, 29(7), 740-750.
Blanke, O., Landis, T., & Seeck, M. (2000). Electrical cortical 
stimulation of the human prefrontal cortex evokes complex 
visual hallucinations. Epilepsy & Behavior, 1(5), 356-361.
Blanke, O., Perrig, S., Thut, G., Landis, T., & Seeck, M. (2000). 
Simple and complex vestibular responses induced by elec­
trical cortical stimulation of the parietal cortex in humans. 
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 69(4), 
553-556.
Buckner, R. L. (2010). The role of the hippocampus in prediction 
and imagination. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 27—48.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and rel­
evance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1124, 1-38. doi: 10.1196/annals. 1440.011
Burke, J. F., Sharan, A. D., Sperling, M. R., Ramayya, A. G., 
Evans, J. J., Healey, M. K., . . . Kahana, M. J. (2014). 
Theta and high-frequency activity mark spontaneous recall 
of episodic memories. The Journal of Neuroscience, 34(54), 
11355-11365.
Buzsaki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51-59. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.brainres.2011.09.060
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U S A ,  106(21), 8719-8724. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17(11), 718-731.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2004). Cognitive 
and neural basis of spontaneous thought processes. Cortex, 
40, 623-630.
Daitch, A. L., Foster, B. L., Schrouff, J., Rangarajan, V., Ka§ik<p, 
I., Gattas, S., & Parvizi, J. (2016). Mapping human tem­
poral and parietal neuronal population activity and func­
tional coupling during mathematical cognition. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the U S A ,  113(46), 
E7277-E7286.
Dastjerdi, M., Foster, B. L., Nasrullah, S., Rauschecker, A. 
M., Dougherty, R. F., Townsend, J. D., . . . Kennedy, D. 
P. (2011). Differential electrophysiological response during 
rest, self-referential, and non-self-referential tasks in human 
posteromedial cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108(7), 3023-3028.
Delamillieure, P, Doucet, G., Mazoyer, B., Turbelin, M.-R., 
Delcroix, N., Mellet, E.,... Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2010). The 
resting state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire
1 7 6
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

for evaluation of inner experience during the conscious rest­
ing state. Brain Research Bulletin, 81(6), 565-573.
Diaz, B. A., Van Der Sluis, S., Moens, S., Benjamins, J. S., 
Migliorati, F., Stoffers, D., . . . Van’t Ent, D. (2013). The 
Amsterdam Resting-State Questionnaire reveals multiple 
phenotypes of resting-state cognition. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7, 1-13.
Dixon, M. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Spreng, R. N., Irving, Z. 
C., Mills, C., Girn, M., & Christoff, K. (2017). Interactions 
between the default network and dorsal attention network 
vary across default subsystems, time, and cognitive states. 
Neuroimage, 147, 632-649.
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. R. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 342-353.
Douglas, R. J., & Martin, K. A. (2004). Neuronal circuits of 
the neocortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 419-451.
Dumontheil, I., Gilbert, S. J., Frith, C. D., & Burgess, R W.
(2010). Recruitment of lateral rostral prefrontal cortex in 
spontaneous and task-related thoughts. Quarterly Journal 
of Experimental Psychology (Hove), 63(9), 1740-1756. 
doi: 10.1080/17470210903538114
Eichenbaum, H., Dudchenko, P., Wood, E., Shapiro, M., & 
Tanila, H. (1999). The hippocampus, memory, and place 
cells: Is it spatial memory or a memory space? Neuron, 23(2), 
209-226.
Ekstrom, A. D., Kahana, M. J., Caplan, J. B., Fields, T. A., 
Isham, E. A., Newman, E. L., & Fried, I. (2003). Cellular 
networks underlying human spatial navigation. Nature, 
425(6954), 184-188.
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59(2), 1783-1794. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuroimage.2011.08.008
Ellamil, M., Fox, K. C. R., Dixon, M. L., Pritchard, S., Todd, 
R. M., Thompson, E., & Christoff, K. (2016). Dynamics 
of neural recruitment surrounding the spontaneous aris­
ing of thoughts in experienced mindfulness practitioners. 
Neuroimage, 136, 186-196.
Engel, A. K., Moll, C. K., Fried, I., & Ojemann, G. A. (2005). 
Invasive recordings from the human brain: Clinical insights 
and beyond. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(1), 35-47.
Feindel, W., & Penfield, W. (1954). Localization of discharge 
in temporal lobe automatism. AMA Archives of Neurology & 
Psychiatry, 72(5), 605-630.
Ferguson, S. M., Rayport, M., Gardner, R., Kass, W., Weiner, 
H., & Reiser, M. F. (1969). Similarities in mental content of 
psychotic states, spontaneous seizures, dreams, and responses 
to electrical brain stimulation in patients with temporal lobe 
epilepsy. Psychosomatic Medicine, 31(6), 479-498.
Fish, D., Gloor, R, Quesney, F., & Oliver, A. (1993). Clinical 
responses to electrical brain stimulation of the temporal and 
frontal lobes in patients with epilepsy: Pathophysiological 
implications. Brain, 116(2), 397-414.
Foster, B. L., & Parvizi, J. (2017). Direct cortical stimulation 
of human posteromedial cortex. Neurology, 88(7), 685-691.
Fox, K. C. R., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
The neurobiology of self-generated thought from cells to 
systems: Integrating evidence from lesion studies, human 
intracranial electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and neuroen­
docrinology. Neuroscience, 335, 134-150.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., & 
Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: Evidence
from functional neuroimaging and first-person con­
tent reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C. R., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & 
Christoff, K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commen­
tary on Wilson et al.’s “Just think: The challenges of the dis­
engaged mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5(1427), 1-4.
Fransson, P. (2005). Spontaneous low-frequency BOLD sig­
nal fluctuations: An fMRI investigation of the resting-state 
default mode of brain function hypothesis. Human Brain 
Mapping, 26(1), 15-29.
Fried, I., MacDonald, K. A., & Wilson, C. L. (1997). Single 
neuron activity in human hippocampus and amygdala dur­
ing recognition of faces and objects. Neuron, 18(5), 753-765.
Fried, I., Rutishauser, U., Cerf, M., & Kreiman, G. (2014). 
Single neuron studies of the human brain: Probing cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gelbard-Sagiv, H., Mukamel, R., Harel, M., Malach, R., & 
Fried, I. (2008). Internally generated reactivation of single 
neurons in human hippocampus during free recall. Science, 
322(5898), 96-101.
Gloor, P. (1997). 
The temporal lobe and limbic system. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Golchert, J., Smallwood, J., Jefferies, E., Seli, P., Huntenburg, J. 
M., Liem, F., . . . Villringer, A. (2017). Individual variation 
in intentionality in the mind-wandering state is reflected in 
the integration of the default-mode, fronto-parietal, and lim­
bic networks. Neuroimage, 146, 226-235.
Golland, Y., Golland, P., Bentin, S., & Malach, R. (2008). Data- 
driven clustering reveals a fundamental subdivision of the 
human cortex into two global systems. Neuropsycholona, 
46(2), 540-553.
Gorgolewski, K. J., Lurie, D., Urchs, S., Kipping, J. A., 
Craddock, R. C., Milham, M. P., . . . Smallwood, J. (2014). 
A correspondence between individual differences in the 
brain’s intrinsic functional architecture and the content and 
form of self-generated thoughts. PLoS ONE, 9(5), e97176.
Gould, S. J. (1991). Exaptation: A crucial tool for an evolution­
ary psychology. Journal of Social Issues, 47(3), 43-65.
Gould, S. J., & Vrba, E. S. (1982). Exaptation: A missing term in 
the science of form. Paleobiology, 5(01), 4-15.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2003). 
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A network 
analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 100( 1), 253-258.
Halgren, E., Walter, R. D., Cherlow, D. G., & Crandall, P. H. 
(1978). Mental phenomena evoked by electrical stimulation 
of the human hippocampal formation and amygdala. Brain, 
101( 1), 83-115.
Herbet, G., Lafargue, G., De Champfleur, N. M., Moritz-Gasser, 
S., Le Bars, E., Bonnetblanc, F., & Duffau, H. (2014). 
Disrupting posterior cingulate connectivity disconnects con­
sciousness from the external environment. Neuropsychologia, 
56, 239-244.
Jacobs, J., Kahana, M. J., Ekstrom, A. D., Mollison, M. V., & 
Fried, I. (2010). A sense of direction in human entorhi- 
nal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
107(14), 6487-6492.
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX
1 77

Kahane, P., Hoffmann, D., Minotti, L., & Berthoz, A. (2003). 
Reappraisal of the human vestibular cortex by cortical 
electrical stimulation study. Annals of Neurology, 54(5), 
615-624.
Klinger, E. (2008). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
Kondo, H., Saleem, K. S., & Price, J. L. (2003). Differential 
connections of the temporal pole with the orbital and 
medial prefrontal networks in macaque monkeys. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 465(4), 499-523.
Kreiman, G., Koch, C., & Fried, I. (2000a). Category-specific 
visual responses of single neurons in the human medial tem­
poral lobe. Nature Neuroscience, 3(9), 946-953.
Kreiman, G., Koch, C., & Fried, I. (2000b). Imagery neurons in 
the human brain. Nature, 408(6810), 357-361.
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2014). Dynamic functional con­
nectivity of the default mode network tracks daydreaming. 
Neuroimage, 100, 471—480.
Lachaux, J. P, Rudrauf, D., & Kahane, P. (2003). Intracranial 
EEG and human brain mapping. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 
97(4), 613-628.
Lee, H., Hong, S., Seo, D., Tae, W., & Hong, S. (2000). 
Mapping of functional organization in human visual cortex 
Electrical cortical stimulation. Neurology, 54(4), 849-854.
Lega, B. C., Jacobs, J., & Kahana, M. (2012). Human hip­
pocampal theta oscillations and the formation of episodic 
memories. Hippocampus, 22(4), 748-761.
Li, X.-G., Somogyi, P, Tepper, J., & Buzsaki, G. (1992). Axonal 
and dendritic arborization of an intracellularly labeled 
chandelier cell in the CA1 region of rat hippocampus. 
Experimental Brain Research, 90(3), 519-525.
Li, X. G., Somogyi, P., Ylinen, A., & Buzsaki, G. (1994). 
The hippocampal CA3 network: an in vivo intracellular 
labeling study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 339(2), 
181-208.
Liu, S., Erkkinen, M. G., Healey, M. L., Xu, Y., Swett, K. E., 
Chow, H. M., & Braun, A. R. (2015). Brain activity and 
connectivity during poetry composition: Toward a mul­
tidimensional model of the creative process. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36, 3351-3372.
Logothetis, N. K. (2008). What we can do and what we cannot 
do with fMRI. Nature, 453(7197), 869-878.
Mahl, G. F., Rothenberg, A., Delgado, J. M., & Hamlin, H. 
(1964). Psychological responses in the human to intracere­
bral electrical stimulation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 26(4), 
337-368.
Markram, H., Toledo-Rodriguez, M., Wang, Y., Gupta, A., 
Silberberg, G., & Wu, C. (2004). Interneurons of the neo- 
cortical inhibitory system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
5(10), 793-807.
McGuire, P. K., Paulesu, E., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Frith, C. D. 
(1996). Brain activity during stimulus independent thought. 
Neuroreport, 7(13), 2095-2099.
Mesulam, M. (2000). Principles of behavioral and cognitive neu­
rology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Morris, H. H., Luders, H., Lesser, R. P., Dinner, D. S., & 
Hahn, J. (1984). Transient neuropsychological abnormalities 
(including Gerstmann’s Symdrome) during cortical stimula­
tion. Neurology, 34(J), 877-877.
Mulak, A., Kahane, P., Hoffmann, D., Minotti, L., & Bonaz, 
B. (2008). Brain mapping of digestive sensations elicited
by cortical electrical stimulations. Neurogastroenterology & 
Motility, 20(6), 588-596.
Mullan, S., & Penfield, W. (1959). Illusions of comparative 
interpretation and emotion: production by epileptic dis­
charge and by electrical stimulation in the temporal cortex. 
AMA Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry, 81(3), 269-284.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greek, M., Bermpohl, F., 
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential 
processing in our brain: A meta-analysis of imaging studies 
on the self. Neuroimage, 3/(1), 440—457.
Olson, I. R., Plotzker, A., & Ezzyat, Y. (2007). The enigmatic 
temporal pole: A review of findings on social and emotional 
processing. Brain, 130(7), 1718-1731.
Ostrowsky, K., Desestret, V., Ryvlin, P., Coste, S., & Mauguiere, 
F. (2002). Direct electrical stimulations of the temporal pole 
in human. Epileptic Disorders: International Epilepsy Journal 
with Videotape, 4, S23-S27.
Parvizi, J., Van Hoesen, G. W., Buckwalter, J., & Damasio, A. 
(2006). Neural connections of the posteromedial cortex in 
the macaque. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
103(5), 1563-1568.
Penfield, W. (1958). Some mechanisms of consciousness discov­
ered during electrical stimulation of the brain. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences U SA, 44(2), 51.
Penfield, W., & Boldrey, E. (1937). Somatic motor and sensory 
representation in the cerebral cortex of man as studied by 
electrical stimulation. Brain, 60, 389-443.
Penfield, W., & Perot, P (1963). The brain’s record of audi­
tory and visual experience: A final summary and discussion. 
Brain, 86(4), 595-696.
Penfield, W., & Welch, K. (1951). The supplementary motor 
area of the cerebral cortex: A clinical and experimental study. 
AMA Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry, 66(3), 289-317.
Quiroga, R. Q., Mukamel, R., Isham, E. A., Malach, R., & Fried, 
I. (2008). Human single-neuron responses at the threshold 
of conscious recognition. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 105(9), 3599-3604.
Quiroga, R. Q., Reddy, L., Kreiman, G., Koch, C., & Fried, I. 
(2005). Invariant visual representation by single neurons in 
the human brain. Nature, 435(7045), 1102-1107.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences U SA, 98(2), 678-682.
Schmahmann, J. D., Pandya, D. N., Wang, R., Dai, G., 
D’arceuil, H. E., de Crespigny, A. J., & Wedeen, V. J. (2007). 
Association fibre pathways of the brain: Parallel observations 
from diffusion spectrum imaging and autoradiography. 
Brain, 130(3), 630-653.
Schulz, R., Woermann, F. G., & Ebner, A. (2007). When written 
words become moving pictures: Complex visual hallucina­
tions on stimulation of the lateral occipital lobe. Epilepsy & 
Behavior, 11(1), 147-151.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Mind­
wandering with and without intention. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 20(8), 605-617.
Selimbeyoglu, A., & Parvizi, J. (2010). Electrical stimulation 
of the human brain: Perceptual and behavioral phenomena 
reported in the old and new literature. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 4, 46.
Shannon, B. J., & Buckner, R. L. (2004). Functional-anatomic 
correlates of memory retrieval that suggest nontradi- 
tional processing roles for multiple distinct regions within
i78
N E U R A L  O R I G I N S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  T H O U G H T

posterior parietal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 24(45), 
10084-10092.
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the mind 
wanders: A process-occurrence framework for self-generated 
mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 519.
Spiers, H., & Maguire, E. (2006). Spontaneous mentaliz- 
ing during an interactive real world task: An fMRI study. 
Neuropsychologia, 44(10), 1674-1682.
Spreng, R., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2015). The default net­
work and social cognition. In A. W. Toga (Ed.), Brain map­
ping: An encyclopedic reference (pp. 165-169). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Stawarczyk, D., & D’Argembeau, A. (2015). Neural correlates 
of personal goal processing during episodic future thinking 
and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36(8), 2928-2947.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., Van der Linden, 
M., & D’Argembeau, A. (2011). Mind-wandering: 
Phenomenology and function as assessed with a novel expe­
rience sampling method. Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam), 
136(3), 370-381. doi: 10.10l6/j.actpsy.2011.01.002
Stefanacci, L., Suzuki, W. A., & Amaral, D. G. (1996). 
Organization of connections between the amygdaloid com­
plex and the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices in 
macaque monkeys. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 
375(4), 552-582.
Suthana, N., & Fried, I. (2012). Percepts to recollections: Insights 
from single neuron recordings in the human brain. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 16(8), 427-436.
Thomson, A. M., & Bannister, A. P. (2003). Interlaminar con­
nections in the neocortex. Cerebral Cortex, 73(1), 5-14.
Tusche, A., Smallwood, J., Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. (2014). 
Classifying the wandering mind: Revealing the affective con­
tent of thoughts during task-free rest periods. Neuroimage, 
97, 107-116.
Vignal, J.-P, Maillard, L., McGonigal, A., & Chauvel, P. (2007). 
The dreamy state: Hallucinations of autobiographic memory 
evoked by temporal lobe stimulations and seizures. Brain, 
130(1), 88-99.
Wakana, S., Jiang, H., Nagae-Poetscher, L. M., Van Zijl, P. C., 
& Mori, S. (2004). Fiber tract-based atlas of human white 
matter anatomy. Radiology, 230, 77-87.
Windt, J. M. (2010). The immersive spatiotemporal hallucina­
tion model of dreaming. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 9(2), 295-316. doi: 10.1007/s 11097-010-9163-1
Wise, R. G., Ide, K., Poulin, M. J., & Tracey, I. (2004). Resting 
fluctuations in arterial carbon dioxide induce significant low 
frequency variations in BOLD signal. Neuroimage, 21(4), 
1652-1664.
Yeo, B. T. T., Kirienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. 
R., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., . . . Buckner, R. L.
(2011). The organization of the human cerebral cortex 
estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 106, 
1125-1165. doi: 
10.1152/ 
jn.00338.2011.-
Zabelina, D. L., & Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Dynamic net­
work interactions supporting internally-oriented cognition. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 40, 86-93.
K I E R A N  C. R. FOX
179


C H A P T E R
15
Mind-Wandering and 
Self-Referential Thought
Arnaud D’Argembeau
Abstract
When one’s mind wanders, one frequently experiences thoughts, images, and feelings about oneself 
and one’s life. These self-referential thoughts involve diverse contents and take various forms, but most 
often focus on specific future events that are closely related to one’s personal goals and concerns. 
Neuroimaging studies show that such spontaneous thoughts recruit many of the same brain regions—  
largely corresponding to the default network— as directed self-referential thought. The medial prefrontal 
cortex is most consistently involved and might contribute to assign value and to integrate processed 
contents with autobiographical knowledge. The tendency of the wandering mind to focus on self-related 
information might foster a sense of personal identity and lay the foundation for long-term goal pursuit.
Key Words: mind wandering, spontaneous thought, self, autobiographical memory, goals, future thinking, 
medial prefrontal cortex, default network
A fascinating feature of the human mind is its 
ability to temporarily disengage from current sen­
sory input to mentally simulate alternatives to the 
here and now. During our daily activities, the mind 
indeed frequently drifts away from the task at hand 
and focuses on various thoughts and mental images 
that are only loosely (if at all) related to our imme­
diate environment. These thoughts can be remark­
ably varied in their content and phenomenology, yet 
a bit of introspection readily indicates that many of 
them involve self-referential information— memories 
of personal experiences, anticipations of and plans 
about ones future, evaluations of ones personal char­
acteristics and life situations, thoughts about ones 
social relationships, and so on. The purpose of this 
chapter is to discuss the nature, neural correlates, and 
possible functions of such self-referential thoughts.
The Centrality of Self-Referential Thought 
When the Mind Wanders
The occurrence of thoughts that are not tied 
to the immediate environment (here referred to
as “task-unrelated thought”)1 is a frequent phe­
nomenon: On average, peoples minds wander 
between 25% and 50% of the time in daily life, 
although there is substantial individual and situ­
ational variability in this respect (Kane et al., 2007; 
Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Song & Wang,
2012). Furthermore, many of the thoughts (around 
30%) that people experience in their daily life are 
judged to be spontaneous (Klinger & Cox, 1987). 
It has long been proposed that the content of day­
dreaming and mind-wandering is not random, but 
is often focused on self-relevant information, such 
as personal goals and concerns (Klinger, 2013; 
J. L. Singer, 1998; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006), 
and recent research on the characteristics of task- 
unrelated and spontaneous thoughts largely sup­
ports this view.
A number of studies have investigated the 
properties of mind-wandering episodes occurring 
while performing various tasks in the laboratory. 
Using a retrospective questionnaire administered 
after task completion to assess subjective aspects
18 1

of mind-wandering, Andrews-Hanna, 
Reidler, 
Huang, and Buckner (2010) found that task- 
unrelated thoughts were often judged to revolve 
around personally relevant concerns. Similarly, 
Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, Van der Linden, and 
D ’Argembeau (2011) collected subjective ratings 
of mind-wandering episodes occurring in the con­
text of a sustained attention task and found that, 
on average, participants rated their thoughts as 
personally important and related to their goals. 
In a study by Baird, Smallwood, and Schooler
(2011), participants reported the content of their 
mental states at several occasions during a choice- 
reaction time task, and the subsequent coding of 
described thoughts revealed that the majority of 
task-unrelated thoughts (66%) included specific 
mentions of the individual’s self. Relatedly, Cole 
and Berntsen (2016) observed that memories and 
future thoughts that were spontaneously activated 
during a vigilance task were frequently linked to 
the participants’ current concerns.
Investigations of how different thought char­
acteristics relate to each other also point to self­
relevance as a central dimension of mind-wandering. 
For example, Stawarczyk, Cassol, and D ’Argembeau
(2013) had participants rate various characteristics 
of task-unrelated thoughts and applied a multilevel 
factor analysis to these data. The results showed that 
personal significance was an important factor in 
explaining variations in thought characteristics, with 
dimensions that loaded most strongly on this factor 
being the importance of thought content, relation­
ship to personal goals, and frequency of occurrence 
in daily life. In the same vein, other studies have 
indicated that self-relatedness is a central dimen­
sion characterizing task-unrelated thought content 
(Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 2013; Ruby, 
Smallwood, Sackur, & Singer, 2013).
The self-relevance of mind-wandering has like­
wise been demonstrated in studies investigating 
the characteristics of thoughts in daily life. Using 
an experience-sampling method to assess task- 
unrelated thought content, Song and Wang (2012) 
found that most mind-wandering episodes were 
related to one’s self and personal life. Andrews- 
Hanna et al. (2013) asked participants to report and 
assess a series of thoughts that had been recently in 
their minds in daily life. Although the characteris­
tics of reported thoughts varied widely, on average, 
participants characterized their thoughts as highly 
self-relevant. Furthermore, when examining the 
relationships between the different characteristics 
of thoughts using hierarchical clustering analysis, it
was found that personal significance was an impor­
tant dimension characterizing thought content.
Other studies have focused more specifically on 
particular types of self-related thoughts. For exam­
ple, in a series of studies by Berntsen and colleagues 
(e.g., Berntsen, 1996; Berntsen & Jacobsen, 2008; 
Finnbogadottir & Berntsen, 2013), participants 
monitored the occurrence of involuntary (spon­
taneous) autobiographical memories and future 
thoughts in their daily life and recorded their char­
acteristics in a diary. Overall, these studies have 
shown that involuntary autobiographical memories 
and future thoughts are common in daily life, are 
often activated in response to situational cues, and 
typically arise in states of diffuse attention.
In summary, a number of studies using various 
methods to assess mind-wandering in the laboratory 
or in natural settings converge to show that task- 
unrelated and spontaneous thoughts are frequent 
and often involve personally significant contents. 
The next section considers more deeply the differ­
ent forms that these self-related thoughts can take.
Varieties of Self-Referential Thought
Self-referential thoughts can vary widely in 
their content, specificity, and temporal orientation. 
Some thoughts rely on personal semantic informa­
tion, such as abstract representations of one’s per­
sonal characteristics (e.g., one’s personality traits, 
abilities, goals, social roles, preferences, and val­
ues) and knowledge of facts about one’s life (Klein 
& Gangi, 2010; Markus & Wurf, 1987; Renoult, 
Davidson, Palombo, Moscovitch, & Levine, 2012). 
Other thoughts involve the mental simulation of 
specific life episodes, either events that occurred 
in one’s personal past or situations that might hap­
pen in one’s personal future (D’Argembeau & Van 
der Linden, 2004; Schacter, 2012; Szpunar, 2010). 
Although the extent to which the wandering mind 
involves these different types of self-referential 
thought remains to be investigated in detail, current 
evidence suggests that it tends preferentially toward 
particular forms.
One of the most consistent findings has been 
that the wandering mind focuses most frequently 
on future events; for example, Smallwood, Nind, 
and O ’Connor (2009) observed that task-unrelated 
thoughts that occurred while performing an unde­
manding task were mostly future-oriented, a find­
ing that has been replicated in several laboratory 
studies of mind-wandering (Baird et al., 2011; 
Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 2013; Ruby, 
Smallwood, Sackur, & Singer, 2013; Smallwood
182
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  AND S E L F - R E F E R E N T I A L  T H O U G H T

et al., 2011; Stawarczyk et al., 2013; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maj, et al., 2011). Similarly, studies 
investigating the characteristics of task-unrelated 
thoughts in daily life have shown that most thoughts 
focus on the future (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013; 
Song & Wang, 2012). Furthermore, there is evi­
dence that future-oriented mind-wanderings are 
perceived as more personally significant than non­
future-oriented 
mind-wanderings 
(Stawarczyk 
et al., 2013), and often involve the anticipation and 
planning of personally relevant future goals (Baird 
et al., 2011).
The 
future 
orientation 
of 
task-unrelated 
thoughts seems particularly pronounced when self­
relevant information is salient in a persons mind. 
Indeed, research has shown that priming personally 
significant contents increases the prospective bias of 
mind-wandering. Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, et al.
(2011) asked participants to write an essay about 
their personal goals or about a topic unrelated to 
personal goals (i.e., a familiar itinerary); then, the 
temporal focus of mind-wandering during an unre­
lated task was assessed. The results showed that 
participants who had previously thought about 
their personal goals subsequently experienced more 
future-oriented mind-wandering. In a related vein, 
Smallwood et al. (2011) found that making people 
think about their personality traits increased future- 
oriented mind-wandering in a subsequent task.
Other data suggest that, although task-unrelated 
thoughts can vary widely in their representational 
format and degree of abstraction, they most often 
focus on specific events. Andrews-Hanna et al.
(2013) found that 77% of thoughts reported to 
happen in daily life pertained to a specific event 
and, of these, 60% were oriented toward the future. 
Similarly, Stawarczyk et al. (2013) found that the 
contents of mind-wandering episodes were mostly 
related to something concrete and well-defined 
(e.g., a particular situation or action). Some stud­
ies have further compared the characteristics of 
spontaneous versus voluntary autobiographical rep­
resentations, showing that spontaneous memories 
and future thoughts are typically more specific than 
their voluntary counterparts (Berntsen & Jacobsen, 
2008; Cole, Staugaard, & Berntsen, 2016).
Altogether, these findings indicate that the wan­
dering mind can represent diverse contents and take 
various forms, but most often involves the repre­
sentation of specific future events that are closely 
related to one’s personal goals (for a more in-depth 
discussion, see Chapter 16 by Stawarczyk in this 
volume).
Neural Correlates of Directed and 
Spontaneous Self-Referential Thought
Neuroimaging research has shown that mind­
wandering is associated with activations in a specific 
set of brain regions, which largely corresponds to the 
so-called default network (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Schacter, 2008) and includes the medial prefrontal 
cortex, posterior cingulate/precuneus, inferior pari­
etal lobules, and areas of the medial and lateral tempo­
ral lobes (e.g., Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, 
& Schooler, 2009; Mason et al., 2007; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maquet, & D ’Argembeau, 2011) (for meta­
analyses, see Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Christoff, 2015; Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 
2015). Many of these regions are also activated when 
people are explicitly instructed to process self-related 
information, which provides additional support to 
the view that self-referential thought is an important 
component of the mind-wandering state. This sec­
tion first presents an overview of the neural correlates 
of different types of self-representation (as revealed by 
task-based studies), and then considers the few stud­
ies that have investigated the neural correlates of task- 
unrelated and spontaneous self-referential thought.
The neural correlates of different types of self­
representation have been extensively investigated 
using functional neuroimaging. Some studies have 
focused on personal semantic knowledge, such as 
the representation of one’s personality traits. In 
a typical study (e.g., Kelley et al., 2002), partici­
pants are asked to evaluate the self-descriptiveness 
of traits (e.g., polite, dependable, daring), and this 
task is compared to making other types of trait 
judgements (e.g., assessing their descriptiveness in 
reference to another person). Several meta-analyses 
have shown that both self- and other-referential 
judgments engage regions supporting semantic pro­
cessing (such as the lateral temporal cortex), and 
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is typically 
more activated during self- versus other-referential 
judgments (Araujo, Kaplan, & Damasio, 2013; 
Murray, Schaer, & Debbane, 2012; van der Meer, 
Costafreda, Aleman, & David, 2010). Research 
further suggests that the mPFC is involved in pro­
cessing different types of personal semantic infor­
mation: not only one’s personality traits, but also 
one’s attitudes, values, and physical attributes (e.g., 
Brosch, Coppin, Schwartz, & Sander, 2012; Jenkins 
& Mitchell, 2011; Zysset, Huber, Ferstl, & von 
Cramon, 2002).
The neural basis of autobiographical memory—  
memories of one’s past experiences and knowledge 
of facts about one’s life— has also received extensive
ARNA UD D AR GE MB E A U
I83

attention (for a review, see Cabeza & St. Jacques,
2007). In many studies, memories of specific per­
sonal experiences (i.e., events that happened at a 
particular place and time in an individuals life) are 
compared with the retrieval of non-personal infor­
mation (e.g., non-personal semantic knowledge or 
stimuli that have been learned in the laboratory 
before the scanning session). Neuroimaging evi­
dence indicates that such autobiographical memory 
retrieval is associated with activations in the mPFC, 
medial and lateral temporal areas, posterior cingu- 
late/retrosplenial cortex, and inferior parietal lobes 
(for meta-analyses, see Kim, 2012; Martinelli, 
Sperduti, & Piolino, 2013; McDermott, Szpunar, & 
Christ, 2009; Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2009; Svoboda, 
McKinnon, & Levine, 2006). Furthermore, lesion 
data have revealed that damage to these areas is 
associated with deficits in autobiographical memory 
retrieval (Philippi, Tranel, Duff, & Rudrauf, 2015).
A recent meta-analysis of neuroimaging stud­
ies (Martinelli et al., 2013) has compared the neu­
ral correlates of different types of self-referential 
thought: representations of personal characteristics 
(such as personality traits), knowledge of personal 
facts, and memories for specific events. The results 
show that each type of self-referential thought is 
associated with unique brain activations, with a 
shift from posterior to anterior regions with increas­
ing abstraction of representations. Indeed, specific 
memories predominantly activate posterior struc­
tures, including the medial and lateral temporal 
lobes and posterior cingulate/precuneus, whereas 
abstract representations of personal characteristics 
recruit only medial prefrontal structures; finally, 
knowledge of personal facts is associated with 
anterior activations, as well as posterior structures 
(mainly the lateral temporal cortex). Interestingly, 
the mPFC is the only brain region that is consis­
tently activated when thinking about ones traits, 
retrieving specific experiences from ones past, and 
accessing knowledge of facts about ones life, with 
both common and distinct activations across these 
three kinds of self-referential thought.
As mentioned in the previous section, the wander­
ing mind often focuses on future events and involves 
the processing of personal goals. The neural corre­
lates of future-oriented and goal-directed thought 
are thus of particular interest. Neuroimaging stud­
ies in which participants are explicitly instructed 
to reflect on their personal goals have shown that 
this process recruits areas of the default network. 
For example, Johnson et al. (2006) asked partici­
pants to think about their hopes and aspirations,
about their duties and obligations, and about non­
self-relevant topics (e.g., polar bears fishing). The 
results showed that the mPFC, posterior cingulate/ 
precuneus, and lateral temporal cortex were more 
activated when thinking about personal goals than 
when thinking about non-self-relevant topics. 
There were also distinct activations as a function of 
the type of personal goals considered: a region of 
the mPFC showed greater activation when think­
ing about hopes and aspirations, whereas a poste­
rior medial region showed greater activation when 
thinking about duties and obligations. Subsequent 
studies have detected similar activations in the 
mPFC, posterior cingulate, and lateral temporal 
cortex when reflecting on personal goals, especially 
promotion goals (i.e., things the individual would 
like to achieve) (for a meta-analysis, see Stawarczyk 
& D ’Argembeau, 2015).
In recent years there has also been increasing 
interest in episodic future thinking— the ability to 
imagine or simulate specific events that might hap­
pen in ones personal future (D’Argembeau, 2012; 
Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2008; Szpunar, 2010). 
A number of neuroimaging studies have shown that 
such mental simulations of fixture events depend on 
largely the same brain regions as autobiographical 
remembering— the mPFC, posterior cingulate and 
restrosplenial cortices, medial and lateral temporal 
regions, inferior parietal lobules, and parts of the lat­
eral prefrontal cortex (e.g., Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 
2007; Szpunar, Watson, & McDermott, 2007; 
for a meta-analysis, see Benoit & Schacter, 2015). 
These different brain regions likely support differ­
ent component processes involved in episodic future 
thought; for example, the medial temporal lobe may 
support the flexible retrieval and recombination of 
episodic details to construct representations of novel 
events (Addis & Schacter, 2012), whereas the lateral 
temporal cortex may represent semantic knowledge 
that is used for constructing coherent events (Irish, 
Addis, Hodges, & Piguet, 2012).
A few studies have investigated whether personal 
goal processing is associated with specific activations 
within this core network supporting episodic future 
thought. It has been found that medial prefrontal 
and posterior cingulate cortices are more activated 
when thinking about goal-related compared to 
goal-unrelated future events, suggesting that corti­
cal midline structures may underpin the processing 
of personal goals during episodic future think­
ing (D’Argembeau et al., 2010). In line with this 
view, a recent meta-analysis has shown that studies 
of episodic future thinking and studies of personal
184
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  AND S E L F - R E F E R E N T I A L  T H O U G H T

goal processing are associated with overlapping 
activations in the mPFC and posterior cingulate 
cortex, as well as other regions of the core network 
(Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau, 2015). It has also 
been found that imagining taking various steps and 
actions to achieve personal goals depends on the 
functional coupling of the core network with the 
frontoparietal control network, a system supporting 
cognitive control (Spreng, Stevens, Chamberlain, 
Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010). Thus, the frontopa­
rietal control network may also contribute to per­
sonal goal processing, perhaps by monitoring and 
integrating future-oriented thoughts in coherent 
sequences to achieve imagined end-states. A recent 
study has further clarified the role of distinct brain 
areas in personal goal processing by showing that 
imagining what it would be like to achieve a given 
goal mainly involves the mPFC, whereas construct­
ing a detailed plan of how to reach this goal engages 
regions from both the core network and the frontro- 
parietal control network (Gerlach, Spreng, Madore, 
& Schacter, 2014).
While many studies have investigated the neural 
correlates of self-referential thought using directed 
self-processing tasks, only a few studies have 
examined the brain regions associated with task- 
unrelated and spontaneous self-referential thought. 
Some studies investigated thought processes spon­
taneously occurring when people were not required 
to perform a particular task (the so-called rest­
ing state). In a pioneering study, Andreasen et al.
(1995) used positron emission tomography (PET) 
to investigate similarities and differences in neu­
ral activity between the explicit retrieval of auto­
biographical memories and a rest condition (i.e., 
lying quietly with no specific instructions about 
mental activity). They found that the mPFC and 
medial 
posterior areas 
(precuneus/retrosplenial 
cortex) showed greater activity during both auto­
biographical memory retrieval and rest compared 
to a semantic memory condition. Interviews with 
the participants indicated that they spontaneously 
thought about a variety of things during the rest 
condition, but especially about self-related contents 
such as past experiences and future activities. The 
authors concluded that the psychological common­
ality between the rest and autobiographical memory 
conditions is that “both involve something personal 
and highly individual” (p. 1583).
Another PET study examined the common­
alities in brain activation between the resting state 
and the active reflection on ones personality traits 
(D’Argembeau et al., 2005). It was found that both
conditions were associated with common activation 
in the mPFC compared with conditions requiring 
participants to reflect on non-self-related contents. 
Furthermore, an analysis of the content of men­
tal activity (using verbal reports and rating scales 
obtained after each scan) showed that participants 
spontaneously experienced self-referential thought 
during the rest condition, and the amount of self- 
referential processing correlated specifically with the 
activity of the mPFC. Common activations in the 
mPFC and posterior cingulate cortex during the 
resting state and directed self-reference tasks have 
also been observed in a more recent functional mag­
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) study (Whitfield- 
Gabrieli et al., 2011), and have been confirmed by a 
meta-analysis comparing the location of activations 
in neuroimaging studies on the default network 
(i.e., brain regions showing stronger activation dur­
ing the resting state compared to active tasks) with 
the location of activations associated with various 
self-related tasks (e.g., trait judgments, autobio­
graphical memory, face recognition, and name per­
ception) (Qin & Northoff, 2011).
There is also evidence that self-referential 
thoughts that occur while performing an unrelated 
task are associated with similar neural correlates as 
directed self-referential thoughts. Stawarczyk and 
D ’Argembeau (2015) performed a meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging studies of episodic future thinking, 
on the one hand, and a meta-analysis of neuroimag­
ing studies of mind-wandering, on the other hand. 
A conjunction analysis showed that these two types 
of studies were associated with common activations 
in several regions of the default network, including 
the mPFC, posterior cingulate cortex, left inferior 
parietal cortex, and left medial and lateral tempo­
ral regions. Considering that most mind-wandering 
episodes are future-oriented (see previous discus­
sion), this finding suggests that task-based and task- 
unrelated future thoughts are supported by largely 
similar brain regions. Some differences between 
the two kinds of self-referential thoughts were also 
noted, however. In particular, the lateral prefron­
tal cortex showed greater activity during directed 
future thinking compared to mind-wandering. 
Similarly, it has been found that voluntary episodic 
memories involve the lateral prefrontal cortex to a 
greater extent than involuntary episodic memories, 
with otherwise extensive overlaps in default network 
activity between the two kinds of memories (Hall 
et al., 2014). Together, these results suggest that 
directed and spontaneous self-referential thoughts 
share many commonalities, but may differ in the
ARNA UD D AR GE MB E A U
I85

extent to which they rely on effortful cognitive pro­
cesses (see also Dixon, Fox, & Christoff, 2014).
In summary, neuroimaging studies have shown 
that directed self-referential thoughts are associated 
with activations in a set of brain regions that largely 
corresponds to the default network. The specific 
areas that are recruited depend on the type of self­
representation under consideration, with abstract 
thoughts relying mainly on the mPFC and lateral 
temporal cortex, while more specific (past or future) 
thoughts recruit additional regions supporting the 
representation of episodic details (e.g., the medial 
temporal lobe and posterior cingulate/restroplenial 
cortex). A number of studies and meta-analyses 
have further demonstrated that many of the same 
areas are activated during the resting state or in 
association with mind-wandering, suggesting that 
these brain regions are also involved in spontane­
ous or unconstrained self-referential thought pro­
cesses. Across all these studies, the mPFC is the 
brain region that has been most consistently asso­
ciated with different types of self-representation, 
indicating that this region might play a particularly 
important role in both intentional and spontaneous 
self-referential cognition.
What Is the Role of the Medial Prefrontal 
Cortex in Self-Referential Thought?
While it has become clear that the mPFC plays 
a key role in self-referential thought, the exact pro­
cessing operations mediated by this region are not 
fully understood. One possibility is that the mPFC 
contributes to the appraisal or representation of the 
subjective value or significance of self-related infor­
mation. Indeed, the mPFC is thought to play a broad 
role in affective and value-based processing (Roy, 
Shohamy, & Wager, 2012). Most notably, research 
has shown that medial prefrontal activity encodes 
the subjective values of various types of rewards, 
which has led to the view that the mPFC integrates 
information from multiple sources to represent 
the significance or value of stimuli (for review, see 
Levy & Glimcher, 2012; Peters & Buchel, 2010b; 
Rangel & Hare, 2010; Sescousse, Caldu, Segura, 
& Dreher, 2013). Although these studies focused 
on the subjective valuation of stimuli from the 
external environment, the medial prefrontal activa­
tions that are observed in relation to self-referential 
thought could reflect a similar valuation mecha­
nism (D’Argembeau, 2013). Stimuli and mental 
representations that refer or relate to the self tend 
to be assigned a unique value, and the function of 
the mPFC may precisely be to evaluate or represent
such significance. This account is, for example, sup­
ported by the finding that activity in the mPFC 
increases linearly with the personal importance of 
the mental representations under consideration 
(Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, Poulin, & 
Buckner, 2010; D ’Argembeau et al., 2012). By flex­
ibly assigning degrees of value to self-related con­
tents, the mPFC might play an important role in 
the construction, stabilization, and modification of 
self-representations.
Another (not necessarily mutually exclusive, but 
somewhat broader) view is that the mPFC supports 
the integration of multiple representations dur­
ing self-referential thought. It has been proposed 
that self-reference acts as an integrative hub for 
perception, decision-making, and memory, help­
ing to bind together different types of informa­
tion and even different stages of processing (Sui & 
Humphreys, 2015). In support of this view, there 
is, for example, evidence that people recall more 
episodic details about items judged in reference 
to the self, suggesting that self-reference enhances 
the binding of different forms of information in 
memory (e.g., items and associated contextual 
details) (Conway, Dewhurst, Pearson, & Sapute,
2001). A potential role of the mPFC in this inte­
grative process is suggested by evidence showing 
that the self-reference effect in memory is predicted 
by medial prefrontal activity in healthy individuals 
(Macrae, Moran, Heatherton, Banfield, & Kelley,
2004) and is abolished in patients with focal brain 
damage to the mPFC (Philippi, Duff, Denburg, 
Tranel, & Rudrauf, 2012). More generally, there 
is substantial evidence that the mPFC is involved 
in relating and integrating incoming information 
to preexisting knowledge structures (Brod, Werkle- 
Bergner, & Shing, 2013; Kroes & Fernandez, 2012; 
Preston & Eichenbaum, 2013; van Kesteren, Ruiter, 
Fernandez, & Henson, 2012).
The 
integration 
of 
multiple 
representa­
tions may be particularly important for auto­
biographical remembering and future thinking, 
which inherently involve different types or lev­
els of self-related information (Conway, 2005; 
D ’Argembeau & Mathy, 2011). For example, 
there is evidence that specific memories and future 
thoughts are often part of higher-order auto­
biographical knowledge structures that organize 
specific events in broader themes and causal 
sequences— referred to as event clusters (Brown & 
Schopflocher, 1998; D ’Argembeau & Demblon,
2012). In a recent fMRI study, we found that 
the processing of such event clusters is associated
186
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  AND S E L F - R E F E R E N T I A L  T H O U G H T

with increased activation in the mPFC and with 
greater functional coupling between the mPFC 
and posterior regions supporting semantic and 
episodic representations (Demblon, Bahri, & 
D ’Argembeau, 2016). These findings suggest that 
the function of the mPFC during autobiographi­
cal remembering and future thinking might be 
to integrate specific event representations with 
higher-order autobiographical knowledge (e.g., 
personal goals and general knowledge about one’s 
life). Through this integrative process, the mPFC 
might contribute to contextualize specific event 
representations within an individual’s life story, 
thus rendering memories and future thoughts 
truly autobiographical.
On the Possible Functions of Spontaneous 
Self-Referential Thought
The fact that mind-wandering is such a pervasive 
experience makes it unlikely that it merely consists 
in a lapse of attention with no intrinsic value. On 
the contrary, there is growing evidence suggesting 
that mind-wandering may serve adaptive functions, 
such as planning (Baird et al., 2011) and problem­
solving (Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, et al., 2013).
The main function of mind-wandering might 
be to allow the mental simulation of alternatives 
to the here and now, and in particular to envision 
possible futures. As mentioned earlier, most mind­
wandering episodes indeed involve future-oriented 
and goal-related contents. The wandering mind 
may anticipate a variety of future events, conceive 
possible ways to attain or avoid envisioned situ­
ations, and predict the probable outcomes of dif­
ferent courses of action. In turn, these mental 
simulations may be used to inform decisions and 
behaviors. Many mind-wandering episodes are sub­
jectively perceived as fulfilling such future-oriented 
functions— evaluating and planning for possible 
situations, making decisions, and solving problems 
(Stawarczyk et al., 2013; Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, 
et al., 2011). Although the extent to which such 
future-oriented thoughts are beneficial in guiding 
decisions and behavior remains to be investigated 
in detail, recent evidence suggests that this might be 
the case. For example, a recent study suggests that 
mind-wandering can help people to better specify 
their goals and plans, which might lead to more 
effective goal achievement (Medea et al., 2016). 
Furthermore, it has also been found that mind­
wandering (Smallwood, Ruby, & Singer, 2013) and 
future thinking (Lin & Epstein, 2014) are associated 
with reduced delay discounting (i.e., with a greater
capacity to resist the temptation of an immediate 
reward in favor of receiving a larger reward later 
in the future). Interestingly, neuroimaging studies 
suggest that the mPFC might mediate this effect 
of future-oriented thoughts on farsighted decisions 
(Benoit, Gilbert, & Burgess, 2011; Bernhardt et al., 
2014; Peters & Buchel, 2010a).
Another potentially important function of 
mind-wandering may be to contribute to our 
sense of personal identity. People in modern soci­
eties construct their personal identity by creating 
an evolving life story that integrates past, present, 
and possible future experiences in such a way as to 
provide their lives with some degree of unity, pur­
pose, and meaning (McAdams, 2001; J. A. Singer, 
Blagov, Berry, & Oost, 2013). The construction 
of such narratives critically depends on autobio­
graphical reasoning, a process of reflective thinking 
through which we form links between disparate 
elements of our life and the self (Habermas & 
Bluck, 2000). Autobiographical reasoning helps 
in establishing personal identity and continuity 
across change, and research has shown the impor­
tance of this process for identity development, 
maturity, and well-being (King, Scollon, Ramsey, 
& Williams, 2000; Lilgendahl & McAdams, 2011; 
McLean & Pratt, 2006; Raffard et al., 2010; J. A. 
Singer, Rexhaj, & Baddeley, 2007). Intriguingly, 
a recent study (D ’Argembeau et al., 2014) has 
shown that the neural correlates of autobiographi­
cal reasoning closely correspond to a dorsome- 
dial prefrontal subsystem of the default network, 
which might play a broad role in introspective 
processes (Andrews-Hanna, 2012). Although this 
issue remains to be investigated in detail, this 
might suggest that spontaneous self-referential 
thought plays a role in reflecting on the broader 
meaning and implications of personal experiences, 
thereby contributing to the construction, main­
tenance, and update of an individual’s life story. 
In addition, frequent mental trips to the past and 
future during the mind-wandering state might also 
provide a more direct, experiential sense of conti­
nuity of the self through time (Prebble, Addis, & 
Tippett, 2013). Through these processes, the wan­
dering mind might thus contribute to the creation 
and functional maintenance of self-models, which 
then lay the foundation for long-term motivation 
and future planning (Metzinger, 2013).
Conclusion
When our attention is not entirely focused on 
the external environment, various thoughts and
ARNA UD D AR GE MB E A U
I87

mental images tend to spontaneously populate our 
minds. These spontaneous mentations frequently 
involve personally significant contents and often 
focus on future, goal-related events. Neuroimaging 
research suggests that the activity of a specific set of 
brain regions, largely corresponding to the default 
network, correlates with the formation of self- 
referential thoughts during the mind-wandering 
or resting state. The specific areas that are recruited 
depend on the content and specificity of the mental 
representation under consideration, but the mPFC 
appears to play a broad role in processing various 
types of self-related contents. While the specific 
function of this brain region remains to be inves­
tigated in detail, current evidence suggests that it 
might process the subjective value of self-related 
information and/or integrate multiple represen­
tations in the service of self-referential thought. 
Overall, the tendency of the wandering mind to 
focus on self-related contents may foster one’s sense 
of personal identity and may serve adaptive func­
tions, such as planning and long-term goal pursuit.
Acknowledgments
Arnaud D ’Argembeau is supported by the Fonds 
de la Recherche Scientifique-FNRS, Belgium.
Note
1. Mind-wandering involves “a shift in the contents of thought 
away from an ongoing task and/or from events in the exter­
nal environment to self-generated thoughts and feelings” 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). Importantly, however, 
mind-wandering is a type of thought that is characterized not 
only by its content, but also by its spontaneous and dynamic 
nature; it involves thoughts that arise freely due to an absence 
of strong constraints on thought contents and on the transi­
tions from one thought to another (Christoff, Irving, Fox, 
Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016). In empirical research 
on mind-wandering, terms referring to the content (such 
as “task-unrelated” and “stimulus-independent” thought) or 
the spontaneous nature of mind-wandering are sometimes 
used interchangeably, which is problematic because these 
terms designate separable dimensions of thought (Christoff 
et ah, 2016). Whenever possible, in this chapter I use the 
term “task-unrelated thought” when describing empirical 
research that investigated mind-wandering from a content- 
based perspective (i.e., by assessing the contents of thoughts 
in terms of their relationship to an ongoing task or activ­
ity), and the term “spontaneous thought” when describing 
research that assessed the unconstrained nature of thoughts.
References
Addis, D. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2012). The hippocampus 
and imagining the future: Where do we stand? Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 5, 173.
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common
and distinct neural substrates during event construction and 
elaboration. Neuropsychologia, 45, 1363-1377.
Andreasen, N. C., O’Leary, D. S., Cizadlo, T., Arndt, S., Rezai, 
K., Watkins, G. L .,... Hichwa, R. D. (1995). Remembering 
the past: Two facets of episodic memory explored with posi­
tron emission tomography. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
152(11), 1576-1585.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and 
its adaptive role in internal mentation. Neuroscientist, 18(3), 
251-270.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E. J., Reineberg, 
A., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. (2013). A 
penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated 
thought content and relationships with individual differ­
ences in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 900.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, 
R. L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in 
spontaneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104(1), 
322-335.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., & 
Buckner, R. L. (2010). Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network. Neuron, 65(4), 550-562.
Araujo, H. F., Kaplan, J., & Damasio, A. (2013). Cortical 
midline structures and autobiographical-self processes: An 
activation-likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 7, 548.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 
1604-1611.
Benoit, R. G., Gilbert, S. J., & Burgess, P. W. (2011). A neural 
mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospection 
on farsighted decisions. The Journal of Neuroscience, 3/(18), 
6771-6779.
Benoit, R. G., & Schacter, D. L. (2015). Specifying the core net­
work supporting episodic simulation and episodic memory 
by activation likelihood estimation. Neuropsychologia, 75, 
450-457.
Bernhardt, B. C., Smallwood, J., Tusche, A., Ruby, F. J. M., 
Engen, H. G., Steinbeis, N., & Singer, T. (2014). Medial 
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortical thickness predicts 
shared individual differences in self-generated thought and 
temporal discounting. Neuroimage, 90, 290-297.
Berntsen, D. (1996). Involuntary autobiographical memories. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 10, 435-454.
Berntsen, D., & Jacobsen, A. S. (2008). Involuntary (spontane­
ous) mental time travel into the past and future. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 17, 1093-1104.
Brod, G., Werkle-Bergner, M., & Shing, Y. L. (2013). The 
influence of prior knowledge on memory: A developmental 
cognitive neuroscience perspective. Frontiers in Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 7, 139.
Brosch, T., Coppin, G., Schwartz, S., & Sander, D. (2012). The 
importance of actions and the worth of an object: Dissociable 
neural systems representing core value and economic value. 
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7(5), 497—505.
Brown, N. R., & Schopflocher, D. (1998). Event clusters: An 
organization of personal events in autobiographical memory. 
Psychological Science, 9(6), 470-475.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and rel­
evance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1124, 1-38.
188
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  AND S E L F - R E F E R E N T I A L  T H O U G H T

Cabeza, R., & St Jacques, P. (2007). Functional neuroimaging 
of autobiographical memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
if  (5), 219-227.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences U SA, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17{ 11), 718-731. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrn.2016.113
Cole, S. N., & Berntsen, D. (2016). Do future thoughts reflect 
personal goals? Current concerns and mental time travel into 
the past and future. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 69(2), 273-284.
Cole, S. N., Staugaard, S. R., & Berntsen, D. (2016). Inducing 
involuntary and voluntary mental time travel using a labora­
tory paradigm. Memory & Cognition, 44(6), 376—389.
Conway, M. A. (2005). Memory and the self. Journal of Memory 
and Language, 53, 594-628.
Conway, M. A., Dewhurst, S. A., Pearson, N., & Sapute, A. 
(2001). The self and recollection reconsidered: how a “failure to 
replicate” failed and why trace strength accounts of recollection 
are untenable. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15(6), 673-686.
D’Argembeau, A. (2012). Autobiographical memory and 
future thinking. In D. Berntsen & D. C. Rubin (Eds.), 
Understanding autobiographical memory: Theories and
approaches 
(pp. 
311-330). 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge
University Press.
D’Argembeau, A. (2013). On the role of the ventromedial pre­
frontal cortex in self-processing: The valuation hypothesis. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 372.
D’Argembeau, A., Cassol, H., Phillips, C., Balteau, E., Salmon, 
E., & Van der Linden, M. (2014). Brains creating stories of 
selves: The neural basis of autobiographical reasoning. Social 
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9, 646—652.
D’Argembeau, A., Collette, F., Van der Linden, M., Laureys, S., 
Del Fiore, G., Degueldre, C., . . . Salmon, E. (2005). Self- 
referential reflective activity and its relationship with rest: A 
PET study. Neuroimage, 25(2), 616-624.
D’Argembeau, A., & Demblon, J. (2012). On the representa­
tional systems underlying prospection: Evidence from the 
event-cueing paradigm. Cognition, 125(2), 160-167.
D’Argembeau, A., Jedidi, H., Balteau, E., Bahri, M., Phillips, C., 
& Salmon, E. (2012). Valuing one’s self: Medial prefrontal 
involvement in epistemic and emotive investments in self­
views. Cerebral Cortex, 22(3), 659-667.
D’Argembeau, A., & Mathy, A. (2011). Tracking the construc­
tion of episodic future thoughts. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 140, 258-271.
D’Argembeau, A., Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Collette, F., Van 
der Linden, M., Feyers, D.,. ..  Salmon, E. (2010). The neu­
ral basis of personal goal processing when envisioning future 
events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(8), 1701—1713.
D’Argembeau, A., & Van der Linden, M. (2004). Phenomenal 
characteristics associated with projecting oneself back into 
the past and forward into the future: Influence of valence 
and temporal distance. Consciousness and Cognition, 13(4), 
844-858.
Demblon, J., Bahri, M. A., & D’Argembeau, A. (2016). Neural 
correlates of event clusters in past and future thoughts: How
the brain integrates specific episodes with autobiographical 
knowledge. Neuroimage, 127, 257—266.
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). A frame­
work for understanding the relationship between externally 
and internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 62, 
321-330.
Finnbogadottir, H., & Berntsen, D. (2013). Involuntary future 
projections are as frequent as involuntary memories, but 
more positive. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 272—280.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Gerlach, K. D., Spreng, R. N., Madore, K. P, & Schacter, D. L. 
(2014). Future planning: Default network activity couples 
with frontoparietal control network and reward-processing 
regions during process and outcome simulations. Social 
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(12), 1942—1951.
Habermas, T., & Bluck, S. (2000). Getting a life: The emergence 
of the life story in adolescence. Psychological Bulletin, 126(5), 
748-769.
Hall, S. A., Rubin, D. C., Miles, A., Davis, S. W., Wing, E. A., 
Cabeza, R., & Berntsen, D. (2014). The neural basis of invol­
untary episodic memories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
26(10), 2385-2399.
Irish, M., Addis, D. R., Hodges, J. R., & Piguet, O. (2012). 
Considering the role of semantic memory in episodic future 
thinking: Evidence from semantic dementia. Brain, 135(Pt 
7), 2178-2191.
Jenkins, A. C., & Mitchell, J. P. (2011). Medial prefrontal cortex 
subserves diverse forms of self-reflection. Social Neuroscience, 
6(3),211-218.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Mitchell, K. J.,Touryan, S. R., Greene, 
E. J., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2006). Dissociating medial 
frontal and posterior cingulate activity during self-reflection. 
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 2(1), 56-64.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18(7), 614-621.
Kelley, W. M., Macrae, C. N., Wyland, C. L., Caglar, S., Inati, 
S., & Heatherton, T. F. (2002). Finding the self? An event- 
related fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 
785-794.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932.
Kim, H. (2012). A dual-subsystem model of the brain’s default 
network: Self-referential processing, memory retrieval pro­
cesses, and autobiographical memory retrieval. Neuroimage, 
61(4), 966-77.
King, L. A., Scollon, C. K., Ramsey, C., & Williams, T. (2000). 
Stories of life transition: Subjective well-being and ego devel­
opment in parents of children with Down Syndrome. Journal 
of Research in Personality, 34, 509-536.
Klein, S. B., & Gangi, C. E. (2010). The multiplicity of 
self: Neuropsychological evidence and its implications for 
the self as a construct in psychological research. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 1191, 1—15.
Klinger, E. (2013). Goal Commitments and the content of 
thoughts and dreams: basic principles. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4 ,4 15.
ARNA UD D AR GE MB E A U
189

Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 7, 
105-128.
Kroes, M. C. W., & Fernandez, G. (2012). Dynamic neural sys­
tems enable adaptive, flexible memories. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(7), 1646-1666.
Levy, D. J., & Glimcher, P. W. (2012). The root of all value: A 
neural common currency for choice. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 22(6), 1027-38.
Lilgendahl, J. P., & McAdams, D. P. (2011). Constructing sto­
ries of self-growth: How individual differences in patterns of 
autobiographical reasoning relate to well-being in midlife. 
Journal of Personality, 79, 391-428.
Lin, H., & Epstein, L. H. (2014). Living in the moment: Effects 
of time perspective and emotional valence of episodic 
thinking on delay discounting. Behavioral Neuroscience, 
128(1), 12-19.
Macrae, C. N., Moran, J. M., Heatherton, T. F., Banfield, J. F., 
& Kelley, W. M. (2004). Medial prefrontal activity predicts 
memory for self. Cerebral Cortex, 14(6), 647—654.
Markus, H., & Wurf, E. (1987). The dynamic self-concept: A 
social psychological perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 
38, 299-337.
Martinelli, P, Sperduti, M., & Piolino, P (2013). Neural sub­
strates of the self-memory system: New insights from a meta­
analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 34(7), 1515-1529.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315(5810), 393-395.
McAdams, D. P (2001). The psychology of life stories. Review of 
General Psychology, 5, 100-122.
McDermott, K. B., Szpunar, K. K., & Christ, S. E. (2009). 
Laboratory-based and autobiographical retrieval tasks dif­
fer substantially in their neural substrates. Neuropsychologia,
47( 11), 2290-2298.
McLean, K. C., & Pratt, M. W. (2006). Life’s little (and big) 
lessons: Identity statuses and meaning-making in the turn­
ing point narratives of emerging adults. Developmental 
Psychology, 42(A), 714-722.
Medea, B., Karapanagiotidis, T., Konishi, M., Ottaviani, C., 
Margulies, D., Bernasconi, A., . . . Smallwood, J. (2016). 
How do we decide what to do? Resting-state connectiv­
ity patterns and components of self-generated thought 
linked to the development of more concrete personal goals. 
Experimental Brain Research, 1—13.
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 931.
Murray, R. J., Schaer, M., & Debbane, M. (2012). Degrees of 
separation: A quantitative neuroimaging meta-analysis inves­
tigating self-specificity and shared neural activation between 
self- and other-reflection. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 36(3), 1043-59.
Peters, J., & Buchel, C. (2010a). Episodic future thinking 
reduces reward delay discounting through an enhancement 
of prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions. Neuron, 66(1), 
138-148.
Peters, J., & Buchel, C. (2010b). Neural representations of sub­
jective reward value. Behavioural Brain Research, 213(2), 
135-141.
Philippi, C. L., Duff, M. C., Denburg, N. L., Tranel, D., & 
Rudrauf, D. (2012). Medial PFC damage abolishes the
self-reference effect. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(2), 
475-481.
Philippi, C. L., Tranel, D., Duff, M., & Rudrauf, D. (2015). 
Damage to the default mode network disrupts autobio­
graphical memory retrieval. Social Cognitive and Affective 
Neuroscience, 10(3), 318-326.
Prebble, S. C., Addis, D. R., & Tippett, L. J. (2013). 
Autobiographical memory and sense of self. Psychological 
Bulletin, 139, 815-840.
Preston, A. R., & Eichenbaum, H. (2013). Interplay of hippo­
campus and prefrontal cortex in memory. Current Biology, 
23(17), R764-R773.
Qin, P, & Northoff, G. (2011). How is our self related to mid­
line regions and the default-mode network? Neuroimage, 
57(3), 1221-1233.
Raffard, S., D’Argembeau, A., Lardi, C., Bayard, S., Boulenger, 
J. P, & Van der Linden, M. (2010). Narrative identity 
in schizophrenia. Consciousness and Cognition, 19(1), 
328-340.
Rangel, A., & Hare, T. (2010). Neural computations associated 
with goal-directed choice. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
20(2), 262-270.
Renoult, L., Davidson, P. S., Palombo, D. J., Moscovitch, M., & 
Levine, B. (2012). Personal semantics: At the crossroads of 
semantic and episodic memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
16(11), 550-558.
Roy, M., Shohamy, D., & Wager, T. D. (2012). Ventromedial 
prefrontal-subcortical systems and the generation of affective 
meaning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(3), 147—156.
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. 
(2013). How self-generated thought shapes mood: The 
relation between mind-wandering and mood depends 
on the socio-temporal content of thoughts. PLoS ONE, 
8( 10),e77554.
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Sackur, J., & Singer, T. (2013). 
Is self-generated thought a means of social problem solving? 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 962.
Schacter, D. L. (2012). Adaptive constructive processes and the 
future of memory. American Psychologist, 67(8), 603—13.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2008). Episodic 
simulation of future events: concepts, data, and applications. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 39—60.
Sescousse, G., Caldu, X., Segura, B., & Dreher, J. C. (2013). 
Processing of primary and secondary rewards: A quantitative 
meta-analysis and review of human functional neuroimag­
ing studies. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(A), 
681-696.
Singer, J. A., Blagov, R, Berry, M., & Oost, K. M. (2013). Self­
defining memories, scripts, and the life story: Narrative iden­
tity in personality and psychotherapy. Journal of Personality, 
81(6), 569-582.
Singer, J. A., Rexhaj, B., & Baddeley, J. (2007). Older, wiser, and 
happier? Comparing older adults’ and college students’ self­
defining memories. Memory, 75(8), 886—898.
Singer, J. L. (1998). Daydreams, the stream of consciousness, 
and self-representations. In R. F. Bornstein & J. M. Masling 
(Eds.), Empirical perspectives on the psychoanalytic unconscious 
(pp. 141—186). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Smallwood, J., Nind, L., & O ’Connor, R. C. (2009). When is 
your head at? An exploration of the factors associated with 
the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 18(1), 118-125.
190
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  AND S E L F - R E F E R E N T I A L  T H O U G H T

Smallwood, J., Ruby, F. J. M., & Singer, T. (2013). Letting 
go of the present: Mind-wandering is associated with 
reduced delay discounting. Consciousness and Cognition, 
22( 1) ,  1- 7.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 946-958.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66( 1), 487—518.
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. J., 
Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and the 
temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20(4), 1120-1126.
Song, X., & Wang, X. (2012). Mind wandering in Chinese 
daily lives: An experience sampling study. PLoS ONE, 7(9), 
e44423.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009). The common neu­
ral basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, 
theory of mind, and the default mode: A quantitative meta­
analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 489—510.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. R, Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. Neuroimage, 53(1), 303-317.
Stawarczyk, D., Cassol, H., & D’Argembeau, A. (2013). 
Phenomenology of future-oriented mind-wandering epi­
sodes. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 425.
Stawarczyk, D., & D’Argembeau, A. (2015). Neural correlates 
of personal goal processing during episodic future thinking 
and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36(8), 2928-2947.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., Van der Linden, 
M., & D’Argembeau, A. (2011). Mind-wandering: 
Phenomenology and function as assessed with a novel
experience sampling method. Acta Psychologica, 136, 
370-381.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P, & D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLoS ONE, 6(2), 
el6997.
Sui, J., & Humphreys, G. W. (2015). The integrative self: How 
self-reference integrates perception and memory. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 19(12), 719-728.
Svoboda, E., McKinnon, M. C., & Levine, B. (2006). The func­
tional neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: A meta­
analysis. Neuropsychologia, 44( 12), 2189-2208.
Szpunar, K. K. (2010). Episodic future thought: An emerging 
concept. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 142—162.
Szpunar, K. K., Watson, J. M., & McDermott, K. B. (2007). 
Neural substrates of envisioning the future. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences U SA, 104(2), 642-647.
van der Meer, L., Costafreda, S., Aleman, A., & David, A. S. 
(2010). Self-reflection and the brain: A theoretical review 
and meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies with implications 
for schizophrenia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
34(6), 935-946.
van Kesteren, M. T. R., Ruiter, D. J., Fernandez, G., & Henson, 
R. N. (2012). How schema and novelty augment memory 
formation. Trends in Neurosciences, 35(4), 211—219.
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Moran, J. M., Nieto-Castanon, A., 
Triantafyllou, C., Saxe, R., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2011). 
Associations and dissociations between default and self­
reference networks in the human brain. Neuroimage, 55(1), 
225-232.
Zysset, S., Huber, O., Ferstl, E., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2002). 
The anterior frontomedian cortex and evaluative judg­
ment: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 15(4), 983-991.
191
ARNA UD D AR GE MB E A U


C H A P T E R
16
Phenomenological Properties of 
Mind-Wandering and Daydreaming: 
A Historical Overview and Functional 
Correlates
David Stawarczyk
Abstract
Mind-wandering and daydreams (i.e., spontaneous thoughts that are both task-unrelated and decoupled 
from current sensory perceptions) have recently become the object of increased interest in cognitive 
psychology and neuroscience. To date, however, there have been relatively few attempts at investigating 
the form and content of these thoughts, and what individuals are exactly thinking about when they 
daydream or their minds wander from the here and now. This chapter provides a historical overview of 
the studies that have investigated the phenomenological properties of mind-wandering and daydreams.
It reviews the current state of research, examining how specific phenomenological features of these 
thoughts are related to beneficial and deleterious aspects of cognitive and affective functioning. It 
concludes by discussing possible avenues for future investigations, such as how the content and context 
of occurrence of mind-wandering and daydreams might interact to determine their functional outcomes.
Key Words: mind-wandering, daydreams, phenomenology, cognitive psychology, affect
Although the beginning of experimental research 
on mind-wandering and daydreaming can be traced 
back to the spreading of cognitive psychology dur­
ing the early 1960s (for seminal works on this topic, 
see Antrobus, Singer, & Greenberg, 1966; Singer, 
1966; Singer & McCraven, 1961), there has been a 
surprisingly low number of studies investigating the 
phenomenological features and content of these par­
ticular kinds of spontaneous cognition. One of the 
first things that one may indeed reasonably wonder 
when hearing for the first time of mind-wandering 
or daydreaming is, “What are people thinking 
about when their minds drift away from the here 
and now and engage in spontaneous cognitions?” 
Are people thinking of dreamlike and chimeric 
contents, as illustrated by the idiomatic expression 
“building castles in Spain,” or are their thoughts 
more closely related to their everyday activities and
to the achievement of short-term personal goals? 
From there, one may also wonder whether there is 
some kind of regularity between individuals in the 
content of mind-wandering and daydreams. For 
instance, do people tend to think of similar topics 
when their minds wander, or has each individual his 
own pattern of thoughts during this type of spon­
taneous cognition? Finally, a last important ques­
tion might be how the phenomenological features 
of mind-wandering and daydreaming are related to 
other variables outside the domain of spontaneous 
thought. In other words, can the form and content 
of daydreams and mind-wandering episodes predict 
the degree to which these thoughts are associated 
with functional or deleterious aspects of individuals’ 
daily cognitive functioning?
The aim of the present chapter will be to discuss 
and answer the preceding questions in two different
193

sections. In the first section, I will focus on the phe­
nomenological structure of mind-wandering and 
daydreams. I will do so by providing a historical per­
spective of the studies that have investigated the form 
and content of these two kinds of spontaneous cogni­
tion. I will begin by reviewing the early questionnaire 
studies that assessed the features of daydreams, and 
then the more recent experience-sampling research 
on mind-wandering. In the second section, I will 
center my attention on the few studies that have 
examined how some phenomenological features of 
mind-wandering and daydreams are related to ben­
eficial and deleterious aspects of cognitive and affec­
tive functioning outside their direct impact on task 
performance. Finally, I will conclude this chapter 
with a brief summary of the current state of research 
on the phenomenology of mind-wandering and day­
dreams and the possible avenues that could be inter­
esting to investigate for future research.
Phenomenological Structure 
of Mind-Wandering and Daydreaming
In the general population, there is a common 
lay-belief that daydreams and mind-wandering 
episodes are mostly fleeting thoughts about ran­
dom topics with no particular personal meaning. 
For instance, many influential thinkers throughout 
history, such as Plato, Blaise Pascal, and Sigmund 
Freud, have argued that daydreams and other kinds 
of spontaneous thoughts are mostly fanciful and are 
distinct from reality, and therefore should be disre­
garded in favor of more deliberate and controlled 
forms of cognition (Klinger, 1990). Can mind­
wandering and daydreams truly be considered as 
pointless or futile thoughts, however? On the one 
hand, if these two forms of spontaneous cogni­
tion represent nothing more than “psychological 
noise” that disturbs individuals from their current 
task at hand, then no consistent phenomenologi­
cal structure should emerge from the investigation 
of the content and form of these thoughts. On the 
other hand, if mind-wandering and daydreams are 
the product of a well-defined cognitive and neu­
ral system, and if this particular kind of thoughts 
plays a role in several important aspects of our 
daily cognitive functioning, such as planning (e.g., 
Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maj, Van der Linden, & D ’Argembeau,
2011), the generation of creative ideas (e.g., Baird 
et al., 2012), prospective memory (e.g., Mason & 
Reinholtz, 2015), or the regulation of mood and 
emotions (e.g., Engert, Smallwood, & Singer, 2014; 
Mar, Mason, & Litvack, 2012; Ruby, Smallwood,
Engen, & Singer, 2013), then it is likely that these 
two types of spontaneous cognition might represent 
a more phenomenologically structured phenom­
enon than what might be initially assumed.
Questionnaire Studies on the Features 
of Daydreams
One of the first published studies that examined 
the regularities that exist across individuals in the 
content of spontaneous thoughts was conducted 
by Singer and McCraven (1961). In this study, the 
authors asked a large sample o f240 college students 
to rate the frequency with which they experience in 
their everyday life a list of 93 specific examples of 
potential daydreams. Their main finding was that 
the most frequently endorsed instances of daydreams 
were those related to future practical concerns dur­
ing social situations (e.g., thinking about work that 
needed to be done in the following weeks), rather 
than those related to fanciful or wish-fulfilling ide­
ation (e.g., thinking about inheriting an important 
sum of money). Although a limitation of this study 
is that the authors solely computed frequency esti­
mates and did not use more advanced statistical 
techniques such as factor analyses to obtain their 
results, this research can still be considered as a piv­
otal study in the domain of spontaneous thought 
because it was one of the first to suggest that day­
dreams may possess common phenomenological 
features across individuals, including a future tem­
poral orientation and a relationship with short-term 
personal concerns in interpersonal situations.
Capitalizing on these results, the authors then 
created a more exhaustive questionnaire, the 
Imaginal Process Inventory (IPI; Singer & Antrobus, 
1970), designed to assess the general dimensions 
of private mental experiences in daily life, rather 
than specifically the features of daydreams and 
spontaneous thoughts. This 344-item question­
naire comprises 28 subscales that investigate vari­
ous factors related to the individuals inner mental 
life, such as night dreaming, distractibility, need 
for external stimulations, or boredom tendency, in 
addition to daydreaming-related dimensions, such 
as the frequency of these thoughts, their temporal 
orientation, their visual and auditory nature, or the 
positive and negative emotional reactions that indi­
viduals experience with their occurrence. Across dif­
ferent studies, the authors computed several factor 
analyses on the scale scores of the IPI and consis­
tently found three second-order factors (e.g., Huba, 
Segal, & Singer, 1977; Singer & Antrobus, 1972; 
Starker, 1973, 1974), leading them to develop a
194
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T IE S OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

short 45-item version of the IPI, the Short Imaginal 
Process Inventory, specifically designed to assess 
these three general dimensions of inner men­
tal life (SIPI; Huba, Aneshensel, & Singer, 1981; 
Huba, Singer, Aneshensel, & Antrobus, 1982). 
Interestingly, the first of these factors was named 
positive-constructive daydream ing and is character­
ized by vivid daydreams oriented toward the future 
and problem-solving, and more generally with atti­
tudes consisting of acceptance and positive reactions 
to daydreams. The second factor was guilty-dysphoric 
daydreams and mainly consists of hostile, fearful, 
and guilty daydreams associated with stressful and 
negative emotional reactions. Finally, the last fac­
tor was termed poor attentional control and reflects 
a general tendency toward boredom and distract- 
ibility associated with fleeting thoughts. Although 
the IPI and SIPI departed from the specific inves­
tigation of the content and features of spontaneous 
thoughts, their factorial structure nonetheless rep­
licated the initial finding by Singer and McCraven 
(1961) that an important qualitative feature of day­
dreaming might be a future temporal orientation 
associated with problem-solving processes.
One of the most extensive investigations of the 
phenomenological features of daydreams with the 
IPI was conducted by Leonard Giambra with the aim 
of clarifying the changes that occur in daydreaming 
and inner mental life across the life span (Giambra, 
1999a, 1999b, 2000). For approximately 25 years, 
starting in the early 1970s, Giambra administered 
the full IPI to a large sample of more than 3,000 
participants before examining and contrasting how 
scores on various groups of subscales vary with age. 
A first set of investigations focused on daydreaming 
frequency and the three different subscales assess­
ing the present, past, and future temporal orienta­
tion of daydreams (Giambra, 1999b). Results of 
these analyses first revealed the now well-accepted 
finding that the tendency to experience daydreams 
generally decreases with increasing age (for a recent 
review on this topic, see Maillet & Schacter, 2015). 
Giambra further showed that future-oriented day­
dreams were generally more prominent across age 
groups than past and present daydreams, but that 
this effect decreased with aging. More precisely, the 
future orientation was significantly greater than the 
past and present orientations from the youngest 
age group (17-24 years); but by 45-54 years and 
65-74 years, the differences for present and past, 
respectively, had become non-significant. It is only 
in the oldest age group (75-84 years) that scores 
for past and present daydreams became higher than
those for future daydreams. This first set of results 
suggests that daydreaming is mostly future-oriented 
and that the predominance of this temporal orien­
tation remains relatively stable with increasing age, 
except for the oldest groups of individuals.
Giambra also examined whether daydreams tend 
to occur more consistently in the form of visual than 
auditory imagery (i.e., imagining sounds other than 
one’s own voice, such as tunes or voices of acquain­
tances). He found that scores on the visual imag­
ery subscale were consistently higher than those for 
auditory imagery across all age groups and that both 
forms of imagery generally declined with increasing 
age. In accordance with the finding that the vivid­
ness of daydreams might be lower in older adults, 
he also found in a second set of results that scores 
on the absorption in daydreams and hallucinatory 
vividness of daydreams subscales strongly decreased 
with age (Giambra, 1999a). Finally, in a third set 
of analyses (Giambra, 2000), he showed that scores 
on the problem-solving subscale of daydreams were 
generally much higher than on other subscales 
assessing the content of daydreams, including hos­
tile, fear of failure, heroic, sexual, guilt, bizarre- 
improbable, and achievement-oriented daydreams. 
Furthermore, scores on the problem-solving sub­
scale remained relatively stable across age groups, 
whereas scores for most of the other content sub­
scales showed moderate to high decline with aging. 
Overall, these results confirm those of Singer and 
McCraven (1961) and the studies that investigated 
the factorial structure of the IPI/SIPI by showing 
the importance of future-oriented and problem­
solving daydreams.
Unfortunately, following the creation of the 
IPI and SIPI, no clear and elaborated attempts 
were made to further develop retrospective tools 
designed to assess the occurrence and character­
istics of spontaneous thoughts in daily life and, 
at present, these two questionnaires are still the 
only self-rating scales available to assess the gen­
eral features of daydreams, mind-wandering, and 
inner mental life of healthy individuals. Several 
questionnaires have recently been created to ret­
rospectively assess the features of inner thoughts 
occurring during functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), and more particularly follow­
ing resting state periods (e.g., Delamillieure 
et al., 2010; Diaz et al., 2013; Diaz et al., 2014; 
Gorgolewski et al., 2014); however, the use of 
these scales is still in its infancy, and further stud­
ies are still required to clearly assess their valid­
ity and factorial structure. Be that as it may, the
DAVID STAWARCZYK
195

initial attempts to determine the phenomenologi­
cal structure of daydreaming with the use of ret­
rospective self-rating scales, such as the IPI and 
SIPI, still remain significant today because they 
revealed the important findings that (1) day­
dreams and more generally spontaneous thoughts 
might be reducible to a limited number of impor­
tant dimensions that are common across individu­
als, and (2) the fancifulness/wish-fulfilling aspects 
of spontaneous thoughts might not be as prepon­
derant as argued by early influential thinkers.
Early Experience Sampling Studies of Mind- 
Wandering and Thought Content
Surprisingly, following the preliminary investiga­
tions with retrospective questionnaires of everyday 
life experiences, very few studies attempted to further 
examine in detail the content and phenomenologi­
cal features of mind-wandering and daydreams for 
several decades. Although the IPI and SIPI provided 
some important findings, their main limitation is that 
they completely rely on long-term memory processes 
from daily life experiences, and it has been ques­
tioned whether individuals are truly able to give an 
accurate evaluation of their spontaneous thought pat­
terns over such extended time periods (Singer, 1993,
2003). To address this concern, researchers gradually 
started to rely more and more on online experience 
sampling of mind-wandering during laboratory tasks 
with methods such as thought-probes to minimize 
dependency on memory processes. This method­
ological switch in the study of spontaneous thoughts 
was, however, also accompanied by an impoverish­
ment of the phenomenological dimensions of mind­
wandering that were investigated. Until recently, 
most of the studies that used online experience sam­
pling indeed solely focused on the mere presence of 
spontaneous thoughts, with thought-probes consist­
ing of dichotomous questions simply asking whether 
individuals were mind-wandering or not during the 
task just prior to their appearance. The aims of these 
studies also departed from the idea of describing the 
general phenomenological structure of spontane­
ous thoughts; their main focus was rather to inves­
tigate how contextual factors, such as task demands 
and complexity, can influence either the frequency 
of mind-wandering episodes or the extent to which 
these episodes negatively impact task performance 
(for reviews on this topic, see Randall, Oswald, & 
Beier, 2014; Smallwood, Fishman, & Schooler, 
2007; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006).
Some early studies using thought-probes none­
theless 
attempted 
to 
investigate 
spontaneous
thoughts beyond their mere presence or absence, 
but in these cases the authors did not examine in 
depth the content and form of mind-wandering epi­
sodes; rather, they mostly focused on a single phe­
nomenological dimension of these thoughts, such 
as their representational format (e.g., inner speech 
versus visual imagery; Antrobus, Singer, Goldstein, 
& Fortgang, 1970; Antrobus et al., 1966), the 
intentionality of their occurrence (Forster & Lavie, 
2009; Giambra, 1995), or their structuration in 
complex sequences of thoughts (Stuyven & Van der 
Goten, 1995; Teasdale, Proctor, Lloyd, & Baddeley,
1993). Although these studies greatly advanced 
the understanding of some important aspects of 
mind-wandering, such as how these thoughts might 
depend on the same cognitive resources as those 
required for task performance (e.g., Smallwood, 
2013; Thomson, Besner, & Smilek, 2015), for most 
of this time no clear advances were made to answer 
the important question of what individuals are actu­
ally thinking about when their minds wander from 
the here and now.
A notable exception to the general decrease of 
interest of early experience-sampling studies in 
thought content is the research conducted by Klinger 
and Cox (1987), who examined the dimensions of 
thought flow in everyday like. These authors asked 
their participants to report the content of their lat­
est thoughts (i.e., not only spontaneous but all kinds 
of thoughts) when randomly probed with a beeper 
in their daily life and to rate them on a wide variety 
of phenomenological dimensions including, among 
others, vividness, fancifulness, improbability, control­
lability, or deliberateness. During a mean of four and 
a half days, 29 participants reported and rated a total 
of 1,425 thoughts. These thoughts were then submit­
ted to a within-individuals factor analysis to assess 
how their phenomenological features related to each 
other when mean inter-individual differences on each 
dimension were controlled for. The detailed results of 
this study are reported elsewhere (e.g., Klinger, 1990,
2009), but one of the most interesting findings was 
that the dimensions related to (1) the fancifulness 
of the thoughts and (2) directedness/deliberateness 
loaded on orthogonal factors. These results indicate 
that the spontaneous nature of the thoughts is unre­
lated to the degree to which their content departs 
from reality. These findings thus argue against the 
proposal that daydreams and mind-wandering are 
mostly chimerical wish-fulfilling ideations by demon­
strating that the approximately 10% of thoughts rated 
as mostly fanciful in this study are evenly distributed 
between spontaneous and directed thoughts.
196
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T IE S OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

The Prospective Bias of Mind-Wandering
Although the study by Klinger and Cox (1987) 
reported some interesting findings on the relation­
ship between the phenomenological dimensions of 
thought flow, it did not offer detailed answers to the 
question of what people are exactly thinking about 
when they experience spontaneous cognitions. It is 
only in recent years that researchers have started to 
investigate more exhaustively the form and content 
of mind-wandering with online experience-sampling 
procedures. A first important step in this direction 
was made by Smallwood, Nind, and O ’Connor 
(2009), who asked their participants about the pre­
cise temporal orientation of their mind-wandering 
episodes during attentional and reading tasks. Their 
main finding was that mind-wandering sampled 
during task performance is characterized by a pro­
spective bias (i.e., that in most circumstances mind­
wandering is temporally oriented toward the future 
more often than the past; see Table 16.1) and that 
this bias can be reduced by increasing task demands 
during attentional tasks, or by greater interest and 
more prior experience with the topic of the text 
during reading tasks. These findings can be directly 
related to the previously mentioned questionnaire 
studies, which showed that future orientation is 
an important dimension of daydreams and are 
consistent with the idea that the content of mind­
wandering episodes and daydreams might possess 
common properties across individuals.
A direct follow-up of the study by Smallwood 
et al. (2009) was made in our lab, with the aim of 
gaining a more complete view of what characterizes 
the prospective bias of mind-wandering (Stawarczyk 
et al., 2011). More specifically, we asked participants 
to write a short description of each mind-wandering 
episode that they reported to thought-probes during a 
laboratory attentional task, the Sustained Attention to 
Response Task (SART; Robertson, Manly, Andrade, 
Baddeley, & Yiend, 1997). At the end of this task, 
our participants were further requested to rate 
each of their reported thoughts on a variant of the 
Memory Characteristics Questionnaire adapted for 
mind-wandering studies (a questionnaire the original 
purpose of which is to investigate the phenomenolog­
ical properties of episodic memories; Johnson, Foley, 
Suengas, & Raye, 1988). Importantly, besides tempo­
ral orientation, we also asked our participants to deter­
mine the possible functions of their mind-wandering 
episodes and how distant from the here and now were 
the events referred to in their thoughts. Our findings 
replicated the prospective bias of mind-wandering by 
showing that approximately half of reported episodes
were directed toward the future, with the other half 
being evenly distributed between past, present, and 
atemporal episodes (see Table 16.1). Furthermore, 
our findings also revealed that most mind-wandering 
episodes were given personal goal-oriented functions, 
such as planning (35%), decision-making (8%), and 
the appraisal of events (10%), in comparison to hav­
ing no function (29%) or non-personal goal-oriented 
functions, such as self-entertainment (7%) or trying 
to maintain arousal (8%). Finally, we also found that 
most future-oriented episodes were about upcom­
ing events within a short temporal distance from the 
present moment, with 79% of these thoughts being 
about events happening later in the same day or in the 
next seven days. Together, these results confirm the 
prospective bias of mind-wandering and further indi­
cate that these thoughts are mostly directed toward 
planning and preparing for upcoming events in the 
near future.
Following the studies by Smallwood et al. 
(2009) and Stawarczyk et al. (2011), there has been 
an exponential number of studies further assess­
ing the prospective bias of mind-wandering (see 
Table 16.1 for a detailed list of the recent studies 
that have investigated the temporal orientations 
of mind-wandering episodes). For instance, Baird 
et al. (2011), also demonstrated that most mind­
wandering episodes are future-oriented, and further 
showed that these future episodes are specifically 
characterized by a combination of goal- and self- 
directed contents compared to past, present, and 
atemporal episodes, suggesting that the content of 
future-oriented mind-wandering mainly consists in 
autobiographical planning. Smallwood et al. (2011) 
also demonstrated the importance of self-related 
processes during future-oriented mind-wandering 
by showing that the prospective bias of these 
thoughts could be increased by asking participants 
to reflect on their own personality traits before the 
experience-sampling period. Jackson, Weinstein, 
and Balota (2013) showed that the prospective bias 
of mind-wandering sampled during task perfor­
mance is still present in older adults, although it is 
reduced when allowing participants to report atem­
poral episodes. Ye, Song, Zhang, and Wang (2014) 
demonstrated that future-oriented episodes are 
already the most prevalent kind of mind-wandering 
in 10-year-old Chinese children. Iijima and Tanno
(2012) showed that the prospective bias of mind­
wandering is also present in Japanese participants 
and replicated the finding that this bias is reduced 
with increasing task difficulty. Finally, several 
studies demonstrated that the prospective bias of
DAVID STAWARCZYK
197

ral Orientation of Mind-Wandering and Daydreams
Prospective
Bias
Future
Past
Present
Atemporal
Task
Assessment
Method
Parti
>006)
NO
31 (28)
32 (28)
/
/
Rest during fMRI
Retrospective rating on an
12 (v
NO
5(15)
1 (3)
/
/
WM during fMRI
analog scale
desig
il.,
7b)
NO
26%
23%
/
10%
Rest during fMRI
Retrospective interview
19
l et al., 
Y 1
YES
.33 (.02)
.23 (.02)
/
/
Rest, CRT, and 
WM
Thought-probes
76 (v
desig
l et al.,
YES
.27 (.03)
.20 (.03)
/
/
WM
Thought-probes
77 (v
desig
yi
NO
.10 (01)
.09 (02)
/
/
Reading
, 2010)
YES
63.4%
36.6%
/
/
Vigilance (forward 
vection)
Retrospective rating on an 
analog scale
25 (b 
desig
NO
40.03%
59.07%
/
/
Vigilance (backward 
vection)
lanna
)
YES
28.7%
19.2%
/
15%
Rest during fMRI
Retrospective questionnaire
139
: et al.,
YES
59%
14%
17%
11%
SART preceded 
by personal goal 
priming
Thought-probes and 
retrospective questionnaire
46 (b
desig
YES
41%
25%
19%
15%
SART preceded by 
mental navigation
, 2011)
YES
48%
12%
28%
11%
CRT
Thought-probes
47
l et al.,
YES
.32 (03)
.20 (.02)
/
/
CRT and WM 
preceded by self­
reflection tasks
Thought-probes
68 (n
1
3r,
V 2
YES
1.7 (.15)
.92 (.23)
/
1.58
CRT preceded by 
mood induction 
procedures
Thought-probes
82 (b
desig

anno,
YES
.33 (.03)
.23 (.03)
/
/
Zero-back WM
Thought-probes
31 (v 
desig
NO
.20 (.03)
.30 (.05)
/
/
One-back WM
NO
.09 (.03)
.11 (.03)
/
/
Two-back WM
YES
41.3%
28.8%
/
/
Daily life
Retrospective evaluation 
(proportion of participants 
responding “always” or 
“frequently” when asked if 
their daydreams are about 
the past of the future)
17,5?
Kane,
YES
.26 (.27)
.10 (.18)
/
/
Reading
Thought-probes
242
YES
.33 (.36)
.17 (.29)
/
/
Reading
YES
.22 (.23)
.11 (.17)
/
/
Stroop
NO
.18 (.25)
.17 (.26)
/
/
SART
ang,
YES
40.53%
21.53%
15.92%
22.02%
Daily life
Thought-probes
165
lanna
1
YES
59.8 % 
(25.4)
40.2%
(25.4)
/
/
Daily life
Retrospective rating of self­
generated thoughts about 
specific events
76
:t al.,
NO
5.04 (2.24)
/
/
Daily life
Retrospective ratings on a 
continuous scale ranging 
from 1 (always past) to 10 
(always future)
200 f
West.
YES
5.85 (2.57)
/
/
200 f
East j
2013)
NO
2.72
2.14
3.43
/
Rest
Retrospective rating on three 
continuous scales ranging 
from 1 (completely disagree) 
to 5 (completely agree)
1,35?
al., 2013)
YES
3.33 (1.34)
2.82 (1.32)
/
/
SART
Self-caught reports
89 (b 
desig
NO
1.36 (2.13)
2 (1.23)
/
3(1.23)

Prospective
Bias
Future
Past 
Present 
Atemporal
Task
Assessment
Method
Part
YES
1.72(1.08)
.83 (.53) 
/
/
SART
Self-caught reports
57 of 
(betw
desigi
NO
1.03(1.34)
.93 (1.32) 
/
1.03 (.07)
al., 2013)
YES
2.72 (.78)
1.38 (.22) 
/
/
SART
Thought-probes
82 (b 
desigi
NO
2.59 (.92)
1.07 (.56) 
/
1.9 (.55)
YES
1.83 (.39)
.67 (.82) 
/
/
SART
Thought-probes
74 of 
(betw 
desigi
NO
1.68 (.78)
.34 (.22) 
/
2.66 (84)
., 2013)
YES
3.7 (2.7)
3.2 (2.9) 
/
/
Rest during fMRI
Retrospective evaluation 
of the number of past and 
future thoughts
24 yo
YES
2.8 (2.2)
2.1 (3) 
/
/
22 m
NO
2.6 (2.6)
2.8 (2.2) 
/
/
17 ag
2013)
YES
3.40 (.24)
/
/
Daily life
Thought-probes and 
continuous scale ranging 
from 1 (distant past) to 5 
(distant future)
24
llwood,
YES
4.45 (.19)
2.72 (.14) 
/
/
CRT
Thought probes and two 
independent scales ranging 
from 1 to 9 to assess past and 
future orientation
84 (w 
desigi
inger,
YES
4 (.23)
2.74 (.13) 
/
/
WM
llwood,
inger,
YES
3.38 (.12)
2.26 (.08) 
/
/
CRT
Thought probes and two 
independent scales ranging 
from 1 to 9 to assess past and 
future orientation
au, 2013)
YES
59%
10% 
20% 
9%
SART preceded by 
stressful concern 
priming
Thought-probes and 
retrospective questionnaire
32 (b 
desigi

YES
52%
32%
10%
6%
SART preceded 
by neutral concern 
priming
Cassol,
Lbeau,
YES
43%
26%
15%
16%
SART
Thought-probes and 
retrospective questionnaire
67
2014)
NO
2.62
2.44
3.74
/
Rest
Retrospective rating on three 
continuous scales ranging 
from 1 (completely disagree) 
to 5 (completely agree)
562
L, 2014)
YES
4.2 (2.7)
3.5 (2.5)
/
/
CRT and WM 
preceded by a stress 
induction procedure
Thought probes and two 
independent scales ranging 
from 1 to 9 to assess past and 
future orientation
99 (v 
desig
YES
4.4 (2.8)
3 (2.3)
/
/
CRT and WM 
preceded by rest
&
2014)
NO
.22 (.30)
.22 (.32)
/
/
Reading
Thought-probes
150
YES
.25 (.02)
.14 (.02)
/
/
CRT
Thought-probes
71 cl 
subje
V 2
YES
26 (.03)
11. (02)
/
/
WM
d., 2015)
YES
50%
10.5%
39.5%
/
Daily life (driving)
Retrospective questionnaire 
about the participants’ most 
recent driving trip
109
;t al.,
NO
25%
46%
29%
Vigilance with cue 
words
Thought-probes
17 dj
indiv
NO
28%
41%
31%
19 nc
indiv
-Clavertz
1
YES
4.05 (2.91)
2.23 (2.32)
2.31
(2.10)
SART
Thought-probes
111
ses studies that investigated the temporal orientation of mind-wandering and daydreams with tools other than the Imaginal Process Inventory (IPI) or Short Imaginal Process 1
: was performed on healthy young adult participants except when stated otherwise in the Participants column.
time; fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging; SART = sustained attention to response task; WM = working memory.

mind-wandering is not limited to laboratory tasks, 
and that most mind-wandering episodes sampled 
in daily life are also future and goal-oriented (e.g., 
Berthie et al., 2015; Poerio, Totterdell, & Miles, 
2013; Song & Wang, 2012).
Not all studies consistently showed the prospec­
tive bias of mind-wandering, however. For instance, 
and in contrast to a later study (Andrews-Hanna, 
Reidler, Huang, & Buckner, 2010), two early 
studies that retrospectively assessed the content of 
thoughts directly after fMRI did not find a clear 
prevalence of future-oriented mind-wandering epi­
sodes compared to past episodes (Fransson, 2006; 
Mason et al., 2007a, 2007b). Miles, Karpinska, 
Lumsden, and Macrae (2010) found that a retro­
spective rather than a prospective bias of mind­
wandering could be induced when performing a 
vigilance task involving backward rather than for­
ward illusions of self-motion. Contrary to most 
other studies, McVay and colleagues (McVay & 
Kane, 2012; McVay, Unsworth, McMillan, & 
Kane, 2013) found the presence of a prospective 
bias of mind-wandering during reading tasks, but 
not during a less demanding attentional go/no-go 
task. On the basis of a retrospective evaluation of 
daily life thoughts, Christian, Miles, Parkinson, and 
Macrae (2013) found that the prospective bias of 
mind-wandering is more prominent in participants 
from Eastern Asian than Western cultures. Finally, 
Plimpton, Patel, and Kvavilashvili (2015) included 
irrelevant cue words during a vigilance task and 
found a retrospective rather than prospective bias 
to mind-wandering. Although these studies indi­
cate that further investigations remain to be done 
to clearly determine the circumstances that influ­
ence our minds tendency to wander toward the 
future, they nonetheless represent a minority of the 
literature. To date, the vast majority of experience­
sampling research converges on the finding that, 
whenever individuals experience mind-wandering, 
there is a higher probability that the focus of their 
thoughts will be directed at planning and preparing 
for upcoming events rather than remembering past 
memories.
Mind- Wandering and Personal Goals
In parallel to the studies on temporal orienta­
tion, a more indirect yet complementary way in 
which the prospective bias of mind-wandering has 
been investigated is by examining the relationship 
between these thoughts and personal-goals/future- 
related concerns. In an initial study involving US 
college students, Antrobus et al. (1966) played a
fake alarming radio broadcast about the entry of 
the Chinese Communists into the war in Vietnam 
going on at the time. They found that participants 
who heard the broadcast reported more mind­
wandering during a subsequent vigilance task in 
comparison to a control group who solely heard 
tape-recorded music before the task. A qualitative 
analysis of the content of thoughts reported by the 
participants in the experimental group showed that 
many mind-wandering episodes were directed at 
dealing with the induced concerns, consisting, for 
instance, in reflections about how a possible draft: in 
the US army would affect their personal future. The 
authors interpreted these findings in the sense that 
an important function of spontaneous thoughts 
might be to help individuals to adjust their con­
ceptual model of the future when presented with 
contradicting information that forces them to revise 
their system of relationship with the environment.
A few years later, Klinger (1978) used a differ­
ent approach, asking his participants to describe 
their personal goals in a first experimental session. 
In a second session, he asked the same participants 
to perform a dichotic listening task in which two 
different sections of the same narrative were played 
in each ear for 15 minutes. Crucially, at different 
time intervals, the two narrations were modified 
to include either words belonging to the partici­
pants’ own personal goals or to the personal goals of 
another participant. A few seconds following these 
modified sections, the narrations were interrupted 
by thought-probes, and the author found that par­
ticipants (1) spent more time listening to the narra­
tion modified to include segments related to their 
personal goals, and (2) had thoughts related to their 
own personal goals more frequently than to the 
other participants’ goals. Klinger interpreted these 
findings in favor of his current concerns theory, which 
proposes that individuals are constantly involved in 
a myriad of personal goals (or current concerns) 
throughout their daily life. Cues related to these 
goals either in the external world or coming from 
the individuals’ own thoughts would be particularly 
effective in capturing attention and, in a situation 
where no behavioral actions can be performed to 
advance toward the achievement of the cued per­
sonal goals (for instance, because of being already 
engaged in another task), the typical response of 
most individuals would be to engage in thoughts 
related to the management of these goals (for more 
detailed discussions of the current concern theory, 
see Klinger, 1971, 1996, 1999, 2009; 2013, and 
also Klinger, Marchetti, & Koster, Chapter 17 in
202
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

this volume). Klinger later extended these findings 
by showing (with retrospective self-rating question­
naires) that the current concerns rated as being most 
important or as requiring actions in the impend­
ing future were the most likely to influence the 
content of thoughts in daily life (Klinger, Barta, & 
Maxeiner, 1980). Similarly, Gold and Reilly (1985) 
asked their participants to describe in a diary the 
content of daydreams experienced in their daily life 
and found that approximately 65% of the reported 
thoughts were about the five most important cur­
rent concerns that the participants listed in an ear­
lier session.
Following these initial studies, several research 
teams have attempted to prime personal goals or 
future-related concerns to influence the content 
and/or frequency of mind-wandering. For instance, 
in our previously mentioned study (Stawarczyk 
et al., 2011), we further asked half of our partici­
pants to write a one-page essay on their most impor­
tant personal goal or to perform a control spatial 
navigation task before performing the SART with 
thought-probes. We found that participants who 
previously reflected on their personal goal subse­
quently reported more temporally and functionally 
future-oriented mind-wandering episodes than par­
ticipants in the control condition. These findings 
were recently replicated by Kopp, D ’Mello, and 
Mills (2015), who showed that participants asked 
to make a “to do list” of their current personal goals 
subsequently reported more mind-wandering dur­
ing a reading task than control participants asked 
to make a list of the features that define a car. In 
the same vein, Masicampo and Baumeister (2011) 
found that writing about two unfulfilled personal 
goals resulted in more mind-wandering directed 
toward these goals in a subsequent reading task, 
but that this effect could be reduced by asking 
participants to detail precise ways to reach these 
goals, rather than simply describing them as well 
as their personal importance. Using a procedure 
slightly similar to the one used by Klinger (1978), 
McVay and Kane (2013) inserted words related to 
participants’ personal goals in a modified version 
of the SART with thought-probes and showed 
that responses to the probes preceded by words 
cuing the participants’ personal goals were more 
likely to consist in mind-wandering reports than 
responses to the probes preceded by words related 
to the goals of other participants. Finally, in another 
study performed in our lab (Stawarczyk, Majerus, 
& D ’Argembeau, 2013), we told our participants a 
cover story falsely informing them that they would
perform either a stressful task (to do a videotaped 
speech about one’s physical appearance) or a neu­
tral task (to do a simple visual planning task) fol­
lowing the SART with thought-probes. We found 
that more than 25% of reported mind-wandering 
episodes in the experimental group were described 
as attempts to prepare for the supposedly subse­
quent task, versus only 2% in the control group. 
Furthermore, participants who reported a higher 
increase in negative affect after being told about the 
stressful speech also reported a higher frequency of 
mind-wandering during the SART, suggesting that 
emotions might play an important role in the asso­
ciation between personal goals/current concerns 
and spontaneous thoughts.
Although the preceding studies suggest that 
personal goals and mind-wandering episodes are 
strongly coupled, results of the studies that simply 
asked individuals to rate on Likert scales the extent 
to which their mind-wandering episodes are related 
to personal goals without using any form of goal­
priming procedures found only moderate associa­
tions between these two variables. For instance, in 
another study where we asked our participants to 
rate the content of each of their mind-wandering 
episodes during the SART with thought-probes 
(Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 2013), we 
found that the mean score for the item asking about 
the strength of the relationship between mind­
wandering and personal goals was slightly below 
the midpoint of the scale (i.e., mildly related to 
personal goals). Similar findings were reported for 
the retrospective evaluation of daily life thoughts 
(Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013) and for the online 
experience sampling of mind-wandering in every­
day life (McVay, Kane, & Kwapil, 2009; Poerio 
et al., 2013), which also found mean self-rating 
scores reflecting only moderate relationships with 
personal goals.
A potential explanation for the lower than 
expected association between mind-wandering epi­
sodes and personal goals outside goal-priming and 
cuing procedures can be related to the results of 
Klinger et al. (1980), who found that highly valuable 
personal goals and those for which actions have to 
be carried out in the close future are the most likely 
to influence thought content. It could therefore be 
that, in experience-sampling studies, most mind­
wandering episodes relate to personal goals that are of 
moderate importance but for which individuals will 
need to take actions in the near future. Although this 
proposal remains to be specifically investigated, it is 
supported by two preliminary lines of evidence: first,
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
203

by the findings that most future-oriented mind­
wandering episodes are related to events supposed to 
happen in the next few days rather than the far future 
(e.g., Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013; Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010; Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 
2013; Stawarczyk et al., 2011); second, by the results 
that mind-wandering episodes related to the future 
not only have higher ratings regarding their relation­
ships with personal goals than those being attrib­
uted other temporal orientations but, additionally, 
that episodes about events happening in the far 
future (i.e., in more than one week) are also more 
strongly associated with personal goals than those 
happening in the near future (Stawarczyk, Cassol, 
& D ’Argembeau, 2013). Together, these results sug­
gest that there could be a valuation trade-off between 
importance and imminence to determine the topic 
of future-related spontaneous thoughts, poten­
tially explaining why most self-ratings of mind­
wandering episodes reflect that these thoughts are 
about short-term and mildly important concerns, 
rather than more meaningful (but often long-term) 
personal goals.
In summary, investigations on the relationships 
between personal goals and mind-wandering nicely 
complement the research on temporal orientation 
by showing that induced future-related concerns 
are likely to influence the frequency and content of 
spontaneous thoughts. Notably, several studies have 
shown that a significant part of mind-wandering epi­
sodes reported during tasks following goal-priming 
procedures are directly aimed at dealing with the 
cued personal goals. Research that investigated 
the degree to which “naturally” occurring mind­
wandering episodes (i.e., without prior cuing of 
future-related concerns) are related to personal goals 
in laboratory and daily life settings revealed slightly 
less convincing findings, however. Self-ratings of 
such episodes showed only a moderate association 
with personal goals. The precise reasons why some 
spontaneous thoughts are more likely to be related 
to low-relevance rather than high-relevance personal 
goals and concerns still remains to be investigated, 
and I have proposed that the imminent requirement 
of behavioral actions might moderate the influence 
of importance on the probability of personal goals to 
influence thought content.
Other Phenomenological Features 
of Mind- Wandering
Temporal orientation and relationships with per­
sonal goals are currently the two most investigated
phenomenological properties of mind-wandering 
and daydreams. To date, the other features that 
characterize the form and content of these two 
kinds of spontaneous thought have received much 
less attention from the scientific community and are 
also generally associated with more mixed findings. 
In the following subsections I will summarize the 
findings related to the most widely investigated phe­
nomenological properties of mind-wandering out­
side temporal orientation and goal-relatedness: (1) 
representational format, (2) emotional valence, 
(3) realism and specificity, (4) unintentionally, 
(5) sequential versus fragmented form, (6) repeti­
tiveness, (7) visual perspective, and (8) self and 
social aspects.
First, regarding representational format, there 
is evidence that mind-wandering is generally as 
likely to be in the form of visual images as inner 
speech (e.g., Diaz et al., 2014; Song & Wang, 
2012; Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 2013; 
Stawarczyk et al., 2011), with other modalities 
(e.g., auditory, tactile, gustatory, etc.) representing 
a much smaller proportion of this kind of sponta­
neous thought (Christian et al., 2013; Klinger & 
Cox, 1987). Regarding the relationships between 
inner speech and visual imagery, we found in one of 
our studies that these two representational formats 
are strongly negatively correlated at the within- 
individual level (coefficient of -.55; Stawarczyk, 
Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 2013), suggesting that a 
particular mind-wandering episode is less likely to 
involve inner speech if it strongly consists of visual 
imagery. Not all results are consistent with this find­
ing, however. Klinger and Cox (1987), for instance, 
found in their within-individuals factorial analyses 
that inner speech was unrelated to visual imagery 
and that the auditory modality (i.e., mentally imag­
ining sounds other than one’s own voice) loaded on 
a factor independent from visual modality. It could 
be that differences in the kinds of thoughts sampled 
in these studies— exclusively mind-wandering for 
Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Axgembeau (2013) versus 
all kinds of thoughts for Klinger and Cox (1987)—  
are the cause of these discrepant findings. On the 
other hand, at the between-individuals level, results 
of our study revealed that these two representational 
formats were much less negatively correlated (coeffi­
cient o f-.22), suggesting that individuals are gener­
ally not characterized by a style of mind-wandering 
consistently occurring mostly in either visual or 
verbal forms (Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau,
2013). Intriguingly, in an early paper, Antrobus 
et al. (1970) reported that performing a visual
204
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

task strongly interfered with visual imagery dur­
ing mind-wandering, whereas auditory tasks rather 
interfered with auditory imagery. These results have 
not yet been replicated, however, and future stud­
ies should investigate more precisely (1) the factors 
that influence verbal versus visual imagery during 
spontaneous thoughts, as well as (2) the precise 
relationships that exist between these two kinds of 
representational formats.
A second important dimension regards the emo­
tionality of mind-wandering episodes. Findings 
here are generally consistent within the literature; 
most studies have shown that when people engage 
in spontaneous cognition, it is mostly to think about 
slightly pleasant topics. For instance, we found in 
our studies that approximately 42% of reported 
mind-wandering episodes were associated with pos­
itive affect, whereas only 19% were related to nega­
tive affect (Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 
2013; Stawarczyk et al., 2011). Similar ratings were 
found for the daily life sampling of mind-wander­
ing, with proportions of 42.5% of pleasant versus 
26.5% of unpleasant mind-wandering episodes 
(Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010). Other studies that 
rated on Likert scales the affective valence of sponta­
neous thoughts from daily life (e.g., Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2013; Song & Wang, 2012) or occurring dur­
ing laboratory sessions (Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, 
et al., 2013; Tusche, Smallwood, Bernhardt, & 
Singer, 2014) also consistently found that, on 
average, these thoughts are mildly positive (for a 
recent discussion on this topic, see Fox, Thompson, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2014).
Third, in line with the findings that most mind­
wandering episodes are about autobiographical 
planning for events in the near future, we found in 
our studies that most reported episodes are rated 
as (1) having highly realistic content (85%-90% 
of episodes), (2) being related to specific events or 
actions (approximately 75% of reported thoughts), 
and (3) that these two dimensions are strongly posi­
tively correlated at the within-individuals level (coef­
ficient of .52), suggesting that the specific events 
imagined by our participants are nearly always very 
realistic (Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 
2013; Stawarczyk et al., 2011). In the same vein, 
Andrews-Hanna et al. (2013) found that 77% of 
daily life thoughts retrospectively assessed by their 
participants were related to specific events. Klinger 
and Cox (1987) found in their study that approxi­
mately 90% of reported thoughts involved none to 
low level of either physical impossibly, inappropri­
ate actions, or reality distortions. Less consistent
with these previous findings, two other studies 
that sampled mind-wandering in daily life found 
that these thoughts involve on average a moder­
ate amount of fantasy (Kane et al., 2007; McVay 
et al., 2009). These later results should be consid­
ered carefully, however, because the wording of the 
item used in these two studies to assess fanciful­
ness (i.e., “I was daydreaming or fantasizing about 
something”) makes it somewhat difficult to clearly 
determine whether the thoughts that scored high 
on this dimension truly departed from real-world 
events. Nevertheless, we can conclude overall from 
the current state of research that mind-wandering is 
generally about precise, concrete, and highly realis­
tic events.
A fourth important phenomenological dimen­
sion is the unintentionally of mind-wandering. 
Most studies generally consider that, when people 
mind-wander, it is mostly in an unintended man­
ner. However, it is also possible that some individu­
als could deliberately engage in thoughts unrelated 
to the task at hand (for a recent discussion on this 
topic, see Seli, Wammes, Risko, & Smilek, 2016). 
In our studies, we found that deliberate mind­
wandering episodes occur much less frequently 
than unintentional episodes during the SART, with 
approximately 10% of mind-wandering being rated 
as intentional (Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 
2013; Stawarczyk et al., 2011). Forster and Lavie 
(2009) found similar results, reporting that 13.9% 
of responses to thought-probes in their experiment 
involved deliberate mind-wandering versus 38.3% 
for unintentional mind-wandering during a visual 
search task. More recently, Seli et al. (2016) found 
that 9% of probe responses were deliberate mind­
wandering episodes versus 24% of unintentional 
episodes while memorizing a videotaped lecture. 
Not all studies are consistent with these results, 
however. Giambra (1995), for instance, reported 
in several experiments using low-demand vigilance 
tasks that deliberate mind-wandering episodes out­
numbered unintentional episodes. Seli and col­
leagues also recently created a four-item self-rating 
scale designed to assess the frequency of deliberate 
and unintentional mind-wandering in daily life 
(e.g., Carriere, Seli, & Smilek, 2013; Seli, Carriere, 
& Smilek, 2015; Seli, Smallwood, Cheyne, & 
Smilek, 2015) and found roughly similar ratings for 
these two kinds of thoughts across studies. Finally, 
studies that used experience-sampling methods in 
everyday life revealed that, when asked whether they 
allowed their minds to wander on purpose, indi­
viduals generally report that their mind-wandering
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
205

episodes consisted of a mixture of unintentional 
and deliberate thoughts (Kane et al., 2007; McVay 
et al., 2009). In sum, although research generally 
considers mind-wandering episodes as reflecting 
unintentional thoughts, several studies suggest that 
a non-negligible proportion of these episodes none­
theless consist of deliberate disengagements from 
the current task at hand.
A fifth phenomenological feature of mind-wan­
dering is the degree to which this kind of sponta­
neous cognition consists of structured sequences of 
thoughts (e.g., as in reasoning, argumentation, etc.) 
versus disjointed segments of thoughts with no par­
ticular continuity. In their investigation of thought 
flow in daily life, Klinger and Cox (1987) found 
that thoughts were mostly coherent, although 
approximately 20% of them involved a moderate 
to high level of disconnected segments. Teasdale 
et al. (1993) found in a laboratory session that 
sequential mind-wandering was nearly four times 
more prevalent than fragmented thoughts during 
periods of rest. However, this difference became 
non-significant when their participants performed 
more demanding working memory tasks, with the 
frequency of sequential mind-wandering episodes 
decreasing to the same level as fragmented episodes 
(the rate of which did not change across conditions). 
The authors interpreted these results in the sense 
that sequential thoughts might be more resource 
consuming than fragmented ones. Two years later, 
Stuyven and Van der Goten (1995) replicated these 
findings and additionally found that, in compari­
son to rest, the frequency of sequential mind-wan­
dering was less affected by a finger tapping than a 
random letter-generation task. In the studies per­
formed in our lab, we found that approximately 
25% of reported mind-wandering episodes during 
the SART were rated as highly structured sequences 
of thoughts (Stawarczyk, Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 
2013; Stawarczyk et al., 2011). Although requiring 
further investigations, these results suggest (1) that 
mind-wandering involves both sequential and frag­
mented segments of thoughts, and (2) that the 
respective proportions of these two kinds of spon­
taneous cognition might depend on task difficulty.
Another 
important 
dimension 
of 
mind­
wandering is whether this phenomenon is mainly 
composed of repetitive thoughts that chronically 
reappear throughout daily life or rather consists of 
more varied topics that continuously change over 
time (Watkins, 2008, 2010). When asked to rate 
whether the content of each of their reported mind­
wandering episodes reoccurs repetitively in daily life,
we found in our studies that participants gave aver­
age scores close to the anchor point “sometimes” of 
the scale, suggesting that some but not all spontane­
ous thoughts possess repetitive content (Stawarczyk, 
Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 2013; Stawarczyk et al.,
2011). More interestingly, we also found that scores 
regarding the repetitiveness of reported thoughts 
correlated highly with both the personal importance 
and goal-relatedness of these thoughts (coefficients 
higher than .50 at the within-individuals level and 
higher than .70 at the between-individuals level), 
suggesting that the more a mind-wandering episode 
is related to important personal goals, the more it 
is likely to occur repetitively in daily life. Andrews- 
Hanna et al. (2013) later confirmed these findings 
by showing that repetitiveness is part of a general 
“personal relevance” dimension of thoughts, along 
with other variables related to the importance of 
thought content (e.g., goal-directedness, centrality 
to self-identity, self-relevance, etc.). Together, these 
findings are consistent with the current concerns the­
ory (Klinger, 1971, 1996, 1999, 2009, 2013) and 
its proposal that the most important personal goals 
are more likely to influence the content of thoughts 
occurring in everyday life.
A much less examined dimension is the visual 
perspective adopted while mind-wandering (i.e., 
first- versus third-person perspective). Andrews- 
Hanna et al. (2013) found that 64.3% of thoughts 
in their study were rated as having a first-person 
point of view, 18.7% as having a different perspec­
tive, and 17% did not have any particular visual 
perspective. In another study, Christian et al. (2013) 
replicated the finding of a prevalence of the first- 
person perspective in participants form Western 
cultures 
(60.4%), 
whereas 
participants 
from 
Eastern Asian cultures reported a bias toward the 
third-person perspective in their mind-wandering 
episodes (59.5%). Female participants also showed 
a preference for first- (59.9%) over third-person 
imagery, whereas no preference was found in male 
participants. Interestingly, East Asian participants 
and males also reported less vivid mental imag­
ery during mind-wandering than Westerners and 
females. The authors did not assess whether this 
difference was attributable to visual perspective, 
however. Generally, more studies should be con­
ducted to determine whether differences in visual 
perspective during mind-wandering are associated 
with other phenomenological variables such as 
emotional intensity, self-relatedness, temporal dis­
tance, or coherence, similar to findings on episodic 
memories (e.g., Sutin & Robins, 2008, 2010).
206
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Finally, a last important dimension concerns 
the social aspects of mind-wandering content. As 
discussed earlier, Singer and McCraven (1961) 
found in their seminal study that the most fre­
quently endorsed instances of daydreams were 
related to interpersonal situations. In an online 
questionnaire study involving a vast number of 
participants (N  = 17,556), Mar et al. (2012) found 
that 73.2% of respondents reported always or at 
least frequently daydreaming about other people, 
whereas only .8% reported that their daydreams 
never had social contents. Using online experience 
sampling of mind-wandering in daily life, Song and 
Wang (2012) found that the proportion of mind­
wandering episodes focusing on people (70.95%) 
was significantly higher than the proportion of 
episodes focusing on objects (29.05%). In their 
study about daily life thinking, Andrews-Hanna 
et al. (2013) found that the thoughts reported by 
their participants were highly self-relevant (see also 
Baird et al., 2011; Smallwood et al., 2011) but only 
moderately involved other people. Similar find­
ings were reported by Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, 
et al. (2013) who showed that mind-wandering 
episodes are generally more self- than other-related. 
Interestingly, these authors computed several prin­
cipal component analyses on the dimensions of 
mind-wandering and consistently found that self- 
related episodes tend to be more future-oriented, 
whereas past episodes tend to more consistently 
involve thoughts about other people (Engert 
et al., 2014; Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 
2013; Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, & Singer, 2013). 
Although these findings remain to be replicated by 
other research teams, studies on the social aspects 
of mind-wandering generally converge toward the 
finding that, if most mind-wandering episodes are 
about oneself, they also quite frequently involve 
other people.
In summary, we have shown in this subsection 
that, apart from temporal orientation and goal- 
relatedness, mind-wandering episodes (1) occur 
most generally under the form of visual imagery or 
inner speech; (2) are mostly about pleasant rather 
than unpleasant topics, resulting in a slightly posi­
tive emotional bias; (3) are in most cases about 
highly realistic and specific events; (4) can either 
occur unintentionally or in a more deliberate way; 
(5) can take the form of both sequential or frag­
mented segments of thoughts (and that increasing 
task demands may particularly reduce the frequency 
of sequential mind-wandering); (6) do not necessar­
ily consist of repetitive thoughts, although episodes
focusing on more important and self-relevant top­
ics tend to reappear more consistently in daily life; 
(7) mainly involve a first- rather than third-person 
visual perspective (although culture and gender may 
influence this effect); and finally (8) nearly always 
involve self-related contents but also frequently 
focus on other people and social situations.
How the Phenomenology of Mind- 
Wandering and Daydreaming Is Related 
to Daily Life Functioning
In the previous section, I have shown that, far 
from being wish-fulfilling ideations or random 
representations of fanciful topics, daydreams and 
mind-wandering episodes generally show consis­
tent phenomenological properties across individu­
als. Studies that have examined the content of these 
two kinds of thought have more specifically revealed 
that their main features are a future temporal ori­
entation associated with autobiographical planning 
processes related to specific events. A question that 
naturally follows from these findings is: “Do future- 
and goal-oriented mind-wandering episodes have 
concrete beneficial impacts on daily life function­
ing in comparison to other kinds of episodes?” One 
may indeed wonder whether using mind-wandering 
and daydreams in a constructive way to plan and 
prepare for future events may effectively be asso­
ciated with a better daily cognitive and affective 
functioning. To date, however, studies assessing this 
particular question are relatively scarce, and their 
results often show mixed findings. In the present 
section, I will first review questionnaire studies that 
retrospectively assessed the general features of day­
dreams, and then the results of research that focused 
on more specific instances of mind-wandering dur­
ing laboratory tasks and daily life.
Regarding the retrospective evaluations of day­
dreams in daily life, questionnaire studies using 
the IPI (Singer & Antrobus, 1970) or SIPI (Huba 
et al., 1982) have generally shown that high scores 
on the positive-constructive daydreams dimension are 
associated with beneficial correlates (or at least the 
absence of negative correlates), whereas the oppo­
site is commonly found for the guilty-dysphoric 
daydreams and poor attentional control dimensions 
(e.g., Finnbogadottir & Berntsen, 2013; Giambra 
& Traynor, 1978; Klinger, Henning, & Janssen, 
2009; Wilson et al., 2014). For instance, Zhiyan 
and Singer (1997) administered the SIPI to their 
participants, as well as two other questionnaires 
assessing (1) the tendency to experience positive 
and negative affect in daily life and (2) the Big Five
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
207

personality traits. On the one hand, they found that 
positive-constructive daydreams correlated positively 
with openness to experience, conscientiousness, and 
positive affect. On the other hand, guilty-dysphoric 
daydreams and poor attentional control were both 
related to higher neuroticism and negative affect in 
daily life. In addition, poor attentional control was 
also negatively correlated with conscientiousness 
and experience of positive affect in daily life. These 
results suggest that the tendency to experience and 
enjoy vivid future-oriented daydreams associated 
with problem-solving processes is related to positive 
emotional outcomes in everyday life and personal­
ity traits reflecting higher intellectual curiosity and 
self-discipline.
In a more recent study, Marcusson-Clavertz, 
Cardena, and Terhune (2016) used experience 
sampling of mind-wandering in daily life and fur­
ther asked their participants to complete the SIPI, 
a working memory task, and the Stroop task in a 
laboratory session. The aim of these authors was 
to examine how individual differences on the SIPI 
dimensions modulate the relationships between 
daily life mind-wandering and cognitive task per­
formance. They found that, for participants with 
high levels of guilty-dysphoric daydreams, mind­
wandering frequency was negatively correlated 
with working memory capacity, whereas the oppo­
site was found for participants scoring low on this 
dimension. Next, as concerns positive-constructive 
daydreams, results showed that mind-wandering 
frequency is related to poor inhibition abilities dur­
ing the Stroop task, but only for participants with 
below average scores on this particular dimension. 
Together, these results suggest that the relationship 
between cognitive abilities and mind-wandering is 
moderated by thought content: the more an indi­
vidual has a tendency to experience high positive- 
constructive or low guilty-dysphoric daydreams, the 
less his or her mind-wandering episodes are likely to 
be related to poor inhibition abilities and low work­
ing memory capacity, respectively.
An issue with the IPI/SIPI dimensions is that 
they represent a combination of different facets, 
some of which are not directly representative of 
spontaneous thought features per se (e.g., posi­
tive and negative attitudes toward daydreams) and 
it may be questionable whether similar positive 
correlates would emerge for experience sampled 
mind-wandering episodes, and more specifically 
those whose content reflects autobiographical plan­
ning processes. Preliminary results in this regard 
came from the study of Baird et al. (2011), who
found that the tendency of their participants to 
report future-oriented mind-wandering during 
low-demand task performance was associated with 
higher working memory capacity. In accordance 
with the SIPI findings, these results suggest that the 
tendency to experience constructive spontaneous 
thoughts is associated with better cognitive func­
tioning. Other findings regarding the specificity of 
prospective mind-wandering came from a study of 
ours where we examined how future-/goal-oriented 
mind-wandering (1) differs from other kinds of epi­
sodes along several phenomenological dimensions, 
and (2) whether these differences are consistent 
with the supposed role of these episodes in plan­
ning and preparing for future events (Stawarczyk, 
Cassol, & D ’Argembeau, 2013). Our main findings 
were that future-/goal-oriented episodes generally 
focused on more personally important, concrete, 
and specific events, and that these episodes were 
also more deliberate and structured in sequential 
thoughts than other episodes (i.e., past, present, and 
atemporal mind-wandering). In accordance with 
our hypotheses, these results indicated that prospec­
tive mind-wandering possesses features making it 
more likely than other forms of mind-wandering to 
beneficially influence future behaviors.
More concrete evidence in favor of the benefi­
cial outcomes of prospective mind-wandering were 
recently found by Mason and Reinholtz (2015). In 
this study the authors asked their participants to 
perform specific actions in their daily life (i.e., to 
send an email or text message to the experimenter 
at a specific time and date without using external 
memory aids). The two authors then examined 
whether self-reported mind-wandering episodes 
specifically related to these future tasks (and occur­
ring outside the enactment window) would predict 
the probability of the participants subsequently 
remembering to perform the requested actions. 
Across five experiments, the results generally showed 
that participants who reported more intention- 
related mind-wandering episodes were indeed more 
likely to send the email or text message at the right 
moment. These findings are particularly important 
because they are currently the only firm evidence 
indicating that future-oriented mind-wandering 
about a planned action can increase the probability 
of carrying out this action and, more generally, that 
spontaneous thoughts can effectively reinforce goal 
pursuit by fulfilling a self-reminding function.
In addition to its goal-reminding utility, there is 
also some recent evidence from experience-sampling 
studies on the possible emotion-regulation function
208
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

of future-oriented mind-wandering. For instance, 
Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, et al. (2013) investi­
gated whether the socio-temporal content of mind­
wandering episodes can predict changes in mood 
states during a laboratory attentional task. Using 
time lag analyses, they found that (1) reports of 
mind-wandering episodes related to the past and 
other people when interrupted by a thought-probe 
predicted lower mood at the next thought-probe, 
and (2) this finding remained significant even if the 
emotional valence of the initially reported thought 
was positive. In contrast, mind-wandering episodes 
focusing on the future and the self were associated 
with better mood state at the next probe, even if 
the content of these initial episodes was negatively 
emotionally toned. Consistent with these findings, 
Engert et al. (2014) exposed their participants to 
a stress-induction procedure before assessing their 
levels of stress hormones and asking them to per­
form an attentional task with thought-probes. These 
authors found that the content of mind-wandering 
episodes reported by their participants generally 
moderated the levels of alpha-amylase and cortisol 
in saliva samples following the stressor. More spe­
cifically, (1) thinking about future- and self-related 
topics was associated with lower levels of cortisol 
and alpha-amylase, whereas (2) thinking about the 
past and other people was associated with a higher 
alpha amylase peak following the stress induction, 
and (3) negatively toned thoughts were associ­
ated with higher levels of cortisol. Together, the 
results of these studies suggest that future-oriented 
mind-wandering has beneficial effects on mood, 
independently of its emotional valence, and also is 
associated with reduced biological marker responses 
to stressors.
Not all findings are consistent with beneficial 
correlates of future-oriented mind-wandering, how­
ever. For instance, McVay et al. (2013) assessed 
mind-wandering during more demanding tasks than 
Baird et al. (2011) and did not replicate the finding 
that future-oriented mind-wandering is associated 
with a better working memory capacity. In another 
study, Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, and Singer (2013) 
found no association between the future/self and 
past/other content of mind-wandering episodes 
and performance in a social problem-solving task. 
In their daily-life investigation on the affective con­
sequences of mind-wandering, Poerio et al. (2013) 
found that future-oriented episodes had no effect 
on feelings of sadness and anxiety 15 minutes after 
the initial thought report. In addition, their find­
ings revealed that it was the affective valence of the
thoughts that was congruently predictive of subse­
quent mood states, rather than their temporal ori­
entation. Similarly, Andrews-Hanna et al. (2013) 
found for their retrospective assessment of daily life 
thoughts that temporal orientation was unrelated to 
the experience of depression and negative affect in 
their participants. Again, it was instead the affective 
valence of the thoughts (and, to a lower extent, the 
tendency to rate the content of thoughts as more 
personally significant) that was predictive of lower 
emotional well-being. Finally, in the study where 
we induced a stressful concern in our participants 
before the SART with thought-probes (Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, & D ’Argembeau, 2013), we found that 
the number of future-oriented mind-wandering 
episodes aiming at dealing with the induced con­
cern was associated with a maintenance, rather than 
a decrease, of negative affect during the SART. It 
could be that, in this particular study, the experi­
ence of repetitive future thoughts about the induced 
concern was indicative of unsuccessful rather than 
successful attempts to deal with this particular con­
cern. Nevertheless, these results indicate that further 
studies should be conducted to clearly determine 
the affective and cognitive correlates of prospective 
mind-wandering.
Finally, aside from autobiographical planning 
processes, some studies have found that other fea­
tures related to the content of mind-wandering and 
daydreams can also influence the affective correlates 
of these thoughts. For instance, Franklin et al. (2013) 
used experience sampling in daily life and found 
that the presence of mind-wandering was generally 
associated with lower mood than moments where 
individuals reported being focused on their cur­
rent task (see also Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010). 
Importantly, however, a more detailed examination 
of mind-wandering content showed that episodes 
rated as high for either interest or usefulness were 
associated with better mood than moments where 
individuals were focused on task. In another study, 
Mar et al. (2012) found with retrospective reports 
that, whereas the frequency of daydreaming about 
people in daily life was positively correlated with 
loneliness, it was only daydreams about people 
for whom the participants could not be close (i.e., 
strangers, fictional characters, or past/potential 
romantic partners) that explained this relationship. 
Daydreaming about family members and close 
friends was not associated with loneliness and was 
instead related to an increased perception of social 
support and greater life satisfaction. These results 
suggest that phenomenological dimensions other
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
209

than temporal orientation and emotional valence 
are important to take into account when examin­
ing the affective correlates of mind-wandering, day­
dreams, and, more generally, spontaneous thought.
In summary, we have shown in this section 
that evidence suggesting that some forms of mind­
wandering may have more beneficial outcomes 
than others is currently very scarce. Evidence from 
questionnaire studies suggests that either a high 
score on the positive-constructive or low score on 
the guilty-dysphoric dimensions of daydreams are 
associated with better emotional and cognitive 
functioning. However, the extent to which these 
effects are due to daydreams per se and not to other 
variables associated with these two general dimen­
sions of inner mental life (e.g., acceptance and emo­
tional reactions to spontaneous thoughts) remains 
unknown. With regard to experience sampled 
mind-wandering, apart from a single recent study 
by Mason and Reinholtz (2015), there is no really 
direct evidence that future- and goal-oriented mind­
wandering can concretely facilitate the achieve­
ment of personal goals. There are some indications 
that future-oriented mind-wandering is associated 
with beneficial effects on mood states and biologi­
cal reaction to stressors, but these findings need to 
be replicated. Some other studies have found, for 
instance, that it is the affective valence of thought 
content, rather than its temporal orientation, that 
is predictive of mood states and emotional well­
being. Finally, it seems that other variables, such as 
the social proximity of imagined individuals and the 
subjective interest and usefulness of thought con­
tent, also influence the affective correlates of spon­
taneous thoughts.
Conclusions and Future Directions
In this chapter I have attempted to answer two 
important questions: (1) What are people thinking 
about when they daydream and their minds wan­
der from the here and now? (2) Can the form and 
content of these two kinds of thoughts influence 
their correlates outside the domain of spontaneous 
cognition? First, regarding the form and content of 
mind-wandering and daydreams, early question­
naire studies are generally consistent in finding 
that, rather than being fanciful ideations, important 
phenomenological dimensions of daydreams are a 
future temporal orientation associated with prob­
lem-solving processes. These findings were later 
confirmed by experience-sampling research during 
daily life and laboratory tasks that demonstrated a 
prospective bias of mind-wandering associated with
autobiographical planning processes. Several stud­
ies have also shown that cuing and inducing future- 
related concerns can strongly influence the content 
and frequency of mind-wandering, suggesting that 
these thoughts are closely related to the processing 
of personal goals. Finally, other phenomenological 
features of mind-wandering have been much less 
investigated and the most consistent findings are 
that these thoughts (1) are mostly about oneself 
and events happening in the near rather than dis­
tant future, (2) generally occur under the form of 
a visual image or inner speech, (3) focus on specific 
and highly realistic events, and (4) show a slight 
positive emotional bias. Second, regarding the ques­
tion of whether the content of mind-wandering and 
daydreams can moderate the beneficial or deleteri­
ous correlates of these thoughts, there is currently 
little direct evidence that future-oriented mind­
wandering can concretely facilitate the achieve­
ment of personal goals or intended actions. Some 
questionnaire and experience-sampling studies have 
found that future-oriented/constructive daydreams 
and mind-wandering are associated with beneficial 
affective and cognitive correlates, but these findings 
have not been consistently replicated across research 
groups.
One possible way to explain the contrast between 
research that consistently showed the importance of 
prospective thoughts to daydreaming and mind­
wandering and, on the other hand, the inconclusive 
results of the studies that assessed how this kind of 
thought may beneficially impact daily life could be 
related to the lack of investigation of the context in 
which these spontaneous thoughts occurs. Based on 
the findings that mind-wandering is generally more 
frequent and also has a lower negative impact on 
performance during low-demand and easy tasks, 
Smallwood and Andrews-Hanna (2013) recently 
proposed that it is crucially important to take into 
account the context of mind-wandering episodes, in 
addition to their content, to clearly determine their 
beneficial outcomes. To date, however, very few 
studies have assessed whether and how the phenom­
enological properties of mind-wandering are influ­
enced by the context in which it occurs, and even 
fewer have attempted to determine how this modu­
lating effect of context on content may moderate the 
relationships between mind-wandering and its pos­
sible outcomes (but see Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, 
& Singer, 2013). Interestingly, some evidence sug­
gests that the association between mind-wandering 
and higher ability to delay future gratification 
(Smallwood, Ruby, & Singer, 2013) and to generate
2 1 0
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

creative ideas (Baird et al., 2012) is stronger for 
mind-wandering occurring during low- rather than 
high-demand tasks. Furthermore, we have seen in 
this chapter that mind-wandering seems to be more 
consistently future-oriented and structured in com­
plex sequences of thoughts during low- than high- 
resource-consuming tasks. An interesting avenue 
for future studies in the growing field focusing on 
the phenomenological properties of spontaneous 
thoughts might therefore be to examine whether 
the beneficial correlates previously found for mind­
wandering episodes during low-demand tasks can 
be explained by the higher occurrence of future- 
oriented and complex episodes in this particular 
context.
To conclude, it is important to remember that 
the study of the phenomenological properties of 
spontaneous thoughts is still in its infancy, being 
less than one decade old for the precise investiga­
tion of daydreaming and mind-wandering content 
with thought-probes. I nonetheless believe that 
a major next step in the study of this particular 
kind of cognition, and for which we hope that this 
H andbook will represent a strong anchor point, will 
be to develop an integrative theoretical model of 
spontaneous thoughts. I think that it will be cru­
cial for this model to include the various dimen­
sions reflecting the phenomenological features of 
thoughts, and a key component of this theoretical 
framework will require more precisely investigat­
ing how different kinds of daydreams and mind­
wandering episodes can concretely influence our 
daily cognitive and affective functioning, be it del- 
eteriously or beneficially.
References
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E., Reineberg, 
A. E., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. T. (2013). 
A penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated 
thought content and relationships with individual differ­
ences in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 900. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00900 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R.
L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104{\), 322- 
335. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00830.2009
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., Goldstein, S., & Fortgang, M. 
(1970). Mindwandering and cognitive structure. Transactions 
of the New York Academy of Science, 32(2), 242-252. 
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., & Greenberg, S. (1966). Studies in 
the stream of consciousness: Experimental enhancement and 
suppression of spontaneous cognitive processes. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 23(2), 399-417.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., Franklin,
M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by distraction:
Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. Psychological 
Science, 23(10), 1117-1122. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10T 177/ 
0956797612446024
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 1604- 
1611. doi: http://dx.doi.Org/10.10l6/j.concog.2011.08.007
Berthie, G., Lemercier, C., Paubel, R V., Cour, M., Fort, A., 
Galera, C., . . . Maury, B. (2015). The restless mind while 
driving: Drivers’ thoughts behind the wheel. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 76, 159-165. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.10 l6/j.aap.2015.01.005
Carriere, J. S., Seli, R, & Smilek, D. (2013). Wandering in both 
mind and body: Individual differences in mind wander­
ing and inattention predict fidgeting. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67(1), 19-31. doi: http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1037/a003l438
Christian, B. M., Miles, L. K., Parkinson, C., & Macrae, C. N. 
(2013). Visual perspective and the characteristics of mind 
wandering. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 699. doi: http://dx.doi. 
org /10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00699
Delamillieure, R, Doucet, G., Mazoyer, B., Turbelin, M. R., 
Delcroix, N., Mellet, E., . . . Joliot, M. (2010). The resting 
state questionnaire: An introspective questionnaire for evalu­
ation of inner experience during the conscious resting state. 
Brain Research Bulletin, 81(6), 565-573.
Diaz, B. A., Van Der Sluis, S., Benjamins, J. S., Stoffers, D., 
Hardstone, R., Mansvelder, H. D., . . . Linkenkaer-Hansen, 
K. (2014). The ARSQ2.0 reveals age and personality effects 
on mind-wandering experiences. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 
271. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.20l4.00271
Diaz, B. A., Van Der Sluis, S., Moens, S., Benjamins, J. S., 
Migliorati, F., Stoffers, D., . . . Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. 
(2013). The Amsterdam Resting-State Questionnaire reveals 
multiple phenotypes of resting-state cognition. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 7 ,446. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2013.00446
Engert, V., Smallwood, J., & Singer, T. (2014). Mind your 
thoughts: Associations between self-generated thoughts 
and stress-induced and baseline levels of cortisol and alpha- 
amylase. Biological Psychology, 103, 283-291. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .biopsycho.2014.10.004
Finnbogadottir, H., & Berntsen, D. (2013). Involuntary future 
projections are as frequent as involuntary memories, but 
more positive. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 272-280. 
doi: http://dx.doi.Org/10.10l6/j.concog.2012.06.0l4
Forster, S., & Lavie, N. (2009). Harnessing the wander­
ing mind: The role of perceptual load. Cognition, 111(3), 
345-355. doi: S0010-0277(09)00061-4 [pii] 10.1016/ 
j.cognition.2009.02.006
Fox, K. C., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, 
K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commentary on 
Wilson et al.’s “Just think: the challenges of the disengaged 
mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1427. doi: http://dx.doi. 
org /10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01427
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Anderson, C. L., Smallwood, J., 
Kingstone, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The silver lining of 
a mind in the clouds: Interesting musings are associated with 
positive mood while mind-wandering. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 583. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00583
Fransson, P. (2006). How default is the default mode of brain 
function? Further evidence from intrinsic BOLD signal fluc­
tuations. Neuropsychologia, 44( 14), 2836-2845.
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
211

Giambra, L. M. (1995). A laboratory method for investigating 
influences on switching attention to task-unrelated imagery 
and thought. Consciousness and Cognition, 4{ 1), 1—21.
Giambra, L. M. (1999a). Frequency and intensity of day­
dreaming: Age changes and age differences from late 
adolescent to the old-old. Imagination, Cognition and 
Personality, 19(3), 229-267. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/ 
XN4W-1CRE-B0MH-84XT
Giambra, L. M. (1999b). The temporal setting, emotions, and 
imagery of daydreams: Age changes and age differences 
from late adolescent to the old-old. Imagination, Cognition 
and Personality, 19(A), 1999-2000. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2190/H0W2-1792-J WUY-KU35
Giambra, L. M. (2000). Daydreaming characteristics across the 
life-span: Age differences and seven to twenty year longitu­
dinal changes. In R. G. Kunzendorf & B. Wallace (Eds.), 
Individual differences in conscious experience (pp. 147-206). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Giambra, L. M., & Traynor, T. D. (1978). Depression and 
daydreaming: An analysis based on self-ratings. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 34( 1), 14-25.
Gold, S. R., & Reilly, J. P. (1985). Daydreaming, current con­
cerns and personality. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 
5(2), 117-125.
Gorgolewski, K. J., Lurie, D., Urchs, S., Kipping, J. A., 
Craddock, R. C., Milham, M. P., . . . Smallwood, J. (2014). 
A correspondence between individual differences in the 
brain’s intrinsic functional architecture and the content and 
form of self-generated thoughts. PLoS ONE, 9(5), e97176. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0097176
Huba, G. J., Aneshensel, C. S., & Singer, J. L. (1981). 
Development of scales for three second-order factors of 
inner experience. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 16(2), 
181-206.
Huba, G. J., Segal, B., & Singer, J. L. (1977). Consistency of 
daydreaming styles across samples of college male and female 
drug and alcohol users. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
86( 1), 99- 102.
Huba, G. J., Singer, J. L., Aneshensel, C. S., & Antrobus, J. S. 
(1982). Manual for the short imaginalprocesses inventory. Port 
Huron, MI: Research Psychologists Press.
Iijima, Y., & Tanno, Y. (2012). [The effect of cognitive load 
on the temporal focus of mind wandering]. Shinrigaku 
Kenkyu: Japanese Journal of Psychology, 83(3), 232-236.
Jackson, J. D., Weinstein, Y., & Balota, D. A. (2013). Can 
mind-wandering be timeless? Atemporal focus and aging in 
mind-wandering paradigms. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 742. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00742
Johnson, M. K., Foley, M. A., Suengas, A. G., & Raye, C. L. 
(1988). Phenomenal characteristics of memories for per­
ceived and imagined autobiographical events. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 117(A), 371-376.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18(7), 614-621. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.llll/ 
j. 1467-9280.2007.01948.x
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wander­
ing mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10T 126/science.l 192439
Klinger, E. (1971). Structure and Junctions of fantasy. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Klinger, E. (1978). Modes of normal conscious flow. In K. S. 
Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of consciousness (pp. 
225-258). New York: Plenum.
Klinger, E. (1990). Daydreaming. Los Angeles: Tarcher (Putnam).
Klinger, E. (1996). The contents of thoughts: Interference as 
the downside of adaptive normal mechanisms in thought 
flow. In I. G. Sarason, G. R. Pierce, & B. R. Sarason (Eds.), 
Cognitive interference: Theories, methods, and findings (pp. 3— 
23). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klinger, E. (1999). Thought flow: Properties and mechanisms 
underlying shifts in content. In J. A. Singer & R Salovey 
(Eds.), At play in the fields of consciousness (pp. 29-50). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E. (2013). Goal commitments and the content of 
thoughts and dreams: Basic principles. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 415. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.004l5
Klinger, E., Barta, S. G., & Maxeiner, M. E. (1980). Motivational 
correlates of thought Content frequency and commit­
ment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(6), 
1222-1237.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 7(2), 
105-128.
Klinger, E., Henning, V. R., & Janssen, J. M. (2009). Fantasy- 
proneness dimensionalized: Dissociative component is
related to psychopathology, daydreaming as such is not. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 43(3), 506-510.
Kopp, K., D’Mello, S., & Mills, C. (2015). Influencing the 
occurrence of mind wandering while reading. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 34, 52-62. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j .concog.2015.03.003
Maillet, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2015). From mind wandering to 
involuntary retrieval: Age-related differences in spontaneous 
cognitive processes. Neuropsychologia, 80, 142-156.
Mar, R. A., Mason, M. F., & Litvack, A. (2012). How day­
dreaming relates to life satisfaction, loneliness, and social 
support: The importance of gender and daydream content. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 27(1), 401—407. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .concog.2011.08.001
Marcusson-Clavertz, D., Cardena, E., &Terhune, D. B. (2016). 
Daydreaming style moderates the relation between working 
memory and mind wandering: Integrating two hypotheses. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & 
Cognition, 42(3), 451-464.
Masicampo, E. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2011). Consider it done! 
Plan making can eliminate the cognitive effects of unful­
filled goal s. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 101(A), 
667-683.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007a). Response to 
comment on “Wandering minds: The default network and 
stimulus-independent thought.” Science, 377(5834), 43c.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007b). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 375(5810), 393-395.
Mason, M. F., & Reinholtz, N. (2015). Avenues down which a 
self-reminding mind can wander. Motivation Science, 7(1), 
1-21. doi: http://dx.doi.Org/10.1037/mot0000011
2 1 2
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012). Why does working memory 
capacity predict variation in reading comprehension? On the 
influence of mind wandering and executive attention. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(2), 302-320.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2013). Dispatching the wandering 
mind? Toward a laboratory method for cuing “spontaneous” 
off-task thought. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 570. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00570
McVay, J. C., Kane, M. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2009). Tracking 
the train of thought from the laboratory into everyday 
life: An experience-sampling study of mind wandering across 
controlled and ecological contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 16(5), 857-863. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/ 
PBR. 16.5.857
McVay, J. C., Unsworth, N., McMillan, B. D., & Kane, M. 
J. (2013). Working memory capacity does not always sup­
port future-oriented mind-wandering. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67(1), 41-50. doi: http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1037/a0031252
Mevel, K., Landeau, B., Fouquet, M., La Joie, R., Villain, N., 
Mezenge, F., . . . Chetelat, G. (2013). Age effect on the 
default mode network, inner thoughts, and cognitive abili­
ties. Neurobiology of Aging, 34(A), 1292-1301. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .neurobiolaging.2012.08.018
Miles, L. K., Karpinska, K., Lumsden, J., & Macrae, C. N. 
(2010). The meandering mind: Vection and mental time 
travel. PLoS ONE, 5(5).
Plimpton, B., Patel, P., & Kvavilashvili, L. (2015). Role of 
triggers and dysphoria in mind-wandering about past, 
present and future: A laboratory study. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 33, 261-276. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.concog.2015.01.014
Poerio, G. L.,Totterdell, P., & Miles, E. (2013). Mind-wandering 
and negative mood: Does one thing really lead to another? 
Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4), 1412-1421. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .concog.2013.09.012
Randall, J. G., Oswald, F. L., & Beier, M. E. (2014). Mind­
wandering, cognition, and performance: A theory-driven 
meta-analysis of attention regulation. Psychological Bulletin, 
140(6), 
1411-1431. 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0037428
Robertson, I. H., Manly, T., Andrade, J., Baddeley, B. T., & 
Yiend, J. (1997). “Oops!”: Performance correlates of every­
day attentional failures in traumatic brain injured and nor­
mal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 35(6), 747-758. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(97)00015-8
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). How 
self-generated thought shapes mood-the relation between 
mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio-temporal 
content of thoughts. PLoS ONE, 5(10), e77554. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.137 l/journal.pone.00775 54
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Sackur, J., & Singer, T. (2013). Is 
self-generated thought a means of social problem solv­
ing? Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 962. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00962
Seli, P, Carriere, J. S., & Smilek, D. (2015). Not all mind wan­
dering is created equal: dissociating deliberate from spontane­
ous mind wandering. Psychological Research, 79(5), 750-758. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00426-0l4-06l7-x
Seli, P, Smallwood, J., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2015). 
On the relation of mind wandering and ADHD symptom­
atology. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22(3), 629-636. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s 13423-014-0793-0
Seli, P., Wammes, J. D., Risko, E. F., & Smilek, D. (2016). On 
the relation between motivation and retention in educational 
contexts: The role of intentional and unintentional mind 
wandering. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23(A), 1280- 
1287. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/sl3423-015-0979-0
Singer, J. L. (1993). Experimental studies of ongoing conscious 
experience. Ciba Foundation Symposium, 174, 100-122. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/97804705l44l2.ch6
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming. New York: Random House.
Singer, J. L. (2003). Daydreaming, consciousness, and self­
representations: Empirical approaches to theories of William 
James and Sigmund Freud. Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic 
Studies, 5(A), 461-483.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1970). Imaginalprocess inventory. 
New York: City University of New York.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1972). Daydreaming, imaginal 
process and personality: A normative study. In P. W. Sheehan 
(Ed.), The function and nature of imagery (pp. 175-202). 
New York: Academic Press.
Singer, J. L., & McCraven, V. G. (1961). Some characteristics 
of adult daydreaming. Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary 
and Applied, 51, 151-164. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 
00223980.1961.9916467
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the mind 
wanders: A process-occurrence framework for self-generated 
mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139(3), 519-535. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030010
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 441. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.0044l
Smallwood, J., Fishman, D. J., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). 
Counting the cost of an absent mind: Mind wandering as 
an underrecognized influence on educational performance. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2), 230-236.
Smallwood, J., Nind, L., & O ’Connor, R. C. (2009). When is 
your head at? An exploration of the factors associated with 
the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 18(1), 118-125.
Smallwood, J., & O’Connor, R. C. (2011). Imprisoned by the 
past: Unhappy moods lead to a retrospective bias to mind 
wandering. Cognition and Emotion, 25(8), 1481-1490.
Smallwood, J., Ruby, F. J., & Singer, T. (2013). Letting go of 
the present: Mind-wandering is associated with reduced 
delay discounting. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 1-7. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .concog.2012.10.007
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 946-958. doi: http://dx.doi. 
org /10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.946
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. J., 
Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and the 
temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20(A), 1120-1126.
Song, X., & Wang, X. (2012). Mind wandering in Chinese 
daily lives: An experience sampling study. PLoS ONE, 
7(9), 
e44423. 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0044423
Starker, S. (1973). Aspects of inner experience: Autokinesis, 
daydreaming, dream recall and cognitive style. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 36(2), 663-673. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.2466/pms. 1973.36.2.663
Starker, S. (1974). Daydreaming styles and nocturnal dreaming. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 53(1), 52-55.
D A V I D  S T A W A R C Z Y K
213

Stawarczyk, D., Cassol, H., & D’Argembeau, A. (2013). 
Phenomenology of future-oriented mind-wandering epi­
sodes. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 225. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00425
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., & D’Argembeau, A. (2013). 
Concern-induced negative affect is associated with the occur­
rence and content of mind-wandering. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 22(2), 442-448. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.concog.2013.01.012
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., Van der Linden, M., & 
D’Argembeau, A. (2011). Mind-wandering: Phenomenology 
and function as assessed with a novel experience sampling 
method. Acta Psychologica, 136(3), 370-381. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2011.01.002 
Stuyven, E., & Van der Goten, K. (1995). Stimulus indepen­
dent thoughts and working memory: The role of the central 
executive. Psychologica Belgica, 33(4), 241-251.
Sutin, A. R., & Robins, R. W. (2008). When the “I” looks at 
the “Me”: Autobiographical memory, visual perspective, and 
the self. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(4), 1386-1397. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2008.09.001 
Sutin, A. R., & Robins, R. W. (2010). Correlates and phenomenol­
ogy of first and third person memories. Memory, 18(6), 625- 
637. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2010.497765 
Teasdale, J. D., Proctor, L., Lloyd, C. A., & Baddeley, A. D. 
(1993). 
Working memory and stimulus-independent 
thought: Effects of memory load and presentation rate. 
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5(4), 417-433. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0954l449308520128 
Thomson, D. R., Besner, D., & Smilek, D. (2015). A resource- 
control account of sustained attention: Evidence from
mind-wandering and vigilance paradigms. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 10(1), 82-96. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1177/1745691614556681
Tusche, A., Smallwood, J., Bernhardt, B. C., & Singer, T. 
(2014). Classifying the wandering mind: Revealing the 
affective content of thoughts during task-free rest periods. 
Neuroimage, 97, 107-116. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.neuroimage.2014.03.076
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2014). Similarities 
and differences between mind-wandering and exter­
nal distraction: A latent variable analysis of lapses of 
attention and their relation to cognitive abilities. Acta 
Psychologica, 150, 14-25. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.actpsy.2014.04.001
Watkins, E. R. (2008). Constructive and unconstructive repeti­
tive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 163-206.
Watkins, E. R. (2010). Level of construal, mind wandering, 
and repetitive thought: Reply to McVay and Kane (2010). 
Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 198-201.
Wilson, T. D., Reinhard, D. A., Westgate, E. C., Gilbert, D. T., 
Ellerbeck, N., Hahn, C., . . . Shaked, A. (2014). Social psy­
chology. Just think: The challenges of the disengaged mind. 
Science, 345(6192), 75-77. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/ 
science. 1250830
Ye, Q., Song, X., Zhang, Y., & Wang, Q. (2014). Children’s 
mental time travel during mind wandering. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 5, 927. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2014.00927
Zhiyan, T., & Singer, J. L. (1997). Daydreaming styles, emotion­
ality and the Big Five personality dimensions. Imagination, 
Cognition and Personality, 16(4), 399-414.
214
P H E N O M E N O L O G I C A L  P R O P E R T I E S  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

C H A P T E R
17
Spontaneous Thought and Goal Pursuit: 
From Functions Such as Planning to 
Dysfunctions Such as Rumination
Eric Klinger, Igor Marchetti, and Ernst H. W. Koster
Abstract
Spontaneous thoughts occur by default in the interstices between directed, task-oriented thoughts or 
moments of perceptual scrutiny. Their contents are overwhelmingly related to thinkers’ current goals, 
either directly or indirectly via associative networks, including past and future goals. Their evocation 
is accompanied by emotional responses that vary widely in type, valence, and intensity. Given these 
properties of thought flow, spontaneous thoughts are highly adaptive as (1) reminders of the individual’s 
larger agenda of goals while occupied with pursuing any one of them, (2) promotion of planning for 
future goal pursuits, (3) deeper understanding of past goal-related experiences, and (4) development 
of creative solutions to problems in goal pursuit. The same mechanisms may occasion repetitive but 
unproductive thoughts about the pursuit, the consequences of the failure, or the self, and strong negative 
emotions steering the train of thought may lead to narrowing of its focus, thus producing rumination.
Key Words: spontaneous thought, adaptive, goal, rumination, emotion
Under normal conditions, the brain never just 
rests. As circumstances change from, for example, 
focusing on tasks to seemingly aimless musing, or 
from waking to the various phases of sleep (or the 
reverse of these), the parts of the brain that are most 
active change from one set to another. Studies of the 
contents of consciousness have long recognized this 
apparently unceasing activity, and the technology of 
brain imaging has permitted researchers to gradu­
ally reveal the neural reality that underlies it. Two 
important generalizations have emerged from these 
studies, which are also central components of the 
goal theory o f  current concerns (Klinger, 1971, 1975, 
1977, 2013; Klinger & Cox, 2011a): (a) spontane­
ous thought represents the mental baseline; (b) the 
content of spontaneous thought is mainly related to 
personal goals.
Basic Properties of Spontaneous Thought
Spontaneous Mentation as Baseline or 
Default Mental State
First, as early observations suggested, spontane­
ous thought (in the sense of “unintended, nonwork­
ing, non-instrumental mental content that comes to 
mind unbidden and effortlessly”; Christoff, 2012, 
p. 52; Klinger, 2009) constitutes a baseline state of 
mental activity that occurs irresistibly in the absence 
of instrumental, 
task-oriented mental activity 
(Klinger, 1971). Spontaneous thought in this sense 
includes mostly such states as mind-wandering 
and other forms of daydreaming. In parallel, early 
brain imagers discovered that when their research 
participants turned from task mentation to mind­
wandering, certain brain structures, such as the pos­
terior cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, and
2 15

possibly medial temporal lobe, predictably became 
particularly active; they dubbed these the default 
mode network (e.g., Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, 
Huang, & Buckner., 2010; Christoff, Gordon, 
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Mason et al., 
2007; Raichle et al., 2001; Stawarczyk, Majerus, 
Maquet, 
& 
D ’Argembeau, 
2011b)— “default” 
here carrying the same meaning as the earlier term 
“baseline.”
To be clear, mind-wandering is not the only kind 
of conscious content that can be observed while 
the default mode network is active. That is, other 
self-referential and perceptually decoupled content 
may also occur (e.g., Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2009). 
Moreover, mind-wandering is often interwoven with 
executive systems (Christoff, 2012; Christoff et al.,
2009), with the default mode network being posi­
tively correlated with the frontoparietal control net­
work during internally focused tasks (e.g., Spreng, 
Stevens, Chamberlain, Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010). 
Still, mind-wandering is clearly a prominent part of 
the default mix (for a more extended discussion of 
the relationship between the default mode network 
and mind-wandering, see Klinger, 2013).
Mind-wandering 
accounts 
on 
average 
for 
between about a third and a half of conscious 
thoughts (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Klinger 
& Cox, 1987-1988). It would therefore be surpris­
ing if it could have evolved in the absence of impor­
tant contributions to human functioning.
Content of Spontaneous Mentation 
as Principally Goal-Related
A second important generalization is that 
the content of spontaneous waking thought and 
dreaming is prominently related to the individ­
uals goal pursuits, directly or indirectly, includ­
ing metaphorically. For animal species, pursuit 
and adequate attainment of goals is, of course, a 
categorical imperative for survival. Furthermore, 
progress toward one’s goals is an important deter­
minant of an individual’s positive affect (Klug & 
Maier, 2015). It is therefore not surprising that a 
chief focus of thought, spontaneous and other­
wise, is the pursuit of an individual’s goals, great 
and small. The goal pursuits in mind-wandering 
are mostly those in the individual’s current life, but 
may also, by association in spontaneous menta­
tion, be those of the past or contemplated future, as 
revealed through thought- or dream-sampling using 
probes (Hoelscher, Klinger, & Barta, 1981; Klinger, 
1978, 2009; Nikles, Brecht, Klinger, & Bursell,
1998). This view is also supported by indications
of spontaneous planning during mind-wandering 
(Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maj, Van der Linden, & D ’Argembeau, 
2011a)— presumably planning for action toward 
one of the participant’s goals. Studies of thoughts 
retrospectively recalled as thoughts about “today 
and yesterday” were also characterized, in com­
parison with things less thought about, as being 
about goals marked by stronger commitment or 
by obstacles to their attainment (Klinger, Barta, & 
Maxeiner, 1980).
Spontaneous thoughts are probably triggered 
by cues (meaningful stimuli) that may be external 
in the environment or internal in the person’s own 
mental activity and that are associated with one or 
another of the individual’s goals. Such cues may 
take many forms, such as the name of a loved one 
or something associated in the person’s mind with 
a loved one (or with an enemy, etc.), or a word, 
image, or smell associated with an ongoing goal 
pursuit, including cues related to failure to achieve 
a goal (Chatard & Selimbegovic, 2011, Study 6).
A growing literature indicates that becoming 
committed to pursuing a goal boosts the cognitive- 
processing priority for cues related to that goal. 
Thus, knowing a person’s goals is a good predictor 
of which cues (such as spoken words) the person 
will attend to, recall, and have thoughts or dreams 
about— namely, those that are associated with the 
person’s own goals, as compared with someone else’s 
goals (Hoelscher, Klinger, & Barta, 1981; Klinger, 
1978, 2009, 2013; Nikles et al., 1998). (The paral­
lels in findings with thoughts and dreams become 
less surprising in light of the argument that dreams 
are partly akin to mind-wandering in regard to 
both content and neural substrates; Domhoff & 
Fox, 2015.)
The processing priority may also be found in 
interference effects. For example, in the classic Stroop 
procedure, in which participants are under instruc­
tions to name as quickly as possible the color of the 
font of words displayed one at a time, participants 
typically respond more slowly when the meaning of 
the word conflicts with the color, such as green font 
for the word red. Presumably, word meaning takes 
precedence in cognitive processing over font color. 
Similarly, reaction times (RTs) in reporting the font 
color of goal-related words are typically on aver­
age longer than they are to non-goal-related words 
(Johnsen Laberg, Cox, Vaksdal, & Hugdahl, 1994; 
Riemann & McNally, 1995; Gilboa-Schechtman, 
Revelle, & Gotlib, 2000; Fadardi & Cox, 2008) or 
images. Presumably, the own-goal-relatedness of the
216
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

word’s meaning grabs processing priority over iden­
tification of font color, thereby slowing reporting 
of font color. This processing priority could readily 
account for the tendency of conscious mental con­
tent in mind-wandering to gravitate toward material 
related to the individuals own goals. The stimuli for 
shifts in the content of mind-wandering segments 
are presumably internal ones in the individual’s own 
ongoing stream of thought.
Interestingly, a recent study provided evidence 
for the notion that attention allocation is strongly 
influenced at early stages by the goal-relatedness of 
information (Vogt, Lozo, Koster, & De Houwer,
2011). In this study, individuals either received a 
disgust or a neutral induction. As expected, it was 
shown that a disgust induction elicited attention 
toward disgust-related pictures that were briefly pre­
sented. More important, individuals in the disgust 
induction condition also showed heightened atten­
tion for pictures representing cleanliness, which is 
due to disgust triggering the goal to be clean and 
attention thus being allocated to the means (e.g., 
cleaning products) of becoming clean.
It is, of course, hard to control particular seg­
ments of participants’ thought stream experimen­
tally so as to examine their role as internal cues to 
further thoughts. The evidence described in the pre­
ceding showed that subtle own-goal-related external 
stimuli strongly affected the content of thoughts 
and dreams, but those cues were external. However, 
in a different kind of interference method, Kopp, 
D ’Mello, and Mills (2015) instructed some par­
ticipants to list the features of an automobile and 
other participants to list their to-do plans for the 
next five days. Subsequently, all read a scientific text 
and indicated whenever they became aware of their 
mind wandering to task-unrelated thoughts (TUTs) 
or to task-related interference (TRIs). As predicted, 
the participants who had just reminded themselves 
of their short-term goals reported more TUTs and 
displayed less comprehension of the text than did 
the control group, whereas the groups did not differ 
in TRIs. The difference in TUTs mediated the dif­
ference in comprehension. Presumably, recounting 
one’s own goals triggered more subsequent distract­
ing thoughts, probably also about one’s own goals. 
Other research (McVay & Kane, 2013) has also 
shown with thought probes that displaying word 
triplets that contain words alluding to participants’ 
personal concerns, as compared with other word 
triplets, increased subsequent mind-wandering.
Mind-wandering is, 
of course, 
by defini­
tion thought that wanders off-task. However,
Dijksterhuis and his colleagues (e.g., Dijksterhuis & 
Meurs, 2006; Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006) have 
proposed that “unconscious thought,” defined as 
“thought or deliberation in the absence of con­
scious attention directed at the problem” at hand 
(Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren, & van Baaren, 2006, 
p. 1005), provides important contributions to goal 
attainment, such as superior decision-making. Their 
investigations have provided evidence in support of 
this position (but see Nieuwenstein et al., 2015). 
However, this evidence is based on a procedure that, 
typically and tacitly, operationalizes unconscious 
thought as whatever mental processing occurs dur­
ing a task designed to distract the participant from 
a previous assignment that is to be resumed after an 
intervening distractor task. This seems very similar 
to the operational definition commonly used for 
opportunities for mind-wandering, except that the 
distracting tasks assigned by Dijksterhuis’s group, 
such as the /z-back task (i.e., pressing a space bar when 
the character on a screen is the same as one n trials 
ago), are intended to block all conscious thought. 
What we now know about mind-wandering makes 
it likely that this procedure reduces but does not 
completely block it. It remains an open question 
as to the extent or way that “unconscious thought” 
and mind-wandering are in fact different processes. 
Perhaps future brain-imaging research can address 
this question.
The reason for raising this point here is that one 
investigation (Bos, Dijksterhuis, & van Baaren,
2008) finds clearly that, in the absence of an experi­
mentally induced goal to complete a task later, the 
contribution of unconscious thought to that task 
disappears. This supports the view that continuing 
the processing of task-relevant information depends 
on having established the current concern that 
underlies a goal pursuit. Relatedly, a review of other 
evidence indicates that “goal completion dissolves 
the cognitive, affective, and behavioural effects of 
goal striving” (Oettingen, 2012, p. 34), indicat­
ing that successful goal pursuit ends the cognitive 
effects of the respective current concern.
Duration and Frequency of Spontaneous 
Thought Segments
Thought segments are on average very brief. 
A group of 20 participants, who had received prac­
tice with feedback at estimating brief time lapses, 
rated the durations of their latest thought segments 
prior to probes, and of the segments just preced­
ing those, in both laboratory settings and, for 12 
of them, while living their otherwise normal daily
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
2 1 7

lives. A segment here was defined as a thought that 
is thematically homogeneous and ends when the 
topic shifts. These participants’ median estimates of 
segment duration were 5 seconds in both laboratory 
and daily-life settings, with a mean of 9 seconds in 
the laboratory setting and 14 seconds (with a stan­
dard deviation of 22 seconds) outside the laboratory 
(Klinger, 1978). These participants rated their con­
fidence in their own estimates as “very confident” 
64% of the time and as “moderately confident” 
35% of the time. Pope (1977) asked participants 
in a laboratory to signal with a key press every time 
their mind shifted to a new topic, which happened 
on average about 5 to 6 seconds apart. This agrees 
very approximately with the findings described in 
the preceding (Klinger, 1978).
These estimated durations applied to all of a par­
ticipant’s sampled thoughts, not just the spontane­
ous ones, but participants in Klinger’s (1978) sample 
also rated each thought on a variety of variables, 
including Directedness and Undirectedness, the lat­
ter being equivalent to spontaneity. The correlations 
of Undirectedness ratings with Duration for daily- 
life samples were -.18 for the latest thought segment 
and -.08 for the just-previous thought segment; 
the corresponding correlations for Directedness 
were .17 and .11. The corresponding correlations 
for Undirectedness in laboratory samples were -.05 
and .00; for Directedness, they were .06 and .02. 
Clearly, these are all very small correlations. It there­
fore seems safe to consider spontaneous thoughts, 
which make up between about a third and a half of 
people’s thought segments, to be of approximately 
the same duration as directed thoughts.
The implication is that mental content continu­
ally jumps from one goal-related topic to another in 
brief segments that may or may not reflect the same 
goal. A very rough estimate provides the general­
ization that waking mental activity over a 16-hour 
day contains about 4,000 such thought segments 
(Klinger, 1990), of which perhaps between about 
1,300 to 2,000 are spontaneous.
Emotional Responses in Relation 
to Spontaneous Thoughts
There are a number of reasons to believe that 
thoughts carry emotional charge and may, in fact, 
be triggered by at least low-amplitude, fragmentary 
emotional responses 
(proto-emotional responses; 
Klinger, 1996). First, there are substantial intra­
individual correlations, across words, between 
the strength of participants’ self-rated emotional 
response to each word and the extent to which
they rated each word as related to their “important 
concerns, problems, worries, or goals that currently 
preoccupy” them. These correlations range from 
.45 (Bock & Klinger, 1986) to a set of correlations 
that ranged from 0.57 to 0.65 in four unpublished 
data sets.
Second, goal-relatedness of thoughts is associ­
ated with emotional arousal. For example, another 
investigation (Nikula, Klinger, & Larson-Gutman, 
1993) prompted participants for their thought con­
tent when experimenters observed unsolicited skin- 
conductance responses, which are often taken to 
indicate emotional response. Ratings for the goal- 
relatedness of thoughts were at those times signifi­
cantly higher than when participants’ thoughts were 
sampled during electodermally quiescent periods. 
Using a different approach, inducing an affectively 
negative concern experimentally led to increased 
mind-wandering and, subsequent to the mind­
wandering episodes, continuing negative affect, 
suggesting that the mental content of the mind­
wandering contributed to maintaining the negative 
affect (Stawarczyk, Majerus, & D ’Argembeau, 2013; 
see also Watkins, Grafton, Weinstein, & MacLeod, 
2015, in regard to “emotional extrapolation”).
Also, in a lexical-decision task (pressing a but­
ton as quickly as possible to indicate whether a let­
ter on a screen was an X or a Y; Schneider, 1987), 
one side of the screen contained words intended to 
be peripheral distracting stimuli and probably not 
consciously perceived. The emotional-arousal effect 
of the distractor words (as subsequently rated by the 
participants) was inversely correlated with reaction 
time to the letters being judged as X or Y; that is, 
words that participants rated as emotionally arous­
ing slowed their task response— gained higher cog­
nitive processing priority over the assigned lexical 
decision-making— in a way similar to that found 
with goal-related words in the Stroop. That this 
really was an effect of emotion is supported by the 
finding that the interference with task responses was 
associated with participants’ scores on the Affective 
Intensity Measure (Larsen & Diener, 1987). Given 
the preceding evidence that goal-related thoughts 
accompany emotional arousal and that mind­
wandering mostly features goal-related thoughts, it 
is of interest that mind-wandering is itself associated 
with pupillary dilation, often viewed as indicative 
of emotional arousal (Franklin, Broadway, Mrazek, 
Smallwood, & Schooler, 2013).
This similarity between emotional arousal and 
goal-relatedness in the effects of distractor words 
on cognitive processing is consistent with the view
218
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

that “being goal-related” means “being emotion­
ally arousing.” It presumably follows that the 
emotional tenor of mind-wandering is to some 
extent determined by the affective quality of the 
emotional response to cues, which accompanies or 
perhaps evokes the next segments of thought flow. 
Glowing recollections of a good time at a party, of 
recognition for an accomplishment, or of a lov­
ing social interaction would expectedly carry a 
strongly positive emotional charge. Recollections 
of personal rejection or failure— threats to or 
loss 
of important 
goal 
attainments— would 
expectedly carry a strongly negative emotional 
charge. Furthermore, mood at one time point is 
associated with the affective tone of subsequent 
thoughts (Poerio, Totterdell, & Miles, 2013). 
Correspondingly, emotionally charged thought 
segments are likely to lead to further segments 
of similar affective quality, whether anticipa­
tion of future positive consequences in the case 
of a foregoing positive segment, or, in the case 
of foregoing negative segments, subsequent seg­
ments of self-examination, self-criticism, anger 
at others with anticipation of future avoidance of 
them or revenge, and imagined future episodes of 
rejection, failure, or loss. With strong emotional 
charge, as when important goals are involved, the 
resulting thought stream may be funneled into 
loops of thematically and emotionally related or 
event-repetitive content, as in rumination (rumi­
nation is discussed at greater length in a later 
section).
Adaptiveness of Spontaneous Thoughts
The preceding view on spontaneous thoughts 
suggests both adaptive and maladaptive conse­
quences. That spontaneous thoughts must have sig­
nificant adaptive benefits is a clear logical inference 
from the apparent fact that humans have evolved to 
spend up to half of their mental activity engaging 
in them.
The notion that such an ubiquitous process must 
have significant adaptive advantages for the human 
species has received recognition (Baars, 2010; 
Klinger, 1990; Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna,
2013), but so far only limited research attention, 
although that is gradually changing, including 
integration with advancing neuroscientific find­
ings 
(Andrews-Hanna, 
2012; Andrews-Hanna, 
Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014; Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015; Gruberger 
Ben-Simon, Levkovitz, Zangen, & Hendler, 2011). 
From a purely inductive standpoint, based on
informal observation of the contents of spontane­
ous thoughts, a number of possible benefits are 
already apparent.
Keeping Track of Goals
First, given the brevity of most mind-wandering 
segments and the large number of them during a 
particular day, and given the tendency for these seg­
ments to cycle through thematic material relevant 
to an individuals numerous current goals, it is 
apparent that mind-wandering serves the function 
of reviewing an individuals agenda of goals other 
than the goal being currently pursued. This must 
surely refresh memory of these other goals and, 
most likely, serve as a reminder mechanism for tak­
ing timely action.
Promoting Planning
Second, given that a substantial portion of 
mind-wandering or daydream segments are future- 
oriented (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2010; Baird et al., 
2011; Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; 
Klinger & Cox, 1987-1988; Smallwood, Nind, 
& O ’Connor, 2009; Smallwood, Schooler, et al.,
2011), they provide an arena for spontaneous plan­
ning or contributions to planning. Indeed, there is 
now evidence for such a planning function. On the 
one hand, these spontaneous contributions are in 
most instances imaginary fragments that bear on 
goals and plans without providing a linear planning 
process (Schacter, 2012). On the other hand, there 
is no reason to believe that mind-wandering cannot 
wander onto and perhaps be interrupted by brief 
operant (i.e., instrumental) segments. Researchers 
discovered that mind-wandering often includes 
an interweaving of default-network activity with 
executive brain systems (Christoff, 2012; Christoff, 
Ream, & Gabrieli, 2004; Christoff et al., 2009; 
Mason et al., 2007; Spreng et al., 2010). One would 
expect such a process to contribute to the formula­
tion of concrete plans for future behavior, as found 
by Baird et al. (2011) and Stawarczyk et al. (201 la). 
For example, spontaneous imagery of an upcoming 
party might portray an awkward interaction with 
an individual who is expected to be present, which 
might stimulate some operant thoughts of how to 
handle that situation. Spreng et al. (2010), based 
on fMRI observations, proposed a three-network 
model of how this switching process happens. The 
three networks are the default-mode network, the 
dorsal attention network, and a frontoparietal con­
trol network. The first two have “an intrinsic com­
petitive relationship” (Spreng et al., 2010, p. 303),
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
219

whereas the third plays a key role in the switch back 
and forth.
Creative Problem-Solving
It has long been recognized in popular culture 
that difficult problems requiring non-routine and 
hence creative solutions can benefit from merely 
allowing time to pass before trying to finalize them, 
as in the advice to “sleep on” the problem. It is likely 
that not only sleep, but also periods of spontaneous 
mentation, such as mind-wandering, facilitate this 
kind of incubation. There are numerous anecdotal 
accounts of people having important insights into 
difficult problems during carriage rides, bathing, 
taking a walk or a nap, and so on— that is, activities 
conducive to spontaneous mentation (e.g., Klinger, 
1990; Singer, 2009). Now there are also relevant 
controlled experiments.
Dijksterhuis and Meurs (2009), investigating 
the efficacy of “unconscious thought” (Dijksterhuis 
& Nordgren, 2006), assigned participants to tasks 
such as finding creative names for pastas or unusual 
uses for a brick and placed them in one of three 
conditions: immediate responses, or responses 
following three-minute periods of either focused 
thought about the problem or a distractor task. 
In three experiments, the participants responded 
with more creative or divergent responses after the 
distractor task than after the other activities. The 
investigators hoped to design distractor tasks that 
would suppress conscious thought, but from what 
we know about mind-wandering— very brief seg­
ments, focused on unmet goals— it seems unlikely 
that the suppression could have been complete 
(Singer, 1966). It is therefore likely but uncertain 
that spontaneous thoughts could have been respon­
sible for the results.
However, Baird et al. (2012) provided partici­
pants with two opportunities to think of unusual 
uses for common objects. Between these opportu­
nities, some participants engaged in a very unde­
manding task that would provide plenty of time 
for spontaneous thoughts, and others received a 
very demanding task that would limit spontaneous 
mentation. The group who had the undemand­
ing interim task performed significantly better 
than the other group on the second opportunity 
to come up with creative solutions. Evidently the 
chance to engage in spontaneous thought, as in 
mind-wandering, fostered the necessary incuba­
tion of creative solutions in a way that improved 
performance.
Reviewing Past Experiences
O f course, coming up with new ideas often 
involves drawing on ones past experiences. Also, 
there is pleasure to be savored when reliving ones 
past good times and successes, perhaps in relation to 
hopes for more of them. Furthermore, when faced 
with ones own limitations and failures, transcend­
ing these often thrusts one into scrutinizing what 
one might have done differently, sometimes leading 
to useful insights that improve performance later 
on. Indeed, the contents of spontaneous thoughts 
and dreams include a substantial portion of memo­
ries and reflections on past events (Andrews-Hanna 
et al., 2010; Klinger & Cox, 1987-1988), especially 
during negative moods (Smallwood et al., 2011; 
Smallwood & O ’Connor, 2011). Reviewing past 
experiences for benefits to future endeavors is pre­
sumably advantageous in reaching one’s goals.
Reduced Delay Discounting
Delay discounting is the phenomenon in which 
people, given the choice, prefer to receive smaller 
rewards soon rather than larger rewards later; that 
is, they presumably discount the value to them 
of the reward the more remote it will be in time. 
This preference may keep a person from maximiz­
ing well-being by settling for less than is available, 
be it money, career satisfaction, or a solid personal 
relationship. There is evidence that people whose 
minds wander more than others display less delay 
discounting (Smallwood, Ruby, & Singer, 2013), 
presumably therefore displaying more patience and 
arriving at more prudent choices. Unfortunately, 
because this evidence is correlational rather than 
experimental, one cannot be sure regarding the 
direction of causality.
Consolidation of Memories
There is ample evidence that sleep helps to con­
solidate long-term memories (e.g., Pace-Schott, 
Germain, & Milad, 2015), especially during rapid- 
eye-movement (REM) sleep (McDevitt, Duggan, & 
Mednick, 2014) and especially with regard to goal­
relevant features (Bennion, Payne, & Kensinger, 
2015). It now appears that periods of spontaneous 
thinking confer a similar, albeit weaker, consoli­
dation benefit. In an extensive review of relevant 
literature, Christoff, Gordon, and Smith (2011) 
concluded that “recent findings suggest that the off­
line processing that occurs during periods of rest is 
associated with the kind of memory consolidation 
processes that occur during sleep” (p. 264).
220
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

Superiority in Shifting Between Internal 
Thought Flow and External Stimuli
There are individual differences in control over 
the direction of attention between internal and 
external processes. The ability to shift back and forth 
appears positively related to the individuals work­
ing memory capacity (Rummel & Boywitt, 2014). 
Additionally, trait measures of mind-wandering 
appear inversely related to the size of attentional 
blinks (Thomson, Ralph, Besner, & Smilek, 2015); 
that is, when individuals are presented with a pair 
of stimuli in rapid enough succession, they do not 
register the second of those stimuli. The maximum 
inter-stimulus interval for this to happen is the size 
of an individual’s attentional blink. In the study by 
Thomson et al. (2015), high scores on trait mind­
wandering predicted shorter blinks, meaning that 
people whose minds wander more can on average 
shift more rapidly than others to the second stimu­
lus in such a pair. Thomson et al. suggest that this 
is an indication of adaptively finer control over the 
focus of attention.
Facilitating Action Toward Goal-Attainment
Setting goals and moving on them generally 
begin with mental processes, often spontaneous, 
that recognize the desirability of an outcome, its 
attainability, and the means necessary for attaining 
it. It is, of course, difficult in observational research 
to disentangle these processes for purposes of estab­
lishing what leads to what. The closest that inves­
tigators have come so far is by instructing human 
participants to initiate daydream-like experiences 
and to vary something about the nature of these 
experiences, such as what the person might look 
forward to enjoying as a result of goal attainment 
or the obstacles that the person might imagine hav­
ing to overcome (e.g., Oettingen, Pak, & Schnetter, 
2001). These imaginal segments are clearly not 
completely spontaneous in regard to their initiation 
and certain features of content, but once initiated 
and broadly determined by the investigator, they 
then unfold in perhaps partly spontaneous fash­
ion. Experimental evidence indicates that induced 
daydreaming of this kind can influence subsequent 
real-life goal attainment. Oettingen et al. (2001) 
have in a number of studies established that optimal 
goal-attainment “requires explicit, simultaneous 
mental elaborations of both the desired future and 
present reality as instigated in the mental contrast­
ing procedure” (p. 748), as for example reaching 
health-promoting goals (Johannessen, Oettingen,
& Mayer, 2012), exercise goals (Sheeran et al.,
2013), and a variety of goals in a depressed sample 
(Fritzsche et al., 2016). Dwelling only on the plea­
sures of attainment or only on the obstacles in its 
way tended to be counterproductive in leading par­
ticipants to reach their goals (e.g., Oettingen, 1996), 
as, for instance, in their teachers’ ratings of actual 
achievement (Oettingen et al., 2001). Other stud­
ies of thoughts initiated by experimental instruc­
tions but allowed to unfold spontaneously have 
also found effects on intentions or actions likely to 
advance particular goal pursuits (e.g., Gollwitzer, 
1990; Gollwitzer, Heckhausen, & Ratajczak, 1990; 
Nenkov & Gollwitzer, 2012). Whether these find­
ings with only partially spontaneous thoughts will 
transfer to the effects of fully spontaneous thoughts 
remains to be demonstrated. (For a summary of 
research related to mental contrasting and prospec­
tive thinking, see Oettingen, 2012).
Costs of Spontaneous Thoughts
Research 
on 
the 
consequences 
of mind­
wandering has focused heavily on its costs in the 
form of attentional lapses and degraded perfor­
mance. However, it is important to keep in mind 
that neuroscientists became interested in mind­
wandering and the default mode network as their 
participants switched from working on tasks to 
more relaxed intervals between tasks (Raichle et al., 
2001). Mind-wandering occurs most often when 
the brain is less than fully occupied with tasks 
(such as during rest or undemanding tasks) or the 
external environment (e.g., Andrews-Hanna et al.,
2010), when it is often safe to decouple brain activity 
(Smallwood, Tipper, et al., 2013) briefly from the 
external environment and ongoing tasks.
Because of this timing, there may be only mod­
est impacts of mind-wandering on performance, 
but in other cases the impact can be substantial. 
Mooneyham and Schooler (2013) have presented 
an extensive review of empirical work on these 
costs, which include impaired comprehension 
when reading, impaired sustained attention to 
tasks, poorer performance on measures of work­
ing memory and general aptitude, and, on average, 
lowered mood. Since the publication of this review, 
Mrazek, Phillips, Franklin, Broadway, and Schooler
(2013) have similarly reported impaired reading 
comprehension associated with prompt-assessed 
mind-wandering. A number of further studies have 
found additional costs: attentional lapses associ­
ated with impaired performance on the Stroop
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
221

task (Unsworth & McMillan, 2014), a significant 
relationship between mind-wandering proclivity 
and frequency of falls in older adults, presumably 
at least partly because of inattention to external 
stimuli (Nagamatsu, Kam, Liu-Ambrose, Chan, & 
Handy, 2013), particularly in the left visual field 
(Kam, Nagamatsu, & Handy, 2014), and reduced 
empathic responses to others’ physical discomfort, 
as assessed by participants’ ratings and electrophysi- 
ologically with event-related potentials (Kam, Xu, 
& Handy, 2014). By contrast, when leaving aside its 
perseverative, ruminative forms, mind-wandering 
appears unrelated to most measures of health 
(Ottaviani & Couyoumdjian, 2013; Ottaviani, 
Shapiro, & Couyoumdjian, 2013).
Nevertheless, the cognitive impairment found 
in these studies must be qualified by other findings 
that even during mind-wandering, people retain 
some sensitivity to external cues when these relate 
to potentially important matters or when a stimulus 
is unexpected (Kam et al., 2013). This conclusion 
is consistent with sleeping or otherwise occupied 
participants’ disproportionate response to and 
incorporation of unexpected cues related to their 
goal pursuits (Hoelscher, Klinger, & Barta, 1981; 
Klinger, 1978). Furthermore, the interference of 
mind-wandering with task activity appears to affect 
especially response inhibition and working mem­
ory, but not set-shifting (assessed in this case by 
delays caused after shifts in task rules within a series 
of trials; Kam & Handy, 2014). The costs of mind­
wandering to task performance are therefore appar­
ently different for different aspects of performance 
and different kinds of external cues, the brain seem­
ingly weighing the relative importance of external 
information versus maintaining the ongoing stream 
of thought (Handy & Kam, 2015).
Spontaneous Thoughts and Mood
The findings for the cognitive costs of mind­
wandering are easily understandable. Perceptual 
decoupling is bound to interfere to some extent 
with absorbing one’s reading material and to dis­
tract from other ongoing tasks, including, of course, 
those that are measures of a person’s cognitive 
capacity. Mooneyham and Schooler’s (2013) gen­
eralization regarding lowered mood, however, must 
be treated with caution.
The generalization that mind-wandering low­
ers mood was misleadingly emphasized in the title 
and summary statements of an otherwise impor­
tant article by Killingsworth and Gilbert (2010), 
an experience-sampling study with a huge sample.
Close inspection of their data fails to support the 
generalization that mind-wandering as such low­
ers mood, only that the thematic content of mind­
wandering segments influences mood. Inasmuch 
as minds wander to concerns about one’s own 
goal pursuits, especially those that are still incom­
plete and those that may be in trouble (Klinger, 
Barta, & Maxeiner, 1980), one might expect lower, 
more serious moods on average. However, in 
Killingsworth and Gilbert’s own data, participants 
rated 42.5% of their mind-wandering episodes 
as about something “pleasant,” with mood then 
averaging slightly above the overall mood average, 
roughly equaling mood when not mind-wandering. 
They rated 31 % of the remaining mind-wandering 
episodes as about something “neutral,” with aver­
age mood slightly below overall average but above 
the mood scale’s midpoint. Participants rated mood 
as sharply below overall average and below the 
scale midpoint only during the 26.5% of mind­
wandering samples that they characterized as about 
something “unpleasant.” Thus, only particular 
thought content, not mind-wandering as such, was 
associated with substantially lowered mood (cf. also 
Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 2013; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Van der Linden, & D ’Argembeau, 2012). 
This was also the conclusion reached in subsequent 
experience-sampling studies (Marchetti, Koster, & 
de Raedt, 2013; Poerio, Totterdell, & Miles, 2013; 
see also, Fox, Thompson, Andrews-Hanna, & 
Christoff, 2014).
Maladaptive and Excessive Daydreaming
There has recently been an upsurge of interest in 
a condition in which people spend large amounts of 
time in imaginative daydreaming, usually involving 
imaginary companions or casts of characters that 
recur over time, sometimes as long as years, which 
gains a kind of quasi-reality (Bigelsen & Schupak, 
2011; Schupak & Rosenthal, 2009). Interestingly, 
an early case report was documented by Fere in his 
La Pathologie des emotions (1892/1899). M. M. was 
a 37-year-old commercial man, married and with 
children, who suffered from long periods of absent- 
mindedness. During these zone-outs, he was some­
what insulated from the surrounding environment 
or carried on his daily duties in a rather unconscious 
and mechanical way. Nevertheless, his daydreams 
were very structured and coherent, given that in his 
imaginary life “M. M. had constructed at Chaville 
on the borders of the wood, a pavilion surrounded 
by a garden. By successive additions the pavilion 
became a chateau, the garden a park; stables horses
2 2 2
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

and pieces of water were introduced to ornament 
the domain. [ . . .  ] A woman arrived to animate this 
scene: two children were born, it only remained to 
make this ideal menage legitimate. This was the only 
drawback to the happiness of our dreamer” (Fere, 
1892/1899, p. 316). Although this is an anecdotal 
report and does not represent the virtually unlim­
ited variety of people’s daydreams, the generation 
of vivid and emotionally salient, imaginary second 
lives recurs in recent reports of excessive daydream­
ing as well (Bigelsen & Schupak, 2011).
Importantly, recent accounts show that exces­
sive daydreamers are fully aware that the persons 
depicted in their daydreams are fictional— there 
is no question here of delusion or other psychotic 
phenomena— and the range of the daydream­
ers’ ability to function in real life may range from 
excellent to seriously impaired. These daydreamers 
appear to develop an attachment to their daydream 
sequences that makes it hard to abandon them. 
Attempts to suppress them may lead to a yearn­
ing, even grief over their loss. These daydreamers 
are variably accepting or distressed by their habitual 
daydreaming, especially if they perceive that the 
daydreams interfere with fully actualizing their 
potential in real-life goal attainment.
It is unclear to what extent unusual amounts of 
habitual fanciful daydreaming can be considered 
a particular psychological disorder. Certainly if it 
distresses or significantly handicaps the daydreamer 
and the daydreamer feels incapable of controlling 
it, it can at least be considered a condition that 
merits clinical intervention. However, its manifesta­
tions vary enough across daydreamers that there is 
no clear single psychopathology with which it can 
be classified. In some ways it qualifies as obsessive 
thought, but it seems distinct from that diagnosis 
in that, whereas its existence in this quantity dis­
tresses the daydreamer, the experience of it while it 
happens feels positively satisfying, and suppressing 
it leads to grief—a sense of loss of the daydreamed 
pseudo-reality— rather than to anxiety. It has addic­
tive properties, but at this point there appears to 
be no research that establishes these. Addiction is a 
matter of warped decision-making, warped choices. 
In the case of addiction to substances such as alco­
hol, there are physical changes that skew decisions 
by overweighting the subjective value of the sub­
stance. It is unclear that daydreaming can instill the 
same changes. However, it is known that imagining 
perceptions or actions engages much of the brain’s 
systems that would be engaged by actual percep­
tions and actions (Kosslyn, Thompson, & Alpert,
1997). Perhaps longer-term imagining of fictional 
individuals can foster emotional attachments in 
the same way that extended personal contacts can 
foster emotional attachments to actual others. 
Terminating the fictional relationship may then 
yield a goal-disengagement process (Klinger, 1975, 
1977; Klinger & Cox, 2011a) somewhat similar 
to that produced by the loss of a valued real other 
person.
Rumination
Rumination is a form of repetitive self-focus 
that leads to and exacerbates depressive symptoms 
(Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008; 
Spasojevic & Alloy, 2001). Rumination has been 
conceptualized in various ways, emphasizing either 
the trait or the context-dependent nature of rumina­
tion (Smith & Alloy, 2009). Moreover, various the­
ories have provided different proposals on the main 
triggering events of rumination, which include neg­
ative mood as well as goal non-attainment (Smith 
& Alloy, 2009).
THE CURRENT CONCERNS APPROACH 
TO RUMINATION
Th z goal theory o f  current concerns described earlier 
(e.g., Klinger, 1977, 2013; Klinger & Cox, 2011a) 
is helpful in explaining many of the key features of 
rumination; that is, goal-related cues, presumably 
including those in one’s own thought stream, carry 
varying degrees and kinds of emotional charge and 
receive processing priority. Thoughts with strongly 
emotional content would have a high likelihood 
of evoking associated subsequent thoughts. These 
are also likely to carry a similar valence of emo­
tional charge (positive or negative). This process is 
apparent in, for example, people happily in love, 
where affect is predominantly positive, but also in 
people grieving over a rejection, loss, or significant 
failure, especially while they are disengaging from 
their seemingly doomed goal (Klinger, 1975, 1977; 
Klinger & Cox, 2011a), when affect is predomi­
nantly negative. The focused nature of the resulting 
streams of thought is precisely what we observe in 
rumination. Given the role of emotional response 
in this process, one would predict that individuals 
high in trait affectivity would be especially prone 
to fall into ruminative states. The frequently dem­
onstrated high correlation between trait rumination 
and measures of negative affect supports this predic­
tion (e.g., Watkins et al., 2015).
In support of the idea of narrowed cognitive 
processing of goal- and emotion-related cues, Grol,
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
2 2 3

Hertel, Koster, and De Raedt (2015) instructed 
participants to imagine an emotionally wrenching 
scenario (having just run over people with ones 
car) and then either dwell on their negative feelings 
about it, or engage in problem-solving thinking. In a 
visuo-spatial task where participants needed to pro­
cess self- versus non-self-related stimuli and detect 
targets in the periphery, participants high in trait 
rumination showed attentional narrowing toward 
personally relevant stimuli, with reduced retention 
of personally irrelevant peripheral stimuli. Given 
the close relationship between trait rumination and 
negative affectivity, it would appear that the strong 
negative emotions provoked by the ruminative 
instructions to focus on an emotionally devastating 
scenario led to thoughts responding repeatedly to 
ongoing emotionally charged stimuli, both internal 
(ideation) and external (self-referential experimen­
tal stimuli), thereby maintaining the narrow focus 
of rumination. This notion of difficulties in control­
ling attentional-processing priorities can be related 
to a large body of research on information process­
ing and rumination, to which we now turn.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES AND IMPAIRED 
ATTENTIONAL DISENGAGEMENT THAT MODERATE 
COGNITIVE AND EMOTIONAL MECHANISMS 
IN RUMINATION
Nothing in the 
current concerns approach 
excludes other factors from operating in rumination, 
such as individual differences in attentional focus, 
inhibitory ability, or properties of working memory 
and executive control functions (e.g., Whitmer & 
Gotlib, 2013). On the one hand, current concerns 
theory describes mechanisms that govern the flow of 
spontaneous thoughts in general and indicates how 
these can operate to produce ruminative thought. 
Individual differences enter only insofar as differ­
ent individuals are committed to different sets of 
goals and vary in the properties and strength of their 
emotional reactions. However, this formulation can 
be mapped onto theories that emphasize the cogni­
tive processes related to rumination and that focus 
on the way in which certain emotionally salient 
thoughts receive cognitive processing priority. These 
theories are interesting to explain the persistence of 
rumination, despite efforts to control this process.
Key mechanisms for the cycling in rumination 
within a narrow content field have been proposed 
in a number of theories. Many of these theories 
emphasize individual differences in cognitive pro­
cessing styles. For instance, attentional focus theory 
(Whitmer & Gotlib, 2013) provides a variable of
individual differences in the degree to which indi­
viduals constrict their attention and thought con­
tent to particular cognitive themes after they are 
started. This constriction is enhanced in negative 
mood states and is weakened during positive moods. 
An individuals typical degree of constriction would 
moderate the likelihood that a negatively toned 
ruminative stream, once started, will continue.
Individual differences in emotional extrapola­
tion, posited by Watkins, Grafton, Weinstein, and 
MacLeod (2015), refers to the likelihood that an 
initial mood state associated with some event, pre­
sumably including a thought segment, will persist 
to color expectancies for subsequent events. Current 
concerns theory also posits some degree of such emo­
tional continuity, in that the thematic content of an 
emotionally potent, goal-related thought segment 
is predicted to lead by association to thematically 
and emotionally related (but not identical) subse­
quent thought segments. This hypothesized con­
tinuity is confirmed by findings of negative affect 
being maintained across mind-wandering segments 
(Stawarczyk, Majerus, & D ’Argembeau, 2013). 
Watkins et al. (2015), moreover, theorize that the 
extent of such continuity constitutes a kind of indi­
vidual trait. People high in emotional extrapolation 
would experience amplified emotional continuity. 
When the emotion is predominantly negative, as 
in trait negative affectivity (Tellegen et al., 1988), 
the trait would dispose toward greater likelihood of 
rumination.
The impaired disengagement factor posited by 
Koster, De Lissnyder, Derakshan, and De Raedt 
(2011) as a prominent route toward depression 
refers to impaired control of attention that weak­
ens the individuals ability to switch from a stream 
of negative repetitive thoughts to something more 
constructive that might help to dispel the negative 
mood. Importantly for this formulation, Koster 
et al. (2011) propose that, with sufficient repeti­
tion and progressive impairment of attentional con­
trol, the resulting rumination becomes habitual, 
further hindering its interruption and redirection. 
This approach is, then, not primarily an individual- 
differences approach, but suggests a pathogenic 
extension of the thought-flow processes described 
earlier.
Thus, these important approaches identify dif­
ferent possible mechanisms responsible for indi­
vidual differences in susceptibility to rumination by 
moderating the processes posited by current concerns 
theory, whose model assumes that, with a power­
ful enough emotional tone, any goal pursuit (or
224
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

failed pursuit) can become the subject of repetitive 
thought by any individual. Such repetitive thought 
is tantamount to rumination, or may be so in the 
presence of certain additional qualities, depending 
on the definition of rumination.
Interesting empirical support for information­
processing theories of rumination comes from 
studies that attempt to experimentally improve 
attentional or cognitive control where rumination 
and depressive symptoms are studied as outcome 
variables. For instance, in a recent study where indi­
viduals with heightened levels of rumination were 
allocated to either a cognitive control training ver­
sus an active control condition, it was observed that 
individuals undergoing cognitive control training 
for two weeks showed lower emotional reactivity to 
a lab stressor as well as lowered levels of depresso- 
genic rumination during a subsequent exam period 
(Hoorelbeke, Koster, Vanderhasselt, Callewaert, & 
Demeyer, 2015).
RESPONSE STYLES AND CONTROL THEORIES 
OF RUMINATION
The most influential theory of rumination is 
currently still the response styles theory (RST), which 
defines rumination as “behaviors and thoughts that 
focus ones attention on ones depressive symp­
toms and on the implications of those symptoms” 
(Nolen-Hoeksema 1991, p. 569). According to 
this theory, individuals react to negative mood by 
initiating ruminative processing with the aim of 
enhancing their self-understanding, which unfor­
tunately leads to a paradoxical increase in negative 
mood (Lyubomirsky & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1995). 
Within the RST, two specific ruminative subtypes 
have been defined and are worth mentioning: reflec­
tive pondering and depressive brooding (Treynor, 
Gonzalez, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2003). Reflective 
pondering is considered the less maladaptive form 
of rumination, as it reflects the extent to which 
individuals try to improve their mood by engaging 
in problem-focused thinking. Brooding is consid­
ered the more detrimental form of rumination, as 
it represents “a passive comparison of ones current 
situation with some unachieved standard” (Treynor 
et al., 2003, p. 256).
Importantly, Martin and Tesser, 
consistent 
with earlier current-concerns theory and evidence 
regarding depression (Klinger, 1975, 1977; Klinger, 
Barta, & Maxeiner, 1980), proposed a control theory 
account of rumination. This theory proposes that, 
as in the earlier current-concerns account of depres­
sion, state rumination is initiated by, and focuses
on, a perceived discrepancy between one’s goals and 
one’s current state and continues until the goal is 
either attained or abandoned (Martin & Tesser, 
1989, 1996). Compared with RST, this account is 
focused less on depressed mood but can be applied 
more broadly to a wide range of circumstances. 
Interestingly, it has been found that cuing unre­
solved personal goals indeed was associated with an 
increased number of negative ruminative thought 
intrusions during a sustained attention-to-response 
task, compared with cuing a resolved personal goal 
(Roberts, Watkins, & Wills, 2013).
In an attempt to link the RST and the control the­
ory of rumination, Watkins and Nolen-Hoeksema
(2014) proposed that rumination can be conceptu­
alized as a mental habit (Hertel, 2004) that starts 
with episodes of self-focused repetitive thought, 
triggered by goal discrepancies, which become 
habitual through an automatic associative process 
between repetitive thinking and its context (e.g., 
physical location, mood). When, over time, these 
contexts trigger a passive focus on negative content 
combined with low levels of concrete thinking (see 
Watkins, 2008), the habit of depressive rumination 
is acquired. The latter type of habitual rumination 
is thought to be context-independent of goals and 
resistant to change.
RUMINATION AND SPONTANEOUS THOUGHTS
Given the relevance of goals and mental habits in 
spontaneous thoughts, one might suspect a rather 
large overlap between ruminative thinking and day­
dreaming. However, correlational studies clearly 
report only moderate correlations (Epel et al., 2013; 
Marchetti, Van de Putte, & Koster, 2014). One 
explanation for this is that the term daydreaming 
is often used to refer specifically to fanciful men­
tal streams, whereas rum ination is generally serious 
and uncreative. In these senses, daydreaming and 
rumination are by no means the same phenom­
enon, even though both can usually be construed 
as instances of mind-wandering, and both are gen­
erally instances of spontaneous thought. In a new 
integrative framework aiming to understand the 
link between spontaneous thought and cognitive 
risk factors, Marchetti, Koster, Klinger, and Alloy 
(2016) propose that spontaneous thought, defined 
most broadly, can act as a context in which cognitive 
risk factors for depression such as rumination (but 
also thoughts of hopelessness, negative self-esteem, 
and cognitive reactivity) can be readily expressed, 
which is especially the case in conditions of height­
ened negative affectivity. In that sense, rumination
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
225

is a specific subtype of spontaneous thought char­
acterized by dominant negative thought content 
that is processed in an abstract and repetitive way so 
as to lock the train of thoughts into a thematically 
narrow content channel (Klinger, 2013; Watkins,
2008). Here it is important to note that this differs 
from many other instances in which spontaneous 
thought unfolds in an open, expansive, and diver­
gent way (Marchetti et ah, 2014; Watkins, 2010).
An interesting finding in this regard is empirical 
evidence showing that the affective consequences 
of spontaneous thought are multifactorially deter­
mined, based on the presence of individual- 
difference variables that heighten the susceptibility 
to engaging in state rumination (Marchetti, Koster, 
& De Raedt, 2013). More specifically, rest-related 
spontaneous thoughts seem capable of shaping tran­
sitory ruminative thoughts in individuals showing, 
primarily, medium to high levels of trait cognitive 
reactivity and, secondarily, significant trait levels of 
ruminative brooding.
Clinical Implications
Traditionally, clinical interventions have targeted 
only selective kinds of spontaneous thought, such 
as maladaptive aspects of daydreaming and rumina­
tion, which show partial overlap with spontaneous 
thought (Marchetti et al., 2016; Watkins, 2010). 
However, examining the content and, perhaps, fre­
quency of spontaneous thought in general could 
have some interesting clinical implications that are 
worthy of further examination.
Spontaneous Thought as Ancillary 
Information About Motivational Structure
Broadly speaking and in keeping with a trans­
diagnostic approach, psychopathology is often 
characterized and maintained by problematic goals 
architecture. This can take a number of different 
forms. First, psychopathology, such as anxiety and 
depression, is frequently characterized by strong 
avoidance-related goals (see Hayes, Wilson, Gifford, 
Follette, & Strosahl, 1996), often based on negative 
experiences and avoiding danger, rejection, or hurt. 
This has important consequences for the cognitive 
processing of situations. For instance, for someone 
with social anxiety and the goal to avoid rejection by 
others, a social situation may cue attention to social 
threat and the context-specific means to reach safety 
(e.g., excuses to leave a gathering early), which can 
impair new learning and maintain threat-related 
beliefs. Frequently, such avoidance-related goals 
outweigh other more positively oriented goals so
as to render individuals less likely to process posi­
tive information and/or actively pursue desired 
outcomes.
Given the dependence of spontaneous thought 
content on an individuals goals, these processes can 
be predicted to determine the content of the indi­
vidual s thought flow. Although cognitive therapies 
try to change clients’ beliefs and mental habits as 
a way to change behavior, it is ultimately the cli­
ent’s behavior and affect that the therapy tries to 
influence. Insofar as spontaneous thought con­
tent is itself troublesome, these procedures have 
some merit, but altering a client’s pattern of goal 
pursuits— the client’s m otivational structure— can 
also predictably contribute to changed cognitive 
processing and spontaneous thought flow. Thus, 
one strategy for changing troublesome spontane­
ous thought flow is to change the motivational 
structure— the individual’s set of goals— that largely 
determines its content and frequency.
Psychopathology can also be rooted in negative 
life events where individuals see important goals 
blocked (Klinger, 1975, 1977; Klinger et al., 1980). 
Here it is crucial for individuals to be capable of 
disengaging from unattainable goals and to reori­
ent and engage with goals that are more attainable. 
For various reasons (e.g., perfectionism, high stan­
dards, high valuation of the goal, lack of promising 
alternative goals, etc.) individuals can experience 
problems with disengaging from desired but unat­
tainable goals or engaging with new goals. These 
states powerfully impact spontaneous thought con­
tent and affect.
Based on our theoretical position that the con­
tent of spontaneous thought has important links to 
each individual’s goals, this content (such as mind­
wandering, which is pervasive and often adaptive, 
but may sometimes be viewed as interfering and 
disruptive) can in the therapeutic context be used in 
multiple ways, for instance as diagnostic informa­
tion to aid in obtaining a clear view of the client’s 
goal structure. The content of spontaneous thought 
and, probably, night dreams can signify or help 
to clarify individuals’ motivational and cognitive 
structure (Beck, 1971/2004; Klinger, 1971). There 
are validated measures of goal structure in ques­
tionnaire form, such as the Motivational Structure 
Questionnaire and Personal Concerns Inventory 
(Cox & Klinger, 2011a; Klinger, 1987; Klinger 
& Cox, 2011b), but these rely on clients’ memo­
ries and self-insights. Inferences from examination 
of clients’ spontaneous thought content may add 
important information.
226
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

Modifying Spontaneous Thought Content 
by Modifying Motivational Structure
Assessing motivational structure is important for 
treatment of a wide variety of conditions, perhaps 
especially, but not exclusively, depression, addic­
tion, alienation, aimlessness, and goal conflicts. 
These may require interventions aiming to replace 
maladaptive motivational structures with more 
adaptive ones. For instance, within the Systematic 
Motivational Counseling framework, 
validated 
techniques have been developed to identify mal­
adaptive goals and then help clients disengage 
from them in favor of more realistic and attainable 
goals (Cox & Klinger, 2011b). The efficacy of this 
type of intervention that focuses on clients’ moti­
vational structure, rather than solely on cognitive 
and/or behavioral aspects, has recently been docu­
mented in alcoholic patients (Cox, Fadardi, Hosier, 
& Pothos, 2015), miscellaneous substance abusers 
with traumatic brain injuries (Cox et al., 2003), 
and group treatment in a general clinical popula­
tion (Fuhrmann, Schroer, & de Jong-Meyer, 2011).
The general plan of these interventions is first 
to assess motivational structure (the types of goals 
chosen, the degree of commitment to and valuation 
of each, and expectancies of success) and then to 
discuss the findings with regard to such matters as 
the interrelationships among the goals, the degree to 
which the valuation is the client s own versus some­
one else’s whom the client is trying to satisfy, the 
reasonableness of the expectancies, conflicts among 
the goals and possible resolution of them, shifting 
from aversive to appetitive goal pursuits, disengage­
ment from inappropriate or fruitless goals, possible 
additional or alternative goals that fit the client s own 
true values and might provide greater satisfaction, 
and realistic steps that might render discouragingly 
difficult goals attainable. The goal of these interven­
tions is, of course, a more adaptive motivational 
structure, which should brighten mood and help 
clients abandon destructive behaviors such as sub­
stance abuse. In addition to the already cited studies 
supporting this hypothesis, higher adaptive moti­
vational structure has been found related to lower 
alcohol consumption in people whose consumption 
has led to objective life difficulties, such as in the 
workplace, family and other social relationships, the 
legal system, health, and so on (Cox et al., 2002). 
In clients with low scores on adaptive motivational 
structure, there was no correlation between difficul­
ties incurred from drinking and amount consumed. 
Although this result was correlational and hence 
does not permit a firm conclusion about causality,
it seems a reasonable inference that highly adaptive 
motivational structure facilitates reducing injurious 
alcohol consumption. Although these investigations 
did not assess spontaneous thought content, their 
interventions can be predicted to have changed it 
as well.
As indicated earlier, goal commitments establish 
cognitive processing priorities that direct attention 
to goal-related cues. This can become problematic 
for a variety of conditions and has been investigated 
with substance abusers. In much of the world, for 
example, grocery stores sell alcoholic beverages 
and often place these in locations that are hard to 
overlook. Heavy imbibers report that these displays 
rivet their attention and, even if they are trying to 
reduce alcohol use, nevertheless make it harder not 
to buy. Similarly, when faced with a series of words, 
the attention of heavy drinkers is drawn to words 
associated with alcohol use (as to other important 
goals). One clinical intervention has been designed 
to reduce this problem by retraining attention. 
Using Stroop-like interventions, participants adopt 
the goal of attending to the font color instead of 
to the semantic meaning of alcohol-related words, 
or to the color outlines around various depicted 
bottles. The administrator provides feedback and 
encouragement. Results show that a series of such 
training sessions reduces the processing priority of 
alcohol cues and reduces the amount of alcohol 
subsequently consumed for up to a three-month 
follow-up assessment (Cox et al., 2015; Fadardi & 
Cox, 2009). Although these investigations are still 
in their early stages (Koster & Bernstein, 2015) and 
so far have not assessed spontaneous thought, the 
effect on attentiveness— as one kind of cognitive 
processing— can be predicted to have also affected 
thought content, among other clinical outcomes.
Trainingfor Concrete Versus Abstract 
Thought for Facing Difficulties and Mental 
Contrasting for Goal Attainment
Another topic, which has been raised in the 
context of rumination by Watkins, is that the speci­
ficity of thought can be important in determin­
ing whether thinking has beneficial or detrimental 
consequences. The work by Watkins (e.g., 2008,
2010) has shown that abstract versus more concrete 
thought can be problematic in maintaining nega­
tive affect. Often, sufficiently concrete cognitive 
processing is necessary to facilitate adaptive thought 
and behavior (e.g., planning, problem-solving). 
Excessive levels of abstract negative (and probably 
also positive) spontaneous thinking can undermine
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H.  W .  K O S T E R
2 2 7

concrete steps toward a goal. Similarly, although 
expectancy of ultimate success is important for well- 
motivated behavior, fantasizing only about positive 
outcomes and trouble-free goal-pursuit, rather than 
thinking about the concrete realities necessary for 
success, reduces chances of energetic pursuit and of 
success (Oettingen, 2012). To address these aspects, 
promising training interventions have been devel­
oped to rebalance the proportion and occurrence 
of abstract versus concrete thought (Watkins et al.,
2012) and to tie aspirations to concrete process­
ing of steps necessary to achieve them (Oettingen,
2012), processes that at first almost certainly enlist 
mental activity beyond that of purely spontaneous 
thought and the default mode network (Achtziger, 
Fehr, Oettingen, Gollwitzer, & Rockstroh, 2009). 
Whether the habits of thought developed in these 
trainings eventually become spontaneous remains 
to be established.
Conclusions
Spontaneous thought is a phenomenon that is 
of long-standing interest to researchers. We have 
reviewed some of the research showing the clear 
adaptive as well as maladaptive consequences of 
this phenomenon. Based on a goal perspective, it 
becomes clear why spontaneous thought is so perva­
sively present in mental life. Moreover, this perspec­
tive also casts light on how spontaneous thought 
can become maladaptive. The progress with regard 
to methodologies available to study this phenom­
enon, as well as the strong interest in spontaneous 
thought from philosophical, psychological, and bio­
logical traditions, renders this field an exciting area 
for integrated research and theory.
References
Achtziger, A., Fehr, T., Oettingen, G., Gollwitzer, P. M., & 
Rockstroh, B. (2009). Strategies of intention formation are 
reflected in continuous MEG activity. Social Neuroscience, 
4(1), 11-27.
Andrews-Hanna, J. (2012). The brain’s default network and its 
adaptive role in internal mentation. The Neuroscientist, 18(3), 
251-270.
Andrews-Hanna, J., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. L. 
(2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in spontane­
ous cognition. Journal o f Neurophysiology, 104, 322-335. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals o f 
the N ew  York Academy o f Sciences, 1 3 1 6 (\), 29—52.
Baars, B. J. (2010). Spontaneous repetitive thoughts can be adap­
tive: Postscript on “mind wandering.” Psychological Bulletin, 
136, 208-210.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., 
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by
distraction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. 
Psychological Science, 23 , 1117—1122.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness an d Cognition, 20, 
1604-1611.
Beck, A. T. (1971/2004). Cognitive patterns in dreams and day­
dreams. In R. I. Rosner, W. J. Lyddon, & A. Freeman (Eds.), 
Cognitive therapy an d dreams (pp. 27—32). New York: Springer. 
(Reprinted from Dream  dynamics: Science an d psychoanalysis, 
Vol. 9, pp. 2—9, J. H. Masserman (Ed.), New York: Grune & 
Stratton, 1971).
Bennion, K. A., Payne, J. D., & Kensinger, E. A. (2015). 
Selective effects of sleep on emotional memory: What mech­
anisms are responsible? Translational Issues in Psychological 
Science, 7(1), 79-88.
Bigelsen,J., &Schupak, C. (2011). Compulsive fantasy: Proposed 
evidence of an under-reported syndrome through a system­
atic study of 90 self-identified non-normative fantasizers. 
Consciousness an d Cognition, 2 0(4), 1634—1648.
Bock, M., & Klinger, E. (1986). Interaction of emotion and 
cognition in word recall. Psychological Research, 48, 99—106.
Bos, M. W., Dijksterhuis, A., & van Baaren, R. B. (2008). On 
the goal-dependency of unconscious thought. Journal o f 
Experim ental Social Psychology, 44(4), 1114—1120.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network. Annals o f the N ew  York Academy 
o f Sciences, 1 1 2 4 ( 1), 1-38.
Chatard, A., & Selimbegovic, L. (2011). When self-destructive 
thoughts flash through the mind: Failure to meet standards 
affects the accessibility of suicide-related thoughts. Journal o f 
Personality a n d  Social Psychology, 100(4), 587-605.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51—59.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood. J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings o f the N ational Academ y o f 
Sciences o f the U S A , 106, 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., & Smith, R. (2011). The role of 
spontaneous thought in human cognition. In O. Vartanian 
& D. R. Mandel (Eds.), Neuroscience o f decision m aking (pp. 
259—284). New York: Psychology Press.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2004). Neural basis 
of spontaneous thought processes. Cortex, 40(4), 623-630.
Cox, W. M., Fadardi, J. S., Hosier, S. G., & Pothos, E. M. (2015). 
Differential effects and temporal course of attentional and 
motivational training on excessive drinking. Experimental 
a n d  Clinical Psychopharmacology, 23(6), 445—454.
Cox, W. M., Heinemann, A. W., Miranti, S. V., Schmidt, M., 
Klinger, E., & Blount, J. (2003). Outcomes of Systematic 
Motivational Counseling for substance use following trau­
matic brain injury. Journal o f A ddictive Diseases, 22 , 93—110.
Cox, W. M., & Klinger, E. (201 la). Measuring motivation: The 
Motivational Structure Questionnaire, Personal Concerns 
Inventory, and their variants. In W. M. Cox & E. Klinger 
(Eds.). H andbook o f m otivational counseling (2nd ed., pp. 
161-204). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Cox, W. M., & Klinger, E. (2011b). Systematic Motivational 
Counseling: From motivational assessment to motivational 
change. In W. M. Cox & E. Klinger (Eds.). H andbook o f 
m otivational counseling (2nd ed., pp. 276—302). Chichester, 
UK: John Wiley & Sons.
228
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

Cox, W. M., Schippers, G. M., Klinger, E., Skutle, A., 
Stuchlfkova, I., Man, F., King, A. L., & Inderhaug, R. 
(2002). Motivational structure and alcohol use of univer­
sity students with consistency across four nations. Journal o f 
Studies on Alcohol, 63, 280—285.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & Van 
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On making the right choice: The 
deliberation-without-attention effect. Science, 3 1 1 (5 7 6 3 ), 
1005-1007.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Meurs, T. (2006). Where creativity 
resides: The generative power of unconscious thought. 
Consciousness a n d  Cognition, 75(1), 135—146.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L. F. (2006). A theory of uncon­
scious thought. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(2), 
95-109.
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. R. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness an d  Cognition, 33, 342—353.
Epel, E. S., Puternam, E., Lin, J., Blackbunr, E., Lazaro, A., & 
Mendes, W. B. (2013). Wandering minds and aging cells. 
C linical Psychological Science, 7(1), 75-83.
Fadardi, J. S., & Cox, W. M. (2008). Alcohol-attentional bias 
and motivational structure independently predict alco­
hol consumption in social drinkers. D ru g an d Alcohol 
Dependence, 97, 247—256.
Fadardi, J. S., & Cox, W. M. (2009). Reversing the sequence: 
Reducing alcohol consumption by overcoming alcohol atten- 
tional bias. D ru g an d Alcohol Dependence, 101, 137—145.
Fere, C. S. (1892/1899). The pathology o f emotions (R. Park, 
Trans.). Watford: University Press.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, 
K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commentary on 
Wilson et al.’s “Just think: the challenges of the disengaged 
mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1427. http://journal.fron- 
tiersin. org / article/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01427/full
Franklin, M. S., Broadway, J. M., Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, 
J., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). Window to the wandering 
mind: Pupillometry of spontaneous thought while reading. 
The Quarterly Journal o f Experim ental Psychology, 66(12), 
2289-2294.
Fritzsche, A., Schlier, B., Oettingen, G., & Lincoln, T. M. 
(2016). Mental contrasting with implementation intentions 
increases goal-attainment in individuals with mild to moder­
ate depression. Cognitive Therapy an d Research, 40(4), 557— 
564. doi: 10.1007/s 10608-015-9749-6.
Fuhrmann, A., Schroer, B. M., & de Jong-Meyer, R. (2011). 
Systematic Motivational Counseling in groups: Promoting 
therapeutic change through client interaction. In W. M. Cox 
& E. Klinger (Eds.). H andbook o f m otivational counseling 
(2nd ed., pp. 303-327). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Gilboa-Schechtman, E., Revelle, W., & Gotlib, I. H. (2000). 
Stroop interference following mood induction: Emotionality, 
mood congruence and concern relevance. Cognitive Therapy 
a n d  Research, 2 4 (5 ), 491—502.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1990). Action phases and mind-sets. In E. T. 
Higgins & R.M. Sorrentino (Eds.), H andbook o f  m otivation 
a n d  cognition: Foundations o f social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 53— 
92). New York: Guilford Press.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Heckhausen, H., & Ratajczak, H. (1990). 
From weighing to willing: Approaching a change decision 
through pre- or postdecisional mentation. O rganizational 
Behavior 
a n d  
H um an 
Decision 
Processes, 
45(1), 
41-65.
Grol, M., Hertel, P.T., Koster, E. H. W., & De Raedt, R. (2015). 
The effects of rumination induction on attentional breadth 
for self-related information. C linical Psychological Science, 3, 
607-618.
Gruberger, M., Ben-Simon, E., Levkovitz, Y., Zangen, A., 
& Hendler, T. (2011). Towards a neuroscience of mind­
wandering. 
Frontiers 
in 
H um an 
Neuroscience, 
5, 56. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2011.00056
Handy, T. C., & Kam, J. W. Y. (2015). Mind wandering and 
selective attention to the external world. Canadian Journal 
o f Experim ental Psychology!Revue Canadienne D e Psychologie 
Experimental'e, 69(2), 183—189.
Hawksley, J., & Davey, G. C. L. (2010). Mood-as-input and 
depressive rumination. Behaviour Research an d Therapy, 
48(2), 134-140.
Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., Gifford, E. V., Follette, V. M., & 
Strosahl, K. (1996). Experiential avoidance and behavioral 
disorders: A functional dimensional approach to diagnosis 
and treatment. Journal o f Consulting an d C linical Psychology,
64(6), 1152-1168.
Hertel, P. T. (2004). Memory for emotional and non-emotional 
events in depression: A question of habit. In D. Reisberg 
& P. Hertel (Eds.), M em ory an d emotion (pp. 186—216). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hoelscher,T. J., Klinger, E., & Barta, S. G. (1981). Incorporation 
of concern-and nonconcern-related verbal stimuli into dream 
content. Journal o f  A bnorm al Psychology, 49, 88—91.
Hoorelbeke, K., Koster, E. H., Vanderhasselt, M. A., Callewaert,
S. , & Demeyer, I. (2015). The influence of cognitive control 
training on stress reactivity and rumination in response to 
a lab stressor and naturalistic stress. Behaviour Research an d 
Therapy, 69, 1—10.
Johannessen, K. B., Oettingen, G., & Mayer, D. (2012). Mental 
contrasting of a dieting wish improves self-reported health 
behaviour. Psychology &  Health, 27, 43—58.
Johnsen, B. H., Laberg, J. C., Cox, W. M., Vaksdal, A., & 
Hugdahl, K. (1994). Alcoholic subjects’ attentional bias 
in the processing of alcohol-related words. Psychology o f 
A ddictive Behaviors, 8(2), 111—115.
Kam, J. W. Y., Dao, E., Stanciulescu, M., Tildesley, H., & Handy,
T. C. (2013). Mind wandering and the adaptive control of 
attentional resources. Journal o f Cognitive Neuroscience, 
25(6), 952-960.
Kam, J. W. Y., & Handy, T. C. (2014). Differential recruitment 
of executive resources during mind wandering. Consciousness 
a n d  Cognition, 26 , 51—63.
Kam, J. W. Y., Nagamatsu, L. S., & Handy, T. C. (2014). Visual 
asymmetry revisited: Mind wandering preferentially dis­
rupts processing in the left visual field. Brain an d Cognition, 
92, 32-38.
Kam, J. W. Y., Xu, J., & Handy, T. C. (2014). I don’t feel your 
pain (as much): The desensitizing effect of mind wandering 
on the perception of others’ discomfort. Cognitive, Affective 
&  Behavioral Neuroscience, 14( 1), 286—296.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 33 0 , 932.
Klinger, E. 
(1971). 
Structure 
an d Junctions 
o f fantasy. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H . W .  K O S T E R
229

Klinger, E. (1975). Consequences of commitment to and dis­
engagement from incentives. Psychological Review, 82, 1—25.
Klinger, E. (1977). Meaning and void: Inner experience and 
the incentives in peoples lives. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Klinger, E. (1978). Modes of normal conscious flow. In K.
5, Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of conscious­
ness: Scientific investigations into the flow of human experience 
(pp. 225—258). New York: Plenum, 1978.
Klinger, E. 
(1987). The Interview Questionnaire tech­
nique: Reliability and validity of a mixed idiographic- 
nomothetic measure of motivation. In J. N. Butcher & C. 
D. Spielberger (Eds.), Advances in personality assessment (Vol.
6, pp. 31-48). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klinger, E. (1990). Daydreaming. Los Angeles: Tarcher (Putnam).
Klinger, E. (1996). Emotional influences on cognitive process­
ing, with implications for theories of both. In P. Gollwitzer 
& J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action: Linking 
cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 
168—189). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, and J. 
A. Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simula­
tion (pp. 225—239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E. (2013). Goal commitments and the content of 
thoughts and dreams: Basic principles. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 415. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00415.
Klinger, E., Barta, S. G., & Maxeiner, M. E. (1980). Motivational 
correlates of thought content frequency and commitment. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1222—1237.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987—1988). Dimensions of thought 
flow in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and Personality,
7, 105-128.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (2011a). Motivation and the goal the­
ory of current concerns. In W. M. Cox & E. Klinger (Eds.), 
Handbook of motivational counseling (2nd ed., pp. 3—47). 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (201 lb). The Motivational Structure 
Questionnaire, Personal Concerns Inventory, and their vari­
ants: Psychometric properties. In W. M. Cox & E. Klinger 
(Eds.). Handbook of motivational counseling (2nd ed., pp. 
205—232). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Klug, H. J. P, & Maier, G. (2015). Linking goal progress and 
subjective well-being: A meta-analysis. Journal of Happiness 
Studies, 16(1), 37-65.
Kopp, K., D’Mello, S., & Mills, C. (2015). Influencing the 
occurrence of mind wandering while reading. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 34, 52—62.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., & Alpert, N. M. (1997). 
Neural systems shared by visual imagery and visual percep­
tion: A positron emission tomography study. Neuroimage, 6, 
320-334.
Koster, E. H. W., & Bernstein, A. (2015). Introduction to the 
special issue on cognitive bias modification: Taking a step 
back to move forward? Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 49, 1—4.
Koster, E. H. W., De Lissnyder, E., Derakshan, N., & De Raedt, 
R. (2011). Understanding depressive rumination from a 
cognitive science perspective: The impaired disengagement 
hypothesis. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(1), 138—145.
Larsen, R., & Diener, E. (1987). Affect intensity as an individual 
difference characteristic. Journal of Research in Personality, 
21, 1-39.
Lyubomirsky, S., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1995). Effects of self- 
focused rumination on negative thinking and interpersonal 
problem solving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
69(1), 176-190.
Marchetti, I., Koster, E. H. W., & De Raedt, R. (2013). Rest- 
related dynamics of risk and protective factors for depres­
sion: A behavioral study. Clinical Psychological Science, 1(4),
443-451.
Marchetti, I., Koster, E. H. W., Klinger, E., & Alloy, L. B. 
(2016). Spontaneous thought and vulnerability to mood 
disorders: The dark side of the wandering mind. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 
4(5), 
835-857. 
doi: 
10.1177/
2167702615622383.
Marchetti, I. Van de Putte, E., & Koster, E. H. W. (2014). Self­
generated thoughts and depression: From daydreaming to 
depressive symptoms. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 13.
Martin, L. L., & Tesser, A. (1989). Toward a motivational and 
structural theory of ruminative thought. In J. S. Uleman 
& J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 306—326). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Martin, L. L., & Tesser, A. (1996). Some ruminative thoughts. 
In R. S. Wyer (Ed.), Ruminative thoughts: Advances in 
social cognition (Vol. 9, pp. 1—47). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
McDevitt, E. A., Duggan, K. A., & Mednick, S. C. (2014). 
REM sleep rescues learning from interference. Neurobiology 
of Learning and Memory, 122, 51-62. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.10l6/j.nlm.20l4.11.015.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2013). Dispatching the wandering 
mind? Toward a laboratory method for cuing “spontaneous” 
off-task thought. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 570. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00570.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mindwandering: A review. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67(1), 11—18.
Mrazek, M. D., Phillips, D. T., Franklin, M. S., Broadway, J. 
M., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). Young and restless: Validation 
of the mind-wandering questionnaire (MWQ) reveals dis­
ruptive impact of mind-wandering for youth. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 560. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00560.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J.W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mindwandering: A review. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67, 11—18.
Nagamatsu, L. S., Kam, J. W. Y., Liu-Ambrose, T., Chan, A., & 
Handy, T. C. (2013). Mind-wandering and falls risk in older 
adults. Psychology and Aging, 28(3), 685-691.
Nenkov, G. Y., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2012). Pre- versus post- 
decisional deliberation and goal commitment: The posi­
tive effects of defensiveness. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 48(1), 106-121.
Nieuwenstein, M. R., Wierenga, T., Morey, R. D., Wicherts, 
J. M., Blom, T. N., Wagenmakers, E. J., & van Rijn, H. 
(2015). On making the right choice: A meta-analysis and 
large-scale replication attempt of the unconscious thought 
advantage. Judgment and Decision Making, 10, 1—17.
Nikles, C. D., II, Brecht, D. L., Klinger, E., & Bursell, A. L. 
(1998). The effects of current-concern- and nonconcern- 
related waking suggestions on nocturnal dream content. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 242—255.
230
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

Nikula, R., Klinger, E., & Larson-Gutman, M. K. (1993). 
Current concerns and electrodermal reactivity: Responses to 
words and thoughts. Journal o f Personality, 61, 63—84.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their 
effects on the duration of depressive episodes. Journal o f 
A bnorm al Psychology, 100(4), 569—582.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). 
Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
3 (5), 400-424.
Oettingen, G. (1996). Positive fantasy and motivation. In 
P. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology o f 
action: Linking cognition a n d  m otivation to behavior (pp. 
236—259). New York: Guilford Press.
Oettingen, G. (2012). Future thought and behaviour change. 
European Review o f Social Psychology, 23 , 1-63.
Oettingen, G., Pak, H., & Schnetter, K. (2001). Self-regulation 
of goal-setting: Turning free fantasies about the future into 
binding goals. Journal o f Personality an d Social Psychology, 
80(5), 736-753.
Ottaviani, C., & Couyoumdjian, A. (2013). Pros and cons of a 
wandering mind: A prospective study. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 524. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00524.
Ottaviani, C., Shapiro, D., & Couyoumdjian, A. (2013). 
Flexibility as the key for somatic health: From mind wan­
dering to perseverative cognition. Biological Psychology, 
94(1 ), 38-43.
Pace-Schott, E., Germain, A., & Milad, M. R. (2015). Effects 
of sleep on memory for conditioned fear and fear extinction. 
Psychological Bulletin, 141(4), 835-857. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/bul00000l4.
Poerio, G. L.,Totterdell, P., & Miles, E. (2013). Mind-wandering 
and negative mood: Does one thing really lead to another? 
Consciousness a n d  Cognition, 2 2(4), 1412—1421.
Pope, K. S. (1977). The flo w  o f consciousness. Unpublished Ph. 
D. dissertation, Yale University.
Raichle, M. E. (2009). A paradigm shift in functional brain 
imaging. The Journal o f Neuroscience, 2 9 (4 \), 12729—12734.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001) A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings o f the N ational Academy o f 
Sciences U S A , 9 8, 676-682.
Riemann, B. C., & McNally, R. J. (1995). Cognitive processing 
of personally-relevant information. Cognition an d Emotion, 
9, 325-340.
Roberts, H., Watkins, E. R., & Wills, A. J. (2013). Cueing an 
unresolved personal goal causes persistent ruminative self­
focus: An experimental evaluation of control theories of 
rumination. Journal o f  Behavior Therapy an d Experimental 
Psychiatry, 44(4), 449—455.
Rummel, J., & Boywitt, C. D. (2014). Controlling the stream 
of thought: Working memory capacity predicts adjustment 
of mind-wandering to situational demands. Psychonomic 
Bulletin &  Review, 2 1 (5), 1309—1315.
Schacter, D. L. (2012). Adaptive constructive processes and the 
future of memory. American Psychologist, 67, 603—613.
Schneider, W. (1987). Ablenkung un d Handlungskontrolle: Eine 
kognitiv-m otivationale Perspektive. Unpublished Diploma 
thesis, University of Bielefeld.
Schupak, C., & Rosenthal, J. (2009). Excessive daydreaming: A 
case history and discussion of mind wandering and high fan­
tasy proneness. Consciousness an d Cognition, 18, 290—292.
Sheeran, P., Harris, P., Vaughan, J., Oettingen, G., & Gollwitzer, 
P. M. (2013). Gone exercising: Mental contrasting promotes
physical activity among overweight, middle-aged, low-SES 
fishermen. Health Psychology, 32(7), 802—809.
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming: A n introduction to the experi­
m ental study o f inner experience. New York: Random House.
Singer, J. L. (2009). Researching imaginative play and adult 
consciousness: Implications for daily and literary creativity. 
Psychology o f Aesthetics, Creativity, an d the Arts, 3, 190—199.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4 , 4 4 1. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00441.
Smallwood, J., Nind, L., & O ’Connor, R. C. (2009). When is 
your head at? An exploration of the factors associated with 
the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness an d 
Cognition, TS(1), 118-125.
Smallwood, J., & O’Connor, R. C. (2011). Imprisoned by the 
past: Unhappy moods lead to a retrospective bias to mind 
wandering. Cognition an d Emotion, 25, 1481—1490.
Smallwood, J., Ruby, F. J. M., & Singer, T. (2013). Letting go 
of the present: Mind-wandering is associated with reduced 
delay discounting. Consciousness an d Cognition, 22 , 1-7.
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. J., 
Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and the 
temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness an d 
Cognition, 2 0  (4), 1120—1126.
Smallwood, J., Tipper, C., Brown, K., Baird, B., Engen, H., 
Michaels, J. R., Schooler, J. W. (2013). Escaping the here 
and now: Evidence for a role of the default mode network in 
perceptually decoupled thought. NeuroImage, 69, 120-125.
Smith, J. M., & Alloy, L. B. (2009). A roadmap to rumination: A 
review of the definition, assessment, and conceptualization 
of this multifaceted construct. C linical Psychology Review, 
29(2), 116-128.
Spasojevic, J., & Alloy, L. B. (2001). Rumination as a common 
mechanism relating depressive risk factors to depression. 
Emotion, i(l), 25—37.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. N. (2009). The com­
mon neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, 
navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quanti­
tative meta-analysis. Journal o f Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(5), 
489-510.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. Neuro Image, 53, 303-317.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., & D’Argembeau, A. (2013). 
Concern-induced negative affect is associated with the occur­
rence and content of mind-wandering. Consciousness an d 
Cognition, 22(2), 442-448.
Stawarczyk, 
D., 
Majerus, 
S., 
Maj, 
M., 
Van 
der 
Linden, 
M., 
& D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011a). 
Mind­
wandering: Phenomenology and function as assessed with a 
novel experience sampling method. Acta Psychologica, 136, 
370-381.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011b). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLoS One, 6  (2), 
e l6997.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Van der Linden, M., & 
D’Argembeau, A. (2012). Using the daydreaming fre­
quency scale to investigate the relationships between mind­
wandering, psychological well-being, and present-moment
E R I C  K L I N G E R ,  I G O R  M A R C H E T T I ,  A N D  E R N S T  H . W .  K O S T E R
23I

awareness. Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 363. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00363.
Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T. J., Wilcox, K. J., Segal, 
N. L., & Rich, S. (1988). Personality similarity in twins 
reared apart and together. Journal o f  Personality an d Social 
Psychology, 5 4 (6), 1031-1039.
Thomson, D. R., Ralph, B. C. W., Besner, D., & Smilek, 
D. (2015). The more your mind wanders, the smaller 
your attentional blink: An individual differences study. 
The Q uarterly Journal o f  E xperim ental Psychology, 68(1), 
181-191.
Treynor, W., Gonzalez, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). 
Rumination reconsidered: A psychometric analysis. Cognitive 
Therapy a n d  Research, 27(3), 247—259.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2014). Fluctuations in pre­
trial attentional state and their influence on goal neglect. 
Consciousness a n d  Cognition, 26 , 90—96.
Vogt, J., Lozo, L., Koster, E. H. W., & De Houwer, J. (2011). 
On the role of goal relevance in emotional attention: Disgust 
evokes early attention to cleanliness. Cognition &  Emotion,
2 5 , 466-477.
Watkins, E. R. (2008). Constructive and unconstructive repeti­
tive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 163—206.
Watkins, E. R. (2010). Level of construal, mind wandering, 
and repetitive thought: Reply to McVay and Kane (2010). 
Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 198—201.
Watkins, E., Grafton, B., Weinstein, S. M., & MacLeod, C. 
(2015). For ruminators, the emotional future is bound to 
the emotional past: Heightened ruminative disposition is 
characterized by increased emotional extrapolation. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 3, 648-658.
Watkins, E. R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2014). A habit-goal 
framework of depressive rumination. Journal o f A bnorm al 
Psychology, 123, 24—34.
Watkins, E. R., Taylor, R. S., Byng, R., Baeyens, C., Read, R., 
Pearson, K., et al. (2012). Guided self-help concreteness 
training as an intervention for major depression in primary 
care: A Phase II randomized controlled trial. Psychological 
M edicine, 42(7), 1359-1371.
Whitmer, A. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2013). An attentional scope 
model of rumination. 
Psychological 
Bulletin, 
139(5), 
1036-1061.
232
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  A N D  G O A L  P U R S U I T

C H A P T E R
18
Unraveling Whats on Our Minds:
How Different Types of Mind-Wandering 
Affect Cognition and Behavior
Claire M. Zedelius and Jonathan W. Schooler
Abstract
Mind-wandering encompasses a variety of different types of thought, involving various different 
experiential qualities, emotions, and cognitive processes. Much is lost by simply lumping them together, 
as is typically done in the literature. The goal of this chapter is to explore the nuances that distinguish 
different types of mind-wandering. The chapter draws on research on mind-wandering as well as 
other literatures to gain a better understanding of how these different types of mind-wandering affect 
cognition and behavior. It specifically discusses the distinct effects of different types of mind-wandering 
on task performance, working memory, mood, and creativity. Finally, the chapter discusses the idea of 
deliberate engagement in particular types of mind-wandering as a way to achieve desirable outcomes, 
such as maintaining a positive mood, enhancing creativity, or aiding decision-making.
Key Words: mind-wandering, cognition, behavior, creativity, working memory, decision-making
The stream of consciousness is a stream with 
many twists and turns. Even though our sense organs 
continuously process information about the outside 
world, much of the time our minds ignore this input 
and focus instead on spontaneous thoughts unrelated 
to our current task or environment. When mental 
activity becomes decoupled from the environment 
in this way, the processing of external information 
is reduced, sometimes to the point where our eyes 
mindlessly scan whats in front of us without mak­
ing much sense of the information (Schooler et al., 
2011; Smallwood, Beach, Schooler, & Handy, 2008; 
Smallwood, Brown, et al., 2011).
This phenomenon has been studied under a 
variety of terms, the most prominent ones being 
mind-wandering and daydreaming (e.g., Singer & 
Schonbar, 1961; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). 
In the literature, these terms have typically been 
used interchangeably. Mind-wandering has some­
times been defined as task-unrelated thought (e.g., 
Smallwood & Schooler, 2006), stimulus-unrelated
thought (e.g., Teasdale et al., 1995), or spontane­
ous thought (Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2016). Moreover, in colloquial 
language, the terms mind-wandering and day­
dreaming are sometimes applied to situations in 
which one is thinking about something other than 
ones primary task (e.g., reading or listening to a 
lecture), but also to describe periods when one 
is engaged in no extrinsic task whatsoever and is 
simply staring out into space. Admittedly there is 
a fine line between engaging in a non-demanding 
task (e.g., walking) and doing “nothing,” so the 
distinction between task-unrelated thought and 
stimulus-unrelated thought is somewhat blurry. In 
the present chapter, we will therefore use the term 
mind-wandering to encompass a heterogeneous 
phenomenon (see Seli et al., in preparation), in line 
with colloquial usage, and the term task-unrelated 
thought when referring specifically to situations in 
which mind-wandering occurs during another pri­
mary task or activity.
233

Over the last decades, researchers have made 
considerable progress at uncovering when and how 
much people mind-wander (Giambra, 1989; Kane 
et al., 2007; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; McVay, 
Kane, & Kwapil, 2009; Risko, Anderson, Sarwal, 
Engelhardt, & Kingstone, 2011), why they do so 
(McVay & Kane, 2009; McVay & Kane, 2010; 
Smallwood, 2010), what parts of the brain are 
involved in it (e.g., Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, 
Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015; Mason et al., 
2007; Smith et al., 2006; Smallwood et al., 2008), 
and how mind-wandering affects cognition and 
behavior (see Mooneyham & Schooler, 2013, 
for a review). However, the question of “where” 
our spontaneous thoughts go when they wander 
off task has received considerably less attention. 
Mind-wandering is usually defined in the broadest 
sense, encompassing all types of spontaneous, task- 
unrelated thought: the banal, fleeting thoughts, 
complex problem-oriented reflections, fantasies, 
or intrusive thoughts and worries. But these vari­
ous types of thought have such different experien­
tial qualities, and involve such different emotions 
and cognitive processes, that we may lose much by 
simply lumping them together, as is typically done 
in the literature. Accordingly, we suggest that sys­
tematic analysis of the nature and impact of differ­
ent types of mind-wandering may help to clarify the 
nuanced role that different types of mind-wandering 
play in our daily lives. The goal of this chapter is to 
explore these distinctions and nuances.
The chapter will draw on research on mind­
wandering as well as other literatures that examine 
different aspects of “thinking” (be it task-related or 
unrelated, spontaneous, or instructed) more gener­
ally. We aim to illustrate how combining these lit­
eratures helps us gain a better understanding of how 
different types of spontaneous thought affect cog­
nition and behavior. Finally, we discuss the idea of 
deliberate engagement in particular types of mind­
wandering as a way to achieve desirable outcomes, 
such as maintaining a positive mood, enhancing 
creativity, or aiding decision-making.
Measuring Spontaneous Thought and 
Discerning Types of Mind-Wandering
Mind-wandering poses a dual challenge to sci­
entific investigation. It is spontaneous, and thus 
cannot be experimentally induced (although experi­
mental manipulations can decrease or increase 
the likelihood of spontaneous stimulus-unrelated 
thoughts), and it is subjective, meaning that it
cannot be directly observed from the outside. 
Because we cannot directly observe people’s private 
thoughts, mind-wandering is typically measured 
through indirect measures, such as errors made on 
tasks, or through self-report measures.
A frequently used technique to gather self-reports 
other than through traditional questionnaires is to 
intermittently probe people about the current con­
tent of their thoughts, or simply whether they are 
mind-wandering or not at a particular moment dur­
ing a task. By sampling enough of such moments, a 
technique called “thought sampling” or “experience 
sampling” (e.g., Antrobus, 1968; Giambra, 1995; 
Kane et al., 2007; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Schooler, Reichle, & Halpern, 2004; Parks, Klinger, 
& Perlmutter, 1998), researchers can get an idea of 
how often and when people mind-wander and how 
it affects their cognition and behavior. Another way 
to assess instances of mind-wandering is by ask­
ing participants to “self-catch” their task-unrelated 
thoughts. This, naturally, requires that they be 
aware of their task-unrelated thoughts, and is often 
used as an additional measure in combination with 
probe-initiated self-reports. These types of measures 
are used to test the effects of mind-wandering at the 
state level, by examining the direct consequences of 
stimulus-independent or off-task thought on subse­
quent performance, or at the trait level, by correlat­
ing individuals’ general tendency to mind-wander 
with other measures.
Although researchers routinely treat mind­
wandering as a single undifferentiated construct, 
some attempts have been made at assessing variations 
in the content and quality of people’s daydreams or 
mind-wandering episodes. For instance, it has been 
shown that thoughts about mundane, everyday 
things are more common than fantasies or worries 
(Kane et al., 2007; Klinger, 2009, 2013; Klinger & 
Cox, 1987), thoughts about pleasant topics are more 
common than negative thoughts (Killingsworth & 
Gilbert, 2010), and thoughts related to the future 
are more common than thoughts about the past 
or present (Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; 
Smallwood, Nind, & O ’Connor, 2009). Other 
content distinctions have distinguished between 
thoughts about the self and thoughts involving 
other people (Poerio, Totterdell, Emerson, & Miles, 
2015; Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 2013).
Aside from such distinctions in thought content, 
other qualitative distinctions have been made. For 
instance, research has made a distinction between 
task-unrelated thoughts that occur without meta­
awareness, that is, without the person consciously
234
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

noticing that her mind has disengaged from the task 
or environment, and task-unrelated thoughts that 
the individuals is aware of (e.g., self-caught mind­
wandering)— a distinction that is also referred to 
as “zoning out” versus “tuning out” (e.g., Dorsch, 
2014; Forster & Lavie, 2009; Schooler, 2002; 
Schooler, Mrazek, Baird, & Winkielman, 2014; 
Schooler, Reichele, & Halpern, 2004; Schooler & 
Schreiber, 2004; Schooler et al., 2011; Seli, Carriere, 
& Smilek, 2014; Smith et al., 2006). A related dis­
tinction is that between intentional and uninten­
tional mind-wandering (Dorsch, 2014; Forster & 
Lavie, 2009; McMillan, Kaufman, & Singer, 2013; 
Seli, Carriere, & Smilek, 2014). We speculate that 
that this distinction may, under most circumstances, 
map directly onto that of mind-wandering with and 
without meta-awareness, although it is possible that 
one becomes aware of having daydreamed without 
having had the intention to. Once a person has 
become meta-aware of this fact, however, we think 
that he or she will most likely either stop mind­
wandering or decide to continue, at which point it 
becomes intentional.
Variations of kinds of daydreaming have also 
been assessed at the trait level, by examining dif­
ferences in people’s characterizations of the general 
topics they tend to daydream about. This research, 
spearheaded by Singer and colleagues (e.g., Huba, 
Aneshensel, & Singer, 1981; Singer & Antrobus, 
1961, 1963, 1970) and later Giambra (1980, 1989,
1995), led to the identification of three broad “styles 
of daydreaming”: (1) positive-constructive daydream­
ing, which is characterized by predominantly pleas­
ant and highly captivating daydreams that contain 
vivid imagery, interpersonal curiosity, and future 
planning; (2) guilty-dyspboric daydreaming, which is 
characterized by ruminative thoughts and unpleas­
ant emotions such as shame and guilt, fear of fail­
ure, and thoughts of aggressive impulses; and finally 
(3) poor attentional control, which is characterized 
by highly frequent yet fleeting daydreams and a 
general difficulty in focusing one’s attention, be it 
on internal or external events (Singer & Antrobus, 
1963, 1970; Singer, 1974). Little research has 
been done to relate these particular styles of mind­
wandering to consequences for cognition and 
behavior. However, we can draw on other literatures 
that have examined the effects of related traits, such 
as the tendencies toward engaging in mood repair 
or engaging in ruminative thought. In the following 
discussion, we review a number of findings from the 
mind-wandering literature and discuss for each of 
these findings how a closer look at different types
of mind-wandering leads to more nuanced theories 
and predictions.
How Types of Mind-Wandering Affect Task 
Performance
The most well-established finding from the 
mind-wandering literature, and probably the one 
that is the most self-evident from personal expe­
rience, is that mind-wandering during a task 
interferes with task performance. This has been 
demonstrated for a broad range of tasks, includ­
ing relatively simple and monotonous tasks requir­
ing sustained attention (e.g., Carriere, Cheyne, & 
Smilek, 2008; Cheyne, Solman, Carriere, & Smilek, 
2009; Mrazek, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2012; Seli, 
Cheyne, & Smilek, 2013; Smallwood et al., 2004; 
Smilek, Carriere, & Cheyne, 2010), working mem­
ory and intelligence tasks (e.g., Mrazek et al., 2012), 
reading (e.g., Franklin, Smallwood, & Schooler, 
2011; Schad, Nuthmann, & Engbert, 2012; 
Schooler, Reichle, & Halpern, 2004; Smallwood, 
McSpadden, & Schooler, 2008; Smallwood et al., 
2008; Smallwood, 2011), and performing more 
complex tasks such as driving or operating aircraft: 
(Casner & Schooler, 2013; Galera et al., 2012; 
Yanko & Spalek, 2013).
But is this universally true for all types of task- 
unrelated thoughts? Evidence suggests that it is not. 
One line of evidence comes from research distin­
guishing task-unrelated thoughts occurring with 
or without meta-awareness. It has been suggested 
that, while people are aware of only a small propor­
tion of their spontaneous task-unrelated thoughts 
(e.g., Schooler, Reichle, & Halpern, 2004), meta­
awareness may play a crucial role for regulating 
those thoughts (e.g., Schooler, 2002). Regulation 
could mean stopping the train of thought and refo­
cusing attention back on one’s main task, or engag­
ing in task-unrelated thoughts only at times when 
this is minimally disruptive or even adaptive.
Support for the notion that meta-awareness plays 
a role in the regulation of task-unrelated thoughts 
comes from studies showing that under conditions 
associated with reduced executive control, such as 
alcohol intoxication (Sayette, Reichle, & Schooler,
2009) or cigarette craving (Sayette, Schooler, 
& Reichle, 2010), task-unrelated thoughts are 
increased, while meta-awareness is reduced. In con­
trast, meta-awareness seems to increase when indi­
viduals are motivated to catch their task-unrelated 
thoughts (Zedelius, Broadway, & Schooler, 2015). 
Finally, and most relevant to the relationship between 
types of mind-wandering and performance, studies
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
235

have found that task-unrelated thoughts that occur 
with meta-awareness have less of an impact on task 
performance than those that occur without meta­
awareness (Smallwood, McSpadden, & Schooler, 
2007, 2008; Zedelius et al., 2015).
A related factor that may moderate the relation­
ship between mind-wandering and performance is 
intentionality. It is likely that differences between 
intentional and unintentional mind-wandering 
will often map onto differences between mind­
wandering with or without meta-awareness. After 
all, carrying out an “intention” implies aware­
ness (although see Custers & Aarts, 2010), and 
it is hard to imagine that a person could mind- 
wander unintentionally while being aware of the 
fact that he or she is mind-wandering. Thus, in 
line with the findings on meta-awareness and 
mind-wandering, it is likely that intentional 
mind-wandering episodes are more adapted to 
the demands of the current context (i.e., occur­
ring predominantly when task demands are low), 
and hence are less disruptive to performance, than 
unintentional (unaware) mind-wandering epi­
sodes (see Wammes, Seli, & Smilek, Chapter 20 in 
this volume). There is evidence that people mind- 
wander at “opportune” moments, that is, during 
relatively easy tasks, more than during demanding 
tasks (e.g., Casner & Schooler, 2013; Kane et al., 
2007; Levinson, Smallwood, & Davidson, 2012). 
It is not clear that this difference is uniquely 
driven by intentional mind-wandering, but this 
would be a plausible hypothesis that deserves fur­
ther investigation.
The distinctions between aware/unaware and 
intentional/unintentional mind-wandering may go 
hand in hand with differences in thought content. 
That is, although to our knowledge this issue has 
never been explicitly investigated, we would expect 
deliberate mind-wandering to resemble the type 
of mind-wandering Singer and colleagues termed 
positive-constructive daydreaming, and unintentional 
mind-wandering to be more likely to involve intru­
sive, negative thought content— fitting the guilty- 
dysphoric daydream ing style. This prediction is based 
on the premise that we prefer to engage in thoughts 
we find agreeable, and we are more likely to exert 
control over our thoughts when we are mind­
wandering deliberately and/or with awareness. This 
possibility warrants further investigation and if sup­
ported by empirical evidence would illustrate the 
potentially important ways in which different forms 
of mind-wandering foster different types of thought 
content.
How Types of Mind-Wandering Relate 
to Working Memory
Research suggests that individuals with larger 
working memory capacity typically mind-wander 
less during demanding tasks (McVay & Kane, 2009, 
2012a, 2012b; Mrazek et al., 2012; Unsworth, 
Brewer, & Spillers, 2012; Unsworth & McMillan, 
2014; Unsworth, McMillan, Brewer, & Spillers,
2012) and engage in more opportune mind­
wandering (e.g., Levinson et al., 2012; Rummel 
& Boywitt, 2014) than those with smaller work­
ing memory capacity. This suggests that executive 
processes that rely on working memory are involved 
in the ability to regulate or suppress unwanted 
task-unrelated thoughts at inopportune moments. 
However, considering that individuals likely find 
some types of thoughts worth suppressing more 
than others, does the relationship between working 
memory and mind-wandering differ depending on 
the types of mind-wandering people engage in?
This question was investigated in a recent expe­
rience sampling study by Marcusson-Clavertz, 
Cardena, and Terhune (2015). They found that, 
for individuals who tend to engage most often 
in the kind of intrusive, negative mind-wander­
ing described by the guilty-dyspboric style, greater 
working memory capacity was related to reduced 
mind-wandering during everyday tasks, indicating 
successful suppression of unwanted task-unrelated 
thoughts. For individuals who rarely engaged in the 
guilty-dysphoric style, and for whom task-unrelated 
thoughts are a much more pleasant experience, the 
opposite was found. This finding nicely illustrates 
that mind-wandering is not a homogenous con­
struct, and that different types of mind-wandering 
need to be understood in relation to individuals’ 
interests and motivations to engage in or avoid cer­
tain mental events.
Other research on the relationship between 
working memory and mind-wandering has focused 
more on the functions that different types of mind­
wandering can fulfill. Building on the notion that 
future-thought is essential for planning and attain­
ing personal goals, and that mentally simulating pos­
sible futures is more complex than recalling the past, 
Baird, Smallwood, and Schooler (2011) expected 
that working memory capacity would be differen­
tially related to how much people mind-wander 
about the past, present, and future. Participants 
performed a relatively non-demanding task, inter­
spersed with thought-probes that prompted them 
to describe their task-unrelated thoughts. The 
results confirmed the prediction. While working
236
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

memory capacity was unrelated to task-unrelated 
thoughts about past events, and negatively related 
to task-unrelated thoughts about the present, higher 
working memory capacity predicted increased task- 
unrelated thoughts about future events. These find­
ings, again, illustrate the importance of taking a 
nuanced approach to understanding the processes 
involved in different types of mind-wandering and 
the functions they fulfill for the individual.
How Types of Mind-Wandering 
Affect Mood
Another key finding in the mind-wandering 
literature is that compared to being focused on 
one’s current activity, mind-wandering is gener­
ally associated with negative mood. For instance, 
Killingsworth and Gilbert (2010) conducted a 
large-scale experience-sampling study in which 
participants were probed randomly several times 
during their day while going about their everyday 
life activities, and were asked to report what they 
were doing at the time of the probe, whether they 
were focused on their present moment activity 
or engaged in task-unrelated thoughts, and what 
mood they were in. The results showed that task- 
unrelated thoughts were almost exclusively associ­
ated with a more negative mood than being focused 
on the present, regardless of the type of activity par­
ticipants were engaging in. The negative effect on 
mood was pronounced when participants reported 
negative or neutral thoughts, and even when they 
reported positive task-unrelated thoughts their 
mood was no better than at times when they were 
focused on their present-moment activity.
More recent studies, however, indicate that, 
contrary to Killingsworth and Gilbert’s claim that 
“a wandering mind is an unhappy mind,” on some 
occasions people are happier when their minds are 
in the clouds. This positive relationship between 
mind-wandering and happiness is only revealed, 
however, when differentiating between different 
types of mind-wandering. For instance, a study by 
Franklin and colleagues (2013), which used a simi­
lar approach to Killingsworth and Gilbert but asked 
more nuanced questions about positive aspects of 
people’s task-unrelated thoughts (i.e., how interest­
ing, useful, or novel their thoughts were), indicated 
that task-unrelated thoughts that are experienced 
as highly interesting in fact led to a more positive 
mood, a finding that corroborates our common 
experience. Another study taking the same basic 
approach found that task-unrelated thoughts with 
social content and particularly those involving
close others are associated with increased happiness 
(Poerio et al., 2015).
Research conducted in the laboratory found cor­
roborating evidence that mind-wandering doesn’t 
always lead to negative moods. Ruby, Smallwood, 
Engen, and Singer (2013) measured task-unrelated 
thoughts during a simple computer task, assessing 
the valence and content (i.e., self- vs. other-related, 
past- vs. future-related) of off-task thoughts as 
well as participants’ current mood. They then per­
formed a lag analysis in which they used answers to 
any given thought probe to predict a participant’s 
mood at the time of the following probe. The results 
showed that task-unrelated thoughts about the past 
and involving other people were linked to decreases 
in mood, but task-unrelated thoughts about the 
future and about the self were linked to increased 
positive mood. Moreover, they also found that 
reports of task-unrelated thoughts in combination 
with negative mood were predictive of a more posi­
tive mood at the time of the next thought probe. 
This last finding suggests that, while task-unrelated 
thoughts may often coincide with negative moods, 
this may not necessarily mean that mind-wandering 
causes negative moods. Instead, mind-wandering 
might be a way to repair negative moods.
Yet another study examined the effects of mind­
wandering on mood when taking into account the 
valence of the activity individuals are engaged in 
while mind-wandering, based on the premise that 
mind-wandering can be a pleasant escape from bor­
ing or negative tasks. Indeed, the results showed 
that, during an unpleasant task, engaging in posi­
tive task-unrelated thoughts was associated with 
increased positive mood (Spronken, Dijksterhuis, 
Holland, & Figner, 2015), a finding that is consis­
tent with the mood-repair hypothesis. Drawing on 
these findings, we theorize that the effects of mind­
wandering on mood are likely also dependent on 
whether the mind-wandering is intentional or unin­
tentional. Given that most people are motivated to 
maintain a positive mood, and to engage in mood 
repair when experiencing negative mood (Cialdini 
et al., 1987; Salovey et al., 1995), we think that 
deliberate mind-wandering can be a way to elevate 
one’s mood by directing one’s attention in a goal- 
directed way to pleasant or interesting thoughts. 
This may not be universally true. Chronic rumi- 
nators, for instance, who have a habit of engaging 
in repetitive, self-referential, and typically negative 
thought (Feldman, Joorman, & Johnson, 2008; 
Verhaeghen, Khan, & Joormann, 2005; Whitmer 
& Gotlib, 2013), sometimes report ruminating
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
237

deliberately, because they believe it will lead them 
to new and helpful insights about themselves 
(e.g., Lyubomirsky & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1993; 
Papageorgiou & Wells, 2003; Smallwood et al., 
2003; Simpson, & Papageorgiou, 2003). For the 
majority of people, however, we expect that deliber­
ate mind-wandering, be it during another primary 
task or while doing nothing, will be more positive 
or constructive. In future research, individual dif­
ferences in people’s motives and ruminative tenden­
cies should be taken into account to gain a more 
complete picture of the effects of mind-wandering 
on mood.
How Types of Mind-Wandering Affect 
Creativity
While 
most 
research 
on 
mind-wandering 
has focused on demonstrating negative effects 
of 
task-unrelated 
thoughts, 
researchers 
have 
increasingly been considering the possibility that 
mind-wandering may at times be functional and 
constructive. Both in and outside the scientific 
community, it has long been speculated that mind­
wandering may have a unique benefit for creativ­
ity. Countless anecdotes describe how creative 
ideas and sudden insights have emerged to artists 
and inventors from spontaneous mind-wandering. 
Early studies had found that, when people work 
on creative problems, taking a break and engaging 
in some other, unrelated task often improves sub­
sequent creative thought, a phenomenon referred 
to as incubation (for a review, see Sio & Ormerod,
2009). Some have attributed this effect to sponta­
neous associative thoughts, which are seen as the 
route to creative insights, or “aha!” experiences 
(Bowden, Jung-Beeman, Fleck, & Kounios, 2005; 
Bowers, Regehr, Balthazard, & Parker, 1990; Fiore 
& Schooler, 2001; Mednick, 1962; Schooler & 
Melcher, 1995). Thus, implicitly, the effect has been 
linked to mind-wandering.
Building on this indirect evidence, Baird and 
colleagues (2012) tested the effect of task-unrelated 
thoughts on creative performance. In their study, 
participants performed a creative task— generating 
unusual uses for common objects— and were inter­
rupted midway through the task to perform an 
unrelated “incubation” task. This incubation task 
was either an undemanding task, which left plenty 
of room for engaging in task-unrelated thoughts, 
or a more demanding task. Participants assigned 
to perform the undemanding task (compared to 
a demanding task) subsequently generated more, 
and more unique, uses. (They also reported greater
task-unrelated thoughts during the incubation 
task.) Importantly, the increase in creative perfor­
mance was specific to uses for objects encountered 
before the incubation period and did not extend to 
novel objects not encountered before. This suggests 
that letting the mind wander freely away from the 
task had a transformative impact on participants’ 
mental representations of task-relevant information.
There is also evidence that mind-wandering at 
the trait level is associated with increased creativ­
ity. For instance, a greater self-reported tendency 
toward mind-wandering during everyday life activi­
ties was found to be associated with increased cre­
ative performance on the unusual uses task (Baird 
et al., 2012) and more self-reported engagement 
in creative activities (Baas, 2015). Moreover, indi­
viduals scoring high in fantasy proneness, defined 
as a tendency toward long and intense involvement 
in fantasy and imagination (Lynn & Rhue, 1988; 
Singer & Antrobus, 1972; Singer, 1975), have been 
found to be more creative than less fantasy-prone 
individuals (Lynn & Rhue, 1986). Finally, field 
research assessing mind-wandering and creative ide­
ation in professional creative writers and elite physi­
cists has shown that many real-life creative ideas 
indeed emerged in moments when the participants 
were not actively working on the project or topic the 
ideas related to, but instead were engaged in other 
activities (Gable, Hopper, & Schooler, 2017). This 
finding suggests that engaging in activities and pre­
sumably thoughts unrelated to a current project can 
provide fertile ground for sudden creative insights.
While these findings resonate with the many 
anecdotal accounts of sudden creative insights in 
mind-wandering, they appear surprising in the face 
of the mundane mind-wandering people engage in 
much of the time, which revolves mainly around cur­
rent concerns (e.g., Baird et al., 2011; D ’Argembeau, 
Renaud, & Van der Linden, 2011; Klinger, 2009; 
Klinger, 2013; Klinger & Cox, 1987; Poerio et al., 
2015; Smallwood, Nind, & O ’Connor, 2009). This 
type of mind-wandering isn’t necessarily creative in 
nature, and doesn’t seem particularly inspiring. In an 
attempt to resolve this apparent inconsistency, we 
have argued that mind-wandering can be— but isn’t 
necessarily— facilitative of creativity, and that the 
relationship depends on the type of task-unrelated 
thought and the type of creative process a person 
engages in.
Creative ideas or solutions can be achieved 
in different ways. Sometimes, an idea or solu­
tion comes to mind spontaneously, in a “flash of 
insight,” accompanied by an “aha!” experience
238
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

(Bowden et al., 2005). Alternatively, creative prob­
lems can be approached in an analytic fashion, 
through methodic, conscious thought (Smith & 
Kounios, 1996). In a recent study, we found that 
mind-wandering relates differently to these two cre­
ative processes (Zedelius & Schooler, 2015a). While 
the tendency to mind-wander frequently during 
everyday life predicted better performance on a ver­
bal creative problem-solving task overall, this was 
driven by a benefit for creative insight. Frequent 
mind-wandering was negatively related to solving 
creative problems analytically.
Just as the relationship between mind-wandering 
and creativity seems to depend on the type of cre­
ative approach, we proposed that the relationship 
also depends on the content and style of mind­
wandering one engages in (Zedelius & Schooler, 
2015b). One important aspect of mind-wandering 
likely to moderate its impact on creativity is affec­
tive valence. Research suggests that positive affect 
as well as approach-oriented affective states (e.g., 
joy, but also anger, compared to avoidance-oriented 
states such as fear, tranquility, and contentment) 
enhance creative thinking (e.g., Greene & Noice, 
1988; Isen, 1990; Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 
1987; for a review, see Baas, De Dreu, & Nijstad,
2008). One of the reasons why these mood states are 
theorized to facilitate creativity is that positive mood 
and approach-oriented emotions are associated 
with a broadening of the focus of attention, which 
facilitates cognitive flexibility, or “thinking outside 
the box” (e.g., Ashby, Isen, &Turken; 1999; Kasof, 
1997; Rowe, Hirsch, & Anderson, 2007).
Based on this literature, we expect that types 
of mind-wandering that are associated with posi­
tive affect and approach-oriented emotions should 
facilitate creativity. The first indirect evidence for 
this idea has come from a study by Zhiyan and 
Singer (1996), which showed that the positive- 
constructive daydreaming style, which is character­
ized by positive thoughts, is related to openness to 
experience, a personality trait that has been asso­
ciated with creativity. However, this research does 
not directly examine whether there is a direct link 
between positive and/or approach-oriented task- 
unrelated thoughts and the facilitation of creative 
ideation. Moreover, this research does not distin­
guish between the affective-experiential aspects (i.e., 
positive mood or affect), and motivational compo­
nents of mind-wandering, which may each facilitate 
creativity. In a recent study (Zedelius, Protzko, & 
Schooler, 2016) in which we assessed various differ­
ent daydreaming styles, we distinguished between
daydreaming that can be characterized as happy 
or pleasant (e.g., “My daydreams provide me with 
pleasant thoughts”), which is an aspect of Singer 
and Antrobus’s (1963, 1970) positive constructive 
daydreaming, and daydreaming that is character­
ized as personally meaningful (e.g., “I daydream 
about things that are of great value or importance to 
me”; see Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013, for a similar 
treatment of these different aspects). We found that, 
whereas a tendency for pleasant daydreams did not 
predict self-reported creative behavior, meaningful 
daydreaming did. This suggests that daydreaming 
that can be summarized as positive may facilitate 
creativity by evoking personally meaningful content 
rather than positive affect per se, perhaps because 
meaningful content can be highly motivating (e.g., 
Elliot, 2006).
It is important to note that daydreaming or 
mind-wandering about meaningful things is dif­
ferent from rumination. Rumination is typically 
self-related, and often negative, but is most strongly 
characterized by its repetitive nature and narrow 
focus of attention (Grol, Hertel, Koster, & De 
Raedt, 2015; Smallwood, O ’Connor, & Heim, 
2006; Smallwood et al., 2003). Therefore, we would 
expect that types of mind-wandering that are char­
acterized by ruminative thoughts should be nega­
tively related to creativity.
Research on mind-wandering and creativity, 
thus far, has paid little attention to moderating fac­
tors such as the content, valence, and motivational 
aspects of stimulus- or task-unrelated thoughts. 
Based on the arguments laid out here, we think 
that such examination would introduce important 
nuance to the mind-wandering-creativity link.
How Types of Mind-Wandering Affect 
Future-Oriented Decision-Making
Mind-wandering, more often than not, involves 
thoughts about the future— a finding that has led 
researchers to theorize that it may serve a function 
for autobiographical planning and preparing for 
future events and decisions, and may thus not be 
as maladaptive as it is often made out to be (Baird 
et al., 2011; Klinger, 2009, 2013; Klinger & Cox, 
1987; Poerio, Totterdell, Emerson, & Miles, 2015; 
Smallwood, Nind, & O ’Connor, 2009; Smallwood, 
Schooler, Turk, Cunningham, Burns, & Macrae,
2011). Indeed, there is some evidence that mind­
wandering can aid self-regulation by facilitating 
future-oriented decision-making (e.g., Smallwood, 
Ruby, & Singer, 2013). As with the previously dis­
cussed findings, however, it is likely that this effect
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
239

depends at least in part on what types of mind­
wandering one engages in.
The benefit of mind-wandering for future- 
oriented decision-making has been illustrated in the 
context of delay discounting. Delay discounting is 
the tendency to prefer or to chose smaller imme­
diate rewards over larger rewards one has to wait 
for (e.g., Frederick, Loewenstein, & O ’Donoghue,
2002). What makes it hard to choose a delayed over 
an immediate reward, even if the delayed reward is 
objectively more valuable, is the strong appeal of the 
immediate reward that needs to be down-regulated. 
Such down-regulation is effortful and requires self- 
control (e.g., Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999; Reynolds,
2006). Interestingly, Smallwood et al. (2013) have 
found evidence that delay discounting is easier for 
people who mind-wander more. In their study, 
mind-wandering was measured through experi­
ence sampling during two different attention tasks, 
which differed in difficulty. Before or after the 
attention tasks, participants performed a delay­
discounting task in which they repeatedly chose 
between two financial rewards, a smaller but imme­
diate reward and a larger reward that was delayed 
by up to 180 days. The results showed that more 
frequent mind-wandering during the easy atten­
tion task was associated with a decreased tendency 
toward delay discounting. The authors speculated 
that habitually dreaming away from the here and 
now may enable people to forgo the temptation of 
immediate rewards.
Given that mind-wandering episodes often 
revolve 
around 
the 
future, 
the 
explanation 
Smallwood et al. (2013) gave for their findings 
was that individuals who mind-wander more 
spend more time mentally simulating the future, 
which makes them more sensitive to the value of 
future rewards. This explanation is supported by 
the observation that only mind-wandering during 
the easy but not the more difficult task was predic­
tive of participants’ tendency to choose future over 
immediate rewards. Previous research (Smallwood 
et al., 2009; Smallwood, Schooler, et al., 2011) has 
shown that future-related mind-wandering is much 
more prevalent during easy or passive tasks than 
during highly demanding tasks. Thus, it seems 
that task conditions that are conducive to future- 
related mind-wandering specifically are beneficial 
for future-oriented decision-making.
Indeed, other studies have found that engaging 
in episodic future thinking, as opposed to non- 
episodic thinking (Benoit, Gilbert, & Burgess,
2011) or thinking about things in the present (Lin
& Epstein, 2014), leads to more future-oriented 
choices in delay discounting tasks. And again, 
other research has shown that engaging in spon­
taneous thoughts about the future during a delay­
discounting task reduced preferences for immediate 
rewards (Peters & Biichel, 2010). Interestingly, 
in all those studies, the effect was not driven by 
future-related thoughts that were explicitly associ­
ated with the future reward itself. Lin and Epstein
(2014) attributed the benefit of future-oriented 
thinking for future-oriented decision-making to an 
increased ability to predict one’s own future emo­
tions, a hypothesis that is in line with the findings 
by Smallwood et al. (2013).
Other research, however, suggests that engag­
ing in positive and not necessarily future-related 
types of thoughts can also be an effective strat­
egy to resist the temptation of immediate rewards 
in order to obtain delayed rewards. For instance, 
Mischel, Ebbesen, and Zeiss (1972) found that, 
when children could obtain a desired food item 
by resisting to eat a less desirable but immediately 
available food, instructions to engage in positive 
distracting thoughts (i.e., “anything that is fun to 
think of”) substantially increased their ability to 
wait. Sad thoughts or thoughts directly related to 
the desired rewards, on the other hand, were not as 
helpful. The mechanism behind the benefit of posi­
tive mind-wandering may be different from that of 
future-related mind-wandering. Whereas future- 
related mind-wandering seems to influence how 
individuals think about or attend to future rewards, 
positive mind-wandering might instead reduce 
the relative appeal of the immediate reward. More 
research is needed to test this possibility. To sum up, 
the research discussed in this section illustrates that, 
under conditions giving rise to future-related or pos­
itive thoughts, the seemingly maladaptive tendency 
to escape from the here and now can be functional 
for planning and future-oriented decision-making.
Practicing Constructive Mind-Wandering
If some types of mind-wandering are less disrup­
tive to performance than others, or are more helpful 
for attaining desired outcomes such as maintaining 
positive mood, being creative, or future-oriented 
decision-making, this raises the important ques­
tion of whether we can learn to deliberately increase 
those “constructive” types of mind-wandering. The 
idea of deliberately and consciously engaging in 
mind-wandering may seem paradoxical; after all, 
mind-wandering is typically defined as spontaneous 
and often task-unrelated, and often occurs without
240
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

awareness. If one deliberately engages in a particular 
train of thought, with a desired outcome in mind, 
doesn’t this make the thinking one’s primary task, 
and anything but spontaneous? We think, on the 
contrary, that it is possible to give direction and 
purpose to a mind-wandering episode without nec­
essarily removing all spontaneity from the experi­
ence. As Fox and Christoff (2014) have pointed out 
before, spontaneous thinking and meta-cognitive 
control are not necessarily in conflict, and the inter­
play of these two modes of thinking may facilitate 
creative cognition and other mental phenomena. 
We propose, for instance, that in order to facilitate 
creative thinking, you may decide to let your mind 
wander toward a positive or personally meaningful 
memory or an interesting thought, without control­
ling where your train of thought will go from there. 
Or you may let your mind wander freely, and redi­
rect your attention only when you notice that you 
start to engage in repetitive, ruminative thought. In 
other words, we think that one can give broad direc­
tion to spontaneous thoughts without stifling their 
spontaneous, associative quality. This could be con­
sidered a “mindful” approach to mind-wandering, 
whereby one aims to be at least intermittently 
meta-aware of one’s thought content (see Fox & 
Christoff, 2014).
The idea of engaging in deliberative stimulus- 
unrelated thinking for personal improvement is 
not new. In types of meditation that revolve around 
open monitoring, for instance, practitioners are 
encouraged to observe their spontaneous thoughts 
with a receptive, accepting attitude, giving no prior­
ity to any thought in particular (e.g., Lutz, Slagter, 
Dunne, & Davidson, 2008). In classic Freudian 
approaches to psychotherapy, free association has 
been used as a way to reveal unconscious thought 
processes (e.g., Kris, 1982). And in modern forms 
of cognitive or cognitive behavioral therapy, patients 
are encouraged to become aware of their habitual 
patterns of thoughts and to change their internal 
narrative in a more constructive way in order to cre­
ate changes in their emotions and behaviors (e.g., 
Blagys, & Hilsenroth, 2002; Go^alvs, Matos, & 
Santos, 2009; Hollon & Beck, 1994).
Experimental studies, too, have shown that 
interventions involving guided thought exercises 
can lead to benefits. For instance, recalling positive 
autobiographical memories or vividly imagining 
positive scenarios can help increase positive mood 
and reduce negative intrusive thoughts in rumi- 
nators or individuals with depressive symptoms 
(Gillihan, Kessler, & Farah, 2007; Hirsch, Perman,
Hayes, Eagleson, & Mathews, 2015; Homes, Lang, 
& Shah, 2009; Josephson, Singer, & Salovey, 1996; 
Stokes & Hirsch, 2010). Here, too, different styles 
of thinking have been shown to have different 
effects. Hirsch et al. (2015), for instance, confronted 
ruminators with worrying scenarios and instructed 
them to either think about the potential negative 
or positive outcomes of each scenario. Moreover, 
suspecting that the attempt to fully suppress nega­
tive ruminative thoughts would likely backfire, they 
placed loose constraints on the style of participants’ 
spontaneous thoughts; that is, they instructed them 
to either think about their worries in the form of 
mental images or in the form of verbal descrip­
tions. Next, participants were instructed to focus on 
their breathing for a period of five minutes. After 
the breath focus period, intrusive thoughts were 
assessed. The results showed that both thinking in 
images and focusing on positive outcomes reduced 
negative intrusive thoughts. Interestingly, thinking 
in images reduced intrusions even when partici­
pants thought about negative outcomes, suggesting 
that thinking style had a greater impact than spe­
cific thought content.
In a similar study (Holmes, Coughtrey, & 
Connor, 2008), participants read descriptions of 
a number of positive scenarios and were asked to 
either reflect on the verbal qualities of the descrip­
tions or vividly imagine the scenarios either from 
their own (first-person) perspective, or from an 
observer’s (third-person) perspective. Imagination 
but not verbal analyses of the scenarios led to 
improved mood. Interestingly, this was true only 
when participants imagined events from their own 
perspective. This again suggests that guiding the 
style of people’s mind-wandering can help increase 
constructive types of mind-wandering in order to 
increase positive moods.
Other research has examined whether exer­
cises akin to deliberate mind-wandering can be 
used to improve creativity. Long, Hiebert, Nules, 
and Lalik (1985), for instance, developed guided 
“visualization” 
exercises— essentially 
instructed
mind-wandering— with the goal of improving cre­
ativity and in particular creative writing in elemen­
tary school students. The students were randomly 
assigned to two conditions. In the experimental 
condition, the students engaged in three weekly 
sessions of guided imagination, in which they were 
encouraged to first vividly imagine any memo­
ries or current experiences that came to mind and 
then let these images spontaneously “trigger” fur­
ther images and thoughts. In a control condition,
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
24I

students listened to and wrote stories, without 
deliberately trying to engage in any related or spon­
taneous thoughts. After the intervention, students 
who had engaged in mind-wandering, compared 
to the control condition, showed improvement in 
the originality of their creative writing. In a simi­
lar study, Jampole, Methews, and Konopak (1994; 
see also Jampole, Konopak, Readance, & Mosher, 
1991) tried to elicit vivid thoughts and mental 
images by encouraging students to imagine travel­
ing to different places and to imagine all the smells, 
feelings, and other experiences associated with 
this travel. Again, compared to control conditions 
involving reading and writing exercises, students 
who participated in imaginative thought showed 
increased creativity.
Following a similar approach, future studies 
could explore the consequences of different types of 
mind-wandering for performance, mood, creativity, 
decision-making, and other outcomes. For instance, 
building on the evidence that recalling positive 
autobiographical memories or vividly imagining 
positive events improves mood (Josephson et al., 
1996; Gillihan et al., 2007; Hirsch et al., 2015; 
Holmes, Lang, & Shah, 2009; Serrano, Latorre, 
Gatz, & Montanes, 2004; Stokes & Hirsch, 2010), 
could instructions to deliberately daydream about 
positive or personally meaningful events or mem­
ories be a strategy to improve a persons mood, 
well-being, and creativity? Could instructions to 
imagine future scenarios (versus recalling memo­
ries or thinking about current concerns) facilitate 
future-oriented decision-making? If so, this would 
not only be informative for research on the effects of 
mind-wandering, it would also have more practical 
applications. For instance, it may lead to interven­
tion programs training people in recognizing the 
effects of their tendency to engage in different styles 
of mind-wandering and possibly invoking construc­
tive types of mind-wandering dependent on current 
environmental or task demands.
There is currently a great interest in the benefits of 
mindfulness practices that focus on directing atten­
tion to present-moment experiences and increasing 
meta-awareness of ones experience (e.g., Chambers, 
Lo, & Allen, 2008; Grossmann, Niemann, Schmidt, 
& Walach, 2004; Jha, Stanley, Kiyonaga, Wong, & 
Gelfand, 2010; Mrazek et al., 2013). We think that 
increased meta-awareness may also benefit attempts 
to increase constructive mind-wandering. For one, 
becoming more meta-aware of ones spontaneous 
thoughts may be the first step to recognizing ones 
habitual style of mind-wandering and identifying
how different types of mind-wandering affect ones 
mood or behavior. Recognition, as a first step to 
regulation, is not trivial. Research shows that peo­
ple routinely fail to recognize when they engage 
in unwanted thoughts. For instance, in a study 
by Baird et al. (2013), participants were asked to 
monitor and catch spontaneous intrusive thoughts 
of past romantic relationships while performing a 
task. In addition, participants were probed at ran­
dom moments and asked about their thoughts. 
The results showed that participants often reported 
thinking about the former partner when probed, yet 
rarely caught those thoughts themselves. There is 
evidence, however, that meta-awareness of sponta­
neous thoughts can be increased when people make 
a conscious effort to catch those thoughts (Zedelius 
et al., 2015). Thus, we think that making an effort 
to increase meta-awareness, for instance with the 
help of mindfulness practice, may enable people to 
recognize when they are engaging in dysfunctional 
types of mind-wandering and shift their thoughts 
toward more constructive types of mind-wandering. 
Given that people spend a considerable amount of 
time mind-wandering, such interventions may have 
potential as a tool for self-enhancement.
Summary and Conclusion
Mind-wandering occupies a large amount of our 
waking life, and has inspired decades of research 
examining why and when the mind escapes from 
the here and now, what the neural signatures of 
mind-wandering are, and how mind-wandering 
affects cognition and behavior. In much of this 
research, mind-wandering has been defined in the 
broadest sense, encompassing all types of spontane­
ous, stimulus- or task-unrelated thought, although 
several lines of research have shed more light on 
specific aspects of the contents and styles of mind­
wandering. In the present chapter, we have focused 
on discerning distinct types of mind-wandering, 
characterized by different experiential qualities, emo­
tions, and cognitive processes, and we have exam­
ined how these different types of mind-wandering 
affect cognition and behavior. We have focused on 
research on the effects of mind-wandering on per­
formance, mood, creativity, and future-oriented 
decision-making, and have illustrated how differ­
entiating between different types of thought can 
bring important nuances to our understanding of 
mind-wandering. We have pointed out what we 
think are gaps in the current mind-wandering litera­
ture and have proposed novel hypotheses for future 
research that may elucidate how distinct types of
242
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

mind-wandering— intentional 
mind-wandering,
mind-wandering with meta-awareness, and posi­
tive, approach-oriented, personally meaningful, or 
future-oriented mind-wandering— may uniquely 
benefit stable performance, positive mood, creative 
thought, and future-oriented decisions. Finally, 
we have made a case for adding deliberate mind­
wandering to our scientific toolkit to understand 
and harness the effects of different constructive 
kinds of mind-wandering. We are only beginning 
to unravel the richness of spontaneous thought and 
its diverse consequences.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grant RFP-15-09 
from the Imagination Institute (www.imagination- 
institute.org), funded by the John Templeton 
Foundation. The opinions expressed in this publica­
tion are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Imagination Institute or the 
John Templeton Foundation.
References
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E., Reineberg, 
A., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. (2013). A 
penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated 
thought content and relationships with individual differ­
ences in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 900. 
Antrobus, J. S. (1968). Information theory and stimulus- 
independent thought. British Journal of Psychology, 59, 
423-430.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A neuro­
psychological theory of positive affect and its influence on 
cognition. Psychological Review, 106, 529-550.
Baas, M. (2015). Daydreaming frequency predicts creativity over 
and beyond flexibility and persistence. Preliminary data, 
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Baas, M., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Nijstad, B. A. (2008). A meta­
analysis of 25 years of mood-creativity research: Hedonic 
tone, activation, or regulatory focus? Psychological Bulletin, 
134, 779-806.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Fishman, D. J., Mrazek, M., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2013). Unnoticed intrusions: Dissociations 
of meta-consciousness in thought suppression. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 22, 1003-1012.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Jam, J. W., Franklin, M. 
S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by distraction: Mind 
wandering facilitates creative incubation. Psychological 
Science, 23, 1119-1122.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 2 0 ,1604—1611. 
Benoit, R. G., Gilbert, S. J., & Burgess, P. W. (2011). A neu­
ral mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospec- 
tion on farsighted decisions. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 
6771-6779.
Blagys, M. D., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2002). Distinctive activities 
of cognitive—behavioral therapy: A review of the comparative
psychotherapy process literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 
22, 671-706.
Bowden, E.M., Jung-Beeman, M., Fleck, J., & Kounios, J. 
(2005). New approaches to demystifying insight. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 322-328.
Bowers, K. S., Regehr, G., Balthazard, C., & Parker, K. (1990). 
Intuition in the context of discovery. Cognitive Psychology, 
22, 72-110.
Carriere, J. S. A., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2008). Everyday 
attention lapses and memory failures: The affective conse­
quences of mindlessness. Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 
835-847.
Casner, S. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). Thoughts in 
flight: Automation use and pilots’ task-related and task- 
unrelated thought. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 56, 433-442.
Chambers, R., Fo, B. C. Y., & Allen, N. B. (2008). The impact 
of intensive mindfulness training on attentional control, cog­
nitive style, and affect. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 32, 
303-322.
Cheyne, J. A., Solman, G. J. F., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, 
D. (2009). Anatomy of an error: A bidirectional state model 
of task engagement/disengagement and attention-related 
errors. Cognition, 111, 98—113.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106, 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Cialdini, R. B., Schaller, M., Houlihan, D., Arps, K., Fultz, J., 
& Beaman, A. (1987). Empathy-based helping: Is it self­
lessly or selfishly motivated? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52, 749-758. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.52.4.749
Custers, R., & Aarts, H. (2010). The unconscious will: How 
the pursuit of goals operates outside of conscious awareness. 
Science, 329, 47.
D’Argembeau, A., Renaud, O., & Van der Finden, M. (2011). 
Frequency, characteristics and functions of future-oriented 
thoughts in daily life. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 
96-103.
Dorsch, F. (2014). Focused daydreaming and mind wandering. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 1—23.
Elliot, A. J. (2006). The hierarchical model of approach-avoidance 
motivation. Motivation and Emotion, 30, 111—116.
Feldman, G. C., Joorman, J., & Johnson, S. F. (2008). Responses 
to positive affect: A self-report measure of rumination and 
dampening. Cognitive Therapy Research, 32, 507—525.
Fiore, S. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2001). Convergent or diver­
gent problem space search: The effects of problem structure 
on group versus individual problem solving. In Proceedings 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 
(Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 483-487). Eos Angeles, CA: SAGE 
Publications.
Forster, S., & Favie, N. (2009). Harnessing the wandering 
mind: The role of perceptual load. Cognition, 111, 345-355. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2009.02.006
Fox, K. C., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilitation of 
spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition helps 
the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & C. D.
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
243

Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience of metacognition (pp. 
293-319). Springer: Berlin Heidelberg.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Anderson, C. L., Smallwood, J., 
Kingstone, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The silver lining of 
a mind in the clouds: Interesting musings are associated with 
positive mood while mind wandering. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, e583. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00583.
Franklin, M., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Catching 
the mind in flight: Using behavioral indices to detect mind­
less reading in real time. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 
992-997.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O ’Donoghue, T. (2002). Time 
discounting and time preference: A critical review. Journal of 
Economic Literature, 40, 351—401.
Gable, S. L., Hopper, E. A., & Schooler, J. W. (2017). When the 
muses strike: Creative ideas of physicists and writers regularly 
occur during mind-wandering. (Manuscript under review).
Galera, C., Orriols, L., M’Bailara, K., Laborey, M., Contrand, 
B., Ribereau-Gayon, R., . . . & Lagarde, E. (2012). Mind 
wandering and driving: Responsibility case-control study. 
British Medical Journal, 345, e8105.
Giambra, L. M. (1980). A factor analysis of the items of the ima- 
ginal processes inventory. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 36, 
383-409.
Giambra, L. M. (1989). Task-unrelated thought frequency as a 
function of age: A laboratory study. Psychology of Aging, 4, 
136-143.
Giambra, L. M. (1995). A laboratory method for investigating 
influences on switching attention to task-unrelated imagery 
and thought. Consciousness and Cognition, 4, 1—21.
Gillihan, S. J., Kessler, J., & Farah, M. J. (2007). Memories 
affect mood: Evidence from covert experimental assign­
ment to positive, neutral, and negative memory recall. Acta 
Psychologica, 125, 144-154.
Gon<;alvs, M. M., Matos, M., & Santos, A. (2009). Narrative 
therapy and the nature of “innovative moments” in the 
construction of change. Journal of Constructivist Psychology, 
22, 1-23.
Greene, T. R., & Noice, H. (1988). Influence of positive affect 
upon creative thinking and problem solving in children. 
Psychological Reports, 63, 895-898.
Grol, M., Hertel, P. T., Koster, E. H. W., & De Raedt, R. (2015). 
The effects of rumination induction on attentional breadth 
for self-related information. Clinical Psychological Science, 
3(4), 607-618. doi: 10.1177/2167702614566814
Grossmann, P, Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., & Walach, H. 
(2004). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and health 
benefits: A meta-analysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 
57, 35-43.
Hirsch, C. R., Perman, G., Hayes, S., Eagleson, C., & Mathews, 
A. (2015). Delineating the role of negative verbal think­
ing in promoting worry, perceived threat, and anxiety. 
Clinical Psychological Science, 3(4), 637-647. doi: 10.1177/ 
2167702615577349
Hollon, S. D. & Beck, A. T. (1994). Cognitive and cognitive- 
behavioral therapies. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield, (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (4 th ed., pp. 
428-466). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Holmes, E. A., Coughtrey, A. E., & Connor, A. (2008). Looking 
at or through rose-tinted glasses? Imagery perspective and 
positive mood. Emotion, 8, 875-879.
Holmes, E. A., Lang, T. J., & Shah, D. M. (2009). Developing 
interpretation bias modification as a” cognitive vaccine” 
for depressed mood: Imagining positive events makes you 
feel better than thinking about them verbally. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 118, 76-88.
Huba, G. J., Aneshensel, C. S., & Singer, J. L. (1981). 
Development of scales for three second-order factors of inner 
experience. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 16, 181—206.
Isen, A M. (1990). The influence of positive and negative affect 
on cognitive organization: Some implications for develop­
ment. In N. Stein, B. Leventhal, & T. Trabasso (Eds.), 
Psychological and biological approaches to emotion (pp. 75—94). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). 
Positive affect facilitates creative problem solving. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1122—1131.
Jampole, E. S., Konopak, B. C., Readance, J. E., & Moser, J. E. 
(1991). Using mental imagery to enhance gifted elementary 
students’ creative writing. Reading Psychology, 12, 183-197.
Jampole, E. S., Mathews, F. N., & Konopak, B. C. (1994). 
Academically gifted students’ use of imagery for creative 
writing. The Journal of Creative Behavior, 28, 1—15.
Jha, A. P., Stanley, E. A., Kiyonaga, A., Wong, L., & Gelfand, 
L. (2010). Examining the protective effects of mindfulness 
training on working memory capacity and affective experi­
ence. Emotion, 10, 54.
Josephson, B. R., Singer, J. A., & Salovey, P. (1996). Mood regu­
lation and memory: Repairing sad moods with happy memo­
ries. Cognition and Emotion, 10, 437—444.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeyes, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18, 614-621.
Kasof, J. (1997). Creativity and breadth of attention. Creativity 
Research Journal, 10, 303-315.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 33, 932.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E. (2013). Goal commitments and the content of 
thoughts and dreams: Basic principles. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, e4l5.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 7, 
105-128.
Kris, A. O. (1982). Free association: Methods and process. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). 
The persistence of thought: Evidence for a role of working 
memory in the maintenance of task-unrelated thinking. 
Psychological Science, 12, 375-380.
Lin, H., & Epstein, L. H. (2014). Living in the moment: Effects 
of time perspective and emotional valence of episodic 
thinking on delay discounting. Behavioral Neuroscience, 
128, 12-19.
Long, S., Hiebert, E. H., Nules, J. A., & Lalik, R. (1985). Effects 
of awareness and practice in mental imagery on creative
244
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

writing of gifted children. In J. A. Niles & R. V. Lalik (Eds.), 
Issues in literacy: A research perspective. Thirty-fourth Yearbook 
of the National Reading Conference (pp. 381-385). Rochester, 
NY: National Reading Conference.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. (2008). 
Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 163—169.
Lynn, S. J., & Rhue, J. W. (1986). The fantasy-prone per­
son: Hypnosis, imagination, and creativity. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 404—408.
Lynn, S. J., & Rhue, J. W. (1988). Fantasy proneness: Hypnosis, 
developmental antecedents, and psychopathology. American 
Psychologist, 43( 1), 35-44.
Lyubomirsky, S., 
& Nolen-Hoeksema, S. 
(1993). Self- 
perpetuating properties of dysphoric rumination. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 339—349.
Marcusson-Clavertz, D., Cardena, E., &Terhune, D. B. (2015). 
Daydreaming style moderates the relation between working 
memory and mind wandering: Integrating two hypotheses. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 42(3), 451-464. doi: 10.1037/xlm0000180
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., 
Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds: 
The default network and stimulus-independent thought. 
Science, 315, 393-395.
Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Phillips, D. T., Baird, B., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2013). Mindfulness training improves work­
ing memory capacity and GRE performance while reducing 
mind wandering. Psychological Science, 24, 776—781.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie 
experimentale, 67(1), 11.
Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, J., Franklin, M. S., Chin, J. M., 
Baird, B., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). The role of mind 
wandering in measurements of general aptitude. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 788—798.
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode to 
positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 
e626. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00626
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train of 
thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and mind 
wandering in an executive-control task .Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 196—204.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering 
reflect executive function or executive failure? Comment 
on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and Watkins (2008). 
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 188-197.
McVay, J. C., Kane, M. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2009). Tracking 
the train of thought from the laboratory into everyday 
life: An experience-sampling study of mind wandering across 
controlled and ecological contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 16, 857-863.
Mednick, S. A. (1962). The associative basis of the creative pro­
cess. Psychological Review, 69, 220-232.
Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999). A hot/cool-system analysis 
of delay of gratification: Dynamics of willpower. Psychological 
Review, 106, 3-19.
Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., & Zeiss, A. R. (1972). Cognitive 
and attentional mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 21(2), 204-218.
Papageorgiou, C., & Wells, A. (2003). An empirical test of a 
clinical metacognitive model of rumination and depression. 
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27(3), 261—273.
Parks, C. W., Klinger, E., & Perlmutter, M. (1988). Dimensions 
of thought as a function of age, gender and task difficulty. 
Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 8, 49—62.
Peters, J., & Biichel, C. (2010). Episodic future thinking 
reduces reward delay discounting through an enhancement 
of prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions. Neuron, 66, 
138-148.
Poerio, G., Totterdell, P., Emerson, L. M., & Miles, E. (2015). 
Love is the triumph of the imagination: Daydreams about 
significant others are associated with increased happi­
ness, love and connection. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 
135-144.
Reynolds, B. (2006. A review of delay-discounting research with 
humans: Relations to drug use and gambling. Behavioral 
Pharmacology, 17, 651—67.
Risko, E. F., Anderson, N., Sarwal, A., Engelhardt, M., & 
Kingstone, A. (2011). Everyday attention: Variation in 
mind wandering and memory in a lecture. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 26, 234-242.
Rowe, G., Hirsch, J. B., & Anderson, A. K. (2007). Positive affect 
increases the breadth of attentional selection. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 104, 383-388.
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). 
How self-generated thought shapes mood: The relation 
between mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio­
temporal content of thoughts. PLoS ONE, 8, €17554. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077554
Rummel, J., & Boywitt, C. D. (2014). Controlling the stream 
of thought: Working memory capacity predicts adjustment 
of mind wandering to situational demands. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 21, 1309-1315.
Salovey, P., Mayer, J. D., Goldman, S., Turvey, C., & Palfai, T. 
(1995). Emotional attention, clarity, and repair: Exploring 
emotional intelligence using the Trait-Meta-Mood Scale. 
In J. Pennebaker (Ed.), Emotion, disclosure, and health 
(pp. 125—154). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Sayette, M. A., Reichle, E. D., & Schooler, J. W. (2009). Lost 
in the sauce: The effects of alcohol on mind wandering. 
Psychological Science, 20(6), 747-752.
Sayette, M. A., Schooler, J. W., & Reichle, E. D. (2010). Out for 
a smoke: The impact of cigarette craving on zoning out dur­
ing reading. Psychological Science, 21(1), 26-30.
Schad, D. J., Nuthmann, A., & Engbert, R. (2012). Your mind 
wanders weakly, your mind wanders deeply: Objective mea­
sures reveal mindless reading at different levels. Cognition, 
125, 179-194.
Schooler, 
J. 
W. 
(2002). 
Re-representing 
consciousness: 
Dissociations between experience and meta-consciousness. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 339—344.
Schooler, J. W., & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of insight. 
In S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, & R. A. Finke, The creative cog­
nition approach (pp. 97-133). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schooler, J. W., Mrazek, M. D., Baird, B., & Winkielman, P. 
(2014). Minding the mind: The value of distinguishing 
between unconscious, conscious, and meta-conscious pro­
cesses. In P. Shaver & M. Mikulincer (Eds.), APA handbook 
of personality and social psychology, Vol. 1: Attitudes and social 
cognition (pp. 179-202). Washington, DC: APA Press.
Schooler, J. W., Reichle, E. D., & Halpern, D. V. (2004). Zoning 
out during reading: Evidence for dissociations between expe­
rience and metaconsciousness. In D. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking 
and seeing: Visual metacognition in adults and children (pp. 
204-226). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
245

Schooler, J. W., & Schreiber, C. A. (2004). Experience, meta­
consciousness, and the paradox of introspection. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies, 11, 17—39.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 15, 319-326.
Seli, P., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, D. (2014). Not all mind 
wandering is created equal: dissociating deliberate from 
spontaneous mind wandering. Psychological Research, 75(5), 
750-758.
Seli, P., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2013). Wandering minds 
and wavering rhythms: Linking mind wandering and behav­
ioral variability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance, 39, 1—5.
Seli, P., Maillet, D., Schacter, D. L., Kane, M. J., Schooler, J. W., 
Smallwood, J., & Smilek, D. What does (and should) “mind 
wandering” mean? (Manuscript in preparation).
Serrano, J. P., Latorre, J. M., Gatz, M., & Montanes, J. (2004). 
Life review therapy using autobiographical retrieval practice 
for older adults with depressive symptomatology. Psychology 
and Aging, 19, 272-277.
Simpson, C., & Papageorgiou, C. (2003). Metacognitive beliefs 
about rumination in anger. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 
10( 1), 91-94.
Singer, J. L. (1974). Daydreaming and the stream of 
thought: Daydreams have usually been associated with idle­
ness and inattentiveness. Now, however, through an empiri­
cal research program, their general function and adaptive 
possibilities are being elucidated. American Scientist, 62(4), 
417-425.
Singer, J. L. (1975). The inner world of daydreaming New York: 
Harper & Row.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1963). A factor-analytic study 
of daydreaming and conceptually-related cognitive and per­
sonality variables. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 17, 187—209.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1972). Daydreaming, ima- 
ginal processes, and personality: A normative study. In 
R Sheehan (Ed.), The Junction and nature of imagery. 
New York: Academic Press.
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1970). Tmaginalprocesses inven­
tory. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Singer, J. L., & Schonbar, R. A. (1961). Correlates of daydream­
ing: A dimension of self-awareness. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 25, 1-6.
Sio, U. N., & Ormerod, T. C. (2009). Does incubation enhance 
problem solving? A meta-analytic review. Psychological 
Bulletin, 135, 94-120.
Smallwood, J., Beach, E., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2008). 
Going AWOL in the brain: Mind wandering reduces cortical 
analysis of external events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
20, 458-469.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K. S., Tipper, C., Giesbrecht, B., 
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Carlson, J. M., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2011). Pupillometric evidence for the 
decoupling of attention from perceptual input during 
offline thought. PLoS ONE, 6, e l8298. doi: 10.1371/jour- 
nal.pone.0018298
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F., Sudberry, 
M., O’Connor, R., & Obonsawin, M. (2004). Subjective 
experience and the attentional lapse: Task engagement and 
disengagement during sustained attention. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 13(4), 657-690.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). 
When attention matters: The curious incident of the wan­
dering mind. Memory & Cognition, 36, 1144—1150.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2008). 
When attention matters: The curious incident of the wan­
dering mind. Memory and Cognition, 36, 1144—1150.
Smallwood, J., Nind, L., & O ’Connor, R. C. (2009). When is 
your head at? An exploration of the factors associated with 
the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 18, 118-125.
Smallwood, J., Obonsawin, M., Baracaia, S. F., Reid, H., 
O’Connor, R., & Heim, D. (2003). The relationship 
between rumination, dysphoria, and self-referent think­
ing: Some preliminary findings. Imagination, Cognition & 
Personality, 22, 317-342.
Smallwood, J., O ’Connor, R. C., & Heim, D. (2006). 
Rumination, 
dysphoria 
and 
subjective 
experience. 
Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 24, 355—367.
Smallwood, J., Ruby, F. J., & Singer, T. (2013). Letting go of the 
present: Mind-wandering is associated with reduced delay 
discounting. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 1-7.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler J., W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946-958.
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. J., 
Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and the 
temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20, 1120-1126.
Smilek, D., Carriere, J. S. A., & Cheyne, J. A. (2010). Failures of 
sustained attention in life, lab, and brain: Ecological validity 
of the SART. Neuropsychologia, 48, 2564-2570.
Smith, R., Keramatian, K., Smallwood, J., Schooler, J., Luus, B., 
& Christoff, K. (2006). Mind wandering with and without 
awareness: An fMRI study of spontaneous thought processes. 
In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society (pp. 804-809). Vancouver: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Smith, R. W., & Kounios, J. (1996). Sudden insight: All-or- 
none processing revealed by speed-accuracy decomposition. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22(6), 1443—1462.
Spronken, M., Dijksterhuis, A., Holland, R., & Figner, B. 
(2015). Are we always happiest when being mindful? 
Exploring the role of activity pleasantness using an experi­
ence sampling study. Poster presented at SPSP annual con­
vention 2015, Long Beach, CA.
Stokes, C., & Hirsch, C. R. (2010). Engaging in imagery versus 
verbal processing of worry: Impact on negative intrusions in 
high worriers. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 418-423.
Teasdale, J. D., Dritschel, B. H., Taylor, M. J., Proctor, L., 
Lloyd, C. A., Nimmo-Smith, I., & Baddeley, A. D. (1995). 
Stimulus-independent thought depends on central executive 
resources. Memory & Cognition, 23, 551—559.
Unsworth, N., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. (2012). Variation 
in cognitive failures: An individual differences investiga­
tion of everyday attention and memory failures. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 67, 1—16.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2014). Similarities and 
differences between mind wandering and external dis­
traction: A latent variable analysis of lapses of attention 
and their relation to cognitive abilities. Acta Psychologica, 
150, 14-25.
Unsworth, N., McMillan, B. D., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, 
G. J. (2012). Everyday attention failures: An individ­
ual differences investigation. Journal of Experimental
24 6
U N R A V E L I N G  W H A T  S O N  O U R  M I N D S

Psychology: 
Learning, 
Memory, 
and 
Cognition, 
38, 
1765-1772.
Verhaeghen, P., Khan, R., & Joormann, J. (2005). Why we sing 
the blues: The relationship between self-reflective rumina­
tion, mood, and creativity. Emotion, 5, 226—232.
Whitmer, A. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2013). An attentional 
scope model of rumination. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 
1036-1061.
Yanko, M. R., & Spalek, T. M. (2013). Driving with the wan­
dering mind: The effect that mind wandering has on driv­
ing performance. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 56, 260—269.
Zedelius, C. M., Broadway, J. M. & Schooler, J. W. (2015). 
Motivating meta-awareness of mind wandering: A way
to catch the mind in flight? Consciousness and Cognition,
36, 44-53.
Zedelius, C. M., Protzko, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2016). Styles 
of daydreaming and their relationship with creativity. 
Unpublished data, University of California, Santa Barbara. 
Zedelius, C. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2015a). Mind wandering 
“ahas” versus mindful reasoning: Alternative routes to cre­
ative solutions. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, e834.
Zedelius, C. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2015b). The richness of 
inner experience: Relating styles of daydreaming to creative 
processes. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 2063.
Zhiyan, T. & Singer, J. L. (1996). Daydreaming styles, emotion­
ality and the big five personality dimensions. Imagination, 
Cognition, and Personality, 16, 399-414.
C L A I R E  M .  Z E D E L I U S  A N D  J O N A T H A N  W .  S C H O O L E R
247


C H A P T E R
19
Electrophysiological Evidence for Attentional 
Decoupling during Mind-Wandering
Julia W. Y. Kam 
and Todd C. Handy
Abstract
The tendency to disengage from the immediate environment and to wander off to another time and 
place is a unique characteristic of the human mind. While much research has focused on the neural 
origins of such mind-wandering experience, less understood is the mechanism by which the mind 
facilitates task-unrelated thoughts. This chapter presents electrophysiological evidence demonstrating 
a widespread attenuation of numerous cognitive responses to external events during mind-wandering, 
suggesting that this transient modulation of the depth of the cognitive investment in external events may 
be one potential mechanism in which the mind facilitates these task-unrelated thoughts. The chapter 
also highlights the utility of resting-state and intracranial EEG as valuable methodology in illuminating the 
neural mechanisms underlying these internally directed mental experiences.
Key Words: mind-wandering, electrophysiology, task-unrelated thought, disengagement, EEG, 
intracranial EEG
Despite our embodied presence in the external 
world and the adaptive value of remaining vigilant 
to what is physically around us, our attention inevi­
tably and regularly shifts inward to our own mus- 
ings and reflections. The thoughts that occur during 
this mind-wandering experience generally reflect 
qualitative content that is unrelated to and undi­
rected by external task demands. For example, as 
you are reading through this chapter, you may rem­
inisce about childhood memories, decide between 
two cities for your next vacation, or fantasize about 
your favorite sports team winning a championship. 
However, despite the everyday ubiquity of this phe­
nomenon, only within the last decade has research 
begun to reveal the neural mechanisms underlying 
such perceptually decoupled thinking. Unlike many 
other cognitive phenomena, our thoughts often 
arise without any concomitant behavioral correlates, 
highlighting the role that direct measures of neural 
activity can play in revealing its complex features. 
In this regard, we review how electroencephalogram
(or EEG) has been exploited as a means to under­
stand how mind-wandering alters our engagement 
with the external environment.
While much research on the topic of mind­
wandering has focused on elucidating its subjec­
tive content (e.g., Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
McVay, Kane, & Kwapil, 2009; Smallwood et al.,
2011) and the neural systems mediating its advent 
(e.g., Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & 
Schooler, 2009; Fingelkurts & Fingelkurts, 2011; 
Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 
2015; Mason et al., 2007; Northoff et al., 2006), 
EEG-based measures have been particularly useful 
for addressing a third and equally vital issue that 
calls into question our traditional understanding 
of selective attention. In particular, long-dominant 
models of selective attention implicitly assume that 
we are always selecting for or highlighting something 
in the external environment for higher levels of cog­
nitive analysis (e.g., Desimone & Duncan, 1995; 
Posner, 1980). However, as EEG-based measures
2 49

have helped reveal, it now appears that not only 
is attentional selection transiently attenuated dur­
ing bouts of mind-wandering, but it also involves a 
temporal coordination across multiple domains of 
cognitive functions. The third issue concerns how 
these cognitive domains collectively ebb and flow 
together over time in terms of the depth of their 
engagement with events in the external environ­
ment (Handy & Kam, 2015; Kam & Handy, 2013).
Terminology
At the outset, it is important to appreciate that a 
number of different terms or operational definitions 
have been applied to the phenomenon, including 
m ind-wandering, task-unrelated thought, spontaneous 
thought, stim ulus-independent thought, self-generated 
thought, and zoning/tuning out. Critical theoretical 
differences among these terms can be gleaned (e.g., 
Christoff, 2011; Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2016; Smallwood & Schooler, 
2015). For example, task-unrelated thoughts are 
by definition not related to the ongoing task at 
hand, but may very well be tied to stimulus inputs 
in the surrounding external environment, such 
as the loud noise made by the magnetic reso­
nance imaging (MRI) scanner. Likewise, although 
stimulus-independent thoughts are not initiated 
by a currently present external stimulus, they may 
involve the conscious, metacognitive evaluation 
of ones task performance (Stawarcyzk, Majerus, 
Maquet, & D ’Argembeau, 2011). Such distinc­
tions may be critical when considering the qualita­
tive nature of these internally directed thoughts, or 
when investigating which brain regions are active 
during mind-wandering. However, with respect 
to 
our 
primary 
issue— how 
mind-wandering 
alters our attentional engagement with events in 
the external environment— the conclusions we 
draw generalize to most conceptualizations of this 
mental experience. Hereafter, we will use the two 
terms most appropriate for the studies discussed in 
this chapter— m ind-wandering and task-unrelated 
thought—interchangeably to refer to our empiri­
cal phenomenon of interest. Both terms reflect any 
thoughts that are not currently focused on ongoing 
task performance, spanning across thoughts that are 
stimulus-independent and -dependent, spontane­
ous and deliberate, and that occur with and without 
awareness.
Evidence for Attentional Disengagement
That our attention to the external environ­
ment should disengage during transient bouts of
mind-wandering follows from two points. First, 
the executive control hypothesis proposes that mind­
wandering decouples our executive resources from 
the ongoing task, directing them away from our 
immediate sensory-motor environment to the inter­
nal environment in order to facilitate inner trains of 
thought (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). Consistent 
with this hypothesis, disrupted performance on a 
number of executive tasks has been reported dur­
ing task-unrelated thoughts, suggesting that when 
mind-wandering has successfully recruited the nec­
essary executive resources, a limited amount remains 
for the external task (e.g., Levinson, Smallwood, & 
Davidson, 2012; Teasdale et al., 1995). Second, 
mental imagery in different sensory domains has 
been shown to rely on the same domain-specific 
brain regions engaged by external stimulus inputs 
(e.g., Decety, 1996; Kosslyn, Zatorre & Halpern,
2005), indicating that our task-unrelated thoughts 
and the associated subjective experiences rely on the 
same domain-specific processes engaged by events 
in the external world. Melding these ideas together, 
the attenuation of sensory-motor processing of 
external events appears to play an imperative role 
in facilitating the initiation and maintenance of 
task-unrelated thoughts (Smallwood, 2013). In the 
following, we summarize the EEG-based evidence 
supporting this proposal.
Impact on Sensory)Perceptual Processing
The mounting evidence of disrupted behavioral 
performance on various attentional tasks during 
mind-wandering (e.g., Cheyne, Carriere, & Smilek, 
2006; McVay & Kane, 2009) invites the ques­
tion of the extent to which such disruption corre­
sponds with attenuation of stimulus processing at 
the sensory-perceptual level. Toward addressing this 
question, our event-related potential (ERP) study 
had participants perform a sustained attention to 
response task (SART), wherein a target stimulus 
requiring a simple detection response is presented 
on a computer screen every two seconds or so, while 
interspersed between each target was a task-irrelevant 
visual or auditory “probe” stimulus that participants 
were told to ignore (Kam et al., 2011). As partici­
pants performed the task, we then stopped them at 
unpredictable intervals and queried them on their 
attentional state right before the stoppage as either 
“on-task,” or “mind-wandering”— a method of sub­
jective reporting called experience sampling that 
has shown high validity in capturing global atten­
tional states (Gruberger, Ben-Simon, Levkovitz, 
Zangen, & Hendler, 2011). The amplitudes of
250
E L E C T R O  P H Y S I O  L O G I C A L  E V I D E N C E  F O R  A T T E N T I O N A L  D E C O U P L I N G

the sensory-evoked responses to the task-irrelevant 
visual and auditory probes presented within the last 
12 seconds prior to mind-wandering versus on-task 
attentional reports were examined. Consistent with 
the hypothesis that sensory-perceptual processes in 
the cortex become less sensitive to external events 
when we engage in task-unrelated thoughts, the 
amplitude of the visual PI component (Figure 
19.1A), which is generated in extrastriate visual cor­
tex, was attenuated during mind-wandering states, 
as was the auditory N1 component (Figure 19.1 A), 
which is generated in primary auditory cortex.
In a similar study, Braboszcz and Delorme 
(2011) asked participants to focus on their breath as 
they passively listened to frequent and rare auditory
tones as part of a classic “oddball” paradigm, and 
to report whenever they noticed that their minds 
had wandered away from their breath monitor­
ing. The sensory processing of both frequent and 
rare tones was compared between on-task and 
mind-wandering episodes, via the amplitude of the 
mismatch negativity (MMN) component, which 
reflects the pre-attentive sensory-level processing 
in the cortex associated with the detection of rare 
auditory stimuli. Consistent with the sensory-level 
effects of mind-wandering reported by Kam and 
colleagues (2011), the amplitude of the MMN 
was found to be reduced during periods of mind­
wandering (Figure 19.IB), suggesting that task- 
unrelated thoughts can impact automatic change
Mind-Wandering 
“ “  oddball
standard
Time (ms)
Parietal Target P3
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Figure 19.1. Attenuation of external responses during mind-wandering. This pattern of attenuation was observed in several types 
of responses during task-unrelated thoughts indexed by different measures. (A) Sensory-level processing of auditory stimuli, as 
indexed by the N1 component as shown at Fz, and visual stimuli, as indexed by the PI component shown at Oz, was attenuated 
during mind-wandering based on self report probe-caught measures using experience sampling. (B) Automatic change detection in 
auditory perception as indexed by the MMN (i.e., the difference between standard and oddball waveforms) is also disrupted during 
task-unrelated thoughts, as reported by participants during a breath-monitoring task. (C) Performance errors in a target detection 
task as a proxy for mind-wandering has been associated with reduction in both the P3 and the CNV components, indicative of 
disrupted target detection and anticipatory response to an expected stimulus, respectively, during mind-wandering. Sources: Kam et al. 
(2011); Braboszcz & Delorme (2011); O ’Connell et al. (2009). (See Color Insert)
J U L I A  W .  Y. K A M  A N D  T O D D  C. H A N D Y
2 5 1

detection in auditory perception as well (Braboszcz 
& Delorme, 2011).
Impacts on Cognitive and Affective 
Processing
These effects of mind-wandering at the sensory- 
perceptual level suggest that comparable impacts 
of task-unrelated thoughts might be observed at 
higher levels of stimulus evaluation in the cortex. 
In the first study to address mind-wandering and 
attentional decoupling using ERPs, experience 
sampling was used to assess whether participants 
were in an on-task versus mind-wandering state 
as they performed the SART as described earlier 
(Smallwood, Beach, Schooler, & Handy, 2008). 
Analysis focused on the amplitude of the P3 ERP 
component elicited by targets in the SART, a com­
ponent that indexes the general level of cognitive 
analysis applied to task stimuli. In line with the 
hypothesis that task-unrelated thoughts broadly 
disengage our attentional systems from the external 
stimulus environment, periods of mind-wandering 
relative to on-task attentional states were found to 
be associated with a significant decrease in the P3 
amplitude.
Consistent with this finding, Barron and col­
leagues (2011) also reported an attenuated P3 in 
a three-stimulus visual oddball task in individuals 
who retrospectively reported higher levels of mind­
wandering compared to those who reported lower 
levels of mind-wandering during task performance. 
This P3 reduction was observed in response to both 
infrequent, task-relevant targets and task-irrelevant 
distractors. Importantly, this finding demonstrates 
that mind-wandering appears to disrupt cognitive- 
level processing of rare stimuli, regardless of their 
relevance to the ongoing task.
Beyond the P3 index of attentional attenuation, 
target detection in steady-state visual-evoked poten­
tial paradigms has also been used to examine how 
task-unrelated thoughts impact the processing of 
external stimulus inputs. In one study, the failure to 
detect targets was considered as an index of mind­
wandering (O’Connell et al., 2009). They found, 
within 4 seconds of the missed target, a reduction 
in the amplitude of the P3, as well as the contin­
gent negative variation (CNV) component (Figure 
19.1C), which reflects the anticipatory response to 
an expected stimulus. In contrast, the amplitude of 
alpha over posterior areas increased up to 20 sec­
onds prior to an error, reflecting decreased vigi­
lance to external events. These results indicate that 
mind-wandering is associated with disrupted target
anticipation and detection, as well as decreased 
alertness. In a second study, MacDonald and col­
leagues (2011) asked participants to rate their 
attentional state on a continuous scale and per­
formed trial-by-trial analysis of the neural activity 
associated with target detection as a function of the 
reported attentional state. They found decreased P3 
amplitudes as well as increased pre-stimulus alpha 
power over central and posterior midline areas dur­
ing trials of lower levels of task-focus. Further, pre­
stimulus alpha amplitude predicted attentional state 
on a trial-by-trial basis. Irrespective of the use of an 
objective or subjective measure of attentional states, 
these studies converge on the notion of impaired 
target detection during task-unrelated thoughts (see 
also Smallwood et al., 2008).
The aforementioned studies indicating disrupted 
cognitive processing during mind-wandering have 
generally employed affectively neutral task stimuli. 
In an ERP study we therefore examined whether 
task-unrelated thoughts impact the cognitive evalu­
ation of affectively salient stimuli (Kam, Xu, & 
Handy, 2014). Previous studies have shown that the 
P3 component elicited by visual images is greater 
in amplitude when the image contains affectively 
charged content, relative to comparable images that 
are affectively neutral in content (e.g., Weinberg & 
Hajcak, 2011). Building on these findings, we asked 
a cohort of participants to view images of peoples 
hands in various situations, some of which showed 
them in painful situations (e.g., a hand getting cut 
by a knife) or neutral situations (e.g., a hand next 
to a knife) as we recorded the ERPs generated by 
the images. Again we used experience sampling, and 
periodically asked participants to report whether 
they were on-task or mind-wandering. Our results 
indicate that the P3 to painful images was signifi­
cantly reduced during mind-wandering (Kam et al., 
2014, Experiment 1).
Although behavioral performance in some of the 
aforementioned experimental tasks was impaired 
during mind-wandering states, the neural basis for 
these behavioral errors remains unclear. Accordingly, 
we used ERPs to examine whether mind-wandering 
disrupts performance-monitoring processes in the 
cortex, as measured by the feedback error-related 
negativity (fERN) in the context of a time estima­
tion task (Kam et al., 2012). As hypothesized, we 
observed that the fERN elicited by the trial-by-trial 
performance feedback was significantly attenuated 
in the interval prior to mind-wandering reports 
compared to on-task reports, suggesting that the 
occurrence of task-unrelated thoughts disengages us
252
E L E C T R O  P H Y S I O  L O G I C A L  E V I D E N C E  F O R  A T T E N T I O N A L  D E C O U P L I N G

from monitoring and adjusting behavioral outputs 
relevant for successful task performance.
Mechanisms UnderlyingAttentional 
Attenuation
Building on these aforementioned findings, 
a critical question concerns the neural mecha­
nisms underlying this broad spectrum of atten­
tional attenuation during mind-wandering. Using 
experience sampling during the SART, Baird and 
colleagues (2014) examined the extent to which 
mind-wandering modulates phase synchroniza­
tion or coherence of neural oscillations associated 
with task stimuli. They found decreased phase syn­
chrony in the theta band over parietal areas across 
trials within the PI time-window during mind­
wandering intervals (Figure 19.2A). Importantly, 
phase synchronization in the theta band positively 
correlated with PI amplitude, highlighting the 
potential role of phase-locking of theta band oscilla­
tions in the sensory attenuation of external stimuli 
during mind-wandering.
Paralleling such findings, Kirschner and col­
leagues (2012) performed source localization on 
scalp EEG data in order to investigate the spatial 
distribution of neural activity during task-unrelated 
thoughts. They examined more broadly the neural 
mechanisms that give rise to the transient functional 
coupling within the default mode network (DMN), 
which has been shown to be active during mind­
wandering (e.g., Christoff et al., 2009; Fox et ah, 
2015). Two separate experiments employing the 
SART tested the hypothesis that inter-regional syn­
chronization facilitates functional coupling between 
brain networks. The authors found increased phase 
synchronization in theta, alpha, and gamma bands 
across regions of the DM N during episodes of 
mind-wandering (Figure 19.2B). Together with the 
findings of Baird and colleagues (2014), these stud­
ies converge on the notion that mind-wandering 
attenuates sensory responses in both the auditory 
and visual domains, a process that is associated 
with phase synchronization between regions within 
the DM N.
Given such effects as revealed by EEG-based 
measures, one theory has proposed that the lateral 
prefrontal cortex (1PFC) may be critically involved 
in modulating fluctuations in these attentional states 
(Smallwood, 2013). The 1PFC has been implicated 
in attentional control and the regulation of compet­
ing stimulus inputs (Nagahama et al., 2001; Rowe, 
Toni, Josephs, Frackowiak, & Passingham, 2000), 
suggesting its potential role in facilitating both
externally and internally directed attentional states 
(Dixon, Fox, & Christoff, 2014; Vincent, Kahn, 
Snyder, Raichle, & Buckner, 2008). Importantly, 
the 1PFC has been shown to be recruited during 
both externally and internally directed attentional 
processes (Christoff et al., 2009). Future research in 
this area would benefit from examining this region 
as a promising candidate for facilitating the switch­
ing between attentional states.
Beyond Attentional Attenuation During 
Mind-Wandering
Empirical studies of mind-wandering typically 
involve external stimuli associated with an experi­
mental task. However, these experimental designs 
make it difficult to isolate the neural indices of 
mind-wandering itself. An alternative approach is to 
directly record EEG data while the participant is not 
engaged in any external task. Such an experimen­
tal condition is typically referred to as the “resting 
state.” Resting-state analyses in the fMRI literature 
have revealed that the brain is intrinsically organ­
ized into different functional networks (Yeo et al., 
2011). As it is now widely recognized that the brain 
is not idle at rest, a wealth of cognitive processes 
may be engaged during these resting states, modu­
lated by the varying thoughts that emerge, which 
could be investigated using resting-state EEG— a 
topic to which we turn in the subsequent section.
Electrophysiological Index of Thoughts 
Occurring During Rest
In the aforementioned literature, most stud­
ies employed a similar approach to data analysis, 
in which the electrophysiological response was 
time-locked to an external stimulus and com­
pared between on-task and mind-wandering states. 
However, in EEG data recorded during rest, there 
is no regularly occurring task-related external 
stimulus. Accordingly, instead of examining event- 
related potentials time-locked to a stimulus, the 
amplitude or power at different frequency bands 
averaged across the recording period may be used 
as an index of the strength of neural activity asso­
ciated with a particular attentional state. To then 
surmount the absence of an external stimulus, one 
common approach involves establishing a relation­
ship between patterns of EEG activity at rest and 
behavioral performance in a subsequent task, to see 
how the former correlates with or predicts the latter. 
Another approach is to associate resting-state EEG 
activity with activity in the DM N (e.g., Gusnard 
& Raichle, 2001). Briefly, the DM N is a network
J U L I A  W .  Y. K A M  A N D  T O D D  C. H A N D Y
253

PLF
A
STIM,
Time [ms]
B
a  Default 
9  Area
Q  Task-Relevant 
Area
Mixed 
V  Area
™ O ff Task > O n Task ™ O n Task > O ff Task
™ O ff Task > O n Task ™ O n Task > O ff Task
Left M TG 
Right M TG 
Occipital
Right ACC 
Parietal 
Parietal 
Right MFG
Figure 19.2. Neural mechanisms underlying attentional attenuation during mind-wandering. (A) Decreased phase synchrony in the 
theta band within parietal cortex was observed during episodes of mind-wandering, highlighting the potential role of phase-locking of 
theta band oscillations in the sensory attenuation of external stimuli during mind-wandering. (B) The increased phase synchronization 
in theta, alpha, and gamma bands across regions of the DMN during mind-wandering suggests the role of inter-regional 
synchronization in facilitating functional coupling within the DMN. Sources: Baird et al. (2014); Kirschner et al. (2012). (See Color Insert)

of regions that is generally less active during exter­
nally directed cognitive tasks than during rest (e.g. 
Greicius, Krasnow, & Menon, 2003; Gusnard & 
Raichle, 2001) as well as mind wandering (e.g., 
Mason et al., 2007; Christoff et al., 2009; Fox 
et al., 2015). The spatial distribution and functions 
of the DM N as it relates to task-unrelated thoughts 
are outlined in more detail in Chapter 13 by 
Andrews-Hanna, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Christoff 
in this volume.
One commonly used electrophysiological mea­
sure during resting waking states is EEG power 
averaged across frequency bands. This measure is 
derived from the raw EEG signal by performing a 
time-frequency analysis, which transforms the signal 
into the frequency domain, usually by means of the 
Fourier transform. Once in the frequency domain, 
the signal can then be decomposed into different 
frequency bands. The amplitude of the signal within 
a specified frequency range can be squared in order 
to obtain the band power. This measure indexes 
the strength of neural activity within the speci­
fied range of frequency bands. Using simultane­
ous fMRI and EEG recording during wakeful rest, 
Laufs and colleagues (2003) found that beta power 
(17-23 Hz) was positively associated with activity 
in retrosplenial, temporoparietal, and dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortices, regions generally considered 
to lie within the DM N. Likewise, both alpha (8- 
12 Hz) and beta (13-30 Hz) oscillations showed 
positive correlations with activation of the DM N 
in another study recording simultaneous fMRI and 
EEG (Mantini, Perrucci, Del Gratta, Romani, & 
Corbetta, 2007). Building on this relationship, one 
study focused on the spatial distribution of EEG 
frequency oscillations at rest (Jann, Kottlow, Dierks, 
Boesch, Koenig, 2010), revealing that DM N activa­
tion positively correlated with alpha (10.5-14 Hz) 
oscillations over posterior occipital electrodes and 
low beta (14-18.75 Hz) oscillations over parietal 
electrodes. In addition to increased regional activa­
tion, beta power has also been shown to account for 
variance in the functional connectivity of BOLD 
signal within the DM N (Hlinka, Alexakis, Diukova, 
Liddle, & Auer, 2010). This series of studies con­
verge on distinct electrophysiological signatures of 
neural activity during rest that are corroborated by 
robust correlations with spatially distributed DM N 
activity.
While scalp EEG provides excellent specific­
ity in the time domain, inferences must be made 
with regard to the source of neural activity sub­
serving task-unrelated thoughts. Intracranial EEG
circumvents this issue, as electrodes are placed 
directly on or within the cortex in patients undergo­
ing pre-surgical monitoring for intractable epilepsy. 
As with EEG, this method has superb temporal 
resolution; importantly, it also has great spatial res­
olution, allowing one to better localize the source 
of neural activity as it measures activity directly 
from the cortical surface or deep structures of the 
brain. As this is a relatively new and rare method 
in research, only one study to our knowledge at the 
time used this method to study neural dynamics 
during rest (Foster & Parvizi, 2012). In focusing 
on the posteromedial cortex, a core region of the 
DM N, they found increased theta oscillations (4-7 
Hz), as well as coupling between the phase of theta 
oscillations and the amplitude of high gamma (70- 
180 Hz), during the resting state. Interestingly, this 
modulation occurred at slow time scales, similar to 
those reported in resting-state networks at approxi­
mately 0.1 Hz (e.g., Nir et al., 2008). These results 
reveal that the transient coupling between low fre­
quency and high frequency neural activity within 
the posteromedial cortex (as part of the DMN) 
may be one potential mechanism underlying mind­
wandering in humans.
Future Directions
Here we elaborate on two emerging lines of 
research that are crucial for a more complete under­
standing of the neural mechanisms underlying the 
phenomenon of mind-wandering. First, among 
electrophysiological studies of resting waking states, 
none has explored whether the EEG signature of 
mind-wandering is modulated by its phenomenal 
or subjective content. O f interest, several behavioral 
studies have attempted to characterize the different 
types of task-unrelated thoughts commonly experi­
enced, and have found that our thoughts tend to be 
future oriented (Smallwood et al., 2011), and reflect 
personal issues (Klinger & Cox, 1987; McVay, 
Kane, & Kwapil, 2009). A crucial question then 
concerns how the electrophysiological signatures of 
our thoughts would change as a function of thought 
content. The extent to which electrophysiological 
measures are sufficiently sensitive to differentiate 
types of thoughts (e.g., reminiscing on a childhood 
experience versus contemplating an abstract con­
cept) is an exciting avenue for future research.
Second, in terms of methodology, intracranial 
EEG is proving to be a useful tool for revealing the 
underlying mechanisms of spontaneous thoughts 
and their associated neural networks. In addition 
to electrocorticography (ECoG), where activity is
J U L I A  W .  Y. K A M  A N D  T O D D  C. H A N D Y
255

recorded from the cortical surface, activity can also 
be recorded in deep structures of the brain like the 
amygdala and anterior insula using stereotactically 
implanted depth electrodes (sEEG). While both 
methods offer high temporal and spatial specificity, 
it is important to note that the invasive nature of 
these methods introduces its own limitations. This 
includes potential differences in cognitive functions 
between neurologically healthy brains and epileptic 
brains, as well as recording only from parts of the 
brain that meet strict clinical criteria as being neces­
sary to localize the source of epilepsy. Nonetheless, 
with electrode coverage that is appropriate for the 
cognitive process of interest, ECoG and sEEG can 
reveal the source of neural activity with high spa­
tial resolution. Another advantage concerns the 
detection of high gamma activity (usually indexed 
between 70 and 200 Hz), which has been linked to 
neuronal firing rate and has been shown to reflect 
spiking of population neuronal activity (Miller,
2010). Therefore, high gamma activity as captured 
by intracranial EEG is a promising measure to reveal 
coupling with lower frequencies within regions dur­
ing mind-wandering, as well as concomitant long- 
range synchronization between functional brain 
networks.
Conclusion
Collectively, the EEG-based evidence we review 
here indicates that transient periods of spontane­
ous thought are associated with slow temporal fluc­
tuations in the depth of attentional engagement 
with events in the external environment. Notably, 
beyond simply documenting such effects, there are 
a number of clinical disorders that have been tied to 
abnormal levels of sensory-perceptual and cognitive 
attenuation that also have clear links to spontane­
ous thinking. These include major depressive disor­
der (e.g., Spasojevic and Alloy, 2001; Watkins and 
Teasdale, 2001) and compulsive fantasy (Bigelsen 
and Schupak, 2011)— which can be characterized 
by abnormal increases in the amount of time dis­
engaged from the external environment in order to 
engage in stimulus-independent thought— as well 
as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which 
can be characterized as an abnormal increase in 
the amount of time engaged in the external envi­
ronment and stimulus-dependent thoughts (e.g., 
Fassbender et. al., 2009). We suggest that these 
disorders can be considered as having a common 
component rooted in pathologies of our transient 
engagement with the external environment as
revealed by EEG-based studies of mind-wandering 
and other forms of spontaneous thought.
References
Baird, B., Smallwood, S., Lutz, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2014). 
The decoupled mind: Mind- wandering disrupts corti­
cal phase-locking to perceptual events. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 26, 2596-2607.
Barron, E., Riby, L. M., Greer, J., & Smallwood, J. (2011). 
Absorbed in thought: The effect of mind wandering on the 
processing of relevant and irrelevant events. Psychological 
Science, 22, 596-601.
Bigelsen, J., & Schupak, C. (2011). Compulsive fantasy: Proposed 
evidence of an under-reported syndrome through a system­
atic study of 90 self-identified non-normative fantasizers. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 1634—1648.
Braboszcz, C., & Delorme, A. (2011). Lost in thoughts: neural 
markers of low alertness during mind wandering. Neuroimage 
54,3040-3047.
Cheyne, J. A., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, D. (2006). Absent- 
mindedness: Lapses of conscious awareness and everyday 
cognitive failures. Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 578—592.
Christoff, K. (2011). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51—59.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contribu­
tions. Proceedings of the National. Academy of Sciences U SA, 
106{21), 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Decety, J. (1996). Do executed and imagined movements 
share the same central structures? Cognitive Brain Research, 
3, 87-93.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of 
selective visual attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18, 
193-222.
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., Christoff, K. (2014). A framework 
for understanding the relationship between externally and 
internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 62, 321—330.
Fassbender, C., Zhang, H., Buzy, W. M., Cortes, C. R., Mizuiri, 
D., Beckett, L., et al. (2009). A lack of default network 
suppression is linked to increased distractibility in ADHD. 
Brain Research, 1273, 114-128.
Fingelkurts, A., & Fingelkurts, A. (2011). Persistent operational 
synchrony within brain default-mode network and self­
processing operations in healthy subjects. Brain Cognition, 
75, 79-90. doi: 10.10l6/j.bandc.2010.11.015
Foster, B. L., & Parvizi, J. (2012). Resting oscillations and cross­
frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex. 
Neuroimage, 60, 384-391.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2003). 
Functional connectivity in the resting brain: A network 
analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceeding National 
Academy of Sciences U SA, 100, 253-258.
256
E L E C T R O  P H Y S I O  L O G I C A L  E V I D E N C E  F O R  A T T E N T I O N A L  D E C O U P L I N G

Gruberger, M., Ben-Simon, E., Levkovitz, Y., Zangen, A., 
& Hendler, T. (2011). Towards a neuroscience of mind­
wandering. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, 56. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00056.
Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a 
baseline: Functional imaging and the resting human brain. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 685—694.
Handy, T. C., & Kam, J. W. Y. (2015). Mind wandering and 
selective attention to the external world. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 69, 183—189.
Hlinka, J., Alexakis, C., Diukova, A., Liddle, P. F., & Auer, D. 
P. (2010). Slow EEG pattern predicts reduced intrinsic func­
tional connectivity in the default mode network: An inter­
subject analysis. Neuroimage, 53, 239-246.
Jann, K., Kottlow, M., Dierks, T., Boesch, C., Koenig, T, (2010) 
Topographic electrophysiological signatures of FMRI resting 
state networks. PloS One, 5, el2945. doi: 10.1371/journal. 
pone.0012945
Kam, J. W. Y., Dao, E., Blinn, P., Krigolson, O. E., Boyd, L. 
A. & Handy, T. C. (2012) Mind wandering and motor 
control: Off-task thinking disrupts the online adjustment 
of behavior. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 329. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00329
Kam, J. W. Y., Dao, E, Farley, J., Fitzpatrick, K., Smallwood, J., 
et al. (2011). Slow fluctuations in attentional control of sen­
sory cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 460-470.
Kam, J. W. Y., & Handy, T. C. (2013). The functional conse­
quences of mind wandering: A mechanistic account of sen­
sory and cognitive decoupling. Frontiers in Perception Science, 
4, 725. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00725
Kam, J. W. Y., Xu, J., & Handy, T. C. (2014). I don’t feel your 
pain (as much): The desensitizing effect of mind wandering 
on the perception of others’ discomfort. Cognitive Affective 
and Behavioral Neuroscience, 14, 286—296.
Killingsworth, M. A., and Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330, 932.
Kirschner, A., Kam, J. W. Y., Handy, T. C., and Ward, L. M. 
(2012). Differential synchronization in default and task- 
specific networks of the human brain. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6, 139. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00139
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 7, 
105-128.
Laufs, H., Krakow, K., Sterzer, P., Eger, E., Beyerle, A., Salek- 
Haddadi, A., et al. (2003). Electroencephalographic sig­
natures of attentional and cognitive default modes in 
spontaneous brain activity fluctuations at rest. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences U SA, 100, 11053-11058.
Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). 
The persistence of thought: Evidence for a role of working 
memory in the maintenance of task-unrelated thinking. 
Psychological Science, 23, 375.
MacDonald, J. S. P, Mathan, S., & Yeung, N. (2011). Trial-by­
trial variations in subjective attentional state are reflected 
in ongoing prestimulus EEG alpha oscillations. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 2(82), 1-16.
Mantini, D., Perrucci, M. G., Del Gratta, C., Romani, G. L., 
& Corbetta, M. (2007). Electrophysiological signatures of 
resting state networks in the human brain. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences U SA, 104, 13170-13175. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700668104
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
McVay, J. C., and Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train 
of thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and 
mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 
35, 196-204.
McVay, J. C., Kane, M. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2009). Tracking 
the train of thought from the laboratory into everyday 
life: An experience-sampling study of mind wandering across 
controlled and ecological contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 16, 857-863.
Miller, K. J. (2010). Broadband spectral change: Evidence for 
a macroscale correlate of population firing rate? Journal of 
Neuroscience, 30, 6477-6479.
Nagahama, Y., Okada, T., Katsumi, Y., Hayashi, T., Yamauchi, 
H., Oyanagi, C., Konishi, J., Fukuyama, H., & Shibasaki, 
H. (2001). Dissociable mechanisms of attentional con­
trol within the human prefrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 
11, 85-92.
Nir, Y., Mukamel, R., Dinstein, I., Privman, E., Harel, M., Fisch,
L. , et al. (2008). Interhemispheric correlation of slow spon­
taneous neuronal fluctuations revealed in human sensory 
cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 1100—1108.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greek, M., Bermpohl, F., 
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006): Self-referential 
processing in our brain: A meta-analysis of imaging studies 
on the self. Neuroimage, 31, 440-457.
O’Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., Robertson, I. H., Bellgrove,
M. A., Foxe, J. J., et al. (2009). Uncovering the neural signa­
ture of lapsing attention: Electrophysiological signals predicts 
errors up to 20 s before they occur. Journal of Neuroscience, 
29, 8604-8611.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 32, 3—25.
Rowe, J. B., Toni, I., Josephs, O., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & 
Passingham, R. E. (2000). The prefrontal cortex: Response 
selection or maintenance within working memory?. Science, 
288, 1656-1660.
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the mind 
wanders: A process-occurrence framework for self-generated 
mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 519-535.
Smallwood, J., Beach, E., Schooler, J. W., & Handy, T. C. 
(2008). Going AWOL in the brain: Mind wandering cortical 
analysis of external events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
20, 458-469.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946-958.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Smallwood, J., Schooler, J. W., Turk, D. J., Cunningham, S. J., 
Burns, P., & Macrae, C. N. (2011). Self-reflection and the 
temporal focus of the wandering mind. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 30, 1120-1126.
Spasojevic, J., & Alloy, L. B. (2001). Rumination as a common 
mechanism relating depressive risk factors to depression. 
Emotion, 1, 25-37.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLOS One, 6, e l6997. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.OO 16997
J U L I A  W .  Y. K A M  A N D  T O D D  C. H A N D Y
257

Teasdale, J. D., Dritschel, B. H., Taylor, M. J., Proctor, L., 
Lloyd, C. A., Nimmo-Smith, I., & Baddeley, A. D. (1995). 
Stimulus independent thought depends on central executive 
resources. Memory and Cognition 23, 551—559.
Vincent, J. L., Kahn, I., Snyder, A. Z., Raichle, M. E., Buckner, 
R. L. (2008). Evidence for a frontoparietal control system 
revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 100(6), 3328-3342.
Watkins, E., & Teasdale, J. D. (2001). Rumination and over 
general memory in depression: Effects of self-focus and 
analytic thinking. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 
353-357.
Weinberg, A., & Hajcak, G. (2011). The late positive poten­
tial predicts subsequent interference with target processing. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 2994—3007. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2011.21630 
Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F. M., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M. R., Lashkari, 
D., Hollinshead, M., & Fischl, B. (2011). The organiza­
tion of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic 
functional connectivity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106(3), 
1125-1165.
Zatorre, R. J., & Halpern, A. R. (2005). Mental con­
certs: Musical imagery and auditory cortex. Neuron, 
47(1), 9-12.
258
E L E C T R O  P H Y S I O  L O G  I C A L  E V I D E N C E  F O R  A T T E N T I O N A L  D E C O U P L I N G

C H A P T E R
20
Mind-Wandering in Educational Settings
Jeffrey D. Wammes, Paul Seli, and Daniel Smilek
Abstract
Recently, there has been a growing interest in exploring the influence of mind-wandering on learning 
in educational settings. In considering the available research on the topic, one might draw the following 
conclusions: the prevalence of unintentional mind-wandering in classroom settings is high; mind­
wandering rates increase overtime in lectures; and mind-wandering interferes with learning. Although 
research in the extant literature provides ample support for these conclusions, much of this research was 
conducted in the laboratory, while participants viewed video-recorded lectures. More recently, however, 
researchers have examined the effects of intentional and unintentional mind-wandering in live-classroom 
settings, and, as this chapter reveals, such research has produced some results that are at odds with 
those produced in laboratory-based studies. The chapter discusses these recent findings in the context of 
the aforementioned potential conclusions, and concludes that findings from the laboratory do not readily 
generalize to real-world educational settings.
Key Words: mind-wandering, learning, education, lecture, laboratory
It has been well established that people s ability 
to learn relies heavily on the extent to which they 
pay attention while learning. Indeed, studies exam­
ining mind-wandering in educational settings have 
revealed that mind-wandering often undermines 
learning and hinders ones ability to remember lec­
ture material (see Schacter & Szpunar, 2015 for a 
review). These findings are particularly disconcert­
ing because research has also found that students’ 
rates of inattention during lectures can be quite 
high (e.g. Cameron & Giuntoli, 1972; Schoen, 
1970). Given the evidence indicating that mind­
wandering has negative implications for learning, 
and given the high frequency at which students 
engage in such behaviors, it is not surprising that 
there has recently been an increase in the number of 
studies examining the influence of mind-wandering 
in a variety of educational settings. One of the main 
goals of this work has been to elucidate the causes 
and consequences of mind-wandering, and in some
cases, to attempt to minimize its occurrence (e.g. 
Szpunar, Khan, & Schacter, 2013).
The majority of research examining mind­
wandering 
in 
educational 
settings 
has 
been 
conducted in laboratory-based studies, wherein par­
ticipants watch video-recorded lectures and report 
on their cognitive states (i.e. “mind-wandering” or 
“on task”) when prompted by infrequent “thought 
probes.” The general findings from such studies 
are that inattention and mind-wandering increase 
over time, and that higher rates of mind-wandering 
are associated with poorer retention of the mate­
rial presented in the lecture (Lindquist & McLean, 
2011; Risko, Anderson, Sarwhal, Engelhardt, & 
Kingstone, 2012; Risko, Buchanan, Medimorec, 
& Kingstone, 2013; Seli, Wammes, Risko, & 
Smilek, 2016; Young, Robinson, & Alberts, 2009). 
Importantly, this inclination toward inattentive­
ness has been found to extend beyond the labora­
tory, and has also been observed in massive open
259

online courses (MOOCs), wherein research has 
shown that most video lectures are abandoned (i.e., 
exited) within 6 to 8 minutes of their onset (Kim, 
Guo, Seaton, Mitros, Gajos, & Miller, 2014). This 
suggests that, to accommodate the average learners 
attention span, the optimal length of a lecture ought 
to be 6 to 8 minutes (at least for lecture presented 
in video formats).
Based on the foregoing findings, one might be 
tempted to draw three general conclusions: (1) the 
prevalence of unintentional mind-wandering in 
classroom settings is high; (2) mind-wandering rates 
increase over time, which is sometimes taken as a 
reflection of a basic cognitive limitation in humans; 
and (3) mind-wandering interferes with learning 
and performance. Here, we review findings relevant 
to these three potentially flawed conclusions and 
explore their generality and veracity by reviewing 
recent findings from two of our own studies, each 
of which examined mind-wandering and perfor­
mance throughout an entire semester in an actual 
live undergraduate course (Wammes, Boucher, Seli, 
Cheyne & Smilek, 2016; Wammes, Seli, Cheyne, 
Boucher & Smilek, 2016; Wammes & Smilek,
2017). In what follows, we begin by briefly out­
lining the details of our two studies, after which 
we move on to discuss how the results of these 
studies contribute to our understanding of mind­
wandering, and how they inform the three potential 
conclusions outlined in the preceding.
A Brief Outline of Our Two Studies
In the first study that we conducted, stu­
dents who were enrolled in a live undergraduate 
course were periodically presented with thought 
probes throughout almost every lecture across the 
entire term. The probes were used to obtain self- 
reports indicating whether, just before each probe 
was presented, students were focused on the task, 
intentionally mind-wandering, or unintentionally 
mind-wandering. At the end of each class, students 
were given quiz questions that were derived from 
material presented just before and after they were 
probed. Additionally, we collected various relevant 
self-report measures, including the students’ prior 
knowledge of the course content, their motivation 
to perform well in the course, their grade point aver­
age (GPA), and their actual scores on course exams. 
In a follow-up study conducted during the follow­
ing term (again, in a live undergraduate course), we 
modified the response options for our probes such 
that participants were asked to use a five-point scale 
to indicate whether they were completely on task,
experiencing a mixture of both on-task thought and 
mind-wandering, or completely mind-wandering 
just before the presentation of each thought probe. 
We will now consider the three proposed conclu­
sions described earlier in the context of our findings 
from these studies.
Is there a high prevalence of unintentional 
mind-wandering?
The finding that students frequently engage in 
mind-wandering while watching video-recorded 
lectures is consistent with the broader literature on 
mind-wandering. Indeed, studies in this broader 
literature have shown that people mind-wander 
roughly 30%-60% of the time when they are que­
ried about their attentional focus (e.g., Christoff, 
Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; 
McVay & Kane, 2009; Seli, Carriere, Levene, & 
Smilek, 2013; Thomson, Seli, Besner, & Smilek,
2014), and these high rates of mind-wandering 
have been found to occur across a variety of con­
texts. For example, high rates of mind-wandering 
have been observed while people are engaged in 
everyday activities (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Kane et al., 2007), while they complete tasks mea­
suring sustained attention (e.g., Thomson, Seli, 
et al., 2014), and while they are driving (Yanko & 
Spalek, 2013a, 2013b). One of the primary reasons 
such findings have been of interest is because the 
mind-wandering observed in all of these studies 
was believed to occur unintentionally, despite peo­
ple’s best efforts to focus on the task at hand (e.g., 
Bixler & D ’Mello, 2014; Blanchard, Bixler, Joyce, 
& D ’Mello, 2014; Carciofo, Du, Song, & Zhang, 
2014; Qu et al., 2015; Rummel & Boywitt, 2014; 
Wilson et al., 2014). O f course, if people experience 
high rates of unintentional mind-wandering during 
important activities (e.g., during undergraduate 
lectures), then the prospects for ameliorating the 
problem seem rather dire. Indeed, it is not alto­
gether clear how people might go about reducing 
the occurrence of a phenomenon that occurs despite 
their best intentions. Put differently, because the 
occurrence of unintentional mind-wandering is, by 
definition, beyond one’s control, it seems unlikely 
that people will be able to effectively dampen these 
spontaneously occurring thoughts.
That said, a growing body of evidence now sug­
gests that mind-wandering can be subdivided into 
intentional (or deliberate) and unintentional (or 
spontaneous) types (e.g., Carriere, Seli, & Smilek, 
2013; Forster & Lavie, 2009; Giambra, 1995; Seli, 
Cheyne, Xu, Purdon, & Smilek, 2015; Seli, Risko,
260
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

Purdon, & Smilek, 2016; Seli, Risko, & Smilek, 
2016; Seli, Risko, Smilek, & Schacter, 2016; Seli, 
Wammes, et al., 2016; Seli, Smallwood, Cheyne, 
& Smilek, 2015). Whereas unintentional mind­
wandering occurs despite ones best intentions 
to focus on the task at hand, intentional mind­
wandering involves the deliberate disengagement 
from the task, wherein one allows his or her m in d 
to wander away from the task toward unrelated 
inner thoughts. Importantly, the finding that mind­
wandering can occur with intention raises the pos­
sibility that at least some of the mind-wandering 
measured in previous studies (in which this dis­
tinction is ignored) might have been intentional in 
nature. O f particular interest for our purposes here, 
it may be the case that at least some of the instances 
of mind-wandering that were reported in previous 
work examining mind-wandering in educational 
settings occurred with intention, even though 
researchers have largely assumed that such mind­
wandering occurred unintentionally. This would be 
of great importance because it would suggest that 
theoretical accounts of mind-wandering in educa­
tional settings need to be modified to accommodate 
intentional mind-wandering. Also, perhaps more 
important, it would suggest that researchers who 
are interested in reducing the occurrence of mind­
wandering in the classroom should pay special 
attention to reducing intentional mind-wandering, 
rather than exclusively focusing on methods of 
reducing unintentional mind-wandering.
In the first of our two live-lecture studies 
(Wammes, Boucher, et al., 2016; Wammes, Seli, 
et al., 2016), we were interested in examining 
two issues raised by the foregoing. First, we were 
interested in directly assessing overall rates of 
mind-wandering in a live classroom to determine 
whether, here, we would observe rates of mind­
wandering that were comparable to those reported 
in laboratory-based studies that used video-recorded 
lectures. Second, we wanted to determine the extent 
to which any mind-wandering that we observed 
occurred with intention. To address these issues, 
we intermittently presented students with thought 
probes during the majority of the live lectures, and 
asked them to report whether they were on task, 
intentionally mind-wandering, or unintentionally 
mind-wandering just prior to the presentation of 
each probe. To provide a response to each thought 
probe, participants used an “i>clicker,” which is 
a handheld remote that can collect button-press 
responses in an online manner. In every lecture, 
across the entire term of a second-year course on
Physiological Psychology, between 0 and 3 thought 
probes were presented, and participant responses 
were collected.
In examining the overall prevalence of mind­
wandering during live lectures, we were not alto­
gether surprised by our results. Our live-lecture 
study showed rates of mind-wandering that were 
comparable to those that had been previously 
reported in laboratory-based studies that exam­
ined rates of mind-wandering while participants 
watched video-recorded lectures (e.g., Risko et al., 
2012; Seli, Wammes, et al., 2016; Szpunar et al.,
2013). Specifically, we found that, on the whole, 
students reported mind-wandering (whether inten­
tional or unintentional) about 34% of the time 
when thought probes were presented. Much more 
surprising, however, were the findings concerning 
the intentionality of mind-wandering. Interestingly, 
in contrast to the commonly held assumption that 
reports of mind-wandering reflect the unintentional 
drifting of one’s attention away from the task, our 
results showed that students in the live lecture fre­
quently engaged in intentional mind-wandering. 
In fact, we found that students actually engaged in 
more intentional mind-wandering (roughly 20% of 
the time when probed) than unintentional mind­
wandering (roughly 15% of the time when probed). 
Given that the thought probes used in this study 
were presented at random intervals, this result sug­
gests that participants spent 20% of the lecture time 
deliberately disengaged from the lecture in the ser­
vice of focusing on their unrelated inner thoughts.
The finding that students so frequently delib­
erately disengage from live lectures is of critical 
importance for any strategies aimed at reducing 
rates of mind-wandering in the classroom. Indeed, 
under the conventional view that mind-wandering 
strictly occurs without intention, efforts aimed at 
reducing mind-wandering would likely be tailored 
specifically to reducing the unintentional type. 
Such strategies might rely on exogenously main­
taining or capturing attention by increasing the 
salience of the presented material (MacLean et al., 
2009; Robertson, Manly, Andrade, Baddeley, & 
Yiend, 1997), perhaps by including stimulating 
videos, increasing speaking volume, or ensuring 
that the presentation slides are colorful and visually 
stimulating. If mind-wandering were largely unin­
tentional, then, by definition, the student would 
have no control over his or her mind-wandering 
and would be left: powerless and at the whim of 
the level of stimulation provided by the lecturer. 
Thus, from the students perspective, the prospects
261
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K

of reducing unintentional mind-wandering would 
be rather grim. However, the finding that a large 
portion of overall mind-wandering in live lectures 
is intentional suggests another set of avenues for 
reducing mind-wandering (see Wammes, Boucher, 
et al., 2016; Wammes, Seli, et al., 2016).
One of these new avenues involves increasing 
student motivation. Indeed, as noted earlier, rates 
of intentional mind-wandering are associated with 
motivation, such that individuals who are less 
motivated to attend to the lecture more frequently 
engage in this type of mind-wandering (Seli, 
Cheyne, et al., 2015). Accordingly, using incen­
tives to increase student motivation may decrease 
rates of intentional mind-wandering, which should 
in turn lead to improvements in comprehension 
and retention. Another new avenue of interven­
tion involves the use of intermittent tests. Indeed, 
recent work (Szpunar, Jing, & Schacter, 2014) has 
suggested that providing students with intermittent 
tests throughout a lecture might provide feedback 
about the extent to which the students compre­
hend the material. This might in turn counteract 
students’ overconfidence in the extent to which 
they have learned the material. Given that students 
who are overconfident in their knowledge of the 
lecture material should be particularly inclined to 
intentionally disengage from the lecture, correct­
ing overconfidence via intermittent testing might 
lead to reductions in intentional mind-wandering. 
Indeed, if students are made aware of the fact that 
they actually have less knowledge about the lecture 
material than they assume, then they may feel more 
inclined to refrain from intentionally disengaging 
from the lecture.
Mindfulness training also provides an interesting 
new avenue for potential intervention. Mindfulness 
training involves practicing an unwavering focus 
on the present moment, without allowing any one 
thought to lead to emotional response, or any sort 
of elaborative process beyond the present thought. 
In the context of mind-wandering research, how­
ever, the most commonly used form of mindful­
ness training instructs the participant to focus on 
a particular aspect of their sensory experience (e.g. 
breathing, posture; Mrazek, Franklin, Phillips, Baird 
& Schooler, 2013; Mrazek, Smallwood, & Schooler,
2012). Although previous work has shown that 
mindfulness training is associated with improve­
ments in various cognitive faculties, including 
working memory (Chambers, Lo, & Allen, 2008; 
Jha, Stanley, Kiyonaga, Wong, & Gelfand, 2010; 
Zeidan, Johnson, Diamond, David, & Goolkasian,
2010) and visuospatial processing (Kozhevnikov, 
Louchakova, Josipovic, & Motes, 2009; MacLean 
et al., 2010), only more recently has evidence shown 
that mindfulness training can be used to effectively 
minimize the occurrence of mind-wandering. For 
instance, recent work has shown that eight minutes 
of mindful breathing resulted in reductions in errors 
as well as response time variability in the Sustained 
Attention to Response Task (SART) (Mrazek et al.,
2012). Follow-up work has also demonstrated 
that just two weeks of mindfulness training leads 
to improved standardized test scores, increased 
working memory capacity, and most important, 
decreased mind-wandering in those who are prone 
to mind-wandering (Mrazek et al., 2013). More 
extended mindfulness training has also been found 
to reduce mind-wandering while reading (Zanesco 
et al., 2016). Taken together, these findings sug­
gest that mindfulness training may be a promising 
method with which to reduce mind-wandering in 
various scenarios, and it may be the case that such 
training is effective in reducing mind-wandering in 
the classroom. Indeed, research is already underway 
on the subject, with promising results (for reviews, 
see Mrazek, Zedelius, Gross, Mrazek, Phillips, & 
Schooler, 2017; Weare, 2013). It remains unclear, 
however, whether mindfulness training might have 
an impact on intentional mind-wandering, unin­
tentional mind-wandering, or both.
One final method with which rates of inten­
tional mind-wandering might be reduced is to sim­
ply educate students on the negative consequences 
of intentional mind-wandering, and to encourage 
them to avoid engaging in this cognitive experience 
(see Wammes, Boucher, et al., 2016; Wammes, Seli, 
et al., 2016). Although research has not yet explored 
this possibility, it may be the case that students are 
largely unaware of the negative consequences of 
mind-wandering, and as such, they may frequently 
intentionally disengage from lectures under the 
assumption that doing so will not be consequential. 
Thus, informing students about the negative conse­
quences of mind-wandering might prompt them to 
be more attentive during class.
Having identified the practical implications of 
our lecture studies in terms of improving attentional 
engagement in live lectures, we should also consider 
the implications of our findings for the broader lit­
erature on mind-wandering, which has examined 
the causes and consequences of mind-wandering 
in contexts other than the classroom. We believe 
that the findings we have discussed suggest several 
directions for future research on mind-wandering.
262
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

First, our findings suggest that it is important for 
all research on the topic of mind-wandering to 
abandon the general assumption that reports of 
mind-wandering reflect only unintentional types 
of mind-wandering, and to instead query partici­
pants about both unintentional and intentional 
mind-wandering (see also Seli, Risko, Smilek, & 
Schacter, 2016). We note with considerable excite­
ment that this practice is already being adopted in 
recent studies of mind-wandering (Phillips, Mills, 
D ’Mello, & Risko, 2016; Seli, Risko, & Smilek, 
2016, Seli, Wammes, et ah, 2016). Second, our 
findings suggest that it will become important for 
researchers to examine whether intentional and 
unintentional mind-wandering share similar or 
different relations with other psychological traits. 
This research direction is also well under way (e.g., 
Seli, Carriere, & Smilek, 2013; Seli, Smallwood, 
et al., 2015; Seli, Risko, Purdon, et al., 2017). For 
example, it has been shown that people with atten­
tion deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and 
healthy control participants differ in their levels of 
unintentional mind-wandering, but not in their 
levels of intentional mind-wandering, as measured 
by both thought probes and questionnaires (Shaw 
& Giambra, 1993; Seli, Smallwood, et al., 2015). 
More recently, a similar pattern of results has been 
observed in individuals reporting high levels of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) symptom­
atology (Seli, Risko, Purdon, et al., 2016); that 
is, individuals scoring high on measures of OCD 
report more spontaneous, but not deliberate, 
mind-wandering in their everyday lives relative to 
individuals who score lower on these measures of 
OCD. Moreover, research has shown that individu­
als who report high levels of mindful awareness in 
everyday life also report higher levels of intentional, 
but not unintentional, mind-wandering (Seli et al.,
2014). Given these emerging findings, it will be 
important for future research on mind-wandering 
to determine the similarities and differences in the 
mechanisms underlying intentional and uninten­
tional mind-wandering, which will in turn allow 
for a more nuanced understanding of this prevalent 
phenomenon.
Does Mind-Wandering Increase over Time?
The consensus in the extant literature seems to be 
that, across a wide variety of tasks, inattention (and 
also mind-wandering) tend to increase over time 
on task (for reviews, see Smallwood & Schooler, 
2006; Thomson, Besner, & Smilek, 2015). For 
instance, early work on the topic has reported that
inspection workers— whose job is to examine the 
quality of industrial products— showed reductions 
in efficiency (20%-30%) within an hour of begin­
ning a shift. This implied that the workers were 
unable to remain vigilant over extended periods of 
time on task (Wyatt & Langdon, 1932). Similarly, 
subsequent work empirically tested the suspicion 
that radar operators— who work extended shifts 
during which they monitor screens for infrequent 
blips that might represent enemy submarines—  
show declines in efficiency over time (Lindsley 
& Anderson, 1944). Results indicated that their 
shifts should not be longer than 30-45 minutes, 
as this was the time frame during which atten­
tion (as measured by detection efficiency) began 
to wane (Lindsley & Anderson, 1944). Perhaps 
the most well-known study addressing inattention 
over time is that reported by Mackworth (1948), 
who had participants observe a moving clock-hand 
and detect infrequent instances where the hand 
moved twice the distance that it had ordinarily 
moved. As one might expect, performance dropped 
substantively over time, with sizable decrements 
occurring within the first 30 minutes of task per­
formance. This general finding of a “vigilance decre­
ment” (i.e., decreases in performance over time in 
sustained-attention tasks) has since proven reliable 
in many different paradigms (e.g., Adams, 1956; 
Bakan, 1955; Colquhoun, Blake, & Edwards, 1968; 
Fisk & Schneider, 1981; Frankman & Adams, 
1962; 
Helton 
& 
Russell, 
2011; 
Molloy 
& 
Parasuraman, 
1996; Mackworth, 
1950, 
1968; 
Nuechterlein, 
Parasuraman, 
& 
Jiang, 
1983; 
Parasuraman, 1979, 1984; Parasuraman, Warm, & 
Dember, 1987; Parasuraman, Warm, & See, 1998; 
Temple et al., 2000; Warm, 1984).
Importantly, 
the 
aforementioned 
findings 
have led some to conclude that vigilance decre­
ments are inevitable, and reflect a basic limitation 
of the human cognitive system (e.g., Grier et al., 
2003; Helton & Russell, 2011; Helton & Warm, 
2008; Muraven & Baumeister, 2000; Nuechterlein 
et al., 1983; Smit, Elling, & Coenen, 2004). For 
instance, proponents of the resource depletion theory 
(e.g., Helton & Russell, 2011; Helton & Warm,
2008) posit that sustaining attention over time 
requires the engagement of cognitive resources, and 
furthermore, that one’s pool of cognitive resources 
is finite and limited. In particular, the theory holds 
that sustained-attention tasks require continu­
ous mental effort, so the limited pool of cognitive 
resources is continually depleted or “drained.” To 
exacerbate the issue, the pool of resources does not
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K
263

have an opportunity to be “replenished” because the 
continuous nature of sustained-attention tasks does 
not permit any breaks. Accordingly, the continued 
reduction in available resources over time leads to 
notable performance decrements.
Researchers in the mind-wandering literature 
have observed a pattern of results analogous to the 
pattern reported in the vigilance literature, such 
that rates of self-reported mind-wandering tend to 
increase over protracted periods of task engagement 
(e.g., McVay & Kane, 2012; Teasdale, Segal, & 
Williams, 1995), and this increase often co-occurs 
with a decrease in performance (Cunningham, 
Scerbo & Freeman, 2000; McVay & Kane, 2012; 
Seli, Cheyne, & Smilek, 2012; Smallwood et al.,
2004). Recent work has directly tested whether 
the increases in mind-wandering that accompany 
time-on-task were associated with decreases in per­
formance, and found that more marked increases 
in rates of mind-wandering were associated with 
steeper declines in performance measures, sug­
gesting a close coupling between mind-wandering 
and declines in performance (Thomson, Seli, 
et al., 2014).
Set against the background of the general vigi­
lance and mind-wandering literatures, it is perhaps 
not surprising that, within the specific contexts of 
video and staged live lectures, mind-wandering 
rates (or rates of inattention) tend to increase over 
time (Farley, Risko & Kingstone, 2013; Risko et al., 
2012; Risko et al., 2013; Stuart & Rutherford, 
1978; Young et al., 2009). Also in line with the fore­
going general findings, research has indicated that 
inattention in educational settings is closely associ­
ated with impairments in later retention of lecture 
material (Cameron & Giuntoli, 1972; Lindquist 
& McLean, 2011; Risko et al., 2012; Schacter & 
Szpunar, 2015; Schoen, 1970). Taking into account 
the consensus of the foregoing research on vigi­
lance, mind-wandering, and more specifically on 
mind-wandering during lectures, it seems an obvi­
ous prediction that, if measured during an actual 
live lecture in an authentic university course, mind­
wandering rates would also increase over time.
Surprisingly, however, when we explored this 
possibility across two full-term studies within 
live lectures, we discovered no evidence of such 
an increase. As noted earlier, in our first study 
(Wammes, Boucher, et al., 2016) we probed stu­
dents during class and asked them to indicate 
whether they were (1) on task, (2) intentionally 
mind-wandering, or (3) unintentionally mind­
wandering just prior to the presentation of each
probe. Probe responses were then aggregated across 
the entire term, and separated into four 12-minute 
segments that spanned the entirety of an average 
lecture. In examining these data, there was no evi­
dence to indicate an increase in mind-wandering 
rates over time. In fact, there was a small but sig­
nificant decrease in mind-wandering rates from the 
third to the fourth quarter of the lecture, which 
was driven primarily by a decrease in unintentional 
mind-wandering (Wammes, Boucher, et al., 2016).
In the wake of this study, whose results were 
inconsistent with much of the previous work on 
the topic (e.g., Risko et al., 2012), we reasoned 
that perhaps an increase in mind-wandering (i.e., a 
vigilance decrement) does in fact occur during live 
lectures, but that our dichotomous thought probe 
(i.e., “on task” or “mind-wandering”) was not sensi­
tive enough to detect this increase. Specifically, we 
thought it was possible that the depth, or inten­
sity, of students’ mind-wandering might increase 
as time passes in the lecture, but that this varia­
tion in the depth of mind-wandering might not be 
captured by the rather crude dichotomous thought 
probe that we used in our first study. Moreover, 
given that some previous work suggests that people 
can indeed remain vigilant for nearly 45 minutes 
(e.g., Lindsley & Anderson, 1944), it is possible 
that we simply had not observed a lecture that 
was sufficiently long to elicit increases in rates of 
mind-wandering over time. With this in mind, we 
conducted a follow-up study across another entire 
semester of an undergraduate course (Wammes & 
Smilek, 2017), in which we modified the thought 
probe such that it indexed the depth of mind­
wandering. The rationale was that, if participants 
were asked to indicate the degree to which they 
were mind-wandering (rather than simply indicat­
ing whether they were or not), then we might find 
that participants plunge into deeper states of mind­
wandering as time elapses in the lecture— a pat­
tern that would not have been observable with our 
coarser dichotomous probes. Thus, in our second 
study, upon presentation of each thought probe, 
we asked participants to indicate whether they were
(1) completely on task, (2) mostly on task, (3) both 
on task and mind-wandering, (4) mostly mind­
wandering, or (5) completely mind-wandering. 
As in our earlier work, probe responses were then 
aggregated and divided into quarters of the lecture. 
Importantly, this course consisted of 80-minute 
lectures, which allowed us the added benefit of 
exploring changes in mind-wandering behaviors 
over larger time scales in lectures. Thus, rather than
264
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

four 12-minute segments, the lecture was divided 
into four 18.5-minute segments. Contrary to our 
hypothesis, our results showed no consistent evi­
dence for time-on-task effects, and the average 
depth of mind-wandering was largely stable across 
quarters of the lecture (Wammes & Smilek, 2017). 
So, again, we found no evidence of an increase in 
mind-wandering (or depth of mind-wandering) 
over time in a live lecture.
At this point, it is important to provide clarifica­
tion to ensure that the conclusions we drew from 
these studies are not misunderstood. First, based on 
our findings, we are not arguing that mind-wandering 
does not increase over time in some (or even most) 
undergraduate lectures. Second, we do not wish to 
argue that the time-related mind-wandering incre­
ments shown in the context of video lectures are 
somehow spurious (in fact, we have replicated those 
findings in our own laboratory; Wammes & Smilek,
2017). Rather, we wish to advance the claim that, 
at least in some live undergraduate lectures, mind­
wandering increments do not occur. In other words, 
we provided evidence that mind-wandering incre­
ments are not a necessary outcome of time on task by 
highlighting two instances where increments d id  not 
occur. As there are still some undergraduate courses 
that employ two- to three-hour long lectures, it may 
be possible that mind-wandering increments would 
occur in these cases. Future work will be needed to 
determine whether these lengthier lectures are more 
likely to elicit increases in mind-wandering.
So, why is it that our studies of mind-wandering 
in live lectures failed to produce a mind-wandering 
increment over time in an average class? We have 
already made the case that our findings were 
unlikely to be an artifact of poor measurement sen­
sitivity in our design. But what else could explain 
our findings? One likely possibility is that when stu­
dents are actually enrolled in a real course (as in our 
experiments), the stakes are simply higher. In a lab­
oratory study, the implications of a student s mind­
wandering are largely negligible once he or she has 
left the laboratory (i.e., there are no serious conse­
quences of mind-wandering); in an actual course, 
students are formally evaluated on their retention 
of lecture material. This renders mind-wandering 
during these lectures considerably more consequen­
tial than mind-wandering in a laboratory study. 
Accordingly, it is possible that the participants in 
our live-lecture study were much more intrinsically 
motivated to complete the “task” (i.e., learn from 
the lecture) than those whom one would tradition­
ally find enrolled in a simulated-lecture experiment.
This explanation is consistent with previous research 
suggesting a modulatory role of increased motiva­
tion in reducing mind-wandering rates (Antrobus, 
Singer, & Greenberg, 1966; Seli, Cheyne, Xu, 
Purdon, & Smilek, 2015; Seli, Wammes, et al., 
2016; Unsworth & McMillan, 2013). Moreover, 
some accounts of the vigilance decrement posit that 
motivation and task value might play an impor­
tant role in sustained-attention performance (e.g., 
Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable and Myers, 2013). 
For example, Hancock (2012) has argued that vigi­
lance decrements occur when ones motivation to 
complete a particular task is mostly extrinsic (i.e., 
driven by external factors), and furthermore, that 
vigilance decrements can be drastically reduced or 
eliminated when people are intrinsically motivated 
(i.e., driven by internal personal value) to complete 
the task. Similarly, Hockey (2013, p. 134) has dis­
tinguished between “have to” and “want to” tasks, 
arguing that performance declines over time occur 
primarily in tasks that we “have to” complete, but 
not in tasks that we “want to” complete. With this, 
it seems likely that motivation played a key role in 
our finding that mind-wandering did not increase 
over time.
Does Mind-Wandering Result in Decreases 
in Task Performance?
Another commonly held assumption is that epi­
sodes of mind-wandering are associated with poorer 
task performance, including poorer retention of 
material presented in lectures. The idea that episodes 
of mind-wandering might influence performance 
during laboratory tasks pops up several times in 
the historical literature. Perhaps one of the earliest 
reports of the negative effects of off-task thought on 
performance comes from Hermann von Helmholtz. 
According to Schmidgen (2002, p. 144), when dis­
cussing his possible sources of measurement errors 
during his studies of reaction times while exploring 
the speed of nerve conduction, Helmholtz (1850, 
p. 4) reported the following: “If at the time of per­
ceiving the signal the thoughts are occupied with 
something else, and if the mind has to recall to 
itself what kind of movement one must carry out, it 
[the reaction] takes much more time.” Similarly, in 
the late 1960s, Antrobus (1968) showed that par­
ticipants’ ability to classify different tone frequen­
cies was negatively associated with their propensity 
to report “stimulus-independent thoughts” (i.e., 
mind-wandering). Subsequent work employing 
comparably mundane tasks, including the SART 
(Christoff et al., 2009; Smallwood et al., 2004),
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K
265

and the Metronome Response Task (MRT) (Seli, 
Cheyne, & Smilek, 2013), has demonstrated that 
performance is similarly impaired during periods of 
mind-wandering. This trend seems to apply in more 
complex and engaging tasks as well. For instance, 
mind-wandering that occurs while people encode 
words in a memory paradigm is associated with 
impairments in subsequent retrieval efforts (e.g., 
Smallwood, Baracaia, Lowe, & Obonsawin, 2003; 
Thomson, Smilek, & Besner, 2014). Similarly, 
when retrieving studied words from memory, 
increases in mind-wandering are associated with 
increases in false alarms (Smallwood et al., 2003). 
Experiments measuring narrative comprehension 
while reading also suggest that instances of mind­
wandering are associated with lower scores on 
later text-comprehension tests (Schooler, Reichle, 
& Halpern, 2004; Smallwood, McSpadden, & 
Schooler, 2007; Unsworth & McMillan, 2013).
Taken together, the aforementioned findings 
provide compelling evidence to suggest that mind­
wandering has negative effects on successful task 
performance. However, there are notable excep­
tions to this trend, which indicate that the simple 
conclusion that mind-wandering is always associ­
ated with performance decrements is too strong a 
position to take. For instance, Thomson, Besner, 
& Smilek (2013) measured mind-wandering rates 
during word reading and Stroop tasks while sys­
tematically varying task difficulty within each task. 
Mind-wandering rates were sensitive to the diffi­
culty of the task, such that participants were more 
likely to mind-wander in the easiest iteration of the 
task. Interestingly, though, these fluctuations in 
mind-wandering rates were not associated with any 
changes in performance, in either response times or 
error rates. Thomson et al. (2013) suggest that this 
may reflect a situation in which participants are opti­
mally dividing their attention between the primary 
task and mind-wandering, such that the resources 
one allocates to the primary task are sufficient to 
preclude performance declines, while the remain­
ing resources are allocated to mind-wandering 
(Thomson et al., 2013). Consistent with this idea, 
previous work has demonstrated that individuals 
with high working-memory capacity (which might 
be akin to one’s pool of available “resources”) spend 
more time mind-wandering during tasks with low 
demands (Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; 
Levinson, Smallwood, & Davidson, 2012; Rummel 
& Boywitt, 2014).
It is also worth considering that, although 
mind-wandering can undermine primary task
performance, some work has suggested that it may 
serve longer-term goals by facilitating perspective 
taking in relationships, complex problem-solving 
and decision-making, and future planning (e.g., 
Baars, 2010; Baird et al., 2011; Baumeister & 
Masicampo, 2010; Ruby, Smallwood, Sackur, & 
Singer, 2013). This more adaptive form of mind­
wandering may be the sort that occurs during 
university lectures. It seems plausible, then, that 
although drifting to task-unrelated thoughts may 
lead to poorer immediate performance within a lec­
ture, the long-term effects may not be as substantial, 
as students may be engaging in mind-wandering to 
allow them to elaborate upon learned material.
Most studies of mind-wandering within a lec­
ture environment, however, have demonstrated that 
mind-wandering is typically associated with reduced 
performance (see Szpunar, Moulton & Schacter, 
2013, for a review). In one such example, Lindquist 
and McLean (2011) explored the frequency at which 
“task-unrelated images and thoughts” (TUIT; i.e. 
mind-wandering) occurred during an introductory 
psychology lecture. During one selected lecture, an 
alarm sounded five times throughout the lecture. In 
response to this alarm, participants circled “yes” or 
“no” on a handout to indicate whether they were 
or were not experiencing TUIT at the time of the 
alarm. Results indicated a TUIT rate of 32.9%, and 
these rates were negatively associated with general 
academic ability and people’s propensity toward 
note-taking (Lindquist & McLean, 2011).
Later work using video lectures showed com­
parable results, such that mind-wandering was 
negatively associated with retention, and that as 
mind-wandering rates increased over time, reten­
tion of material presented in the lecture suffered 
(Risko et al., 2012; Risko et al., 2013). At a broader 
level, recent work required participants to record 
everyday attention failures in a diary over the course 
of a week, including when and where the lapse in 
attention occurred (Unsworth, McMillan, Brewer 
& Spillers, 2013). Interestingly, these attention 
failures were most frequently reported when partici­
pants were in educational settings (including while 
studying and attending to lectures). Moreover, this 
specific subset of attention failures was negatively 
associated with standardized test scores, indicating 
that individuals who more frequently mind-wander 
are often also poorer academic performers— a find­
ing that is concordant with previous work (e.g., 
Lindquist & Mclean, 2011; Risko et al., 2012; 
Risko et al., 2013). Furthermore, in our recent 
work, rates of both intentional and unintentional
266
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

mind-wandering were negatively associated with 
the retention of material presented in a video lecture 
(Seli, Wartimes, et ah, 2016).
The most logical conclusion one might draw 
from the foregoing results is that performance will 
always suffer when a student mind-wanders dur­
ing lectures. However, most research on the topic 
involves video lectures, staged lectures, or single 
live lectures. Thus, we sought to test whether this 
assumption applies to a live university course, and 
did so by observing and collecting data in a real uni­
versity course over the entire term. In addition, we 
sought to evaluate whether the same effect on per­
formance would be observed for both intentional 
and unintentional episodes of mind-wandering. 
Specifically, it was possible that intentional mind­
wandering (as opposed to unintentional mind­
wandering) might not be as strongly associated with 
long-term retention failures, as participants could 
be adaptively mind-wandering to allow them to bet­
ter integrate presented material.
Before outlining the results of our study, we 
should revisit the specific details of the study. Recall 
that, in our study, participants were intermittently 
presented with thought probes that asked them 
to use their i>clicker to report on their current 
mental state (i.e., “on task,” “intentionally mind­
wandering” or “unintentionally mind-wandering”). 
In addition, quiz questions at the end of every lec­
ture were used to gauge participants’ retention of 
presented material. Finally, participants allowed 
us access to their actual exam grades for analysis. 
Although these are the most critical details of our 
study, there is one final detail (omitted from our 
earlier description of this study) that is important 
for understanding the results that we present in the 
following. In particular, the quiz questions that we 
gave students were drawn from material that was 
presented either on the slide immediately preced­
ing, or immediately following each thought probe 
(Wammes, Seli, et al., 2016). This feature of our 
design is particularly important because it allowed 
us to explore the relation between mind-wandering 
behaviors and performance at a number of different 
levels. Specifically, our design allowed us to answer 
the following questions: (1) In the case that a partic­
ipant were to report that he was intentionally mind­
wandering, how well would he retain information 
that was presented while he was mind-wandering?
(2) If a participant mind-wanders more frequently 
in general, does this affect her overall quiz accuracy 
or exam scores? And (3) are the effects of mind­
wandering on exam scores mediated by performance
on in-class quiz scores? In other words, does one’s 
propensity to mind-wander directly influence his 
quiz scores, which in turn influences exam scores? 
Or, alternatively, is the relation between mind­
wandering propensity and exam scores independent 
of quiz scores?
Results of our study showed that quiz ques­
tions derived from material that was presented 
while people reported that they were intentionally 
mind-wandering were answered with significantly 
less accuracy than questions that asked about mate­
rial that was presented while people were on task. 
Similarly, quiz questions based on material that was 
presented while people were unintentionally mind­
wandering were answered with marginally less accu­
racy than questions that asked about material that 
was presented while people were on task. Finally, 
accuracy on quiz questions that were associated 
with periods of intentional mind-wandering did 
not differ from those that were associated with peri­
ods of unintentional mind-wandering. What these 
findings suggest, then, is that information presented 
while a participant is mind-wandering (whether 
intentionally or unintentionally) is not retained as 
well as information that is presented while he or she 
is on task. Interestingly, correlation and regression 
analyses revealed that rates of intentional, but not 
unintentional, mind-wandering were significantly 
(uniquely) associated with in-class quiz scores. 
Conversely, these analyses showed that uninten­
tional, but not intentional, mind-wandering rates 
were (uniquely) predictive of later exam scores. 
To further explore these relations, we conducted a 
mediation analysis, where we sought to determine 
whether rates of mind-wandering (both inten­
tional and unintentional) influenced final exam 
scores indirectly via performance on in-class quiz 
scores, or only directly (i.e., without the influence 
of in-class quiz scores). In other words, we tested 
the hypothesis that intentional and unintentional 
mind-wandering rates might be associated with 
decreased quiz scores, which would in turn be asso­
ciated with decreased final exam scores. Intentional 
mind-wandering was only related to later exam 
scores indirectly through in-class quiz performance, 
whereas unintentional mind-wandering was only 
directly related to final exam scores (Wammes, Seli, 
et al., 2016). Taken together, these findings sug­
gest that, although intentional mind-wandering 
can be detrimental in the short term, the long­
term effects are not as apparent and only play an 
indirect role through their association with short­
term quiz scores. On the other hand, unintentional
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K
2 6 7

mind-wandering, although slightly less harmful in 
the short term, has significant negative effects on 
later exam scores.
Conclusion
To begin this chapter, we suggested that one 
could draw three potentially erroneous general con­
clusions based on the extant literature examining 
mind-wandering in educational contexts: (1) the 
prevalence of unintentional mind-wandering in 
classroom settings is high, (2) mind-wandering rates 
increase over time, which is sometimes taken as a 
reflection of a basic cognitive limitation in humans, 
and (3) mind-wandering interferes with learning and 
performance. In our studies, we demonstrated that, 
although there was a notable proportion of unin­
tentional mind-wandering in the classroom, more 
than half of all mind-wandering that occurred was 
actually intentional in nature. Our data also showed 
no increase in mind-wandering over the course of 
live lectures (both 50 minute and 80 minutes in 
length). Finally, we showed that mind-wandering 
interfered with learning and performance, although 
our conclusions were more nuanced than this: spe­
cifically, whereas intentional mind-wandering led to 
more short-term impairments in performance on 
the immediate quiz questions, unintentional mind­
wandering was more tightly linked with long-term 
performance deficits on course exams.
These findings, especially those showing no 
increase in mind-wandering over time in a lecture, 
strongly suggest that there may be important differ­
ences between studies conducted in the laboratory 
and studies conducted in live lecture settings. Given 
that studies on attention and retention in the class­
room have important and far-reaching implications 
for educational structuring and for the development 
and implementation of methods aimed at improving 
students’ attention, it is critical to consider the differ­
ences between the results obtained in the laboratory 
and those obtained in live lectures, and to determine 
what, precisely, these differences mean. Interestingly, 
most of the mind-wandering that students reported 
in our studies was intentional in nature. Given that 
mind-wandering has previously been assumed to be 
largely unintentional (e.g., Bixler & D ’Mello, 2014; 
Blanchard et al., 2014; Carciofo et al., 2014; Qu 
et al., 2015; Rummel & Boywitt, 2014; Wilson et al.,
2014), the finding that mind-wandering during live 
lectures was largely intentional demands a shift in the 
strategies one might employ to reduce the occurrence 
of mind-wandering in the classroom. The available 
evidence suggests that intentional mind-wandering is
more closely associated with motivational problems 
than unintentional mind-wandering (Seli, Cheyne, 
et al., 2015; Seli, Wammes, et al., 2016). Thus, strat­
egies that increase one’s intrinsic motivation to pay 
attention during class might be more effective than a 
strategy that might be used to address unintentional 
mind-wandering, such as mindfulness meditation 
training.
The findings we discussed here (specifically 
those that demonstrate inconsistencies between 
laboratory studies and veridical lectures) are impor­
tant to consider when extrapolating laboratory 
findings to real life. There are clearly some aspects 
of the dynamic relation between mind-wandering 
and academic performance that might not be effec­
tively captured in staged, stand-alone, or video lec­
tures. Thus, moving forward, it would be advisable 
for researchers to conduct studies in both video- 
recorded and live lectures so they can fully ascer­
tain the trends in and effects of mind-wandering in 
educational settings.
References
Adams, J. (1956). Vigilance in the detection of low-intensity 
visual stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52(3), 20. 
Antrobus, J. S. (1968). Information theory and stimulus- 
independent-thought. British Journal of Psychology, 59, 
423-430.
Antrobus, J. S., Singer, J. L., & Greenberg, S. (1966). Studies in 
the stream of consciousness: Experimental enhancement and 
suppression of spontaneous cognitive processes. Perceptual 
and Motor Skills, 23, 399-417.
Baars, B. J. (2010). Spontaneous repetitive thoughts can be adap­
tive: Postscript on “mind wandering.” Psychological Bulletin, 
136, 208-210.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 
1604-1611.
Bakan, P. (1955). Discrimination decrement as a function of 
time in a prolonged vigil. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
50(6), 387-389.
Baumeister, R. F., & Masicampo, E. J. (2010). Conscious thought 
is for facilitating social and cultural interactions: How mental 
simulations serve the animal-culture interface. Psychological 
Review, 117(3), 945.
Bixler, R., & D’Mello, S. (2014). Toward fully automated 
person-independent detection of mind-wandering. In V. 
Dimitrova, T. Kuflik, D. Chin, F. Ricci, P. Dolog, & G.-J. 
Houben (Eds.), User modeling, adaptation, and personaliza­
tion (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 8538, pp. 
37-48). New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media. 
Blanchard, N., Bixler, R., Joyce, T., & D’Mello, S. (2014, 
January). Automated physiological-based detection of mind­
wandering during learning. In S. Trausan-Matu, K. Boyer, 
M. Crosby, & K. Panourgia (Eds.), Intelligent tutoring systems, 
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 8474, pp. 55-60). 
New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media.
268
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

Cameron, E, & Giuntoli, D. (1972). Consciousness sampling 
in the college classroom, or is anybody listening? Intellect, 
101, 63-64.
Carciofo, R., Du, F., Song, N., & Zhang, K. (2014). Mind­
wandering, sleep quality, affect, and chronotype: An explor­
atory study. PloS One, 9(3), e91285. doi: 10.1371/journal. 
pone.0091285.
Carriere, J. S., Seli, P., & Smilek, D. (2013). Wandering in 
both mind and body: Individual differences in mind wan­
dering and inattention predict fidgeting. Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology/Revue canadienne de psychologie 
experimental, 67(1), 19—31.
Chambers, R., Lo, B. C. Y., & Allen, N. B. (2008). The impact 
of intensive mindfulness training on attentional control, cog­
nitive style, and affect. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 32(3), 
303-322.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Colquhoun, W., Blake, M., & Edwards, B. (1968). Experimental 
studies of shift-work II: Stabilized 8-hour shift systems. 
Ergonomics, 11(6), 527—554.
Cunningham, S., Scerbo, M. W., & Freeman, F. G. (2000). The 
electrocortical correlates of daydreaming during vigilance 
tasks. Journal of Mental Imagery, 24, 61—72.
Farley, J., Risko, E. F., & Kingstone, A. (2013). Everyday atten­
tion and lecture retention: The effects of time, fidgeting and 
mind wandering. Frontiers in Perception Science, 4, 619.
Fisk, A. D., & Schneider, W. (1981). Control and automatic 
processing during tasks requiring sustained attention: A new 
approach to vigilance. Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 23(6), 737—750.
Forster, S., & Lavie, N. (2009). Harnessing the wandering 
mind: The role of perceptual load. Cognition, 111(3), 345-355.
Giambra, L. M. (1995). A laboratory method for investigating 
influences on switching attention to task-unrelated imagery 
and thought. Consciousness and Cognition, 4(1), 1—21.
Grier, R. A., Warm, J. S., Dember, W. N., Matthews, G., 
Galinsky,T. L., Szalma, J. L., & Earasuraman, R. (2003). The 
vigilance decrement reflects limitations in effortful attention, 
not mindlessness. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 45(3), 349—359.
Hancock, F. (2012). In search of vigilance: The problem of iat- 
rogenically created psychological phenomena. The American 
Psychologist, 68, 97-109.
Helmholtz, H.V. (1850). UeberdieFortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit 
der Nervenreizung. Annalen der Physik, 155(2), 329—330.
Helton, W. S., & Russell, E N. (2011). Working memory load 
and the vigilance decrement. Experimental Brain Research, 
212(3), 429-437.
Helton, W. S., & Warm, J. S. (2008). Signal salience and 
the mindlessness theory of vigilance. Acta Psycholonca, 
129(1), 18-25.
Hockey, R. (2013). The psychology of fatigue: Work, effort and con­
trol. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jha, A. E, Stanley, E. A., Kiyonaga, A., Wong, L., & Gelfand, 
L. (2010). Examining the protective effects of mindfulness 
training on working memory capacity and affective experi­
ence. Emotion, 10( 1), 54-64.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, E J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind
wanders, and when an experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18(7), 614-621.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932-932.
Kim, J., Guo, E J., Seaton, D. T., Mitros, E, Gajos, K. Z., & 
Miller, R. C. (2014, March). Understanding in-video 
dropouts and interaction peaks in online lecture videos. In 
Proceedings of the first ACM conference on Learning@ scale con­
ference (pp. 31-40). New York, NY: ACM.
Kozhevnikov, M., Louchakova, O., Josipovic, Z., & Motes, 
M. A. (2009). The enhancement of visuospatial processing 
efficiency through Buddhist deity meditation. Psychological 
Science, 20(5), 645-653.
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J., & Myers, J. (2013). An 
opportunity cost model of subjective effort and task perfor­
mance. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 661—679.
Levinson, D. B., Smallwood, J., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). The 
persistence of thought evidence for a role of working memory 
in the maintenance of task-unrelated thinking. Psychological 
Science, 23(4), 375-380.
Lindquist, S., & McLean, J. (2011). Daydreaming and its corre­
lates in an educational environment. Learning and Individual 
Differences, 21, 158-167.
Lindsley, D. B., & Anderson, I. H. (1944). Radar operator 
fatigue: The effects of length and repetition of operating peri­
ods on efficiency of performance. Office of Scientific Research 
and Development, 3334, 48-55.
Mackworth, N. H. (1948). The breakdown of vigilance during 
prolonged visual search. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 7(1), 6-21.
Mackworth, N. H. (1950). Researches on the measurement of 
human performance (Medical Research Council Special 
Report Series No. 268). London, UK: Her Majesty’s 
Stationery Office.
Mackworth, J. (1968). Vigilance, arousal, and habituation. 
Psychological Review, 75(4), 30.
MacLean, K. A., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A., Mangun, G. R., 
Wojciulik, E., & Saron, C. D. (2009). Interactions between 
endogenous and exogenous attention during vigilance. 
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 71(5), 1042-1058.
MacLean, K. A., Ferrer, E., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A., 
Zanesco, A. E, Jacobs, T. L., King, B. G., Rosenberg, E. L., 
Sahdra, B. K., Shaver, E R., Wallace, B. A., Mangun, G. 
R., & Saron, C. D. (2010). Intensive meditation training 
improves perceptual discrimination and sustained attention. 
Psychological Science, 21(6), 829-839.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2009). Conducting the train 
of thought: Working memory capacity, goal neglect, and 
mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
35(1), 196-204.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2012). Drifting from slow to 
“d’oh!”: Working memory capacity and mind wandering 
predict extreme reaction times and executive control errors. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 38(3), 525.
Molloy, R., & Parasuraman, R. (1996). Monitoring an auto­
mated system for a single failure: Vigilance and task com­
plexity effects. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 38(2), 311—322.
Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Phillips, D. T., Baird, B., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2013). Mindfulness training improves
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K
269

working memory capacity and GRE performance while 
reducing mind wandering. Psychological science, 24(5), 
776-781.
Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). 
Mindfulness and mind-wandering: Finding convergence 
through opposing constructs. Emotion, 12(5), 442-448.
Mrazek, M. D., Zedelius, C. M., Gross, M. E., Mrazek, A. J., 
Phillips, D. T., & Schooler, J. W. (2017). Mindfulness in 
education: Enhancing academic achievement and student 
well -being by reducing mind-wandering. In J. C. Karremans 
& E. K. Papies (Eds.), Mindfulness in Social Psychology (pp. 
139-152). New York, NY: Routledge.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-regulation and 
depletion of limited resources: Does self-control resemble a 
muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 247.
Nuechterlein, K. H., Parasuraman, R., & Jiang, Q. (1983). Visual 
sustained attention: Image degradation produces rapid sen­
sitivity decrement over time. Science, 220(4594), 327-329.
Parasuraman, R. (1979). Memory load and event rate con­
trol sensitivity decrements in sustained attention. Science, 
205(4409), 924-927.
Parasuraman, R. (1984). Sustained attention in detection and 
discrimination. Varieties of Attention, 243—271.
Parasuraman, R., Warm, J. S., & Dember, W. N. (1987). 
Vigilance: Taxonomy and utility. In L. S. Mark, J. S. Warm, 
& R. L. Huston (Eds.), Ergonomics and human factors (pp.
11-32). New York, NY: Springer.
Parasuraman, R., Warm, J. S., & See, J. E. (1998). Brain systems 
of vigilance. In R. Parasuraman (Ed.), The Attentive Brain 
(pp. 221-256). Cambridge, UK: MIT Press.
Phillips, N. E., Mills, C., D'Mello, S., & Risko, E. F. (2016). On 
the influence of re-reading on mind wandering. The Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(12), 2338-2357.
Qu, W., Ge, Y, Xiong, Y, Carciofo, R., Zhao, W., & Zhang, 
K. (2015). The relationship between mind-wandering and 
dangerous driving behavior among Chinese drivers. Safety 
Science, 78,41-48.
Risko, E. F., Anderson, N., Sarwal, A., Engelhardt, M., & 
Kingstone, A. (2012). Everyday attention: Variation in 
mind wandering and memory in a lecture. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 26(2), 234-242.
Risko, E. F., Buchanan, D., Medimorec, S., & Kingstone, A. 
(2013). Everyday attention: Mind wandering and com­
puter use during lectures. Computers and Education, 3, 
842-856.
Robertson, I. H., Manly, T., Andrade, J., Baddeley, B. T., & 
Yiend, J. (1997). “Oops!”: Performance correlates of every­
day attentional failures in traumatic brain injured and nor­
mal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 35(6), 747-758.
Ruby, F. J., Smallwood, J., Sackur, J., & Singer, T. (2013). Is 
self-generated thought a means of social problem solving? 
Frontiers in psychology, 4, 962.
Rummel, J., & Boywitt, C. D. (2014). Controlling the stream 
of thought: Working memory capacity predicts adjustment 
of mind-wandering to situational demands. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 21, 1309-1315.
Schacter, D. L., & Szpunar, K. K. (2015). Enhancing attention 
and memory during video-recorded lectures. Scholarship of 
Teaching and Learning in Psychology, 2(1), 60.
Schmidgen, H. (2002). Of frogs and men: The origins of psy- 
chophysiological time experiments, 1850—1865. Endeavour, 
26(4), 142-148.
Schoen, J. R. (1970). Use of consciousness sampling to study 
teaching methods. The Journal of Educational Research, 63, 
387-390.
Schooler, J. W., Reichle, E. D., & Halpern, D. V. (2004). Zoning 
out during reading: Evidence for dissociations between expe­
rience and metaconsciousness. In D. T. Levin (Ed.), Thinking 
and seeing: Visual metacognition in adults and children (pp. 
204-226). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Seli, P., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, D. (2014). Not all mind 
wandering is created equal: Dissociating deliberate from 
spontaneous 
mind 
wandering. 
Psychological Research. 
doi: 10.1007/s00426-0l4-06l7-x.
Seli, P, Carriere, J. S., Levene, M., & Smilek, D. (2013). How 
few and far between? Examining the effects of probe rate on 
self-reported mind wandering. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 430. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00430
Seli, P., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2012). Attention failures 
versus misplaced diligence: Separating attention lapses from 
speed-accuracy trade-offs. Consciousness & Cognition, 21, 
277-291.
Seli, P, Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2013). Wandering minds 
and wavering rhythms: Linking mind wandering and behav­
ioral variability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Perception and Performance, 39(1), 1—5.
Seli, P, Cheyne, J. A., Xu, M., Purdon, C., & Smilek, D. 
(2015). Motivation, intentionality, and mind-wandering: 
Implications for assessments of task-unrelated thought. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & 
Cognition, 41, 1417-1425. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 
xlmOOOOl 16.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Purdon, C., & Smilek, D. (2017). Intrusive 
thoughts: Linking spontaneous mind-wandering and OCD 
symptomatology. Psychological Research, 
81, 392-398. 
doi: 10.1007/s00426-016-0756-3
Seli, P, Risko, E. F., & Smilek, D. (2016). On the necessity of 
distinguishing between unintentional and intentional mind­
wandering. Psychological Science, 27, 685-691.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Mind­
wandering with and without intention. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 20, 605-617.
Seli, P, Smallwood, J., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, D. (2015). 
On the relation of mind-wandering and ADHD symp­
tomatology. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22, 629—636. 
doi: 10.3758/sl 3423-014-0793-0.
Seli, P., Wammes, J. D., Risko, E. F., & Smilek, D. (2016). On 
the relation between motivation and retention in educational 
contexts: The role of intentional and unintentional mind 
wandering. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23, 1280—1287. 
doi: 10.3758/sl3423-015-0979-0
Shaw, G. A., & Giambra, L. M. (1993). Task unrelated thoughts 
of college students diagnosed as hyperactive in childhood. 
Developmental Neuropsychology, 9, 17—30.
Smallwood, J. M., Baracaia, S. F., Lowe, M., & Obonsawin, M. 
(2003). Task unrelated thought whilst encoding informa­
tion. Consciousness and Cognition, 12(5), 452-484.
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F., Sudberry, 
M., O’Connor, R., & Obonsawin, M. (2004). Subjective 
experience and the attentional lapse: Task engagement and 
disengagement during sustained attention. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 13(4), 657-690.
Smallwood, J., McSpadden, M., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). The 
lights are on but no one’s home: Meta-awareness and the
2 7 0
M I N D - W A N D E R I N G  A N D  E D U C A T I O N

decoupling of attention when the mind wanders. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 14, 527-533.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946-958.
Smit, A., Eling, P., & Coenen, A. (2004). Mental effort 
causes vigilance decrease due to resource depletion. Acta 
Psychologica, 115(1), 35-42.
Stuart, J., & Rutherford, R. (1978). Medical student concentra­
tion during lectures. The Lancet, 312, 514-516.
Szpunar, K. K., Jing, H. G., & Schacter, D. L. (2014). Overcoming 
overconfidence 
in 
learning 
from 
video-recorded 
lec­
tures: Implications of interpolated testing for online education. 
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3 ,161—164.
Szpunar, K. K., Khan, N. Y., & Schacter, D. L. (2013). 
Interpolated memory tests reduce mind wandering and 
improve learning of online lectures. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 110(\6), 6313-6317.
Szpunar, K. K., Moulton, S. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2013). Mind 
wandering and education: From the classroom to online 
learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,495.
Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z., & Williams, J. M. G. (1995). How 
does cognitive therapy prevent depressive relapse and why 
should attentional control (mindfulness) training help? 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(1), 25—39.
Temple, J. G., Warm, J. S., Dember, W. N., Jones, K. S., 
LaGrange, C. M., & Matthews, G. (2000). The effects of sig­
nal salience and caffeine on performance, workload, and stress 
in an abbreviated vigilance task. Human Factors: The Journal 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 42(2), 183—194.
Thomson, D. R., Besner, D., & Smilek, D. (2013). In pursuit 
of off-task thought: Mind wandering-performance trade­
offs while reading aloud and color naming. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4,360.
Thomson, D. R., Besner, D., & Smilek, D. (2015). A resource- 
control account of sustained attention evidence from 
mind-wandering and vigilance paradigms. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 10( 1), 82-96.
Thomson, D. R., Seli, P., Besner, D., & Smilek, D. (2014). On 
the link between mind wandering and task performance over 
time. Consciousness and Cognition, 27, 14—26.
Thomson, D. R., Smilek, D., & Besner, D. (2014). On the 
asymmetric effects of mind-wandering on levels of process­
ing at encoding and retrieval. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 
21(3), 728-733.
Unsworth, N., & McMillan, B. D. (2013). Mind-wandering 
and reading comprehension: Examining the roles of working 
memory capacity, interest, motivation, and topic experience. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 39, 832-842.
Unsworth, N., McMillan, B. D., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. 
J. (2013). Individual differences in everyday retrospective 
memory failures. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and 
Cognition, 2(1), 7-13.
Wammes, J. D., Boucher, P. O., Seli, P., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek, 
D. (2016). Mind wandering during lectures I: Changes in 
rates across an entire semester. Scholarship of Teaching and 
Learning in Psychology, 2, 13—32.
Wammes, J. D., Seli, P., Cheyne, J. A., Boucher, P. O., & Smilek, 
D. (2016). Mind wandering during lectures II: Relation to 
academic performance. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning 
in Psychology, 2, 33—48.
Wammes, J. D., & Smilek, D. (2017). Examining the influ­
ence of lecture format on degree of mind wandering. 
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 6, 
174-184.
Warm, J. S. (1984). An introduction to vigilance. In J. S. Warm 
(Ed.), Sustained attention in human performance (pp. 1—14). 
Chichester, England: Wiley.
Weare, K. (2013). Developing mindfulness with children and 
young people: A review of the evidence and policy context. 
Journal of Childrens Services, 8(2), 141—153.
Wilson, T. D., Reinhard, D. A., Westgate, E. C., Gilbert, D. 
T., Ellerbeck, N., Hahn, C., . . .  & Shaked, A. (2014). 
Just think: The challenges of the disengaged mind. Science, 
345, 75-77.
Wyatt, S., & Langdon, J. N. (1932). Inspection processes in 
industry (a preliminary report). Industrial Health Research 
Board Report. Medical Research Council, 63.
Yanko, M. R., & Spalek, T. M. (2013a). Driving with the wan­
dering mind: The effect that mind-wandering has on driv­
ing performance. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 56, 260—269.
Yanko, M. R., & Spalek, T. M. (2013b). Route familiarity breeds 
inattention: A driving simulator study. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 57, 80-86.
Young, M., Robinson, S., & Alberts, R (2009). Students pay 
attention! Combating the vigilance decrement to improve 
learning during lectures. Active Learning in Higher Education, 
10.41-55.
Zanesco, A. R, King, B. G., MacLean, K. A., Jacobs, T. L., 
Aichele, S. R., Wallace, B. A., . . .  & Saron, C. D. (2016). 
Meditation training influences mind wandering and mind­
less reading. Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and 
Practice, 3(1), 12.
Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., & 
Goolkasian, R (2010). Mindfulness meditation improves 
cognition: Evidence of brief mental training. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 19(2), 597-605.
JEF FREY  D.  W A M M E S ,  P A U L  SE LI ,  A N D  D A N I E L  S M I L E K
2 7 I


P A R T
Creativity and Insight


C H A P T E R
21
Interacting Brain Networks Underlying 
Creative Cognition and Artistic Performance
Roger E. Beaty and Rex E. Jung
Abstract
Cognitive neuroscience research has begun to address the potential interaction of brain networks 
supporting creativity by employing new methods in brain network science. Network methods offer a 
significant advance compared to individual region of interest studies due to their ability to account for the 
complex and dynamic interactions among discrete brain regions. As this chapter demonstrates, several 
recent studies have reported a remarkably similar pattern of brain network connectivity across a range 
of creative tasks and domains. In general, such work suggests that creative thought may involve dynamic 
interactions, primarily between the default and control networks, providing key insights into the roles of 
spontaneous and controlled processes in creative cognition. The chapter summarizes this emerging body 
of research and proposes a framework designed to account for the joint influence of controlled and 
spontaneous thought processes in creativity.
Key W ords: creativity, cognitive neuroscience, default network, control network, brain connectivity, 
cognition
Creativity is a seemingly complex and mysteri­
ous construct, and the neuroscience of creativity has 
proven similarly elusive in its quest to capture cre­
ativity in the brain. Seminal meta-analyses reported 
activations of brain regions spanning most of the 
cortex, raising questions about whether creativ­
ity can be reliably distilled to a discrete area of the 
brain (Arden, Chavez, Grazioplene, & Jung ,2010; 
Dietrich & Kanso, 2010). These inconclusive find­
ings also fueled enduring questions surrounding 
the role of cognitive control in creative thought, as 
several studies reported activation of brain regions 
linked to both cognitive control and spontaneous 
thought. Many studies implicated regions of the 
brains default network, a set of brain regions associ­
ated with spontaneous and self-generated cognition 
(Beaty et al., 2014; Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & 
Christof, 2012; Jung, Mead, Carrasco, & Flores , 
2013; Takeuchi et al., 2011, 2012; Wei et al., 2014). 
On the other hand, a similarly large literature impli­
cated regions of the executive control network, a set
of regions linked to focused attention and cogni­
tive control (Benedek et al., 2014a; Ellamil et al., 
2012; Fink et al., 2012; Jung et al., 2013; Takeuchi 
et al., 2010). Notably, a majority of past research 
assessed the isolated contribution of individual 
brain regions, so whether these regions interacted to 
support creative thought remained unclear.
Networks of the Brain and Relevance 
to Creative Cognition
The human brain is comprised of several inter­
acting large-scale networks (Christoff, Irving, Fox, 
Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016). Networks con­
sist of brain regions that are spatially distributed 
but correlated with one another through struc­
tural or functional interactions. Such networks 
are often studied using resting-state functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a technique 
that involves acquiring spontaneous fluctuations in 
blood- oxygen- level- dependent (BOLD) signals 
as participants relax, awake in the scanner, without
2 75

performing a cognitively engaging task. Critically, 
networks identified at rest have been shown to 
contribute to basic cognitive and perceptual pro­
cesses in task-based fMRI, suggesting an interaction 
between default and executive control networks 
across human cognition (Cocchi, Zalesky, Fornito, 
& Mattingley, 2013). Here, we focus primarily on 
functional networks with potential relevance to cre­
ative cognition and artistic performance, namely 
the default and executive control networks.
The first network to be described in the neuro­
imaging literature was the so-called default mode 
network or default network (Raichle et al., 2001; 
Shulman et al., 1997). The default network con­
sists of midline and posterior inferior parietal brain 
regions, and its activity is associated with self- 
referential or “self-generated” thought, including 
mind-wandering, daydreaming, episodic memory 
retrieval, episodic future thinking, and mental- 
izing, among others (Andrews-Hanna, Spreng, 
& Smallwood, 2014; Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Schacter, 2008; Stawarczyk & D ’Argembeau,
2015). The default network is thus characterized 
by internally focused mental activity that occurs in 
the absence of external stimulation (i.e., stimulus- 
independent thought; Giambra, 1995). Several 
neuroimaging studies have reported activation 
of default regions during both creative cognition 
and artistic performance (for reviews, see Beaty, 
Benedek, Silvia, 
& Schacter, 2016a; Gonen- 
Yaacovi et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2016). In light of 
the default networks role in imaginative thought 
(e.g., daydreaming), researchers hypothesize that 
its activation during creative thinking tasks reflects 
spontaneous or self-generated thought (Abraham, 
2014; Beaty et al., 2014; Benedek et al., 2014a; 
Chen et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015; Ellamil et al., 
2012; Jauk, Neubauer, Dunst, Fink, & Benedek , 
2015; Jung et al., 2013; McMillan, Kaufman, & 
Singer, 2013; Mok, 2014).
The executive control network is another core 
network of the brain. Comprised of lateral prefron­
tal and anterior inferior parietal regions, the control 
network shows activation during experimental tasks 
that require externally-focused attention and cog­
nitive control, such as working memory, response 
inhibition, task-set switching, and goal mainte­
nance (Seeley et al., 2007). Regions of the control 
network have been implicated in structural and 
functional neuroimaging studies of creativity (Wu 
et al., 2016), consistent with behavioral research 
reporting associations between executive processes 
and creative cognition (Beaty & Silvia, 2012, 2013;
Benedek, Jauk, Sommer, Arendasy, & Neubauer, 
2014b; Gilhooly, Fioratou, Anthony, & Wynn, 
2007; Jauk, Benedek, Dunst, & Neubauer, 2013). 
Cognitive control is thought to benefit creative 
cognition via top-down monitoring and goal main­
tenance during complex search processes. In the 
absence of such control, creative thought may rely 
solely on the spontaneous generation of ideas that 
do not necessarily adhere to a given task goal, akin 
to the production of mere novelty without corre­
sponding usefulness.
The default and control networks were initially 
characterized by their antagonistic relationship with 
one another. Seminal resting-state fMRI studies dem­
onstrated a negative association or “anti-correlation” 
between regions of the default and control networks 
(Fox et al., 2005). Moreover, the default network 
shows task-induced deactivation during experimen­
tal tasks that require focused external attention and 
cognitive control (e.g., working memory), which 
corresponds with activation of the control network 
(Seeley et al., 2007). Because the default network is 
associated with mind-wandering and other sponta­
neous thought processes, researchers have hypothe­
sized that default network deactivation reflected the 
suppression of task-unrelated thoughts during cog­
nitively demanding tasks (Aiiticevic, Cole, Murray, 
Corlett, Wang, & Krystal, 2012).
More recently, however, the notion that the 
default and control networks always work in 
dynamic opposition has been questioned. Indeed, 
several recent studies have reported cooperation 
of the default and control networks during cog­
nitive tasks that involve both goal-directed and 
self-generated cognition, such as autobiographical 
future planning (Spreng & Schacter, 2012; Spreng, 
Stevens, 
Chamberlain, 
Gilmore, 
& 
Schacter, 
2010) and mind-wandering (Christoff, Gordon, 
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Fox, Spreng, 
Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015). 
Autobiographical future planning, for example, 
involves the construction of a detailed mental 
representation about a future goal state (Spreng 
et al., 2010). In this context, the default network is 
thought to provide episodic content, while the con­
trol network directs and integrates this information 
into a coherent and realistic mental representation 
to be implemented in the external world. In the fol­
lowing, we provide evidence that creativity similarly 
involves such goal-directed, self-generated thought, 
by illustrating the cooperative role of the default 
and control networks during creative cognition and 
artistic performance.
276
C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N  A N D  A R T I S T I C  P E R F O R M A N C E

Brain Networks and Creative Cognition
Brain network research has provided key insights 
into the neural basis of higher-order cognition, 
including core human attributes such as intelli­
gence and personality (Beaty et al., 2016b; van den 
Heuvel, Stam, Kahn, & Pol., 2009). A network 
approach can reveal the extent to which the interac­
tion of distributed brain regions gives rise to vari­
ous cognitive processes. Several recent studies have 
embraced network methods to examine network 
interactions underlying domain-general creative 
cognition (e.g., divergent thinking). As noted ear­
lier, seminal research on the structural and func­
tional correlates of creative thought yielded a rich 
but largely inconsistent body of work (Arden et al., 
2010; Dietrich & Kanso, 2010). Such work impli­
cated a diffuse set of brain regions associated with 
a range of cognitive processes. Critically, research­
ers often reported the involvement of both default 
and control network regions, raising questions 
about whether creative thought was more a product 
of spontaneous thought or cognitive control (Jung 
et al., 2013). Moreover, the extent to which creative 
cognition involved cooperation among default and 
control network regions remained unclear, as these 
networks have shown both cooperation and com­
petition during resting-state and task-based fMRI 
(Cocchi et al., 2013).
To address this question, a recent study explored 
brain network dynamics underlying performance 
on a divergent thinking task (Beaty, Benedek, 
Kaufman, & Silvia, 2015). Using a task paradigm 
similar to past research (e.g., Fink et al., 2009), 
the authors asked participants to think of alternate 
uses for common objects (i.e., divergent thinking) 
or to simply think about the physical properties of 
objects; the resulting task contrast revealed brain 
regions engaged during the creative transformation 
of objects while controlling for activity related to 
simple semantic processing and/or mental imagery. 
Whole-brain functional connectivity analysis was 
used to contrast differences in voxel-to-voxel connec­
tivity between the two tasks. Notably, this approach 
could not provide information about which specific 
brain regions were correlated during performance of 
the task, nor could it reveal potential temporal dif­
ferences in connectivity between regions across the 
task duration. Thus, a series ofpost hoc analyses were 
conducted using regions of interest (ROIs) identi­
fied in the whole-brain analysis.
The whole-brain results revealed a network of 
regions that showed connectivity differences dur­
ing divergent thinking compared to the control
task. This network included several core hubs of the 
default (precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex 
[PCC]) and control (right dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex [dlPFC]) networks, among other regions 
(see Figure 21.1 A). To confirm the network affili­
ation of these voxel clusters, the authors conducted 
resting-state functional connectivity analysis, using 
the peak coordinates of the ROIs from the whole- 
brain analysis; this analysis used resting-state fMRI 
data from an independent sample of age-matched 
participants. The results confirmed the hypoth­
esized resting-state network affiliation of the three 
ROIs: both the precuneus and PCC showed positive 
coupling with other regions of the default network 
(medial prefrontal cortex [mPFC] and bilateral infe­
rior parietal lobe [IPL]) and salience network (ante­
rior cingulate cortex [ACC] and bilateral insula); in 
contrast, these regions showed negative coupling 
with the control network (i.e., dlPFC and bilateral 
anterior IPL). Likewise, the right dlPFC showed 
positive coupling with other regions of the control 
network and negative coupling with default regions.
Having confirmed the network affiliation of the 
ROIs, the authors then examined their connectiv­
ity with other regions during the divergent thinking 
task, using both static and dynamic network analy­
sis. Regarding static connectivity, the results showed 
increased functional connectivity between the 
default ROIs and regions of the control and salience 
networks (see Figure 21.IB). Similarly, the right 
dlPFC showed increased connectivity with regions 
of the default network. To determine whether these 
patterns of connectivity were constant (static) or 
dynamic, the authors employed a temporal con­
nectivity analysis that divided the task into sev­
eral two-second time bins, corresponding to the 
fMRI acquisition time (i.e., TR). Results revealed 
a dynamic pattern of coupling that unfolded across 
the task duration (see Figure 21.1C). Both the PCC 
and precuneus showed early coupling with salience 
network regions (i.e., bilateral insula) and later cou­
pling with control network regions (i.e., dlPFC), 
pointing to delayed interaction between default and 
control regions. This temporal pattern was mirrored 
in the dlPFC, which only showed connectivity dif­
ferences later in the task, including coupling with 
default regions (PCC and left IPL). Taken together, 
the results point to a cooperative and dynamic con­
tribution of the default and control networks to 
divergent thinking.
The notion that creative cognition involves inter­
actions of the default and control networks received 
further support from two recent studies (Green,
R O G E R  E. B E A T Y  A N D  REX E. J U N G
2 77

(A) Whole-brain functional connectivity
(B) Posterior cingulate seed connectivity
(C) Posterior cingulate dynamic connectivity
2
4
o ;
*
a
§
m '
<D pcc:
O  Insula
O
m t g
€ > p m c
O
a c c
O D L P F C
O lP L
O S T G
O
r l p f c
© A N G
Time (s)
Figure 21.1. (See Color Insert) Default network interactions during divergent thinking. (A) A whole-brain network associated with 
divergent thinking, including several default regions (e.g., posterior cingulate). (B) The posterior cingulate shows increased coupling 
with control (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) and salience (e.g., insula) network regions across the task duration. (C) Temporal 
analysis reveals early coupling of the posterior cingulate with salience regions and later coupling with control regions, among others. 
ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; ANG = angular gyrus; DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; IPL = inferior parietal lobe;
MTG = middle temporal gyrus; PMC = pre-motor cortex; RLPFC = rostrolateral prefrontal cortex; STG = superior temporal gyrus.
Cohen, Raab, Yedibalian, & Gray, 2015; Mayseless, 
Eran, & Shamay-Tsoory, 2015). Green and col­
leagues adopted the classic verb generation task, 
which involves generating verbs (i.e., actions) in 
response to a series of presented nouns (i.e., things). 
The task was modified to assess creative cognition 
by asking participants to “think creatively” when 
generating verbs, or to simply generate a typical 
verb in response to nouns; latent semantic analy­
sis was then used to quantify the semantic distance 
between the nouns and verbs in each condition. 
Results showed that compared to generating typical 
verbs, generating creative verbs was associated with 
greater activation in several brain regions, includ­
ing the mPFC, a core hub of the default network. 
Critically, a functional connectivity analysis revealed 
that, as the semantic distance between the nouns 
and verbs increased in the creative condition, the 
mPFC showed stronger coupling with the dorsal 
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC)— a brain structure
commonly associated with executive control. These 
findings suggest that the ability to flexibly combine 
conceptual information involves increased coopera­
tion of brain regions linked to spontaneous thought 
and cognitive control.
Additional support for this proposal comes from 
another recent fMRI study of divergent think­
ing (Mayseless et al., 2015). This study sought to 
assess brain activity and functional connectivity 
associated with the originality of divergent think­
ing responses— defined as the relative rarity of the 
response. Similar to other task paradigms (Beaty 
et al., 2015; Fink et al., 2009), participants were 
presented with common objects and were asked to 
either generate alternate uses (i.e., divergent think­
ing) or to generate physical characteristics of the 
objects. Participant responses were coded for origi­
nality by trained raters, permitting an analysis of 
brain activity and connectivity related to the ability 
to generate uncommon ideas. Results showed that
2 7 8
C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N  A N D  A R T I S T I C  P E R F O R M A N C E

originality scores were associated with increased 
activation of default network regions, including the 
mPFC and the PCC. Moreover, a functional con­
nectivity analysis showed that originality was related 
to greater coupling of the dACC with the occipital- 
temporal region. Taken together with the results of 
Beaty et al. (2015) and Green et al. (2015), these 
findings provide support for the cooperative role 
of brain regions involved in cognitive control and 
spontaneous thought during creative cognition. 
Moreover, it highlights a possible progression of 
functional connectivity from networks linking nov­
elty generation (i.e., default network) with focused 
attention (i.e., salience network), and progressing 
to networks associated with the implementation of 
ideas (i.e., control network).
This neuronal progression from novelty genera­
tion to implementation/execution is at the core of 
the major advance provided by network perspectives 
within the creativity neurosciences. Additionally, 
the integration of various brain networks in the 
execution of creative ideas likely explains the lack 
of specificity apparent in previous reviews focused 
on static measures of discrete brain-behavior cor­
relates of creative cognition. These reviews, which 
covered structural, functional, and lesion studies, 
all showed widespread patterns that lacked suffi­
cient specificity— whether by virtue of hemisphere, 
lobe, or region— regarding how creative cogni­
tion is organized in the human brain (Arden et al., 
2010; Dietrich & Kanso, 2010). Just as creativity 
has been hypothesized to involve discrete stages of 
preparation, incubation, illumination, and evalu­
ation (Poincare, 1913), its manifestation in the
human brain involves the dynamic interaction of 
networks that plausibly underlie these broad cogni­
tive constructs.
Brain Networks and Artistic Performance
A growing body of research has explored the 
brain basis of artistic performance. But like the lit­
erature on domain-general creativity, this literature 
was initially marked by seemingly contradictory 
findings. Neuroimaging studies of musical impro­
visation, for example, reported activation of regions 
within the default and control networks (see Figure 
21.2), raising questions about whether improvisa­
tion involved more or less cognitive control (Beaty,
2015). In a striking illustration of this paradox, 
Limb and Braun (2008) and Berkowtiz and Ansari 
(2008) published results within the same year with 
widely diverging conclusions. While Limb and 
Braun (2008) reported widespread deactivation of 
control network regions and increased activation 
of default regions, Berkowitz and Ansari (2008) 
reported increased activation of several regions 
involved in cognitive control. Such conflicting find­
ings raised questions about whether musical impro­
visation required cognitive control, spontaneous 
thought, both, or neither.
To address this paradox, a recent study assessed 
brain network interactions during musical impro­
visation (Pinho, Ullen, Castelo-Branco, Fransson, 
& de Manzano, 2016). Professional pianists impro­
vised on an MRI-compatible keyboard during two 
experimental conditions. One condition presented 
a specific set of piano keys (or “pitch sets”); par­
ticipants used only these keys to generate melodic
Bengtsson et a l. (2007) 
Berkowitz and Ansari (2008) 
Donnay et al. (2014)
Limb and Braun (2008)
Liu et al. (2012)
Manzano and Ullen (2012a) 
Manzano and Ullen (2012 b)
Primary Motor Cortex (BA 4)
^ B  Premotor Cortex (BA 6)
^ B  Posterior Parietal Cortex (BA 7) 
Frontal Eye Fields (BA 8)
^ ^ P  Anterior Prefrontal Cortex (BA 10) 
Extrastriate Cortex (BA 19)
^ ^ P  Superior Temporal Lobe (BA 22) 
Inferior Parietal Lobe (BA 40)
^ ^ B  IFG Pars Opercularis (BA 44)
^ ^ B  IFG Pars Triangularis (BA 45)
^ ^ P  Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (BA 46) 
IFG Pars Orbitalis (BA 47)
Figure 21.2. (See Color Insert) Visualization of brain activation peaks reported in fMRI studies of improvisation. Highlighted 
regions indicate areas with activation reported in at least two of the seven studies included in the figure. Note that several activations 
are located within regions of the default network (anterior prefrontal cortex) and control network (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex).
R O G E R  E. B E A T Y  A N D  REX E. J U N G
279

sequences. The other condition presented emotional 
cue words (e.g., “joy”); participants were asked to 
express the given emotion during improvisation. 
The authors used functional connectivity analysis 
with the dlPFC as a region of interest to assess its 
interaction with other brain regions during each 
condition. Compared to the emotion condition, the 
“pitch set” condition revealed increased connectiv­
ity between the dlPFC and regions associated with 
motor planning control (e.g., pre-supplementary 
motor area). Conversely, the emotion condition 
was associated with increased coupling between 
the dlPFC and regions of the default network 
(e.g., mPFC and PCC). These findings suggest that 
improvisation involves cooperation between control 
and default network regions during the strategic 
expression of emotion.
Further evidence for the cooperative role of the 
default and control networks comes from a recent 
study of poetry composition (Liu et al., 2015). 
Here, professional poets were asked to spontane­
ously generate new lines of poetry in one condi­
tion, and then to revise their previously generated 
poetry in another condition. To explore brain net­
works associated with both conditions, the authors 
used independent component analysis (ICA)— a 
data-driven method used to identify spatially and 
temporally distinct clusters of brain regions (i.e., 
networks). ICA revealed brain networks associated 
with overall task performance; one included default 
network regions, and another included control net­
work regions. During idea generation, the default 
and control network clusters were negatively corre­
lated. During idea revision, however, the correlation 
between the networks increased significantly. Thus, 
the results demonstrate task-specific differences in 
network dynamics underlying two key aspects of 
poetry composition, with default-control network 
coupling associated with the strategic revision of 
spontaneously generated ideas.
Brain 
network dynamics 
also 
have 
been 
explored during artistic drawing (Ellamil, Dobson, 
Beeman, & Christoff, 2012). This study employed 
a similar paradigm as the poetry composition study 
to examine network interactions involved in the 
generation and evaluation of visual art. Using an 
MRI-compatible drawing pad, semi-professional 
visual artists generated (sketched) ideas for a book 
cover based on a series of descriptions, and then 
evaluated these sketches in a separate condition. 
Results revealed that idea generation recruited sev­
eral regions of the default network, whereas idea 
evaluation simultaneously recruited regions of
both the default and control networks. Critically, a 
functional connectivity analysis revealed increased 
coupling between default and control regions dur­
ing idea evaluation. These findings are consistent 
with the poetry composition study of Liu et al.
(2015), and suggest that the default and control 
networks show increased cooperation when artists 
engage in the critical evaluation of self-generated 
ideas. Such work is also consistent with the inter­
action of default and cognitive control networks 
during creative cognition, with generative aspects 
being associated with decoupling, and imple­
mentation (e.g., planning and goal maintenance) 
components being associated with increased cou­
pling between default and control networks (Beaty 
et al., 2015).
Cognitive Control, Spontaneous Thought, 
and the Creative Brain
In this chapter, we explored the contribution of 
large-scale brain networks in creative cognition and 
artistic performance. Across both domain-general 
and domain-specific contexts, we provide consis­
tent evidence that creative thought is a product 
of dynamic interactions between the default and 
control networks. In general, we contend that the 
default network influences creative idea generation 
via spontaneous and self-generated thought, while 
the control network constrains and directs this pro­
cess via top-down monitoring and executive control. 
This proposal is consistent with a growing number 
of studies showing default-control network coupling 
during goal-directed, self-generated thought. Taken 
together, this research helps to resolve long-standing 
questions in the creativity literature regarding the 
contributions of cognitive control and spontaneous 
thought in creative cognition. It also provides a path 
forward toward research designed to better under­
stand the generative and evaluative components 
underlying creative expression.
We described evidence from several recent 
fMRI studies reporting default-control network 
coupling during domain-general creative cog­
nition (Beaty et al., 2015; Green et al., 2015; 
Mayseless et al., 2015). For example, Beaty and 
colleagues showed increased functional connectiv­
ity between regions of the default and control net­
works during divergent thinking, and a temporal 
connectivity analysis revealed dynamic coupling 
of these regions at different stages of the task. In 
this context, default network activity may reflect 
the spontaneous retrieval of information from 
episodic and semantic memory, and its coupling
280
C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N  A N D  A R T I S T I C  P E R F O R M A N C E

with the control network may in turn reflect exec­
utive mechanisms recruited to monitor, direct, 
and integrate such information into coherent and 
goal-congruent responses. Without sufficient top- 
down control, idea production may rely solely on 
spontaneous thought, which could result in the 
retrieval of salient but unoriginal concepts from 
memory (or alternatively, highly original but not 
relevant concepts).
Behavioral research has shown that common 
(and thus unoriginal) ideas tend to occur at early 
stages of divergent thinking, as people recall known 
uses for objects from memory (Gilhooly et al.,
2007). However, this effect is markedly attenuated 
in people with greater executive resources (Beaty 
& Silvia, 2012), suggesting that cognitive control 
is required to inhibit salient conceptual informa­
tion and manage complex search processes. At the 
other extreme, psychopathology (e.g., schizophre­
nia) can be characterized by highly original but 
irrelevant ideas (e.g., neologisms), resulting from 
insufficient top- down control narrowing infor­
mation flow to meet task demands. Although this 
evidence comes from behavioral research, it may 
help to account for neuroimaging findings that 
reported executive network coupling with default 
regions during divergent thinking. Similarly, dys- 
regulation between default and cognitive control 
networks may help to explain the tantalizing (but 
controversial) overlap between creative cognition 
and psychopathology (Abraham, 2015; Jung, 
Grazioplene, Caprihan, Chavez, & Haier, 2010; 
Jung, 2014).
Default-control network cooperation has also 
been reported during artistic performance, but 
such coupling appears to depend on task goals 
and constraints. On the one hand, Liu et al.
(2015) reported a negative association between 
these networks during the spontaneous genera­
tion of poetry. On the other hand, Ellamil et al.
(2012) found increased connectivity between 
default and control regions when visual artists 
evaluated their ideas, and Pinho et al. (2016) 
found a similar pattern when pianists were asked 
to tailor their improvisations based on specific 
emotional cues. In both studies, artists were given 
an explicit task goal that required them to con­
strain their thought process, presumably leading 
to increased top-down processing stemming from 
the control network. Conversely, Liu et al. (2015) 
simply asked poets to spontaneously generate 
poetry and did not impose specific goals, which 
might have relaxed top-down constraints, possibly
reflected in deactivation of the control network. 
Thus, the control network’s coupling with the 
default network appears to depend on the extent 
of goal-directed processing required for a given 
creative task.
Conclusion and Future Directions
Although the default and control networks 
have shown consistent involvement in neuroimag­
ing studies of creative cognition, the specific cog­
nitive functions underlying their activity remain 
unclear. This lack of clarity presents an opportu­
nity for neuroimaging researchers to add signifi­
cant understanding to this nascent field. Because 
the default network is associated with various self­
generated thought processes, an important direc­
tion for future research is to determine which of 
these processes are relevant to creative cognition. 
Recent behavioral research points to a role for epi­
sodic memory in divergent thinking (Addis, Pan, 
Musicaro, & Schacter, 2016; Madore, Addis, & 
Schacter, 2015), suggesting that people may draw 
upon and flexibly combine episodic content to 
construct novel mental representations (Madore, 
Gaesser, & Schacter, 2014; Madore & Schacter, 
2016; Schacter & Madore, 2016). In addition, 
investigation of the mechanisms underlying con­
trol network activity in creativity presents a vast 
number of opportunities regarding such issues 
as timing, sequencing, and intensity at various 
stages of the creative process. Are the interactions 
between default and cognitive control networks 
similar for creative pursuits in the arts and sci­
ences? Are they the same across males and females, 
as well as younger versus older individuals? Can 
these interactions be modified through external 
behavioral, pharmacological, or electrical stimu­
lation? Ultimately, we believe a critical direction 
for future research is to further characterize the 
brain network dynamics that give rise to creative 
cognition and artistic performance. In our view, 
this line of research shows the greatest promise in 
understanding the roles of cognitive control and 
spontaneous thought within the creative brain.
Acknowledgments
R. E. B. was supported by grant RFP-15-12 
from the Imagination Institute (www.imagination- 
institute.org), funded by the John Templeton 
Foundation. The opinions expressed in this publica­
tion are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the view of the Imagination Institute or the 
John Templeton Foundation.
R O G E R  E. B E A T Y  A N D  REX E. J U N G
281

References
Abraham, A. (2014). Creative thinking as orchestrated by seman­
tic processing vs. cognitive control brain networks. Frontiers 
in Human Neuroscience, 8, 95.
Abraham, A. (2015). Editorial: Madness and creativity-yes, no or 
maybe? Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1055.
Addis, D. R., Pan, L., Musicaro, R., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). 
Divergent thinking and constructing episodic simulations. 
Memory, 24, 89-97.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences USA, 1316, 29—52. 
Anticevic, A., Cole, M. W., Murray, J. D., Corlett, P. R., Wang,
X. J., & Krystal, J. H. (2012). The role of default network 
deactivation in cognition and disease. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 16, 584-592.
Arden, R., Chavez, R. S., Grazioplene, R., & Jung, R. E. (2010). 
Neuroimaging creativity: A psychometric review. Behavioral 
Brain Research, 214, 143-156.
Beaty, R. E. (2015). The neuroscience of musical improvisation.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 108—117.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Kaufman, S. B., & Silvia, P. J. (2015). 
Default and executive network coupling supports creative 
idea production. Scientific Reports, 5, 10964.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016a). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20, 87-95.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Wilkins, R. W., Jauk, E., Fink, A., 
Silvia, P. J. . . . & Neubauer, A. C. (2014). Creativity and 
the default network: A functional connectivity analysis of the 
creative brain at rest. Neuropsychologia, 64, 92—98.
Beaty, R. E., Kaufman, S. B., Benedek, M., Jung, R. E., Kenett,
Y. N., Jauk, E., . . . & Silvia, P. J. (2016b). Personality and 
complex brain networks: The role of openness to experience 
in default network efficiency. Human Brain Mapping, 37, 
773-779.
Beaty, R. E., & Silvia, P. J. (2012). Why do ideas get more 
creative across time? An executive interpretation of the 
serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks. Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 6, 309.
Benedek, M., Jauk, E., Fink, A., Koschutnig, K., Reishofer, G., 
Ebner, F., & Neubauer, A. C. (2014a). To create or to recall? 
Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative 
new ideas. Neuroimage, 88, 125—133.
Benedek, M., Jauk, E., Sommer, M., Arendasy, M., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (2014b). Intelligence, creativity, and cognitive con­
trol: The common and differential involvement of execu­
tive functions in intelligence and creativity. Intelligence, 
46, 73-83.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain's default network. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1124, 1-38.
Chen, Q. L., Xu, T., Yang, W. J., Li, Y. D., Sun, J. Z., Wang, 
K. C., . . . & Qiu, J. (2015). Individual differences in 
verbal creative thinking are reflected in the precuneus. 
Neuropsychologia, 75, 441-449.
Chen, Q., Yang, W., Li, W., Wei, D., Li, H., Lei, Q .,. ..  & Qiu, 
J. (2014). Association of creative achievement with cogni­
tive flexibility by a combined voxel-based morphometry and 
resting-state functional connectivity study. Neuroimage, 102,
474_483.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106, 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: a dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Cocchi, L., Zalesky, A., Fornito, A., & Mattingley, J. B. (2013). 
Dynamic cooperation and competition between brain sys­
tems during cognitive control. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
77,493-501.
Dietrich, A., & Kanso, R. (2010). A review of EEG, ERP, and 
neuroimaging studies of creativity and insight. Psychological 
Bulletin, 136, 822-848.
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59, 1783—1794.
Fink, A., Grabner, R. H., Benedek, M., Reishofer, G., 
Hauswirth, V., Fally, M., Neuper, C., Ebner, F., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (2009). The creative brain: Investigation of brain activ­
ity during creative problem solving by means of EEG and 
fMRI. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 734-748.
Fink, A., Koschutnig, K., Benedek, M., Reishofer, G., Ischebeck, 
A., Weiss, E. M., & Ebner, F. (2012). Stimulating creativ­
ity via the exposure to other peoples ideas. Human Brain 
Mapping, 33, 2603-2610.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van 
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain is 
intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated funcio- 
nal networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
USA, 102, 9673-9678.
Giambra, L. M. (1995). A laboratory method for investigating 
influences on switching attention to task-unrelated imagery 
and thought. Consciousness and Cognition, 4, 1—21.
Gilhooly, K. J., Fioratou, E., Anthony, S. H., & Wynn, V. (2007). 
Divergent thinking: Strategies and executive involvement in 
generating novel uses for familiar objects. British Journal of 
Psychology, 98, 611-625.
Gonen-Yaacovi, G., de Souza, L. C., Levy, R., Urbanski, M., 
Josse, G., & Voile, Emmanulle (2013). Rostral and caudal 
prefrontal contributions to creativity: A meta-analysis of 
functional imaging data. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
7, 465.
Green, A. E., Cohen, M. S., Raab, H. A., Yedibalian, C. G., 
& Gray, J. R. (2015). Frontopolar activity and connectivity 
support dynamic conscious augmentation of creative state. 
Human Brain Mapping, 36, 923-934.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., Dunst, B., & Neubauer, A. C. (2013). 
The relationship between intelligence and creativity: New 
support for the threshold hypothesis by means of empirical 
breakpoint detection. Intelligence, 41, 212—221.
Jauk, E., Neubauer, A. C., Dunst, B., Fink, A., & Benedek, M. 
(2015). Gray matter correlates of creative potential: A latent 
variable voxel-based morphometry study. Neuroimage, 111, 
312-320.
282
C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N  A N D  A R T I S T I C  P E R F O R M A N C E

Jung, R. E. (2014). Evolution, creativity, intelligence, and mad­
ness: “Here be dragons.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 784.
Jung, R. E., Grazioplene, R., Caprihan, A., Chavez, R. S., & 
Haier, R. J. (2010). White matter integrity, creativity, and 
psychopathology: disentangling constructs with diffusion 
tensor imaging. Plos One, 5, e9818.
Jung, R. E., Mead, B. S., Carrasco, J., & Flores, R. A. (2013). 
The structure of creative cognition in the human brain. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 330
Limb, C. L., & Braun, A. R. (2008). Neural substrates of spon­
taneous musical performance: An fMRI study of jazz impro­
visation. PLoS One, 3, el679.
Liu, S., Erkkinen, M. G., Healey, M. L., Xu, Y., Swett, K. E., 
Chow, H. M., & Braun, A. R. (2015). Brain activity and 
connectivity during poetry composition: Toward a mul­
tidimensional model of the creative process. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36, 3351-3372.
Madore, K. R, & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Remembering the past 
and imagining the future: Selective effects of an episodic 
specificity induction on detail generation. The Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 285—298.
Madore, K. P., Gaesser, B., & Schacter, D. L. (2014). 
Constructive episodic simulation: Dissociable effects of 
a specificity induction on remembering, imagining, and 
describing in young and older adults. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40, 609—622.
Madore, K.P., Addis, D. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2015). 
Creativity and memory: Effects of an episodic specificity 
induction on divergent thinking. Psychological Science, 26, 
1461-1468.
Mayseless, N., Eran, A., & Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2015). 
Generating original ideas: The neural underpinning of origi­
nality. Neuroimage, 116, 232-239.
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode 
to positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 626.
Mok, L. W. (2014). The interplay between spontaneous and con­
trolled processing in creative cognition. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 8, 663.
Pinho, A. L., Ullen, F., Castelo-Branco, M., Fransson, P., & de 
Manzano, O. (2016). Addressing a paradox: Dual strategies 
for creative performance in introspective and extrospective 
networks. Cerebral Cortex, 26, 3052-3063.
Poincare, H. (1913). The foundations of science: Science and 
hypotheses, the value of science, science and method. New York 
and Garrison, NY: The Science Press.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 16, 676-682.
Schacter, D. L., & Madore, K. P. (2016). Remembering the 
past and imagining the future: Identifying and enhancing 
the contribution of episodic memory. Memory Studies, 9,
245-255.
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, 
F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1997). Common 
blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in 
cerebral cortex. The Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 
648-663.
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, G. 
H., Kenna, H., . . .  & Greicius, M. D. (2007). Dissociable 
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing 
and executive control. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 
2349-2356.
Spreng, R. N., & Schacter, D. L. (2012). Default network 
modulation and large-scale network interactivity in healthy 
young and old adults. Cerebral Cortex, 22, 2610-2621.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. Neuroimage, 53, 303-317.
Stawarczyk, D., & D’Argembeau, A. (2015). Neural correlates 
of personal goal processing during episodic future thinking 
and mind-wandering: An ALE meta-analysis. Human Brain 
Mapping, 36, 2928-2947.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Hashizume, H., Sassa, Y., Nagase, T., 
Nouchi, R., & Kawashima, R. (2011). Failing to deacti­
vate: The association between brain activity during a work­
ing memory task and creativity. Neuroimage, 55, 681-687.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Hashizume, H., Sassa, Y., Nagase, T., 
Nouchi, R., & Kawashima, R. (2012). The association 
between resting functional connectivity and creativity. 
Cerebral Cortex, 22, 2921-2929.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Sassa, Y., Hashizume, H., Sekiguchi, A., 
Fukushima, A., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Regional gray 
matter volume of dopaminergic system associate with creativ­
ity: Evidence from voxel-based morphometry. Neuro Image, 
51, 578-585.
Van den Heuvel, M. P., Stam, C. J., Kahn, R. S., & Pol, H. 
E. H. (2009). Efficiency of functional brain networks and 
intellectual performance. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 
7619-7624.
Wei, D., Yang, J., Li, W., Wang, K., Zhang, Q., & Qiu, J. (2014). 
Increased resting functional connectivity of the medial pre­
frontal cortex in creativity by means of cognitive stimulation. 
Cortex, 51, 92-102.
Wu, X., Yang, W., Tong, D., Sun, J., Chen, Q., Wei, D., . . . & 
Qiu, J. (2016). A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on 
divergent thinking using activation likelihood estimation. 
Human Brain Mapping, 36, 2703-2718.
R O G E R  E. B E A T Y  A N D  REX E. J U N G
283


C H A P T E R
22
Spontaneous and Controlled Processes 
in Creative Cognition
Mathias Benedek and Emanuel Jauk
Abstract
Creative cognition has long been hypothesized to rely on spontaneous as well as controlled cognitive 
processes. This chapter starts by giving a brief overview of pertinent dual process models of creative 
thought. It then reviews empirical research supporting the relevance of controlled and spontaneous 
processes in creative cognition (mostly defined by divergent thinking and insight problem solving).
The relevance of controlled processes is mainly supported by verbal protocol studies and individual 
differences research on executive functions and intelligence. The relevance of spontaneous processes 
is mainly supported by research on incubation and neuroscientific investigations. The chapter concludes 
by considering potential ways of interaction between goal-directed, controlled thought and undirected, 
spontaneous thought, both from the short-term perspective of immediate creative problem solving as 
well as from the long-term perspective of extended creative work.
Key Words: creativity, divergent thinking, insight, cognitive control, executive function, mind wandering, 
incubation, neuroscience, brain, dual process model
How do creative ideas arise? Are they the result 
of spontaneous, undirected thought, or rather of 
structured deliberation? History provides many 
examples of famous scientists or artists who had 
important spontaneous insights while not focused 
on the problem: for instance, the mathematician 
Henri Poincare discovered the relationship between 
Fuchsian 
and 
non-Euclidian 
geometry when 
going on travels (Poincare, 1913), and Kekule was 
inspired regarding the Benzene ring structure while 
being half asleep (Rothenberg, 1995). A close look 
at the work habits of famous creative people reveals, 
however, that they also often followed strict daily 
routines to facilitate their creative process (Currey,
2013). The psychologist Burrhus Skinner and the 
writer Thomas Mann are just two examples of 
highly prolific individuals who have created their 
work on the basis of precisely scheduled writing 
periods. These reports provide anecdotal evidence 
for the relevance of both spontaneous and con­
trolled processes in creative cognition.
In this chapter, we first revisit pertinent theo­
retical accounts in creativity research that embrace 
dual-process models of human cognition. We then 
review empirical evidence from cognitive and neu­
roscience research on the role of spontaneous and 
controlled processes in creative thought. Finally, 
findings are integrated to infer potential modes of 
interplay between spontaneity and control at differ­
ent time scales: a short-term perspective considers 
moments of active engagement in creative thought, 
and a long-term perspective considers creative work 
on complex, extended projects.
Theoretical Accounts
Dual process models of cognition assume 
two types of thought, which are typically named 
Type 1 and Type 2 thinking processes (e.g., Evans, 
2008; for earlier accounts speaking of System 1 
and System 2 processes, see Stanovich, 1999). 
Type 1 processes are described as automatic, rapid, 
effortless, unconscious, and associative in nature,
28 5

meaning that a stimulus will elicit associations to 
relevant information in long-term memory. Type 2 
processes are described as controlled, analytic, slow, 
conscious, and effortful, and are related to working- 
memory processing (Kahneman, 2011). Thinking 
can also be classified as either undirected or goal- 
directed (Christoff, 2013). Undirected thought can 
be defined as the “thought flow that comes to mind 
unbidden and without effort” (Christoff, 2013, 
p. 321). It hence represents a spontaneous form of 
thought, as observed during mind-wandering, for 
instance. Goal-directed thought involves conscious 
representations of desired states and deliberate 
efforts to attain them. It requires cognitive control 
for the maintenance of task focus, for the develop­
ment of mental strategies, and for task monitoring 
and the evaluation of outcomes.
Dual-process models also have a long tradition 
in creativity research (for recent reviews, see Allen & 
Thomas, 2011; Sowden, Pringle, & Gabora, 2015). 
Guilford’s (1956) structure o f  intellect model distin­
guishes between convergent and divergent thinking. 
While convergent thinking reflects goal-directed 
reasoning and related mental operations, Guilford 
(1959) conceived divergent thinking as “the kind 
that goes off in different directions” (p. 381). 
Though he viewed divergent thinking as the cog­
nitive basis of creative cognition, Guilford (1966, 
1976) acknowledged that creativity essentially 
requires both divergent a n d convergent thinking. 
Another prominent dual-process account of creative 
cognition is the blin d variation a n d selective retention 
(BVSR) model (Campbell, 1960; Simonton, 2011; 
see also Simonton, Chapter 10 in this volume). The 
BVSR model views creative cognition as analogous 
to evolutionary selection: it is proposed that new 
ideas are generated as “blind” variants (BV), and 
the most appropriate ideas are subsequently selec­
tively retained (SR). Similarly, the geneplore model 
(Finke, Ward, & Smith, 1992) assumes that creative 
thought encompasses two iterative states: a genera­
tion phase, which leads to the formation of “pre- 
inventive structures” by means of memory search 
and formation of associations, and an exploration 
phase, when ideas are tested for applicability to dif­
ferent contexts. In contrast to the BVSR model, the 
geneplore model assumes that idea generation can be 
an active and goal-directed cognitive process that is 
characterized by both Type 1 and Type 2 processes.
Theoretical accounts of creative cognition hence 
acknowledge the relevance of both spontaneous and 
controlled processes, which can be loosely mapped 
to the conceptualizations of Type 1 and Type 2
thinking, or undirected and goal-directed thought. 
Spontaneous and controlled processes are typically 
associated with generative and evaluative functions, 
respectively, which are thought to interact in the 
forging of creative ideas. Can these intuitive theo­
retical accounts be supported by empirical research? 
This question will be addressed in the next section, 
which reviews the evidence for involvement of both 
controlled and spontaneous processes in creative 
thought.
Empirical Evidence
The Empirical Study of Creative Thought
Creative thinking can be defined as a mental 
process that leads to novel and meaningful repre­
sentations, such as imaginations, ideas, or insights 
(Diedrich, Benedek, Jauk, & Neubauer, 2015; 
Runco & Jaeger, 2012). There are two central para­
digms in the investigation of creative thought: cre­
ative idea generation and insight problem-solving. 
Creative idea generation is usually studied using 
divergent thinking (DT) tasks, which pose open- 
ended problems and prompt participants to pro­
duce different creative solutions within a given time 
(Guilford, 1967; Runco, 1999). A common exam­
ple is the alternate uses task, which asks participants 
to find creative uses for common objects like a car 
tire within a period of two to three minutes, though 
many other tasks are used as well. Performance in 
DT tasks can be scored for fluency (i.e., number 
of ideas) and for creativity of ideas. The creativity 
of ideas or products can be evaluated by of a set of 
judges (Kaufman, Plucker, & Baer, 2008). DT abil­
ity represents the ability to generate creative ideas on 
demand, and therefore is viewed as an indicator of 
creative cognitive potential (Benedek, Miihlmann, 
Jauk, & Neubauer, 2013; Runco, 1999; Silvia 
et al., 2008).
Divergent thinking ability must not be con­
fused with creativity in terms of real-life creative 
achievement, which refers to the creative accom­
plishments of a person. Creative idea generation (as 
assessed with DT tasks) can rather be conceived as 
a domain-general cognitive process inherent in all 
complex forms of creative performance, from sci­
entific work to artistic performance (Benedek & 
Jauk, 2014). This notion is supported by a positive 
correlation between divergent thinking ability and 
real-world creative achievement (Jauk, Benedek, 
Dunst, & Neubauer, 2013; Kim, 2008; Plucker,
1999). For example, higher DT ability is associated 
with more creative performance in specific domains 
such as music (Beaty, Smeekens, Silvia, Hodges,
286
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

& Kane, 2013; Benedek, Borovnjak, Neubauer, 
& Kruse-Weber, 2014b) and dance (Fink & 
Woschnjak, 2011).
The second common approach in the study of 
creative thought is insight problem-solving. This 
approach poses problems that often cannot be solved 
in a straightforward way due to inadequate initial 
problem representations, leading to an impasse of 
thought (e.g., the candle problem; Dunker, 1945). 
To solve these problems, the problem representation 
needs to be restructured (Weisberg, 1995), and suc­
cessful restructuring can be accompanied by a sub­
jective experience of insight (Gilhooly & Murphy,
2005). A specific task type that is also commonly 
employed in the study of insight is remote associ­
ates problems, as originally used in the Remote 
Associates Test (RAT) (Mednick, 1962; cf. Kounios 
& Beeman, 2014). Remote associates problems 
present three unrelated concepts (e.g., cottage, blue, 
cake) and ask for a solution word that provides an 
unexpected connection between them (cheese: cot­
tage cheese, blue cheese, cheesecake). Creative idea 
generation and insight problem-solving tasks differ 
most notably in the response type. While creative 
idea generation tasks have an indefinite number of 
potential solutions that vary in their creative value, 
insight problem-solving tasks typically have only 
one correct solution. These approaches hence focus 
on two variants of creative thought, acting in solu­
tion spaces of vastly different size.
Controlled Processes in Creative Cognition
Evidence for the involvement of cognitive con­
trol in creative thought comes particularly from 
verbal protocol studies and from individual differ­
ences research. Verbal protocol studies ask partici­
pants to think aloud during task performance. This 
method gives insight into the conscious processes 
that take place between stimulus and response and 
hence is used to identify relevant cognitive strategies 
and operations. For example, Gilhooly, Fioratou, 
Anthony, and Wynn (2007) showed that perfor­
mance of the alternate uses tasks involves several 
strategies, such as the recall of uses from memory, 
or the production of uses guided by specific object 
properties, or the disassembly of objects. Critically, 
some of these strategies turned out to be far more 
effective than others for the generation of novel 
solutions.
An analysis of response guesses in remote asso­
ciates problems showed that people adopt system­
atic strategies in this task as well: initial guesses 
mostly refer to one of the three cues and from there
proceed locally in semantic space (Smith, Huber, 
& Vul, 2013). Similarly, verbal protocol studies of 
insight tasks revealed dissociable procedures dur­
ing problem-solving, including the application of 
knowledge, heuristics, and restructuring based on 
information gained during failed efforts (Fleck & 
Weisberg, 2004,2013). Interestingly, the commonly 
hypothesized sequence of impasse-restructuring- 
insight preceded only a minority of solutions.
Verbal protocol studies illustrate that creative 
thinking, as observed during creative idea gen­
eration and insight problem-solving, involves con­
scious goal-directed strategies. The posed problem 
establishes a more or less well-defined goal (e.g., 
find creative uses for a car tire), and the adoption 
of a specific strategy implies further sub-goals (e.g., 
identify relevant object characteristics). Meeting 
these sub-goals leads to the generation of candi­
date solutions (e.g., a lamp shade is round— maybe 
a car tire could be used as a lamp shade?), which 
then become evaluated with respect to the task con­
straints imposed by the task goal (e.g., solutions 
should be novel and meaningful in order to qualify 
as being creative). The findings of verbal protocol 
studies hence illustrate that creative thinking can 
take place in a very goal-directed way.
Further evidence for the role of controlled pro­
cesses in creative thought comes from research that 
employed an individual differences approach. In 
the individual differences approach, correlations of 
low-level cognitive abilities (e.g., working memory 
capacity) with high-level cognitive abilities (e.g., 
divergent thinking ability) are used to infer the 
involvement of the low-level process in the high- 
level process. In other words, if people with higher 
working-memory capacity generate more creative 
ideas, it is assumed that working memory is rel­
evant to creative idea generation. Following this 
approach, consistent positive correlations between 
creative potential and intelligence (a proxy of execu­
tive control) support the relevance of cognitive con­
trol in creative thought (e.g., Batey & Furnham, 
2006; Cramond, Kim, & VanTassel-Baska, 2010). 
Findings generalize to different facets of intelli­
gence, including Gf, Gc, and Gr (Beaty & Silvia, 
2013; Cho, Nijenhuis, van Vianen, Kim, & Lee, 
2010; Jauk, Benedek, & Neubauer, 2014; Silvia, 
Beaty, & Nusbaum, 2013), and also to different 
measures of creative potential including divergent 
thinking (e.g., Jauk et al., 2014; Nusbaum & Silvia,
2011), generation of creative metaphors (Silvia & 
Beaty, 2012; Beaty & Silvia, 2013), production 
of humor (Greengross & Miller, 2011; Kellner &
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
2 8 7

Benedek, 2017), 
and insight problem-solving 
(Beaty, Nusbaum, & Silvia, 2014; Lee & Therriault,
2013) . An early meta-analysis estimated the aver­
age relationship between intelligence and creativ­
ity to be only of modest magnitude (Kim, 2005). 
More recent evidence, however, suggests that this 
relationship is much more pronounced than previ­
ously assumed (i.e., correlation coefficients around 
.40 to .50) when considering latent correlations 
(Jauk et al., 2014; Silvia, 2008), when creativity is 
measured by DT creativity rather than mere fluency 
(Benedek, Franz, Heene, & Neubauer, 2012; Jauk 
et al., 2013), and when DT tasks explicitly instruct 
participants to be creative rather than to produce 
many different ideas (Nusbaum, Silvia, & Beaty,
2014) . Above-average intelligence is sometimes seen 
as a necessary condition for high creativity, which is 
evidenced by higher intelligence-creativity correla­
tions in the lower range of the intelligence spectrum 
(Jauk et al., 2013; Karwowski et al., 2016).
Individual differences research has also begun 
to elucidate the functional role of intelligence for 
creative thought. Nusbaum and Silvia (2011) had 
participants perform the alternate uses task and 
instructed half of their sample to use a specific strat­
egy when they got stuck during idea generation (i.e., 
consider the disassembly of objects). They found 
that G f predicted creativity of ideas more strongly 
in the strategy group than in the no-strategy group, 
suggesting that Gf facilitates the implementation 
of a useful but cognitively demanding strategy 
during creative idea generation. Another study by 
Nusbaum, Silvia, and Beaty (2014) showed that 
intelligence predicted creativity more strongly when 
people were instructed to be creative rather than to 
be fluent, again indicating that intelligence may be 
particularly relevant for enacting more demand­
ing top-down strategies during creative thought. 
Finally, intelligence was found to be associated with 
higher creativity of ideas, particularly at the begin­
ning of idea generation, suggesting that intelligence 
is relevant for the effective suppression of initial 
common ideas in favor of generating more creative 
ideas right from the start (Beaty & Silvia, 2012).
The relationship between cognitive control 
and creative thought is also evident at the level of 
executive functions such as working memory and 
inhibition. Some studies reported positive cor­
relations between working-memory capacity and 
divergent thinking ability (Benedek, Jauk, Sommer, 
Arendasy, & Neubauer, 20l4d; De Dreu, Nijstad, 
Baas, Wolsink, & Roskes, 2012; Oberauer, Six!?, 
Wilhelm, & Wittmann, 2008), but others found
no significant relationship (Lee & Therriault, 2013; 
Smeekens & Kane, 2016). Notably, higher working 
memory capacity was shown to predict the creativ­
ity of musical improvisation, particularly at later 
trials, suggesting that working memory facilitates 
sustained task-directed effort in highly demand­
ing improvisation tasks (De Dreu et al., 2012). 
Divergent thinking ability has also been related 
to higher cognitive inhibition as measured with 
Stroop, Navon, or random motor generation tasks 
(Benedek et al., 2012; Edl, Benedek, Papousek, 
Weiss, & Fink, 2014; Golden, 1975; Groborz & 
Necka, 
2003; 
Zabelina, 
Robinson, 
Council, 
& Bresin, 2012), and to higher shifting ability 
(Pan & Yu, in press). Yet other work suggests that 
creativity is particularly related to a flexible engage­
ment of cognitive control (Dorfman, Martindale, 
Gassimova, 
& Vartanian, 2008; Kwiatkowski, 
Vartanian, 
& 
Martindale, 
1999; 
Vartanian, 
Martindale, & Kwiatkowski, 2007; Zabelina & 
Robinson, 2010; cf. Vartanian, 2009).
To recap, verbal protocol research has illustrated 
some of the conscious strategies that are involved 
in creative problem-solving, suggesting that creative 
thinking can be pursued in a goal-directed way. 
Individual differences research further points to spe­
cific executive mechanisms that are related to higher 
creativity. Working memory and cognitive inhibi­
tion are primary resources for the control of atten­
tion (Kane, Bleckley, Conway, & Engle, 2001), and 
are known to support goal-directed processes such as 
the active maintenance of task-relevant information 
and the controlled search from memory (Unsworth 
& Engle, 2007). Cognitive control hence can be 
assumed to facilitate the implementation of goal- 
directed processes in creative thought.
Spontaneous Processes in Creative Thought
The observation that creative ideas not only arise 
during deliberate idea generation, but also pop up 
at unexpected times and places, is a major argument 
for the involvement of spontaneous processes in cre­
ative thought. This phenomenon has been acknowl­
edged in models of the creative process (e.g., Wallas, 
1926), which commonly include a preparation 
phase (initial problem-solving attempts that lead to 
an impasse), followed by an incubation phase dur­
ing which the problem is temporarily abandoned. 
The end of incubation is marked by a moment of 
insight, followed by a final verification phase when 
the solution is checked. Empirical research has 
been very interested in the role of incubation for 
creative problem-solving. In a typical experimental
288
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

procedure, participants work on a creative task, 
followed by a distraction task (i.e., incubation 
period) before the original task is presented again. 
Performance gains in the post-incubation task are 
then considered the result of incubation effects.
A growing body of empirical evidence supports 
the value of incubation periods. For instance, a few 
minutes of task-unrelated thought— as opposed 
to prolonged task engagement or immediate 
responding— have been shown to lead to more 
remote associations and more creative solutions 
in divergent thinking (e.g., Dijsterhius & Meurs,
2006). Meta-analytic findings suggest that incuba­
tion effects are robust and are found for divergent 
thinking as well as insight problem-solving (Sio & 
Ormerod, 2009). Incubation gains are especially 
pronounced when participants are confronted with 
distraction tasks that are cognitively undemanding 
(Baird et al., 2012; Sio & Ormerod, 2009), concep­
tually unrelated to the creative problem (Ellwood, 
Pallier, Snyder, & Gallate, 2009), or reflect differ­
ent stimulus modalities (i.e., verbal vs. figural; e.g., 
Gilhooly, Georgiou, & Devery, 2013). Notably, 
incubation effects are observed not only after short 
incubation tasks, but also after extended incubation 
periods, such as following a nap (Cai et al., 2009) or 
a night of sleep (Wagner, Gais, Haider, Verleger, & 
Born, 2004).
What are the mechanisms underlying the incu­
bation effect? It is widely acknowledged that incu­
bation can lead to relaxation (Knoblich, Ohlsson, 
Haider, & Rhenius, 1999), uptake o f facilitating cues 
from the environment (Seifert, Meyer, Davidson, 
Patalano, & Yaniv, 1993), forgetting o f  fixating ele­
ments (Smith & Blankenship, 1991), or set shifting 
(Schooler & Melcher, 1995). All of these mecha­
nisms help to “refresh” the current mindset, and to 
overcome proactive interference from previously 
salient but irrelevant goals and constraints. These 
accounts, however, capitalize on the transient loos­
ening of task-focused attention and hence reflect 
passive mechanisms, rather than an active involve­
ment of spontaneous thought (see also Helie & 
Sun, 2010; Ritter & Dijsterhuis, 2014). In this con­
text, it is interesting to note that incubation research 
has considered only on-task performance thus far, 
but not spontaneous off-task ideas or insights as 
reported in the anecdotes that inspired this line of 
research.
Despite the passive mechanisms that may pro­
mote incubation effects in creative cognition, specific 
incubation findings suggest an active involvement 
of spontaneous processes during creative incubation
(Ritter & Dijksterhuis, 2014). For example, incu­
bation gains are stronger when distractor tasks are 
unrelated to the creative task at hand (Ellwood 
et al., 2009; Gilhooly et al., 2013). These findings 
indicate that incubation periods benefit from a dis­
engagement of task-relevant cognitive systems (i.e., 
verbal versus numerical), which might give rise to 
unconscious processes in this system, but not nec­
essarily facilitate the refreshing of mindset. Further 
evidence for the involvement of active unconscious 
processing during incubation comes from a study 
showing that incubation gains are stronger when 
participants are aware of the post-test following the 
incubation period (Gallate et al., 2012). It seems 
that the awareness of the uncompleted task triggers 
additional processes that cannot be easily explained 
by passive mechanisms. It also has been proposed 
that incubation effects are related to increased 
mind-wandering in the incubation period (i.e., 
spontaneous thoughts that are related to neither 
the distractor task nor the creative task; Baird et al.,
2012). However, this finding was not replicated in 
later research (Smeekens & Kane, 2016), and mind­
wandering during creative task performance has 
been shown to be detrimental to creativity (Hao, 
Wu, Runco & Pina, 2015), as it is in most areas of 
cognitive performance (Mooneyham & Schooler, 
2013; but see Zedelius and Schooler, Chapter 18 
in this volume, for a nuanced discussion). In sum, 
research on the incubation effect shows that inter­
ruptions of goal-directed task performance can have 
positive effects on creative thought, which might be 
due to both active spontaneous processes as well as 
passive mechanisms (refreshing of mindset).
Potentially more direct support for the involve­
ment of spontaneous processes in creative thought 
comes from cognitive neuroscience research. It relies 
on a relationship between spontaneous thought and 
activation of the default mode network (DMN). 
The DM N is highly active in the absence of goal- 
directed thought (i.e., when people are instructed to 
rest and not think of anything in particular; Fox & 
Raichle, 2007; Gusnard & Raichle, 2001). DM N 
activation has been specifically observed during 
mind-wandering (Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, 
Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Hasenkamp, Wilson- 
Mendenhall, Duncan, & Barsalou, 2012; Mason 
et al., 2007) and related mental processes such as 
self-generated thought and prospection (Andrews- 
Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014; Schacter, 
Addis, & Buckner, 2007; Spreng, Mar, & Kim,
2009), although these processes recruit other brain 
areas as well (Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna,
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
289

& Christoff, 2015). Neuroscience research on cre­
ativity has also accumulated robust evidence for 
the involvement of the DM N in creative thought 
(Gonen-Yaacovi et al., 2013; Jung, Benedek, Dunst, 
& Neubauer, 2013; Mok, 2014; see also Beaty and 
Jung, Chapter 21 in this volume). Functional mag­
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies comparing 
brain activation between divergent and convergent 
thinking tasks (e.g., generating creative object uses 
vs. generating typical object characteristics) con­
sistently report higher activation of not only core 
DM N regions such as the posterior cingulate cor­
tex and the posterior inferior parietal cortex, but 
also other regions, including particularly the left 
lateral prefrontal cortex (Abraham et al., 2012; 
Benedek et al., 2014a; Fink et al., 2009; Mayseless, 
Eran, & Shamay-Tsoory, 2015). Tasks with higher 
creativity-related demands hence show a higher 
DM N involvement. As for most cognitive tasks, 
however, DM N activation is generally lower dur­
ing creative thinking when compared to rest (e.g., 
Benedek, et al., 2014c). A possible interpretation 
of this result is that creative thinking tasks gener­
ally involve controlled, goal-directed thought pro­
cesses, but the more creative the task, the higher the 
involvement of spontaneous, undirected processes.
Importantly, DM N involvement during creative 
thought is not merely an effect of internally directed 
attention. Although creative cognition is often 
largely independent from sensory stimulation and 
hence implies an internal focus of attention— which 
is reflected in brain parameters such as increased 
posterior electroencephalogram (EEG) alpha activ­
ity (Benedek, Bergner, Konen, Fink, & Neubauer, 
2011; Benedek et al., 20l4e; Fink & Benedek, 
2013, 2014)— a recent study showed that DM N 
activation during creative thought is not related to 
an internal versus external focus of attention, but 
rather to higher levels of constructive, self-generated 
thought (Benedek et al., 2016).
Creative thinking thus is characterized by brain 
activation in the DM N, as well as prefrontal regions 
that are part of the executive control network 
(ECN). Further investigations of the functional 
coupling of these networks revealed that the DM N 
and ECN do not act independently, but actually 
cooperate during creative thought (Beaty, Benedek 
Silvia, & Schacter, 2016). This is a compelling 
finding, since the DM N and ECN often show an 
antagonistic relationship (Anticevic et al., 2012; 
Fox et al., 2005). Increased coupling of DM N 
and ECN has been observed for different creative 
domains, including creative idea generation (Beaty,
Benedek, Kaufman, & Silvia, 2015), creative draw­
ing (Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & Christoff, 2012), 
poetry composition (Liu et al., 2015), and musi­
cal improvisation (Pinho, Ullen, Castelo-Branco, 
Fransson, & de Manzano, 2016). These findings 
show that creative cognition involves the activa­
tion and cooperation of brain networks linked to 
spontaneous thought and cognitive control (for a 
more detailed account of this emerging literature, 
see Beaty and Jung, Chapter 21 in this volume).
Additional evidence comes from the analysis 
of interindividual differences in DM N function 
and structure. For example, the DM N and ECN 
show higher resting-state connectivity in more 
creative individuals (Beaty et al., 2014). Creative 
people have also been found to show less deactiva­
tion of the DM N during a working-memory task 
(Takeuchi et al., 2011). Similarly, people scoring 
high on schizotypy (a trait related to creativity; e.g., 
Batey & Furnham, 2006) showed attenuated DM N 
deactivation during a divergent thinking task (Fink, 
Weber, et al., 2014). On a brain structural level, 
higher creativity is consistently associated with 
higher gray matter density in DM N regions, espe­
cially the precuneus (Chen et al., 2015; Fink et al., 
2014; Jauk et al., 2015; Kuhn et al., 2014; Takeuchi 
et al., 2010). These neurophysiological findings 
indicate that the association between creativity and 
spontaneous thought might even manifest at a trait 
level, a notion also partially supported by recent 
behavioral research (Baird et al., 2012; Smeekens & 
Kane, 2016; Zedelius & Schooler, 2015).
The Interplay of Spontaneous and 
Controlled Processes in Creative Cognition
We have shown in the preceding that theoreti­
cal accounts and empirical evidence agree that both 
spontaneous and controlled processes contribute 
to creative thought. An important question now is 
how these processes actually interact in their con­
tribution to creativity. To address this question, it 
seems reasonable to distinguish between a short­
term and a long-term perspective. The short-term 
perspective considers the interplay of spontaneous 
and controlled processes during active engagement 
in creative thought, as when we are sitting at the 
workplace, determined to tackle a specific problem 
(e.g., writing or designing). The long-term perspec­
tive acknowledges that complex creative tasks will 
not lead to satisfactory solutions within a few min­
utes, but require extended but intermittent engage­
ment over days, weeks, or longer. Complex creative 
problems (e.g., creating a scientific theory, or
290
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

writing a book or a play) typically consist of many 
interrelated problems, and advancing some of them 
may not yet solve the overarching problem.
A Short-Term Perspective
How do spontaneous and controlled processes 
interact when we are actively looking for a creative 
idea? Active idea generation might be generally con­
ceived as a goal-directed process, but there are good 
reasons to assume that spontaneous, undirected 
processes are substantially involved as well (Beaty, 
Silvia, Nusbaum, Jauk, & Benedek, 2014). First 
of all, goal-directed and undirected thinking need 
not be understood as mutually exclusive states, but 
thinking can also reside somewhere along the con­
tinuum between these extremes (Christoff, 2013; 
Fox & Christoff, 2014). Goal-directed thinking 
is often conceived of in a hierarchical way; that 
is, even when the overall goal is clear, certain sub­
goals can be underspecified. For example, we may 
decide to think of a clever metaphor that illustrates 
an argument, but only have a vague hunch of how 
to find it. Verbal protocol analyses show that peo­
ple engage in different conscious strategies during 
creative problem-solving, but they also indicate 
that a substantial proportion of ideas just come in 
an unmediated way (Gilhooly et al., 2007), or are 
accompanied by a subjective experience of sponta­
neous insight (Gilhooly & Murphy, 2005). People 
are often unable to verbalize their strategy, which 
suggests that no fully conscious strategy was pur­
sued. Moreover, some people engage in very basic 
strategies like self-cuing, which involves the simple 
repetition or imagination of the problem, a quite 
undirected strategy that might be apt to stimulate 
spontaneous ideas. Finally, some strategies turn 
out to be ineffective and lead us to an impasse of 
thought (Fleck & Weisberg, 2004). These consider­
ations indicate that an active engagement in a cre­
ative task does not necessarily imply that thinking is 
fully goal-directed throughout the task.
Second, even when we have picked a strategy that 
entails a clear plan of action, we cannot expect that 
cognitive processes are always under our full control. 
For example, when we decide to perform a con­
trolled retrieval with given constraints (e.g., gener­
ate things that are round), the outcome of this task 
is not fully predictable. We cannot simply achieve a 
systematic and exhaustive search; rather, our recall 
is typically incomplete and sometimes even wrong 
(Schacter, 1999). Search of memory involves asso­
ciative mechanisms (Collins & Loftus, 1975), and 
exerting top-down control means, at best, guiding
these processes— not replacing them with an ana­
lytic search. Conscious resources are simply far too 
limited to monitor and control all ongoing cognitive 
processes (Marois & Ivanoff, 2005). This is not nec­
essarily a disadvantage for creative thought: uncon­
trolled, spontaneous processes can actually become a 
source of creativity, as in the process of reconstruc­
tive interference, where contextual interference dur­
ing recall can foster creative associations (Gabora 
& Ranjan, 2013). Under some conditions, reduced 
control might even be beneficial for creativity (Amer 
et al., 2017; Chrysikou et al., 2014; Wiley & Jarosz,
2012). Individual differences in semantic memory 
structure are yet another bottom-up mechanism 
that is hypothesized to support creativity (Mednick, 
1962), although this remains a point of empirical 
debate (Benedek & Neubauer, 2013; Kenett, Anaki, 
& Faust, 2014). We hence can conclude that active 
engagement in creative thought involves cognitive 
control, but is not continuously goal-directed and 
does not imply full control, therefore leaving ample 
room for a fruitful interplay with spontaneous 
thought. This may actually be true to some extent for 
all kinds of problem-solving, but it appears particu­
larly true for creative problem-solving, because cre­
ative problems commonly are ill-defined (Mumford, 
Reiter-Palmon, & Redmond, 1994).
We might further generalize this point in saying 
that creative problem-solving can vary in its level 
of goal-directedness. The level of goal-directedness 
may depend on the actual task, the problem-solving 
stage, and maybe even individual factors such as 
cognitive styles. For example, an impasse of thought 
is a common characteristic for insight tasks but not 
for divergent thinking tasks. Insight tasks thus may 
be considered relatively less goal-directed. The bet­
ter we understand the relevant cognitive operations 
and strategies involved in a task, the better we will 
be able to estimate the relative relevance of con­
trolled and spontaneous processes.
A central question is how spontaneous and con­
trolled processes cooperate in creative thought: Do 
they alternate in successive phases, or engage in 
actual simultaneous interaction? Some theoreti­
cal accounts suggest shifts between generative and 
evaluative phases, with generative phases producing 
candidate solutions that are evaluated for appropri­
ateness in an iterative fashion until one solution is 
eventually approved (e.g., Finke et al., 1992). On 
the other hand, dual-process models commonly 
assume that Type 1 processes take place in an auto­
matic fashion and Type 2 processes are additionally 
recruited to monitor and potentially overrule Type 1
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
29I

processes, suggesting that these processes can occur 
in parallel and interact directly. The functional cou­
pling of brain networks associated with spontane­
ous thought and cognitive control during creative 
thought (e.g., Beaty et al., 2015) seems to corrobo­
rate the view of direct interaction, but the degree of 
coupling also depends on the problem-solving stage 
(Beaty et al., 2014; Ellamil et al., 2012; Liu et al.,
2014). Moreover, creative individuals appear to be 
better able to flexibly shift: between convergent and 
divergent thinking demands, as expressed in higher 
EEG alpha (de-) synchronization during the respec­
tive task demands (Jauk, Benedek, & Neubauer, 
2012; cf. Vartanian, 2009; Zabelina & Robinson,
2010). This suggests a more nuanced view, imply­
ing that spontaneous and controlled processes show 
actual simultaneous interaction, but their respective 
predominance may vary across time and individuals.
A Long-Term Perspective
Complex creative problems are usually not 
solved within a few minutes and hence are par­
ticularly likely to lead to an impasse. They require 
putting down the problem after some time without 
a satisfactory solution. This is the kind of creative 
problem-solving that has been associated with the 
intriguing anecdotes of spontaneous insights com­
ing suddenly to eminent figures in the arts and 
sciences, which have inspired incubation research. 
To date, incubation research has made impor­
tant advances in showing that periods of task- 
unrelated thought can facilitate creativity (Ritter 
& Dijksterhuis, 2014), which points to the exis­
tence of unconscious, spontaneous processes that 
may not be goal-directed but still are goal-relevant. 
However, it also seems that incubation research has 
thus far hardly addressed the phenomenon at the 
heart of those anecdotes, namely, why, when, and 
how thoughts spontaneously return to an unsolved 
problem and eventually unveil a solution. These 
spontaneous thoughts occur unbidden but can 
nonetheless be largely conscious. This is what likely 
happened to Poincare when boarding the bus and 
to Kelkule when drifting into sleep. Most of us also 
know this phenomenon well from personal experi­
ence: Our mind wanders to an unsolved problem, 
while we are actually concerned with something 
else, and we might only become aware of it when 
we suddenly notice that thoughts have brought us 
to an unexpected idea. To better understand the role 
of spontaneous thoughts in creative cognition, we 
need to understand why this happens and why it 
can be conducive to creativity.
Why and when does it happen? Mind-wandering 
typically concerns personally significant events 
(Singer, 1966; see also Klinger, Marchetti, & Koster, 
Chapter 17 in this volume). It can take the form of 
ruminations concerning the past, and of thoughts 
regarding the future— both positively and negatively 
hued (Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). An unsolved 
problem, to which we have devoted much time 
and effort without any success, can clearly be con­
ceived of as an event of high personal significance. 
Moreover, unsolved problems have been shown to 
be more salient and available for recall than solved 
problems (Yanif & Meyer, 1987; Zeigarnik, 1927). 
Unsolved problems hence have the power to spon­
taneously attract our attention. Mind-wandering 
has been previously associated with cognitive fail­
ure, in terms of ruminations and worries that inter­
fere with the task at hand. However, spontaneous 
thoughts that address unsolved problems can be 
viewed as a very adaptive, functional mechanism of 
our brain. More generally, mind-wandering can be 
seen as spontaneous mental simulations that build 
on previous experience to better prepare us for the 
future, which are relevant for personal planning and 
creativity (Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; 
McMillan, Kaufman, & Singer, 2013; Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015).
When does it happen? In the popular science 
literature, the occurrence of spontaneous insights 
has been associated with three or four “Bs” that 
variably include bed, bathroom, bus, bars, or bor­
ing meetings. Anecdotal reports include further 
activities that do not necessarily start with the 
letter h, like going for a walk, ironing, or watch­
ing cows (Currey, 2013). Many of these activities 
have in common the fact that they are cognitively 
undemanding and therefore can be executed 
largely automatically. Systematic evidence supports 
the observation that spontaneous insights can be 
linked to undemanding activities that leave lots of 
attentional resources free (Sio & Ormerod, 2009). 
It is an intriguing question whether free atten­
tional resources are a necessary condition for hav­
ing spontaneous thought processes, or maybe only 
for becoming consciously aware of them. It has 
been hypothesized that spontaneous thought can 
take place without any conscious awareness, as in 
dreaming (Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, 
& Christoff, 2013), and first-person reports 
from probe-caught mind-wandering suggest that 
people lack meta-awareness of these processes as 
much as half of the time (Christoff et al., 2009). 
One might therefore further speculate whether
292
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

mind-wandering represents a state in which we 
consciously witness cognitive processes that can 
also take place unconsciously, but which enter con­
scious attention when it is not occupied with other 
goal-directed activities (Dixon, Fox, & Christoff, 
2014; Wiggins & Bhattacharya, 2014).
The other important question is why spontane­
ous thought can be fruitful for creativity. First of 
all, spontaneous thought, like mind-wandering, 
is an internal affair—it relies on available seman­
tic and autobiographical knowledge and thus is 
largely independent from sensory information 
(Smallwood, 2013). We can therefore assume that 
spontaneous thoughts will only advance problems 
that can be effectively processed in mind. This is 
usually true for creative thought, which essentially 
relies on imagination and an internal focus of atten­
tion (Benedek et al., 20l4e). Creative ideas build on 
existing knowledge and represent a forging of new 
connections between previously unrelated concepts 
(Koestler, 1964; Mednick, 1962). Moreover, the 
implementation of the idea also requires external 
attention, for expressing (e.g., writing, designing, 
playing, or manufacturing) what has been envisaged 
in the mind s eye or ear. Importantly, this means that 
spontaneous insights do not come out of nowhere; 
presumably all relevant building blocks of knowl­
edge are previously available and are waiting to be 
combined. The creative combination or recombina­
tion of this preexisting knowledge implies a proper 
understanding of the problem and its domain, how­
ever, which often requires extensive deliberate train­
ing in a given field (Weisberg, 1993).
Second, spontaneous thought is assumed to take 
place in a more free-associative and less monitored 
way than goal-directed thought. It hence allows 
more radical and playful variations that might be 
screened out during goal-directed deliberation (see 
Simonton, Chapter 10 in this volume). Since spon­
taneous thoughts are undirected, they may often 
represent irrelevant or inappropriate solutions with 
respect to a given problem. However, if they happen 
to be relevant and appropriate, they likely involve 
more radical novelties than ideas from previous 
goal-directed deliberations. Spontaneous thought 
may therefore be conducive to creativity in intro­
ducing novelty and variations, which happens in a 
largely undirected way but probably not completely 
blindly (Gabora & Kauffman, 2016; Simonton, 
Chapter 10 in this volume). Spontaneous variations 
will not represent a full combinatory variation of 
available knowledge, but rather novel first-order 
combinations of a restricted set of information,
representing what has been called the adjacent pos­
sible (Kauffman, 2000).
What can we infer about the actual interplay 
of spontaneous and controlled thought from the 
long-term perspective of extended creative work 
on a given problem or project? While we can 
schedule the time and amount of goal-directed 
work we want to devote to a problem, it is— by 
definition— impossible to ensure that the problem 
is also addressed by spontaneous thoughts in terms 
of mind-wandering. Nevertheless, deliberate work 
represents an important precondition for spontane­
ous work for at least two reasons. First, deliberate 
work is needed to analyze a problem and to acquire 
all relevant information needed to solve it. Second, 
intense deliberate work on a problem makes it 
salient and personally relevant, and hence makes it 
much more likely to appear as content in subsequent 
problem-related mind-wandering (Singer, 1966).
Aside from ways in which goal-directed work 
may stimulate relevant spontaneous thought, we 
may additionally speculate that regular engagement 
in certain cognitively undemanding activities (e.g., 
going for a walks) might increase psychological 
receptiveness to potentially productive spontaneous 
thought. Because spontaneous thoughts are volatile, 
making use of them requires goal-directed actions. 
Many artists and scientists are well aware of this and 
hence are prepared to take notes when ideas come 
to them so that they are not lost (Currey, 2013). 
Controlled, goal-directed thinking is of course fur­
ther needed to elaborate, verify, and finally imple­
ment creative ideas; some spontaneous ideas appear 
exceptional at first, but not all withstand the test of 
explicit verification.
The benefits of the interplay between goal- 
directed and spontaneous thought in creative 
problem-solving might be illustrated by analogy 
with the optimization process of sim ulated anneal­
ing (Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, & Vecchi, 1983; cf. 
Martindale, 1995). Simulated annealing describes 
a technique for approximating a global optimum 
in complex problems that feature excessively large 
search spaces and cannot be solved in an analyti­
cal way. It generally aims at finding a minimum 
in a goal-directed way (like a marble rolling down 
to the local minimum of a landscape), but also 
introduces (spontaneous) random variations and 
temporarily accepts less optimal solutions (like 
giving the marble a push to jump somewhere 
else). Unlike other (fully goal-directed) brute- 
force algorithms, simulated annealing thus pro­
vides a mechanism to avoid getting trapped in a
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
293

local minimum (which may correspond to a state 
of mental fixation). As pushes get weaker over 
time, the system will eventually converge on the 
global minimum. As in metallurgic annealing, 
where shifts between heating and cooling are used 
to achieve an overall more optimal configuration 
of the material, shifts between controlled and 
spontaneous thought can be conducive to creative 
problem-solving by providing a means to escape 
(local) impasses of thought and thereby eventually 
reach creative (global) solutions.
Extended creative work can have many itera­
tive phases of (predominantly) controlled, goal- 
directed, and spontaneous thought. Creative people 
embrace the creative potential of both states and 
are skilled at integrating them in their work habits 
(see Dobson, Chapter 23 in this volume). Future 
empirical research on the interplay of spontane­
ous and controlled thought, from both short-term 
and long-term perspectives, will allow us to more 
fully appreciate the intricate cognitive mechanisms 
involved in creative cognition.
References
Abraham, A., Pieritz, K., Thybush, K., Rutter, B., Kroger, S., 
Schweckendiek, J., Stark, R., Windmann, S., & Hermann,
C. (2012). Creativity and the brain: Uncovering the neural 
signature of conceptual expansion. Neuropsychologia, 50, 
1906-1917
Allen, A. P., & Thomas, K. E. (2011). A dual process account of 
creative thinking. Creativity Research Journal, 23, 109-118. 
Amer, T., Campbell, K. L., & Hasher, L. (2016). Cognitive con­
trol as a double-edged sword. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
20, 905-915.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J. & & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29-52.
Anticevic, A., Cole, M. W., Murray, J. D., Corlett, P. R., Wang, 
X. J., & Krystal, J. H. (2012). The role of default network 
deactivation in cognition and disease. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 16, 584-592.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., 
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by dis­
traction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. 
Psychological Science, 23, 1117-1122.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 
1604-1611.
Batey, M., & Furnham, A. (2006). Creativity, intelligence, 
and personality: A critical review of the scattered literature. 
Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 132, 
355-429.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Kaufman, S. B., & Silvia, P J. 
(2015). Default and executive network coupling supports 
creative idea production. Scientific Reports, 5, ID 10964. 
doi: 10.1038/srep 10964
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P.J., & Schacter, D.L. (2016). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20, 87-95.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Wilkins, R. W., Jauk, E., Fink, A., 
Silvia, P J., . . . Neubauer, A. C. (2014). Creativity and the 
default network: A functional connectivity analysis of the 
creative brain at rest. Neuropsychologia, 64, 92-98.
Beaty, R. E., Nusbaum, E. C., & Silvia, E J. (2014). Does insight 
problem solving predict real-world creativity? Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 8, 287-292.
Beaty, R. E., & Silvia, P. J. (2012). Why do ideas get more 
creative across time? An executive interpretation of the 
serial order effect in divergent thinking tasks. Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 6, 309-319.
Beaty, R. E., & Silvia, P. J. (2013). Metaphorically speak­
ing: Cognitive abilities and the production of figurative lan­
guage. Memory & Cognition, 41, 255-267.
Beaty, R. E., Silvia, P. J., Nusbaum, E. C., Jauk, E., & Benedek, 
M. (2014). The role of associative and executive processes 
in creative cognition. Memory & Cognition, 42, 1186-1195.
Beaty, R. E., Smeekens, B. A., Silvia, P. J., Hodges, D. A., & 
Kane, M. J. (2013). A first look at the role of domain- 
general cognitive and creative abilities in jazz improvisation. 
Psychomusicology: Music, Mind, and Brain, 23, 262-268.
Benedek, M., Beaty, R., Jauk, E., Koschutnig, K., Fink, A., Silvia, 
P. J., . . . Neubauer, A. C. (2014a). Creating metaphors: The 
neural basis of figurative language production. Neuroimage, 
90, 99-106.
Benedek, M., Bergner, S., Konen, T., Fink, A., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (2011). EEG alpha synchronization is related to 
top-down control in convergent and divergent thinking. 
Neuropsychologia, 49, 3505-3511.
Benedek, M., Borovnjak, B., Neubauer, A. C., & Kruse-Weber, 
S. (2014b). Creativity and personality in classical, jazz and 
folk musicians. Personality and Individual Differences, 63, 
117-121.
Benedek, M., Franz, F., Heene, M., & Neubauer, A. C. (2012). 
Differential effects of cognitive inhibition and intelligence 
on creativity. Personality and Individual Differences, 53,
480-485.
Benedek, M., & Jauk, E. (2014). Creativity: Lost in simplifi­
cation? 
Creativity. 
Theories—Research—Applications, 
1,
213-219.
Benedek, M. Jauk, E., Beaty, R. E., Fink, A., Koschutnig, K. & 
Neubauer, A. C. (2016). Brain mechanisms associated with 
internally directed attention and self-generated thought. 
Scientific Reports, 6, 22959.
Benedek, M., Jauk, E., Fink, A., Koschutnig, K., Reishofer, G., 
Ebner, F., & Neubauer, A. C. (2014c). To create or to recall? 
Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative 
new ideas. Neuroimage, 88, 125-133.
Benedek, M., Jauk, E., Sommer, M., Arendasy, M., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (20l4d). Intelligence, creativity, and cognitive con­
trol: The common and differential involvement of execu­
tive functions in intelligence and creativity. Intelligence, 
46, 73-83.
Benedek, M., Miihlmann, C., Jauk, E., & Neubauer, A. C. 
(2013). Assessment of divergent thinking by means of 
the subjective top-scoring method: Effects of the number 
of top-ideas and time-on-task on reliability and validity. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 7, 341-349.
Benedek, M., & Neubauer, A. C. (2013). Revisiting Mednick’s 
model on creativity-related differences in associative
294
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

hierarchies: Evidence for a common path to uncommon 
thought. Journal of Creative Behavior, 47, 273-289.
Benedek, M., Schickel, R. J., Jauk, E., Fink, A., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (20l4e). Alpha power increases in right parietal cor­
tex reflects focused internal attention. Neuropsychologia, 56, 
393-400.
Cai, D. J., Mednick, S. A., Harrison, E. M., Kanady, J. C., & 
Mednick, S. C. (2009). REM, not incubation, improves 
creativity by priming associative networks. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 106{25), 10130-10134.
Campbell, D. T. (I960). Blind variation and selective reten­
tion in creative thought as in other knowledge processes. 
Psychological Review, 67, 380-400.
Chen, Q. L., Xu, T., Yang, W. J., Li, Y. D., Sun, J. Z., Wang, 
K. C., . . . & Qiu, J. (2015). Individual differences in 
verbal creative thinking are reflected in the precuneus. 
Neuropsychologia, 75, 441-449.
Cho, S. H., Nijenhuis, J. T., van Vianen, A. E. M., Kim, H.-B., 
& Lee, K.-H. (2010). The relationship between diverse com­
ponents of intelligence and creativity. The Journal of Creative 
Behavior, 44, 125-137.
Christoff, K. (2013). Thinking. In K. N. Ochsner & S. M. 
Kosslyn (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of cognitive neuroscience 
(Vol. 2, pp. 318-333). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106, 8719-8724.
Chrysikou, E. G., Weber, M. J., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. 
(2014). A matched filter hypothesis for cognitive control. 
Neuropsychologia, 62, 341-355.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation 
theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review,
82, 407.
Cramond, B., Kim, K. H., & VanTassel-Baska, J. (2010). The 
relationship between creativity and intelligence. In J. C. 
Kaufman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), The Cambridge hand­
book of creativity (pp. 395-412). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Currey, M. (2013). Daily rituals: How artists work. New York: 
Random House.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Nijstad, B. A., Bass, M., Wolsink, I., & 
Roskes, M. (2012). Working memory benefits creative 
insight, musical improvisation, and original ideation through 
maintained task-focused attention. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 38, 656-669.
Diedrich, J., Benedek, M., Jauk, E., & Neubauer, A.C. (2015). 
Are creative ideas novel and useful? Psychology of Aesthetics, 
Creativity and the Arts, 9, 35—40.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Meurs, T. (2006). Where creativity 
resides: The generative power of unconscious thought. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 135-146.
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). A frame­
work for understanding the relationship between externally 
and internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 62, 
321-330.
Dorfman, L., Martindale, C., Gassimova, V., & Vartanian, O. 
(2008). Creativity and speed of information processing: A 
double dissociation involving elementary versus inhibitory 
cognitive tasks. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 
1382-1390.
Edl, S., Benedek, M., Papousek, I., Weiss, E. M., & Fink, 
A. (2014). Creativity and the Stroop interference effect. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 69, 38-42.
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59, 1783-1794.
Ellwood, S., Pallier, G., Snyder, A., & Gallate, J. (2009). The 
incubation effect: Hatching a solution? Creativity Research 
Journal, 21, 6-14.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-process accounts of reasoning, 
judgement and social cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 
59, 255-278.
Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2004). The use of verbal pro­
tocols as data: An analysis of insight in the candle problem. 
Memory & Cognition, 32, 990-1006.
Fleck, J. I., & Weisberg, R. W. (2013). Insight versus analy­
sis: Evidence for diverse methods in problem solving. Journal 
of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 436-463.
Fink, A. & Benedek, M. (2013). The creative brain: Brain cor­
relates underlying the generation of original ideas. In O. 
Vartanian, A. S. Bristol, & J. C. Kaufman (Eds.), Neuroscience 
of creativity (pp. 207-232). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fink, A., & Benedek, M. (2014). EEG alpha power and cre­
ative ideation. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 44, 
111-123.
Fink, A., Grabner, R. H., Benedek, M., Reishofer, G., 
Hauswirth, V., Fally, M., Neuper, C., Ebner, F., & Neubauer, 
A. C. (2009). The creative brain: Investigation of brain activ­
ity during creative problem solving by means of EEG and 
fMRI. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 734-748.
Fink, A., Koschutnig, K., Hutterer, L., Steiner, E., Benedek, 
M., Weber, B., Reishofer, G., Papousek, I., & Weiss, E. 
M. (2014). Gray matter density in relation to different fac­
ets of verbal creativity. Brain Structure and Function, 219, 
1263-1269.
Fink, A., Weber, B., Koschutnig, K., Benedek, M., Reishofer, 
G., Ebner, F., Papousek, I., Weiss, E. M. (2014). Creativity 
and schizotypy from the neuroscience perspective. Cognitive, 
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 14, 378-387.
Fink, A., & Woschnjak, S. (2011). Creativity and personality in 
professional dancers. Personality and Individual Differences, 
51, 754-758.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative 
cognition: Theory, research and applications. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilita­
tion of spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition 
helps the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & 
C. D. Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience of metacognition 
(pp. 293-319). New York: Springer.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., 
& Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: evi­
dence from functional neuroimaging and first-person con­
tent reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, M. D., & Raichle, M. E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations 
in brain activity observed with functional magnetic reso­
nance imaging. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 700-711.
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
295

Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van 
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain 
is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated func­
tional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science, 202, 9673-9678.
Gabora, L., & Kauffman, S. (2016). Toward an evolutionary- 
predictive foundation for creativity. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 23, 632-639. doi: 10.3758/s 13423-015-0925-1
Gabora, L., & Ranjan, A. (2013). How insight emerges in a dis­
tributed, content-addressable memory. In O. Vartanian, A. 
S. Bristol, & J. C. Kaufman (Eds.), Neuroscience of creativity 
(pp. 19-43). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallate, J., Wong, C., Ellwood, S., Roring, R. W., & Snyder, A. 
(2012). Creative people use nonconscious processes to their 
advantage. Creativity Research Journal, 24, 146-151.
Gilhooly K. J., Fioratou, E., Anthony, S. H., & Wynn, V. (2007). 
Divergent thinking: Strategies and executive involvement in 
generating novel uses for familiar objects. British Journal of 
Psychology, 98, 611-625.
Gilhooly, K. J., Georgiou, G., & Devery, U. (2013). Incubation 
and creativity: Do something different. 
Thinking & 
Reasoning, 19, 137-149.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Murphy, P. (2005). Differentiating insight 
from non-insight problems. Thinking & Reasoning, 11, 
279-302.
Golden, C. J. (1975). The measurement of creativity by the 
Stroop color and word test. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
39, 502-506.
Gonen-Yaacovi, G., de Souza, L. C., Levy, R., Urbanski, M., 
Josse, G., & Voile, E. (2013). Rostral and caudal prefron­
tal contribution to creativity: A meta-analysis of functional 
imaging data. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 465.
Greengross, G., & Miller, G. (2011). Humor ability reveals 
intelligence, predicts mating success, and is higher in males. 
Intelligence, 39, 188-192.
Groborz, M., & Necka, E. (2003). Creativity and cognitive 
control: Explorations of generation and evaluation skills. 
Creativity Research Journal, 15, 183-197.
Guilford, J. P. (1956). The Structure of intellect. Psychological 
Bulletin, 53, 267-293.
Guilford, J. P. (1959). Personality. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a 
baseline: Functional imaging and the resting human brain. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 685-694.
Hao, N., Wu, M., Runco, M. A., & Pina, J. (2015). More mind 
wandering, fewer original ideas: Be not distracted during 
creative idea generation. Acta Psychologica, 161, 110-116.
Hasenkamp, W., Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Duncan, E., & 
Barsalou, L. W. (2012). Mind wandering and attention dur­
ing focused meditation: A fine-grained temporal analysis of 
fluctuating cognitive states. Neuroimage, 59, 750-760.
Helie, S., & Sun, R. (2010). Incubation, insight, and creative 
problem solving: A unified theory and a connectionist 
model. Psychological Review, 117, 994-1024.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., Dunst, B., & Neubauer, A. C. (2013). 
The relationship between intelligence and creativity: New 
support for the threshold hypothesis by means of empirical 
breakpoint detection. Intelligence, 41, 212-221.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., Dunst, B., & Neubauer, A. C. (2015). 
Gray matter correlates of creative potential: A latent variable 
voxel-based morphometry study. Neuroimage, 111, 312-320.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., & Neubauer, A. C. (2012). Tackling cre­
ativity at its roots: Evidence for different patterns of EEG 
alpha activity related to convergent and divergent modes of 
task processing. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 84, 
219-225.
Jauk, E., Benedek, M., & Neubauer, A. C. (2014). The road to 
creative achievement: A latent variable model of ability and 
personality predictors. European Journal of Personality, 28, 
95-105.
Jung, R. E., Mead, B. S., Carrasco, J. & Flores, R. A. (2013). The 
structure of creative cognition in the human brain. Frontiers 
in Human Neuroscience, 7, 330.
Kahneman, 
D. 
(2011). 
Thinking, 
fast 
and 
slow. 
New York: Macmillan.
Kane, M. J., Bleckley, M. K., Conway, A. R. A., & Engle, R. 
W. (2001). A controlled-attention view of working-memory 
capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 
169-183.
Karwowski, M., Dul, J., Gralewski, J., Jauk, E., Jankowska,
D. M., Gajda, A., Chruszczewski, M. H., & Benedek, M. 
(2016). Is creativity without intelligence possible? A neces­
sary condition analysis. Intelligence, 57, 105-117.
Kauffman, 
S. 
(2000). 
Investigations. 
Oxford: 
Oxford
University Press.
Kaufman, J. C., Plucker, J. A., & Baer, J. (2008). Essentials of 
creativity assessment. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Kellner, R., & Benedek, M. (2017). The role of creative poten­
tial and intelligence for humor production. Psychology of 
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 11, 52-58. doi: 10.1037/ 
aca0000065.
Kenett, Y. N., Anaki, D., & Faust, M. (2014). Investigating the 
structure of semantic networks in low and high creative per­
sons. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 407.
Kim, K. H. (2005). Can only intelligent people be creative? 
A metaanalysis. The Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, 
16, 57-66.
Kim, K. H. (2008). Meta-analyses of the relationship of creative 
achievement to both IQ  and divergent thinking test scores. 
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 42, 106-130.
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C. D., & Vecchi, M. P. (1983). 
Optimization 
by simulated annealing. 
Science, 220, 
671-680.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D. (1999). 
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight 
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1534-1555.
Koestler, A. (1964). The act of creation. New York: Macmillan.
Kounios, J. & Beeman, M. (2014). The cognitive neuroscience 
of insight. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 7 1-93.
Kuhn, S., Ritter, S. M., Muller, B. C. N., Van Baaren, R. B., 
Brass, M., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2014). The importance of the 
default mode network in creativity: A structural MRI study. 
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 48, 152-163.
Kwiatkowski, J., Vartanian, O., & Martindale, C. (1999). 
Creativity and speed of mental processing. Empirical Studies 
of the Arts, 17, 187-196.
Lee, C. S., & Therriault, D. J. (2013). The cognitive underpin­
nings of creative thought: A latent variable analysis exploring 
the roles of intelligence and working memory in three cre­
ative thinking processes. Intelligence, 41, 306-320.
Liu, S., Erkkinen, M. G., Healey, M. L., Xu, Y., Swett, K.
E. , Chow, H. M., & Braun, A. R. (2015). Brain activ­
ity and connectivity during poetry composition: Toward
296
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

a multidimensional model of the creative process. Human 
Brain Mapping, 36, 3351-3372.
Marois, R., & Ivanoff, J. (2005). Capacity limits of informa­
tion processing in the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 
296-305.
Martindale, C. (1995). Creativity and connectionism. In 
S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, & R. A. Finke (Eds.), The 
creative cognition approach (pp. 249-268). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
Mayseless, N., Eran, A., & Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2015). 
Generating original ideas: The neural underpinnings of origi­
nality. Neuroimage, 116, 232-239.
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode 
to positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology,
4, 626.
Mednick, S. A. (1962). The associative basis of the creative pro­
cess. Psychological Review, 69, 220-232.
Mok, L. W. (2014). The interplay between spontaneous and con­
trolled processing in creative cognition. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 8, 663.
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 67, 11-18.
Mumford, M. D., Reiter-Palmon, R., & Redmond, M. R. 
(1994). Problem construction and cognition: Applying 
problem representations in ill-defined domains. In M. A. 
Runco (Ed.), Problem finding, problem solving, and creativity 
(pp. 3-39). Westport, CT: Ablex.
Nusbaum, E. C., & Silvia, P. J. (2011). Are intelligence and creativ­
ity really so different? Fluid intelligence, executive processes, 
and strategy use in divergent thinking. Intelligence, 39, 36—45.
Nusbaum, E. C., Silvia, P. J., & Beaty, R. E. (2014). Ready, 
set, create: What instructing people to “be creative” reveals 
about the meaning and mechanisms of divergent thinking. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 8, 423-432.
Oberauer, K., Sufi, H.-M., Wilhelm, O., & Wittmann, W. W. 
(2008). Which working memory functions predict intelli­
gence? Intelligence, 36, 641-652.
Pan, X, & Yu, H. (in press). Different effects of cognitive shifting 
and intelligence on creativity. Journal of Creative Behavior. 
doi: 10.1002/jocb.l44
Pinho, A. L., Ullen, F., Castelo-Branco, M., Fransson, P., & de 
Manzano, O. (2016). Addressing a paradox: Dual strategies 
for creative performance in introspective and extrospective 
networks. Cerebral Cortex, 26, 3052-3063.
Plucker, J. A. (1999). Is the proof in the pudding? Reanalyses 
of Torrance’s (1958 to present) longitudinal data. Creativity 
Research Journal, 12, 103.114.
Poincare, H. (1913). The foundations of science. Lancaster: The 
Science Press.
Ritter, S. M., & Dijksterhuis, A. (2014). Creativity—the uncon­
scious foundations of the incubation period. Frontiers, 
8, 215.
Rothenberg, A. (1995). Creative cognitive processes in Kekules 
discovery of the structure of the Benzene molecule. The 
American Journal of Psychology, 108, 419—438.
Runco, M. A. (1999). Divergent thinking. In M. A. Runco &
5. Pritzker (Eds.), Encyclopedia of creativity (Vol. 1, pp. 577- 
582). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Runco, M. A., & Jaeger, G. J. (2012). The standard definition of 
creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 24, 92-96.
Schacter, D. L. (1999). The seven sins of memory: Insights 
from psychology and cognitive neuroscience. American 
Psychologist, 54, 182-203.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past to imagine the future: The prospec­
tive brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 657-661.
Schooler, J. W., & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of 
insight. In S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward, & R. A. Finke (Eds.), 
The creative cognition approach (pp. 97-134). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Seifert, C. M., Meyer, D. E., Davidson, N., Patalano, A. 
L., & Yaniv, I. (1995). Demystification of cognitive 
insight: Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared-mind 
hypothesis. In R. Sternberg, & J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature 
of insight (pp. 65-124). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Silvia, P. J. (2008). Another look at creativity and intel­
ligence: 
Exploring 
higher-order 
models 
and 
prob­
able confounds. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 
1012- 1021.
Silvia, P. J., & Beaty, R. E. (2012). Making creative meta­
phors: The importance of fluid intelligence for creative 
thought. Intelligence, 40, 343-351.
Silvia, P. J., Beaty, R. E., & Nusbaum, E. C. (2013). Verbal flu­
ency and creativity: General and specific contributions of 
broad retrieval ability (Gr) factors to divergent thinking. 
Intelligence, 41, 328-340.
Silvia, P. J., Winterstein, B. B., Willse, J. T., Barona, C. M., 
Cram, J. T., Hess, K. I., . . .  & Richard, C. A. (2008). 
Assessing creativity with divergent thinking tasks: Exploring 
the reliability and validity of new subjective scoring methods. 
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 2, 68-85.
Simonton, D. K. (2011). Creativity and discovery as blind varia­
tion: Campbell's (I960) BVSR model after the half-century 
mark. Review of General Psychology, 15, 158-174.
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming: An introduction to the experi­
mental study of inner experience. New York: Random House.
Sio, U. N., & Ormerod, T. C. (2009). Does incubation enhance 
problem solving? A meta-analytic review. Psychological 
Bulletin, 135, 94-120.
Smallwood, J. (2013). Distinguishing how from why the mind 
wanders: A process-occurrence framework for self-generated 
mental activity. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 519.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Reviews of Psychology, 66, 487-518.
Smeekens, B. A., & Kane, M. (2016). Working memory capac­
ity, mind wandering, and creative cognition: An individual- 
differences investigation into the benefits of controlled versus 
spontaneous thought. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity and 
the Arts, 10, 389-415. doi: 10.1037/aca0000046
Smith, K. A., Huber, D. A., & Vul, E. (2013). Multiply- 
constrained semantic search in the Remote Associates Test. 
Cognition, 128, 64-75.
Smith, S. M., & Blankenship, S. E. (1991). Incubation and the 
persistence of fixation in problem solving. American Journal 
of Psychology, 104, 61-87.
Sowden, P. T., Pringle, A., & Gabora, L. (2015). The shifting 
sands of creative thinking: Connections to dual-process the­
ory. Thinking & Reasoning, 21, 40-60.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009). The com­
mon neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection,
M A T H I A S  B E N E D E K  A N D  E M A N U E L  J A UK
297

navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: a quanti­
tative meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21 (3), 
489-510.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual 
differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Hashizume, H., Sassa, Y., Nagase, T., 
Nouchi, R., & Kawashima, R. (2011). Failing to deac­
tivate: The association between brain activity during a 
working memory task and creativity. Neuroimage, 55, 
681-687.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Sassa, Y., Hashizume, H., Sekiguchi, A., 
Fukushima, A., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Regional gray 
matter volume of dopaminergic system associate with creativ­
ity: Evidence from voxel-based morphometry. Neuro Image, 
51, 578-585.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. W. (2007). On the division of short­
term and working memory: An examination of simple and 
complex span and their relation to higher order abilities. 
Psychological Bulletin, 133, 1038-1066.
Vartanian, O. (2009). Variable attention facilitates creative prob­
lem solving. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 
3, 57-59.
Vartanian, O., Kwiatkowski, J., & Martindale, C. (2007). 
Creative potential, attention, and speed of information 
processing. Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 
1470-1480.
Wagner, U., Gais, S., Haider, H., Verleger, R., & Born, J. (2004). 
Sleep inspires insight. Nature, 427, 352-355.
Wallas, G. (1926). The art of thought. London: Watts.
Weisberg, R. W. (1993). Creativity: Beyond the myth of genius. 
New York: W. H. Freeman.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of insight in 
problem solving: A taxonomy of problems. In R. J. Sternberg 
&J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 157-196). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiggins, G. A., & Bhattacharya, J. (2014). Mind the gap: 
An attempt to bridge computational and neuroscien­
tific approaches to study creativity. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 8, 540.
Wiley, J., & Jarosz, A. F. (2012). Working memory capacity, 
attentional focus, and problem solving. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 21, 258-262.
Yanif, I, & Meyer, D. E. (1987). Activation and metacognition 
of inaccessible stored information: Potential bases for incu­
bation effects in problem solving. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 187-205
Zabelina, D. L., & Robinson, M. D. (2010). Creativity as flex­
ible cognitive control. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and 
the Arts, 4, 136-143.
Zabelina, D. L., Robinson, M. D., Council, J. R., & Bresin, 
K. (2012). Patterning and nonpatterning in creative cogni­
tion: Insights from performance in a random number gen­
eration task. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 
6, 137-145.
Zedelius, C. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). Mind wandering 
“Ahas” versus mindful reasoning: alternative routes to cre­
ative solutions. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 834.
Zeigarnik, B. (1927). Das Behai ten erledigter und unerledigter 
Handlungen. Psychologische Forschung, 9, 1-85.
298
S P O N T A N E O U S  A N D  C O N T R O L L E D  P R O C E S S E S  I N  C R E A T I V E  C O G N I T I O N

C H A P T E R
23
Wandering and Direction 
in Creative Production
Charles Dobson
Abstract
The broad field of creative production offers many anecdotal books devoted to various methods for 
generating ideas. Most of these pay scant attention to such difficulties as figuring out an initial direction; 
sorting out which ideas are worth pursuing, and preventing a critical frame of mind nurtured by years 
of schooling from stymying the flow of ideas. With the literature missing much of what would be useful 
in everyday practice, and lacking the research that would answer basic questions, some productive 
professionals have developed unusual habits through years of trial and error. Many of these seem to 
involve shifting back and forth between a focus on wandering or going somewhere new, and a focus on 
direction or arriving at a specific place.
Key W ords: creativity, innovation, invention, failure, evaluation, design, criticism, fuzzy, creative process
I will summarize here some tentative conclusions 
from three decades of observing what helps and hin­
ders the creative practice of experienced profession­
als and inexperienced students. At the same time, 
I will describe what seems to be going on using the 
spatial metaphor of wandering, because it is useful 
in trying to understand the peculiarities of creative 
production.
The focus will be largely on creative processes in 
design. Many of these processes are also important 
in the arts, including fine art, music, and literature. 
But the arts present additional difficulties to any­
one trying to understand creative production, stem­
ming from a lack of performance constraints, and 
disagreement over the criteria for evaluating new 
work. By design, I mean the synthesis of new and 
useful form in a wide range of different fields. Thus 
designing can be about creating a new and more 
efficient engine, a new and less volatile financial sys­
tem, a new and easier way to understand software, 
or a new and more encompassing scientific theory. 
Two principal criteria for evaluating design work are 
its newness, and its ability to perform its intended
job. Newness is an essential part of modern histori­
cal cultures. Without it, stasis would prevail, and 
every element of culture would be today and in the 
future what it was in the past.
Design problems are characterized by being ill 
defined. They are not problems that can be solved 
through a set of rules, practices, or formulas. If the 
task is to weigh a pumpkin, or tune a guitar, the 
final destination is clear, and the way to get there, 
well established. But if the task is to create a new 
and more efficient engine, the final result is not clear 
at all. You might have some idea of how it might 
perform, but what would this new engine look like, 
and how would it operate? Design problems by 
their very nature require wandering, because you’re 
not sure where you’re going, or how to get a satisfac­
tory result, or what a satisfactory result would be.
In teaching creative problem-solving, I try to 
encourage students to emulate the creative behav­
iors of first-rate professionals. It is important to note 
the difference between emulating their behavior and 
emulating their products. It is easy to emulate their 
products, but far more difficult to figure out how
2 99

they go about doing what they do. When inter­
viewed, creatives typically quote from textbooks on 
creative thinking, offering descriptions that do not 
match what they actually do. The only reliable way 
to begin understanding creative behavior is through 
direct observation. This entails video recording the 
actions of creative people as they work, while they 
verbalize the stream of thoughts going through 
their minds. Unfortunately, very little of this kind 
of observation has been undertaken in design or 
the arts.
Alternating, Intermittent Movement
The most notable characteristic of creative behav­
ior seems to be alternating, intermittent movement. 
It is unpredictable movement, that goes backward 
and forward, and stops and starts. It shifts from one 
activity to another, from enthusiasm to reluctance, 
and from one focus to another.
Generate and Evaluate
The most important form of alternating move­
ment is between the state of mind associated with 
generating ideas and that associated with evaluating 
ideas. To generate ideas, designers will try to switch 
off their voice of judgment. To evaluate ideas, they 
will try to switch it on. One of the most effective 
activities in creative production is the rapid move­
ment between generating and evaluating, a process 
I call flip-flop thinking. Being able to move rapidly 
back and forth between two completely different 
and incompatible states of mind is an unusual abil­
ity that, when observed, looks unusual. One minute 
a person will be physically up, animated, laughing, 
her eyes will be wider, and out will come a stream of 
ideas. The next minute she will be physically down, 
sober, quiet, serious, and reflective, questioning the 
value of what she just produced. And then it begins 
again. When working well, it is a self-triggering, 
iterative process that keeps going. Watching a per­
son do this well is rather like watching someone 
taken over by a form of mania. For this reason, some 
advertising agencies keep their best creatives in back 
rooms where clients will not be disturbed by seeing 
them in action.
Flip-flop thinking seems to be a higher- 
frequency version of the divergent and conver­
gent phases that describe an idealized creative 
process (Jones, 1992). The divergent phase is 
where a number of ideas are produced. The con­
vergent phase is where these ideas are evaluated 
and the weakest are discarded. If the divergent 
phase looks like this <, and the evaluative phase
looks like this >, an idealized picture of the cre­
ative process is an iterative sequence that looks like 
this: <><><><><> . . . .  O f course, real creative 
processes are not linear, and are far messier.
Verbalized flip-flop thinking in full flight is 
something to behold. The most productive cre­
atives can generate such a rapid stream of options 
and evaluations, that their speech struggles to keep 
pace with their thoughts. By comparison, a begin­
ning design student, after generating a few predict­
able options, moves slowly, with many pauses and 
periods of silence. Any evaluation at this stage leads 
to further slowing or stalling. Someone who is good 
at flip-flop thinking does not regard evaluation as a 
slow or stop sign, but a sign that points in another 
direction and still more possibilities.
I should add that flip-flop thinking is not com­
mon, even among experienced creatives. I suspect 
that those who can do it well have had a lot of prac­
tice, prompted by recognition of its usefulness. 
Far more common are those who can generate a 
stream of ideas, but are less interested in which 
ones are any good. They like the thrill of gener­
ating a lot of interesting possibilities, and often 
want to keep on iterating without homing in on a 
final result. To be productive, these people usually 
require a second person to provide the steering 
that comes from good evaluation. Sometimes this 
person is a creative director, sometimes a husband 
or wife, sometimes a work partner. These oppo­
sites, when working as complements, produce an 
externalized version of flip-flop thinking that can 
move a project quickly along because they con­
sist of a creative engine coupled with a means of 
steering.
Methods of Controlling Evaluation
A voice of judgment, switched partly on, is the 
default for most people. Because of this, one must 
take steps to switch it off in order to generate ideas. 
Failure to do so, slows, stops, or makes timid idea 
generation.1 A number of well-established meth­
ods are available to suppress the voice of judgment. 
The first is to begin with warm-up exercises, such 
as “barnyard,” described in James Adam’s book, 
Conceptual Blockbusting (2001). Barnyard is such 
a silly exercise that everyone ends up laughing—  
and one’s critical voice heads for the “back forty.” 
Another approach is to ban criticism, which is 
easier to enforce in a group setting. Brainstorming, 
an ideas-generating technique made popular by 
Alex Osborne (1979), requires that group members 
refrain from any kind of criticism and instead try
300
W A N D E R I N G  A N D  D I R E C T I O N  I N  C R E A T I V E  P R O D U C T I O N

to build one another’s ideas, no matter how screwy 
they might seem. Another way to control evalua­
tion is to work fast, without stopping. Writers 
can overcome a creative block by handwriting 
non-stop, keeping a pen in hand constantly mov­
ing. For songwriters, the advice in The Frustrated 
Songwriters H andbook (Coryat, 2006) is to write 20 
songs in one day. For design students, a version of 
“walk-and-talk” seems helpful. Students pair up and 
choose a quiet route and a destination about a half 
hour away. On the way out, one person, focused on 
one project, generates a steady stream of “what-ifs” 
while speaking into an audio recorder. If all is going 
well, the other person just listens. If the speaker goes 
silent, the other person tries to restart the stream by 
asking provocative “why-not” questions, or “what- 
about” perspective-changing questions, or “tell-me- 
more” questions that invite variations on previous 
“what-ifs.” Once they reach their destination, they 
switch places. On the way back, the listener, now 
the speaker, generates a stream of “what-ifs” for the 
project they are working on.
Several long-term practices can also help control 
evaluation. Some of the most inventive design stu­
dents I have observed seem to spend time during 
class breaks producing jokey streams of “what-if” 
ideas in their area of study. They seem to do this as 
a way of entertaining themselves and their friends. 
Inventive joke-making brings to mind Arthur 
Koestier’s book, The A ct o f Creation (1990), which 
focuses on the relationship between humor and 
invention. It also brings to mind the way children 
once entertained themselves by making up fan­
tasy worlds— before the arrival of the Dark Age of 
Screens.
Apart from joking, something else seems to 
be going on with these students. Most books on 
creative thinking suggest various ways to gener­
ate an abundance of ideas because, as the saying 
goes, the best way to produce a good idea is to 
produce a lot of ideas and throw away those that 
are no good. But the ability to generate a lot of 
ideas requires a lot of practice. This requires more 
time than comes from just the occasions when one 
needs to come up with an idea. For this reason, 
the most creative people are those who incorpo­
rate invention into everyday life. In doing so, they 
get far more practice than anyone else, and get 
better at it than anyone else. The best students 
I encountered in design were simply practicing 
in their spare time. So how do you incorporate 
creative practice into everyday life? It isn’t diffi­
cult. One method is to view food preparation as
an occasion for invention. It is an opportunity to 
make cheap, fast prototypes and quick tests. The 
added benefit is more interesting food that is more 
interesting to make, if you can overlook the fre­
quent but inexpensive failures.
Another way to modify the tendency to evalu­
ate is to modify one’s identity. This approach comes 
from sociologist Charles Cooley’s concept of the 
“looking-glass self.” According to Cooley (1902), 
we define ourselves according to how we see our­
selves reflected back to us in the way others treat us. 
In several design studio classes, I identified students 
who seemed to regard themselves as conservative or 
uncreative. As part of a studio project, I asked them 
to change their appearance, including their cloth­
ing, so that they looked unusual. Because many 
people associate an odd appearance with inventive­
ness, I thought other students might begin to see 
these students as inventive, which would help these 
students see themselves as inventive. This seemed 
to be what happened. Other students started to 
view them as “edgy,” and the work of these students 
actually became more inventive. Altering the “pre­
sentation of self” seems to hold some promise for 
controlling evaluation, although this small trial had 
no controls, no follow-up, and no criteria for what 
constituted improvement.
Methods of Improving Evaluation
While suppressing evaluation is a necessary part 
of improving idea generation, unrestrained evalua­
tion is necessary for steering. Here again, students 
seem to have difficulty. Where professionals can be 
ruthlessly critical of their own work, less confident 
students often mount a defense when they should 
be critical. Familiarity with the skills and knowledge 
that constitute a chosen field serves as a founda­
tion for evaluation. In the arts, being familiar with 
great works from the past and present provides a 
basis of comparison, and a way to avoid retracing 
well-trodden paths.
A simple way to improve evaluation is to ask a 
person with good judgment to say what is wrong. 
They must know they are being asked for an hon­
est evaluation, and not praise. The question, “What 
do you think?” is too ambiguous. The best way to 
obtain accurate evaluation is to provide several alter­
natives, and then ask which one is best. Choosing 
from several options avoids the uneasiness that 
comes with having to critique a single option.
The most common way to evaluate an idea is to 
let it sit. I am constantly surprised at how a seem­
ingly terrific idea will look quite hopeless the next
C H A R L E S  D O B S O N
301

morning. The difficulty of evaluating an idea right 
after it has been generated is the difficulty that 
makes flip-flop thinking so difficult. Letting a proj­
ect sit, then returning to it, then letting it sit again, 
is what makes creative production intermittent. 
Woven into this is the stop-and-go sequence associ­
ated with incubation and illumination.
Incubation and Illumination
A common occurrence in creative production is 
the way a good idea will suddenly pop into con­
sciousness, often at an inopportune time. Usually 
described as incubation and illumination, there 
is general agreement on what is needed to make 
it work. First, one must spend time trying hard 
to solve the problem at hand. Then, one should 
stop working and do something that requires no 
focused mental activity. Finally, one should have 
a ready means to record ideas when they pop up 
(often early in the morning while running water), 
otherwise they will be lost. With incubation and 
illumination, there is an alternation between focus 
and effort, and no-focus and no-effort. It may be 
that making an effort and getting nowhere creates 
frustration that drives the subconscious to search 
for a solution. The setup for incubation and illu­
mination is all-important. A quick or paltry initial 
effort will not provide enough frustration to drive 
incubation, making illumination unlikely. Tight 
schedules will not provide enough time for incu­
bation, making illumination unlikely. The student 
habit of leaving projects to the last minute does not 
provide enough time for incubation. Constantly 
busy people usually fail to provide enough time 
when not concerned with anything in particular, 
making illumination unlikely. Incubation can be 
sidetracked by a focus on the next project, concerns 
about children, or an emotional slight. All of these 
will easily displace the background activity that 
leads to illumination.
Zoom In and Zoom Out
Zoom ing is a term Bruce Archer2 borrowed from 
photography to describe the way designers move 
back and forth between a close-up, or part view, and 
a whole view of a potential solution. Thus someone 
designing online election software might alternate 
between looking at bits of code, and looking at what 
a user has to do to vote. Related to zooming is the 
alternating movement between specific and general. 
A more specific view would be looking at various 
ways a group might run an internal election; a more 
general view would be looking at various ways a
group might work together. Also related to zoom­
ing is the process of shifting focus around different 
parts of a whole solution. Thus an architect might 
move between the exterior and the interior of a 
building, between circulation patterns and interior 
spaces, and between a plan view and a structural 
system. A songwriter might move between melody, 
harmony, rhythm, and lyrics. People with less expe­
rience seem to move around less.
Analysis and Synthesis
Yet another activity common in design is the 
alternating movement between analysis and synthe­
sis. Typically, analysis separates wholes into parts, 
while creative synthesis brings together parts to 
make new wholes. As with many of these alternat­
ing pairs, a cultural bias seems to favor one member 
of the pair at the expense of the other. Our edu­
cational system, for instance, spends far more time 
teaching analysis than it does creative synthesis.
Question and Answer
One of the most important abilities in design is 
the ability to ask good questions. Some designers 
say that asking questions may be the only service 
they provide a client. If the questions are good 
and probing, they may provide enough direction 
for a client to rethink a product or fix an intrac­
table problem. A good question is one that has no 
easy answer. Often it is so basic that it uncovers 
conventions or assumptions no one had thought 
about. Whatever its nature, a good question is one 
that generates wondering, or wandering in search 
of an answer. And the process should not stop 
with one answer; a good answer should generate 
more questions, and then more answers, round 
and round.
The majority of university students I have 
encountered seem to have little facility for asking 
questions. With curiosity so diminished from child­
hood, by the time they reach university they seem to 
have grown into a diminished species. One would 
think that encouraging the ability to ask questions 
would be a principal concern of primary and sec­
ondary school educators, given the constant stream 
of articles in the popular press about the importance 
of research and innovation. I cannot imagine a more 
important educational initiative than figuring out a 
way to reward students for asking questions.
Prototype and Test
Experienced creatives constantly ask them­
selves one question: “Am I on the right track?”
302
W A N D E R I N G  A N D  D I R E C T I O N  I N  C R E A T I V E  P R O D U C T I O N

Often the only way of arriving at a reliable answer 
is to make a prototype, and try it out. For this rea­
son, innovative companies have made an alternat­
ing pattern of rapid prototyping and quick tests 
the main activity of new product development. 
The successes and failures that arise steer projects 
toward products that work as intended. Without 
sufficient prototyping and testing along the way, a 
finished result will be tested on users, and may fail. 
I remember giving a project to industrial design 
students that asked them to design a push scooter 
before these became commercially available. Every 
one of their final designs crashed within a mat­
ter of a few feet. A cheap quick prototype along 
the way would have identified the main problem, 
and focused their design efforts on the issue of 
steering.
In his book H ow  Designers 
Think, Bryan 
Lawson describes the importance of failures. 
He shows that designers are unique in that they 
approach design problems by trying to quickly 
solve them. The failures that inevitably occur tell 
them what they don’t know, and that tells them 
where to focus their research (Lawson, 2005). 
Those who have little design training will typi­
cally undertake far too much unfocused research 
at the beginning of a project. Excessive or irrel­
evant research often leads well-intentioned young 
designers to become bogged down, unable to find 
a way out of the dense fog created by too much 
irrelevant information.
Building and testing prototypes resembles ask­
ing and answering questions, which resembles 
generating and evaluating ideas. One of the char­
acteristics of creative production is that processes 
overlap and are interwoven, so that doing one well 
will often help another. So while testing seems to 
fall into the category of evaluation, arriving at a 
good, cheap, quick test requires invention, because 
the usual ways of testing are so often slow and 
expensive.
Fail and Fail
Genuine creative production inevitably results 
in multiple failures. Even with the simplest proj­
ects, I go through at least three or four failures 
before arriving at something that works, versions 
I call Mark 1, Mark 2, Mark 3, Mark 4. I think of 
them as similar to the Mercury rockets the United 
States built during the space race that toppled over 
and blew up on the launch pad. It’s important 
to recognize that failure is part of creation, and 
that trying to avoid failure is a serious obstacle to
creating anything new. Experienced professionals 
tend to see failure as helpful. Encouraged by what 
they have learned, they will speed up. Those with 
less experience tend to see failure as a setback. 
Discouraged by their inability to succeed imme­
diately, they will defer to an existing solution, 
or slow down, or stop at one option. Innovative 
companies that focus on rapid prototyping call for 
failing fast, failing often, and failing forward. Not 
every failure is helpful. Failures must be “above 
the waterline”— they should not sink the project 
or the company— and should help to propel a 
project toward a useful result. Generating ideas for 
prototypes must be combined with candid evalu­
ation, partly by considering the consequences of 
failure.
In some places there is little incentive to try 
anything new because failures are not tolerated. 
Governments are one of those places. Staff are reluc­
tant to innovate because they know that the elected 
politicians, who are their bosses, will have to take 
the heat for any perceived failure. Fear of repercus­
sions, and a pervasive culture of control that goes 
with the very nature of government, makes it a poor 
environment for creative problem-solving. This 
deficiency deserves some attention from activists, 
because the task of solving our most pressing prob­
lems rests in the hands of government.
Being Rather Lost
When working on a problem, many people 
do not like being lost. They don’t like wandering 
about, trying to figure out where to go next. For 
this reason, they often decide quickly what the final 
result should look like, then head straight for it. 
Experienced designers recognize that any potential 
solution should be held lightly. They are wary of 
making a beeline in the direction of an early idea, 
no matter how attractive it may be. New informa­
tion arriving along the way should be allowed to 
alter a destination. For less experienced designers, 
uneasiness about wandering, looming deadlines, 
and a lack of confidence in their ability to gener­
ate ideas all seem to contribute to premature clarity 
and to hanging on to the first idea as if it were a life 
preserver. Sometimes hanging on will yield a great 
result; more often, it will get in the way of consid­
ering better possibilities. If it leads to a refusal to 
respond to real-world obstacles, it can send an entire 
project down the drain. Premature clarity— some­
times called prem ature congratulation— is very com­
mon. The antidote for premature clarity is getting 
used to getting lost.
C H A R L E S  D O B S O N
303

Making It New 
Vm Not Going There
Outstanding creative people often have a perva­
sive contrary attitude to the world as given. They 
don’t want to create more of what exists, and they 
don’t want to emulate the great work of others. The 
best don’t even want to produce more of their own 
successful work. Their contrary stance treats Terra 
Incognita as the place to be. In the early part of their 
careers, most creatives focus on emulation, as they 
try to understand and succeed in the mainstream. 
The Beatles, for instance, based many of their early 
songs on the music of Buddy Holly. Eventually, 
most get tired of emulation and try to define their 
own voice. In doing so, they turn away from safe 
and successful work. Now the only option is to go 
where they have not gone before. The result may be 
a disaster, but it will be new. Consider the career 
of leading abstract painter Philip Guston, who sud­
denly dropped abstraction in 1970 and began paint­
ing clumsy, cartoon-like figures. The shift shocked 
the art world, and was widely ridiculed, notably 
by the N ew  York Times art critic Hilton Kramer in 
an article entitled A  M andarin Pretending to Be a 
Stum blebum (1970).
Constraints
Constraints can both help and impede creative 
production. It is tempting to believe that every­
thing will be easier without constraints. More 
often, the opposite is true. The first constraint is 
the knowledge, skills, and goals that belong to your 
chosen domain of practice. The time that it takes 
to become familiar with one domain makes it dif­
ficult to become sufficiently familiar with another 
to make a significant contribution. Another con­
straint is available time. Every writer understands 
the importance of a project deadline; with an 
unlimited amount of time, nothing gets done. 
Architects often say that context and performance 
constraints define the problem. Celebrated archi­
tect Frank Gehry said that the strict acoustical 
requirements of Disney Hall helped him design the 
building. Just the opposite happened when he was 
asked to design a house with zero constraints. “I 
had a horrible time of it,” he said. “I had to look 
into the mirror a lot. Who am I? Why am I doing 
this? What is this all about?” (Sturt, 2013). Lack of 
resources is another helpful constraint. With too 
many resources, there are too many options to con­
sider. As Twyla Tharp says in her book The Creative 
H a b it, “Whom the gods wish to destroy, they give 
unlimited resources” (2003).
Most constraints should be seen as guides that 
can help the emergence of form. When absent, con­
straints need to be found. If they can’t be found in 
the project or the situation at hand, they may be 
found by zooming out to a larger view and ques­
tioning goal, category, or field constraints. Italio 
Calvino took this route when he decided to replace 
the linear structure of the novel with the relational 
structure of a three-dimensional array. This led him 
to the circular recursive work for which he is known, 
such as his book I f  on a W inters N ight a Traveler. In 
Creativity from  Constraints, Patricia Stokes quotes 
Calvino: “For me the main thing in the narrative 
is not the explanation of an extraordinary event, 
but the order of things that this extraordinary event 
produces in itself and around itself; the pattern, the 
symmetry, the network of images deposited around 
it is in the formation of a crystal” (Stokes, 2006).
It is good practice to examine field-defined con­
straints because they impose overarching goals. 
Consider the state of visual fine art today. A large 
number of leading artists focus on creating what 
is called conceptual art— art that is good to think. 
Marcel Duchamp established the trend by pan­
ning “retinal art”— art that is made for the eye. The 
trouble with the goal of “good to think” is that it 
imposes almost no constraints. Just about anything 
can be converted to conceptual art by attaching it 
to a philosophical or critical theory text. Thus many 
contemporary artists have been left to wander in a 
desert of deep thought, trying to illustrate texts 
they don’t quite understand. In H old It Against M e, 
Jennifer Doyle suggests a different goal for visual 
art (2013). Like Robert Hughes in The Shock o f the 
N ew  (1991), she suggests that art should provoke 
an emotional response. This is a real constraint, 
one that would make visual art more engaging and 
relevant to a wider public. Nevertheless, it faces an 
uphill battle, partly because of the supposed depth 
of conceptual art, partly because visual art training 
has become increasingly more academic.
Making It Wrong
A more explicit form of contrariness is the 
deliberate attempt to “make it wrong,” the mantra 
of German designer John Bielenberg. This sounds 
like another call for making mistakes, but it’s not 
the same thing. Wrong is not normal, not familiar, 
not right, not comfortable. It relies on the clar­
ity of the world as it is, to suggest options for a 
world that isn’t. French ad man Jean-Marie Dru 
spelled out a similar process in his book D isruption
(1996). For Dru, the first and most difficult step
304
W A N D E R I N G  A N D  D I R E C T I O N  I N  C R E A T I V E  P R O D U C T I O N

for any designer is to identify conventions. The 
next step is to ask disruptive questions about why 
that convention exists, and then to ask “what- 
if” and “why-not” questions about alternatives. 
This approach undoes the familiar world, turning 
something fixed into something fluid. Consider an 
ordinary chair. Why are chairs bilaterally symmet­
rical? Why is the seat always at the same height? 
Why do chairs with backs only have one, why 
not two? Why are chairs just for sitting, why can’t 
they accommodate sleeping? Sitting for long peri­
ods contributes to weight gain. Why not a chair 
that requires physical activity, a chair-exercise- 
machine? Why are chairs always self-supporting 
stand-alones; why can’t they have two legs or one 
and be supported by something nearby? An ordi­
nary chair is hemmed in by dozens of conventions, 
all of which can be questioned.
Making the Words Different
More than anything else, words define the world 
that is. So making the world new requires overcom­
ing the stereotyping that comes with words. Ask 
anyone to design a chair, and immediately a picture 
of a generic chair pops into mind. Because of this, 
design instructors will sometimes create projects for 
students that avoid the usual labels. They will try to 
make the objective less specific; instead of saying, 
“Design a chair,” they might say, “Design a device 
for supporting the human body.” Words not only 
frame problems, they suggest where to go for solu­
tions. If current solutions are not working, a good 
strategy is to change the frame by changing the 
words. Sometimes all that is needed is a thesaurus 
to alter one or two key words. At other times it may 
be necessary to identify an established frame that 
is not working, and gather support for a convinc­
ing replacement. Let’s suppose the problem is drug 
abuse. If we describe the problem as illegal drugs 
flowing into the country, solutions will be sought in 
intercepting traffickers. If we describe it as a medi­
cal problem, solutions will be sought in benign sub­
stitutes, antidotes, and safe injection sites. Different 
words create different frames that suggest different 
solutions.
Making the words different is sometimes nec­
essary just to recognize that there is a problem. 
Disadvantaged people easily become inured to their 
situation. In Pedagogy o f the Oppressed (2000), Paolo 
Freire encouraged disadvantaged groups to improve 
their conditions by engaging in naming and 
renaming exercises. Michael Newman, in his book 
Teaching Defiance, gives an example. “So a Freirian
educator, using a drawing of an alleyway and a shan­
tytown, might encourage a group of people to focus 
on the water lying in the streets, and to rename it 
dirty water, then sewage, then a health hazard for 
their children, then an example of bureaucratic 
indifference, then yet another example of the dif­
ferences between the rich and the poor sectors the 
city, then an example of injustice.” As the group 
begins the process of renaming, what it took for 
granted becomes a problem, but “ [office the cycle 
has begun, there may be no turning back. The world 
will of necessity be different” (Newman, 2006).
Making Metaphors, Similes, and Analogies
If we were to create a metaphor to describe the 
role of words, we might say that they pin everything 
in place, fixing the world that is. Different words 
loosen the pins, allowing shifts in point of view. 
Metaphors, similes, and analogies go a step further. 
They bridge categories that language normally keeps 
separate. This is very helpful when the task is to 
make the world new, so experienced designers will 
often start with a metaphor or an analogy. Many 
designers will ask, how has nature solved the prob­
lem? They will then start thinking of ways to adapt 
nature’s approach to the problem at hand. This 
process of “biomimicry” has yielded thousands of 
technical innovations (Benyus, 2002). For example, 
bumps called tubercles on the flippers of humpback 
whales have been adapted to wind turbines, where 
they improve efficiency by increasing lift and reduc­
ing drag (Fish, Weber, Murray, & Howie, 2011).
The use of metaphor seems to be far more evi­
dent in the practice of experienced profession­
als. Most students have difficulty stepping away 
from the literal. This leaves them trapped by 
words, unable to benefit from the way metaphor 
can open up possibilities. Let’s say you wanted to 
improve the performance of a hospital. A literal 
approach would require a study of various hospi­
tal functions and a search for external models that 
represent best practices. Without excluding this 
approach, you could include a metaphor framed 
as a question: “How can we make this place more 
like a mother?” This would shift the focus from 
physical repair to emotional care, and shift see­
ing the hospital as an institution toward seeing 
it as a temporary home. In any case, the meta­
phor would take the designer somewhere that a 
straightforward approach would not. Thinking 
with metaphors, seeing resemblances across dif­
ferent planes of reality, makes reality more fluid 
and makes possible the cross-fertilization that
C H A R L E S  D O B S O N
305

can occur when we begin to see the relationships 
between things we normally keep apart.
The potential o f Wandering Outside 
Your Field
Those who study creative production like to 
underline the fact that the most valuable work is 
done, not within fields, but between fields. Since 
most people come attached to a field, a profession, 
or a trade, the challenge is to avoid being hemmed 
in by the vocabulary that defines their territory. To 
do this requires identifying what is inside your field, 
and surveying what lies just outside. Let me pro­
vide a simple example. Inexpensive, cool, efficient, 
and long-lasting light emitting diodes (LEDs) were 
available for decades before they were incorporated 
into lighting systems. Lighting designers ignored 
them because they belonged to the field of electron­
ics, which lay outside the field of lighting. Because 
abundant opportunities lie in the spaces between, 
smart designers explore work from other places, 
other times, other categories, and other fields. In 
going outside their chosen field, they choose to 
wander; their surroundings will be unfamiliar and 
the language strange. They wont know where they 
are going or what they might find.
Less Directed Wandering
Sometimes the best strategy is for a creative to 
give up conscious control and become an agent of 
the subconscious.
Autopilot
Everyone will be familiar with stories of uncon­
trolled creative production that have produced 
rather good results. There is the story of the play­
wright who says, “I create the characters, then they 
take over and decide what happens in the play.” 
And the sculptor who says, “I don’t create work in 
stone— I only reveal what is already there.” These 
creatives have learned to trust their instincts, 
enabling them to work on what I call “autopilot.” 
They aren’t consciously thinking about where they 
are going, or whether the result is any good; they 
are simply hosting the emergence of form. On auto­
pilot, they are not aware of their surroundings or 
the time; when they switch off autopilot, they’re 
often surprised at the late hour. Autopilot requires 
enough practice and technical know-how that pro­
duction can proceed unselfconsciously. If a person 
working with ceramics does not understand the 
nature of clay and runs into basic problems of crack­
ing or collapsing, they must address these problems
consciously. Autopilot seems to have some relation­
ship with what Martin Heidegger calls “dasein,” a 
state where there is no separation between subject 
and object, no subject consciously controlling an 
object (Heidegger, 1962). Everyone who drives a 
car has experienced this integration of subject and 
object when making a journey without consciously 
thinking of what they were doing. Autopilot also 
seems to be related to the Buddhist concept of 
“no-mind” or “mushin,” (Soho, 1986) and Mihaly 
Csiksgentmihalyi’s concept of “flow” (2013).
Play
Play is an activity that is carried out for its own 
enjoyment. Professional creatives all recognize the 
importance of play, but most admit they don’t allow 
it enough time. To encourage play, innovative com­
panies such as Google allow employees paid time 
just to pursue whatever might catch their fancy. 
Ideally we would all find time to step out of our 
roles as adults, advisors, teachers, and parents, and 
revert to being children again— motivated, not by 
what needs to get done, but by sheer curiosity.
Jamming
We’ve already talked about altering perspec­
tive by altering the words used to frame a problem. 
Jamming is another technique that focuses on words, 
but here the creative has less control. With jamming, 
the objective is to create interesting clashes that will 
steer a project in a new direction. This makes jam­
ming especially good for getting out of ruts, and for 
restarting projects that have run into a dead end. To 
begin word jamming, a person makes selections at 
random from lists of concrete words, and then cre­
ates different pairs of these words to see what results. 
To avoid being stuck with the literal— and often very 
odd— result of two collided words, those who use 
word jamming will explore the potential of interest­
ing pairs by taking them through a stream of associa­
tions until they arrive at something that relates to the 
problem at hand. Students who try word jamming 
for the first time are often surprised at how arbitrary 
pairs of words can be so useful in generating ideas for 
a specific project. Edward de Bono, who has writ­
ten many books on creative thinking, has turned to 
writing short manuals that consist of nothing more 
than word lists and different ways of choosing and 
combining words from the lists (De Bono, 2008).
Working H alf Awake
A commonly reported feature of incubation and 
illumination is that it often occurs just before going to
306
W A N D E R I N G  A N D  D I R E C T I O N  I N  C R E A T I V E  P R O D U C T I O N

sleep or just before waking up. The recognized setup 
for incubation and illumination— a strong effort to 
solve a problem— helps to bring forth ideas while half 
awake. A liminal state seems to provide opportunities 
for ideas to arise, possibly because of the absence of 
conscious controls. Some creatives also recommend a 
drink to achieve the same result, sometimes just before 
going to bed, being careful to drink enough, but not 
too much, depending on ones tolerance for alcohol.
Lucid dreaming is another half-awake process that 
seems useful in solving problems (see Windt and Voss, 
Chapter 29 in this volume). Here one is said to be con­
scious of being in a dream while in the dream. Lucid 
dreaming can be learned with dedicated practice, and 
those who can bring it about also say they can keep 
it going while in the dream. They recommend that 
beginners try to extend the period of waking up in 
the morning. Interesting ideas that occur while wak­
ing up have a good chance of being recorded, if they 
can actually wake the sleeper. Here is Paul McCartney 
describing the origins of the song “Yesterday”: “I had 
a piano beside my bedside, and I must have dreamed 
it, because I tumbled out of bed and put my hands 
on the piano keys and I had a tune in my head. It was 
just all there, a complete thing. I couldn’t believe it” 
(Russell, 1995). The difficulty when falling asleep is 
the absence of an opportunity to record what comes 
up. To address this issue, some people tell themselves to 
remember their dreams before going to sleep. Thomas 
Edison had another method: He allowed himself to 
fall asleep in his favorite armchair with a tin plate on 
the floor on either side. In each hand, he would hold 
a steel bearing suspended above each plate. Just as he 
fell asleep, he would drop one or both bearings onto 
the plates. This would wake him up, whereupon he 
would write down whatever he was thinking about at 
the time (Michalko, 2001). Research labs, innovation 
centers, music schools, and other places that nurture 
creatives should consider adding places where people 
can sleep so that during the day they can take advan­
tage of being half awake. An added benefit would 
come from the ability to nap: everyone would be 
more alert when fully awake.
A Black Box
What goes on in the minds of creative people 
when they work is still largely a black box. Some 
hints of what might be happening can come from 
observing them in action, but these will be guesses, 
leaving both creative practitioners and teachers 
wondering if they really know what they are doing. 
For researchers, this black box is a land of opportu­
nity. By venturing here, they will be true explorers.
Whatever they find will be prized by those who 
regard creative thought as one of the most difficult 
and important human capacities.
Notes
1. Perhaps the most convincing research on the effects of evalu­
ation has been done by Teresa Amabile, who looked at the 
way marks stifled the creative output of students.
2. Bruce Archer was an engineer, a former teacher at the 
Royal College of Art, and an advocate for design in general 
education.
References
Adams, J. L. (2001). Conceptual blockbusting: A guide to better 
ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Benyus, J. (2002). Biomimicry: Innovation inspired by nature. 
New York: Morrow.
Cooley, C. (1902). Human nature and the social order. 
New York: Scribner’s.
Coryat, K. A. (2006). The frustrated songwriters handbook. San 
Francisco: Back Beat Books.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2013). Creativity: The psychology of discov­
ery and invention. New York: HarperCollins.
De Bono, E. (2008). Creativity workout, 62 exercises to unlock 
your most creative ideas. Berkeley, CA: Ulysses Press.
Doyle, J. (2013). Hold It Against Me. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Dru, J.-M. (1996). Disruption, overturning conventions and shak­
ing up the marketplace. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Fish, F., Weber, P., Murray, M., & Howie, L. (2011, 51). The tuber­
cles on humpback whales’ flippers: Application of bio-inspired 
technology. Integrative and Comparative Biology, 1, 203—2013.
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed: 30th anniversary edi­
tion. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. M. Robinson, Trans.) 
London: S.C.M. Press.
Hughes, R. (1991). The shock of the new. New York: Knopf.
Jones, J. C. (1992). Design methods. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Koestler, A. (1990). The act of creation. New York: Penguin Books.
Kramer, H. (1970). A Mandarin Pretending to Be a Stumblebum. 
New York Times: Oct 25, p 27.
Lawson, B. (2005). How designers think: The design process demys­
tified. New York: Routledge.
Michalko, M. (2001). Cracking creativity: The secrets of creative 
genius. San Francisco: Ten Speed Press.
Newman, M. (2006). Teaching defiance: Stories and strategies for 
activst educators (p. 209). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Osborne, A. (1979). Applied imagination: The principles and pro­
cedures of creative problem-solving. New York: Scribner’s.
Russell, T. A. (1995). And then I  wrote, the songwriter speaks. 
Vancouver, BC: Arsenal Pulp Press.
Say, M. (2013, July 12). Creativity: How Constraints Drive 
Genius. Forbes Magazine.
Soho, T. (1986). The unfettered mind (W. S. Wilson., Trans.). 
Tokyo: Kodansha International.
Stokes, P. D. (2006). Creativity from constraints: The psychology of 
breakthrough (p.20). New York: Springer.
Sturt, D. (2013). Creativity: How constraints drive genius; 
Forbes, July 12, 2013; http://perma.cc/Y9BT-6WFB.
Tharp, T. (2003). The creative habit (p. 129). New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
C H A R L E S  D O B S O N
307


C H A P T E R
24
Flow as Spontaneous Thought: Insight 
and Implicit Learning
John Vervaeke, Leo Ferraro, and Arianne Herrera-Bennett
Abstract
Flow is an experience encountered in man/ areas of human endeavor; it is reported by athletes and 
artists, writers and thinkers. Paradoxically, it appears to involve significant energy expenditure, and 
yet it is reported to feel almost effortless. It is a prototypical instance of spontaneous thought. The 
flow experience has been extensively documented and studied by many scholars, most prominently 
Csikszentmihalyi, who characterized it as “optimal experience.” This chapter builds on the work of 
Csikszentmihalyi and others by providing a cognitive scientific account of flow, a framework that 
organizes and integrates the various cognitive processes and features that serve to make flow an optimal 
experience. In particular, it is argued that flow is characterized by a dynamic cascade of insight, coupled 
with enhanced implicit learning. This model seeks to integrate the phenomenological accounts of flow 
with the existing body of cognitive research.
Key W ords: flow, Csikszentmihalyi, implicit learning, insight, cognition
Many of us have experienced an unusual sense of 
proficiency or aptitude while being engaged in an 
engrossing task. This is particularly common in ath­
letic pursuits (although not unique to them), where 
it is known as “being in the zone.” People report that 
time seems to pass differently, self-consciousness 
fades, and there is a sense of grace within the deep 
engagement with the task. This is the phenom­
enon of flo w , introduced by Csikszentmihalyi in 
the 1960s, which has received extensive attention 
in psychology and surrounding fields. Observed 
within a wide array of activities, including art and 
science (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996), aesthetic experi­
ence (Csikszentmihalyi & Robinson, 1990), sports 
(Jackson, 1995, 1996), and creative writing (Perry, 
1999), flow is prevalent across differences in cul­
ture, gender, socioeconomic status, occupation, 
and age— and is described nearly interchangeably, 
irrespective of language (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). 
Such a robust, culturally universal phenomenon is 
rarely observed in psychology. In addition to this
universality, the flow phenomenon is also intriguing 
precisely because it seems to enhance and improve 
human experience. Beyond well-documented long­
term benefits such as physical and mental well-being 
(Clarke & Haworth, 1994; Massimini & Carli, 
1988; Mayers, 1978; Wells, 1988), there remains a 
subjective sense that engagement in flow-generating 
activities is intrinsically desirable. Individuals seek 
the flow experience for its own sake, sometimes 
at extreme costs, perceiving their performance as 
pleasurable and successful regardless of any fur­
ther achievements (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 
2002). Flow, by virtue of being both a robust psy­
chological universal and a source of immediate and 
long-term value to individuals, clearly stands out as 
important and deserving of better and more mean­
ingful understanding.
Flow arises in a spontaneous fashion when the 
right balance of skill and challenge meet. The 
experience unfolds in a non-deliberative fash­
ion in which people report that although there is
309

a considerable expenditure of energy, the process 
feels effortless. We will argue that this spontaneity 
is neither coincidental nor epiphenomenal. Instead, 
it is rooted in self-organizing cognitive processes 
that exhibit spontaneous structural and functional 
reorganization in a developmental fashion. Finally, 
this spontaneity is different from both deliberative, 
inferential thought, and implicit, automatic cogni­
tion; it is neither reflection nor reflex. We will argue 
that it is a self-perpetuating dynamical system of 
insight and implicit learning.
Objective
The literature on flow is extensive, with the 
benefits and qualities of flow being well and thor­
oughly examined. What we seek to do, in part, is 
to try to situate flow in a larger theoretical land­
scape. We seek to supplement phenomenological 
explanations of flow with cognitive explanations of 
its phenomenology. We hope to propose a frame­
work for better understanding of the mechanics of 
the flow state. In so doing, we hope to demonstrate 
the larger relevance and applicability of the existing 
understanding of flow to other related psychological 
phenomena.
It appears that flow is inherently highly desir­
able; however, few accounts have sought to explain 
why, beyond invoking long-term positive but indi­
rect psychophysiological effects (generally as an 
argument for evolutionary feasibility). One cannot 
sufficiently explain the prevalence of the flow phe­
nomenon solely in terms of its long-term evolution­
ary viability; the long-term phylogenetic advantage 
has to be translated into immediate ontogenetic 
incentive. The resultant benefits that occur as a 
result of flow do not explain why the immediate flow 
process itself is so strongly sought out. This does not 
debate the fact that flow seems to yield evolution- 
arily adaptive benefits. In fact, it argues that flow is 
an intrinsic evolutionary mechanism present in the 
brain for its massively adaptive function. However, 
in order to effectively answer why flow occurs, one 
must first give a thorough account of exactly w hat is 
taking place during the flow process.
Hence, the goal of this chapter is to propose a 
comprehensive cognitive scientific analysis of flow. 
This elucidation begins with a description of the pro­
cess that mediates flow experiences, supplemented 
by an account of the operating mechanisms. This 
will provide the conceptual basis to offer a strong 
theoretical answer to the question of why the occur­
rence of flow is so prevalent, ultimately highlight­
ing how the phenomenon is evolutionarily adaptive,
as well as affording useful explanatory connections 
between flow and other psychological constructs, 
such as insight and implicit learning.
Outline
The argument in this chapter will proceed 
as follows: We begin with a presentation of 
Csikszentmihalyis theory of flow, outlining the 
prevalent features of the phenomenological experi­
ence and the conditions by which the flow chan­
nel is optimally achieved. Close analysis here aims 
at a fundamental facet of the flow process, “skill­
stretching.” This specific system of learning, as qual­
itatively different from passive or inferential forms 
of learning, will serve as the basis for an alternative 
conceptualization of flow, framing the process as a 
cascade of insights affording one another in a self- 
perpetuating fashion. The phenomenon of insight 
implicated in this account of flow follows from the 
Gestalt framework of cognition, where insight is 
understood as an instance of fundamental restruc­
turing (Kohler, 1924, 1947; Wertheimer, 1923). 
These intuitions, born out of the Gestalt psychol- 
ogy, will be further supported by current cognitive 
scientific theory, drawing connections to the work 
of Hogarth: Flow is framed as a process that allows 
for improved implicit learning, and thereby the cul­
tivation of sound intuition. This conceptualization 
of flow seeks to best explain the phenomenological 
features of Csikszentmihalyis analysis and, further, 
draws flow together with insight and implicit learn­
ing in a larger cognitive framework.
Csikszentmihalyis Theory of Flow
Csikszentmihalyis theory of flow provides an 
account of the phenomenological features charac­
terizing the subjective experience of flow, as well as 
an analysis of the conditions by which the flow state 
is optimally achieved. Research on flow reliably 
documents a set of common features underlying 
the phenomenology of flow, including an intense 
or heightened concentration and attention on the 
activity at hand; a sense of distorted time; transcen­
dence of the self; a reduction or loss of reflective self- 
consciousness; reduced or absent worry over failure; 
focus on the present moment; resilience against dis­
traction; autotelic engagement in the activity itself; 
merging of action and awareness; and the feeling of 
being at one with the environment or activity— in 
other words, a deep sense of “at-oneness” with ones 
surroundings. Csikszentmihalyi expresses flow as 
an “almost automatic, effortless, yet highly focused 
state of consciousness” (1996, p. 110). Not only
310
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

does the flow experience produce powerfully grati­
fying subjective experience, flow is also reported 
to yield optimal performance (Csikszentmihalyi,
1996). Flow is sometimes considered a state of 
optimal engagement, hyper-productivity, hyper­
creativity, or hyper-motivation.
The conditions conducive to generating this 
altered state— creating the “flow channel”— involve 
the dynamic between the individual and his envi­
ronment. There must be a dynamic match between 
the demands of the situation and the skills of the 
individual. When challenge outweighs skill, the 
individual develops anxiety and frustration; when 
skill outweighs challenge, he or she faces boredom. 
Simply matching the level of challenge to skill, how­
ever, is insufficient for producing flow. For example, 
a low level of challenge matched with a low level 
of skill produces apathy, which has been viewed by 
some as the “anti-flow” (Allison & Duncan, 1988). 
All of these phenomenological states— anxiety, 
boredom, apathy, and flow— can be understood 
as functions of how attention is being structured 
with respect to a given time or situation (Nakamura 
& Csikszentmihalyi, 2002). Not only must there 
be a match between challenge and skill, but the 
individual must also feel engaged or pushed to 
his limit. This is a point worth stressing: although 
Csikszentmihalyi describes a “match” or “balance” of 
challenge to skill, it should be emphasized that this 
does not prescribe that the problem or the demands 
at hand be completely within reach. On the con­
trary, the notion of challenge conveys a certain lack 
of ease, denoting a problem or a demand that is just 
beyond the current skill level of the agent.
Csikszentmihalyi, in his 1997 chapter “Finding 
Flow,” reaffirms this central notion. He states that 
“flow also happens when a persons skills are fully 
involved in overcoming a challenge that is just 
about manageable, so it acts as a magnet for learn­
ing new skills and increasing challenges” (p. 47). 
Here emerges the notion of “skill-stretching”— a 
system of learning where the process of meeting and 
overcoming one challenge breeds a new and more 
developed skill set, in turn affording the ability to 
take on a still more difficult set of demands. This 
notion of “skill-stretching” is inherent to flow, and 
implies an important style or system of learning 
that qualitatively differs from more passive or incre­
mental learning processes. The learning fostered 
during flow involves a growth principle (Shernoff 
et al., 2003). It is exactly this quality of learning 
that Csikszentmihalyi describes as the basis of the 
level of motivation observed in flow— motivation
for and during the flow experience is, in large part, 
the enjoyment that comes as a result of confronting 
challenges (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996).
Another important factor to optimally engage 
the flow channel is feedback (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1996). In other words, in order to remain constantly 
engaged and motivated within the flow state, the 
individual needs to have a clear sense of how well his 
skills are meeting the demands of the environment. 
This tight coupling between the individual and the 
environment is necessary for flow and is made possi­
ble via tight environmental feedback in response to 
the actions being performed. This feedback should 
be clearly indicative of the adjustments needed in 
order to maintain performance. Thus, a system that 
optimally induces and perpetuates the flow state 
is characterized by a dynamic match of challenge 
to skill, whereby a tight coupling between an indi- 
viduals actions and his environment is achieved 
through a structure of tight feedback— both clear 
and timely in nature, and thus highly diagnostic of 
the total systems behavior. These conditions ulti­
mately constitute an environment for the cultiva­
tion of skill-stretching.
An Alternative Conceptualization 
of Flow: The Insight Cascade
Csikszentmihalyis descriptive analysis of the 
flow phenomenon appears to implicate a specific 
form of learning or system of engagement between 
agent and environment. He is correct that what 
is occurring during flow does not specify particu­
lar activity— a certain w hat—but rather a specific 
how (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996). This chapter aims 
to follow this notion in order to develop an alter­
native conceptualization of the immediate process 
of flow that emphasizes the tight dynamic cou­
pling between environment and individual action, 
critically outlined by Csikszentmihalyi, as well as to 
explicate the concept of skill-stretching by appeal­
ing to well-established psychological phenomena 
existing in the framework of cognitive science.
The alternative conceptualization of the process 
of flow might be expressed as “an extended aha!’ ” 
The “aha!” moment refers to the overcoming of an 
impasse, specifically within an instance of insight 
problem-solving (IPS). This critical moment of 
grasping the solution to an impasse is perceived or felt 
as a moment of deep realization; the “aha!” moment 
is the phenomenological realization of the relevant 
course of action or approach to solving an insight 
problem (Sternberg & Davidson, 1995). This prop­
osition invokes the notion of IPS because insight
311
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T

learning has been recognized, specifically within the 
Gestalt psychology framework, as qualitatively dif­
fering from other forms of learning. Insight learning 
is not the result of mere repetition or practice, but 
rather a moment of fundamental restructuring of 
the problem, based within the implicit procedural 
system of processing. The Gestalt understanding 
of insight appeals strongly to the concept of pro­
cedural transfer. To elucidate: whereby the solving 
of some types of non-insight problems is facilitated 
by content-similarity existing between the different 
problems, IPS benefits from the existence of pro­
cedural similarity between problems or scenarios. 
In other words, the way in which one construes 
and frames the pieces of a problem in relation to 
one another determines one’s understanding of the 
problem itself, and in turn determines the ability 
to realize the impasse. Because insight is based in 
procedural processing, the method or procedure of 
grasping one solution to a problem can be trans­
ferred to another problem space. This might be 
understood as the transference of a mental set— the 
transference of the way in which one is primed to 
perceive or frame, and in turn potentially reframe, 
a scenario. Further implications of the Gestalt con­
ceptualization of insight and procedural priming 
will be elaborated on in the next section.
With respect to the understanding of flow, 
conceptualizing the process as an extended “aha!” 
moment refers to a chain-like series of instances 
of IPS— an accelerated positive feedback loop, 
whereby the solving of each insight problem yields 
another insight problem to be solved. Flow might 
be understood as a cascade of transference of mental 
sets, each instantiation of insightful restructuring 
procedurally priming the agent to further engage 
insightfully with his or her dynamic surrounding. 
This moment-to-moment series of eureka effects 
fosters a string of insightful realizations— or an 
extended “aha!” As such, it is expected that the flow 
state yields a prolonged phenomenological feeling 
of the ongoing realizing of relevance in one’s action 
with respect to the surrounding demands. Typically 
the flow state is perceived as smooth and continu­
ous (hence the name), whereas impasse within an 
insight problem is experienced as a stoppage in per­
formance. In flow, conditions that could emerge as 
impasse are quickly assimilated into the ongoing 
insight of the flow experience. Skills quickly stretch 
to meet these poten tial impasses, arriving at ben­
eficial restructuring in a much more anticipatory 
and adaptive manner. Impasse is still present, but 
is experienced as a set of challenges or hurdles that
are overcome, rather than roadblocks. In this man­
ner, impasse is experienced as the challenge required 
to trigger and maintain flow, which can be seen as 
an insight cascade. Poet Mark Strand, for instance, 
describes his experience of flowing as “the powerful 
sense of doing exactly the right thing the only way 
it could be done” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996, p.121).
Work surrounding the phenomenon of fluency 
has in fact attempted to bridge the phenomenol- 
ogy of processing and the act of processing itself. 
Fluency is defined as the subjective experience of 
ease or difficulty related to a mental process. Fluency 
refers not to the active cognitive process, but rather 
to the accompanying sensation of how easy or effi­
cient the cognitive processing feels (Oppenheimer,
2008). Recent work, however, has suggested that 
the phenomenology of processing may correlate 
to the actual degree of ease of processing occur­
ring at the neural level. In other words, fluency 
might serve to indicate one’s quality of processing 
in the cognitive operation at hand. Topolinski and 
Reber (2010) specifically propose a fluency account 
of insight whereby the sudden change in process­
ing that occurs when the solution to a problem 
pops into an individual’s mind— the pivotal “aha!” 
moment— acts as the underlying causal mechanism 
of experiencing a light bulb going on inside one’s 
head. This view integrates processing fluency with 
experiential fluency, whereby the latter is not merely 
a hedonic marker of the positive experience, but an 
essential concomitant of insightful processing.
The aforementioned work on fluency ties in 
strongly with the proposed reconceptualization of 
flow. Flow understood as an insight cascade refers 
to a series of instances of insightful processing, each 
marking a more complex or higher level of process­
ing. These sudden bouts of increased processing are 
each accompanied by a subjective sensation of over­
coming the impasse— the phenomenological break­
through. In line with recent accounts, the increased 
fluency or ease in cognitive processing during IPS 
yields the concomitant positive affect marking the 
realization of successful relevant processing, as well 
as the rewarding feeling of overcoming difficulty 
and struggle. It follows that a cascade of insights 
would naturally yield an accompanying and ongo­
ing stream of positive subjective affect, reinforc­
ing a sense of meaning in one’s processing— flow 
phenomenologically equates to an experience of 
extended fluency.
In sum, this proposed alternative conceptualiza­
tion of flow heavily implies a very powerful form of 
learning and processing not only at the cognitive
312
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

level, but also phenomenologically. Flow yields 
a high degree of skill-stretching, which occurs as 
the result of the dynamic interplay, or opponent­
processing, between generation of insight problems 
and subsequent insight problem-solving. The flow 
state nurtures a dynamic system of interaction, 
whereby each instantiation of insightful restructur­
ing procedurally primes the agent for subsequent 
insightful processing. It is through this series of 
transfers of mental sets that instances of IPS start to 
chain and afford one another in a self-perpetuating 
manner. Furthermore, this highly interactive and 
engaged form of learning and processing is naturally 
accompanied by a feeling of reward and ease— a pro­
longed sense of meaningful breakthrough, born out 
of the increase of fluency in ones processing. This 
conceptualization of flow homes in on the charac­
teristic defining feature of flow that Mark Strand 
so aptly expressed in the preceding quotation— the 
potent sense of effortlessly engaging in exactly the 
right way with ones environment: “being in the 
zone.” Hence this chapter will argue that flow ulti­
mately cultivates an optimal form of implicit learn­
ing, directly contesting the usual interpretation of 
the sense of ease and effortlessness in processing 
as indicating highly implicitly automatized or pla- 
teaued learning.
This alternative conceptualization attempts to 
step beyond mere descriptive analysis, appealing 
to documented phenomena to interpret and expli­
cate the immediate process of flowing. However, it 
is necessary to supplement this proposed alterna­
tive conceptualization of flow with a mechanistic 
explanation of how exactly a cascade of insights is 
instantiated and maintained in the brain, as well as 
an account of the increased efficiency in process­
ing that underlies the phenomenological sense of 
experiential fluency. By describing what is actually 
occurring in the “aha!” moment, we can more con­
cretely propose and argue the claim that flow con­
stitutes optimal implicit learning. It is important 
to now take a closer look at the phenomenon of 
insight, specifically by addressing the two prevail­
ing and opposed views within the insight literature. 
The aim is not only to argue in favor of the Gestalt 
framework as being more conceptually apt in 
explaining human cognition and insight processing, 
but also to highlight the limitations that the com­
putational view presents when trying to frame this 
complex phenomenon. In turn, the chapter seeks to 
convey a better sense of the fundamental nature and 
structure of the insight processing that is proposed 
to take place during flow.
The insight literature has historically been 
divided into two schools of thought, each taking a 
different approach to explaining the phenomenon 
of insight and its fundamental nature. The first is 
the computational theory of mind, also referred 
to as the search-inference framework, or symbolic 
representation. The second is the Gestalt approach. 
The search-inference framework, initially proposed 
by Newell and Simon (1956, 1976), is still viewed 
today by many as the dominant formulation for 
insight (Barsalou, 1999; Dietrich & Markman,
2003). Nevertheless, this chapter emphasizes the 
opposing view— the Gestalt approach. O f the two 
theoretical camps, this latter framework is argued 
to be the most apt and precise appraisal of the phe­
nomenon of insight, underlining its procedural, 
dynamic, flexible, and nonlinear nature.
These two camps rely upon two fundamentally 
different sets of premises. The computational theory 
of mind frames thinking as an action. More spe­
cifically, it runs on the idea that thinking creates a 
structure, like that found in a computer, whereby 
information is encoded into a set of propositions, 
and inferentially manipulated. Learning, in turn, 
is theorized to occur sequentially, improving via a 
series of incremental steps, following Thorndikes 
paradigm of incremental learning (Thorndike, 
1932). It follows from this view that all forms of 
learning, including insight, are a process of simple 
feedback, sequential in nature, and are not quali­
tatively different from other forms of learning. By 
this account, flow is considered a form of engage­
ment that does not differ in any fundamental way 
from mere sequential engagement or incremen­
tal learning. Dietrichs theory of flow draws upon 
this computational framework. By framing flow as 
an instance of hypofrontality (Dietrich, 2004), he 
argues that the flow state constitutes a temporary 
absence of explicit processing, resulting in an opti­
mal engagement of the implicit system. Because 
he abides within the constraints of this representa­
tional framework, Dietrich claims that in flow, only 
behavior or actions that have been mastered can 
occur. His theory reduces flow to highly automa­
tized implicit practiced behavior, which entails no 
degree of qualitative growth or complexification of 
the system.
Gestalt psychology, on the other hand, frames 
cognition as perception. The fundamental formula 
of this framework is that the whole is greater than 
the sum of the parts; the behavior of the whole is not 
determined solely by its individual elements, but 
rather from their interactions (Stephen & Dixon,
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
313

2009; Wertheimer, 1923). In the case of simple 
visual perception, the overarching perceptual form is 
thought to convey greater meaning than the sum of 
the individual, isolated constituent elements. More 
specifically, it is the organization of those individ­
ual elements that contributes substantial meaning. 
Insight operates within this framework, as a quali­
tatively different form of learning or thinking than 
that gained through incremental improvement. 
Gestalt psychologists characterize the phenomenon 
of insight as a fundamental restructuring of the cog­
nitive system (Kohler, 1947). Insight affords a shift 
in perspective, which yields a novel representation of 
a particular situation or problem, through an under­
standing of the functional relationships between rel­
evant component parts (Markova, 2005). Insight, 
according to Gestalt psychology, involves a relaxing 
or breaking of constraints, which allows the mind 
to override the imperatives of experience (Knoblich, 
Ohlsson, Haider, & Rhenius, 1999), such that one 
might reconfigure his or her mental space, and 
establish a fundamentally new set of constraints. 
Once one speaks of organization in terms of con­
straints, one is finding a point of convergence with 
the search-inference framework. In that framework, 
constraining the search space to avoid combinato­
rial explosion is central. A problem formulation 
that constrains the search in a felicitous manner is 
a good problem frame. Kaplan and Simon (1990), 
in fact, argued from the search-inference perspec­
tive that insight was such a reframing of a problem 
formulation. Support for this view was offered in 
recent findings by DeYoung, Flanders, and Peterson 
(2008). Investigating the question of what broad
cognitive abilities support insight processing, it was 
found that divergent thinking and breaking frame 
were the indices that were uniquely associated with 
IPS. Further investigation yielded support for their 
hypothesis that the ability to break frame represents 
a different and separate form of cognitive ability 
than divergent thinking. It follows that ones ability 
to break frame independently predicts and facili­
tates his or her capacity for insight. As such, break­
ing frame is argued to be essential to the requisite 
problem-reformulation implicated in IPS. The act 
of breaking frame temporarily creates a new Gestalt 
by entering into a more abstract, holistic processing 
style, which in turn enables a new perspective from 
which to reconfigure the new set of constraints.
This process is termed restructuring or reframing, 
and is exemplified by the S-curve learning para­
digm. S-curve shaped learning refers to the graphi­
cal representation of the changing rate of learning, 
which fundamentally differs from the incremental 
learning of Thorndike (1932) (Figure 24.1).
In the latter, learning is posited to increase 
automatically and incrementally over time, and 
is graphically represented by a steadily increasing 
curve where performance correlates positively with 
time or trials of learning. S-curve learning graphi­
cally maintains the shape of an “S,” where the curve 
is marked by a slow initial increment, followed by 
a sudden steep positive acceleration, and ending 
in a plateau. S-curve learning exemplifies a form 
of learning marked by a pivotal point of grasping 
the scenario or solution to learning. S-curve or 
insight learning presupposes a certain level of real­
ization within the cognitive agent. The graphic shift
S-Leaming Curve
Figure 24.1. Graphical representations of learning paradigms: Incremental (Thorndike) vs. Insight (S-curve). Whereas incremental 
learning (left) is depicted as a steady increase in performance across trials, S-curve learning (right) is marked by a sudden and steep 
acceleration in performance. This pivotal moment in learning, as in the case of insight problem-solving (IPS), can be understood as 
the “aha!” moment of realization upon grasping the solution.
314
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

demonstrates the sudden leap toward a new mode 
of representation— a new way to make sense of ones 
surroundings. Insight here is an illustration of sud­
den improvement in performance, a qualitative shift 
in understanding that is maintained in the learner. 
Early Gestalt work, particularly by Kohler (1924, 
1947), observed insightful behavior being marked 
by an abrupt yet smoothly directed process by which 
an objective is met (Markova, 2005). These changes 
in strategy were argued to reflect emergence— 
instances in which a dynamical system reorga­
nizes itself (Kohler, 1947; Lewis 2005; Stephen & 
Dixon, 2009).
Support for the Gestalt framework of insight 
is evidenced by research conducted around the 
predictors of success on IPS tasks offering better 
understanding of the nature of insight process­
ing. Schooler, McCleod, Brookes, and Melcher 
(1993), found that among various independent 
processes, the single best predictor of insight 
task performance— and not of non-insight task 
performance— was one’s ability to engage in 
perceptual restructuring. These results provided 
further empirical support for the Gestalt theory 
of cognitive reframing during insight. Similarly, 
Baker-Sennett and Ceci (1996) measured one’s 
independent ability to excel on a completion task, 
manipulating the number of prior cues provided. 
The fewer the cues needed before completion, the 
larger the leap signaled, and it was demonstrated 
that one’s ability to make larger leaps was related 
to success on IPS. Once again, these empiri­
cal results mirror the intuitions of the Gestalt 
theorists, supporting the occurrence of abrupt 
cognitive leaps inherent in the S-curve insight 
model.
Support for this formalization of insight is 
also found within work investigating conditions 
of facilitation and hindrance to IPS. Macrae and 
Lewis (2002) measured the effects of an interven­
ing task on the facial recognition abilities of three 
groups of individuals, where the task occurred 
between initial exposure to faces and a subsequent 
recall period. The two experimental groups’ inter­
vening tasks involved observing Navon letters.
The first group was required to focus on constit­
uent letters, causing them to engage in a featural- 
level processing style, while the second group had to 
focus on the overarching letter, causing them to use 
a Gestalt processing style (Figure 24.2). The third 
group did not engage in any intervening task, thus 
acting as the control condition. Results displayed 
greatest facial recognition success among the second
E E E  
E E E
E E E  
E E E
E E E  
E E E
E E E  E E E E E E E  
E E E  E E E E E E E  
E E E  
E E E
E E E  
E E E
E E E  
E E E
E E E  
E E E
Global H 
Local E
Global processing 
orientation
Local processing 
orientation
Figure 24.2. Navon letters: Induction of global vs. local 
processing styles. Navon letter task (left panel) can be used 
to flexibly induce different processing orientations. Focus on 
global letters (middle panel) vs. local letters (right panel) has 
been shown to, respectively, drive one’s frame of thinking or 
processing style up to the Gestalt level vs. down to the featural 
level, which in turn has been shown to facilitate (vs. impair) 
holistic processing, such as facial recognition (Macrae & Lewis, 
2002).
group, those having been driven up to the Gestalt 
level right before recall. This becomes particularly 
relevant because facial encoding and recognition 
are known to make use of holistic processing. Thus, 
being in a Gestalt frame of mind seems to facili­
tate holistic Gestalt processing. Dissociation is seen 
whereby driving an individual’s cognitive process­
ing upward not only significantly acts as facilitation, 
but driving it down to the featural level signifi­
cantly hinders holistic Gestalt processing. This was 
reflected in the first group’s low performance, with 
facial recall falling well below that of the control 
group. Finger (2002) showed that this impairment, 
however, was not permanent, but was quite flex­
ibly undone. Using a similar experimental method 
to that of Macrae and Lewis, Finger was able to 
impair one group’s facial recognition performance 
with a specific intervening task (specifically, driv­
ing the subjects’ attention to the featural level via 
the component letter focus version of the preceding 
Navon letter tasks). A second group also engaged 
in this task, but the subjects were then asked to 
engage in a more Gestalt-oriented activity, such 
as listening to music, before performing the recall 
task. This second group performed much better 
than the first group on the recall task. These stud­
ies reaffirm the flexible dynamic nature of human 
cognition that the Gestalt psychologists predicted 
decades earlier, showing it to be highly responsive 
to the manner in which one is directing attention 
between scales. Furthermore, this same dissociation 
of facilitation and impairment, as exhibited earlier, 
is also shown to apply to IPS performance: Driving 
cognition down to the featural level or up to the
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
3U

Gestalt level respectively impairs and enhances IPS 
(Forster, Friedman, & Liberman, 2004; Hunt & 
Carroll, 2008). Thus, it might be posited that this 
same flexible dynamic structures insight processing, 
where attention to features can break up inappro­
priate frames and afford reframing, while attention 
to Gestalts can generate the needed new framing.
Neuroimaging research shows patterns consis­
tent with this theoretical model of insight. Insight 
processing is associated with marked right inferior 
gyrus activity, as well as increased electroencephalo- 
graphic activity in the right hemisphere (Bowden & 
Jung-Beeman, 2003; Bowden, Jung-Beeman, Fleck, 
& Kounios, 2005; Jung-Beeman et al., 2004). These 
findings appear to reflect a shift from primarily left- 
hemisphere processing to right-hemisphere process­
ing, before returning to the left. This left-right-left 
pattern is assumed to reflect the process of cognitive 
reframing. This shift from the feature-level, sequen­
tial, logical, left-hemisphere system toward the right 
demonstrates a breaking of these constraints and the 
frame by which they were governed. The tempo­
rary right-lateralized processing putatively involves 
the coarse-grained Gestalt level, and being far less 
constrained, is aimed at seeking out multiple asso­
ciations and meanings. Entering this more abstract 
mode enables a different approach toward subse­
quent left-hemispheric processing— this momen­
tary Gestalt affords the ability to project structures 
of constraint that better fit the cognitive space. 
Recent work by Chi and Snyder (2011) lends fur­
ther support to this observed neurological pattern of 
insight. Through the use of transcranial direct cur­
rent stimulation (tDCS), it was found that inhibi­
tion of the left anterior temporal lobe (ATL) (L-) in 
combination with excitation of the right ATL (R+) 
caused a threefold facilitation in insight problem­
solving ability, as compared to controls. Consistent 
with evidence for lateralization of frontal lobe func­
tions, wherein the left hemisphere is associated with 
routine functioning and the right hemisphere with 
novel functioning (Goldberg, 1994), the authors 
theorized that the relative reduction of left hemi­
spheric dominance and relative increase of right 
hemispheric dominance helped participants to 
break the tendency to examine a problem through 
routinized mental templates, and shift to examine 
a problem through a more novel representation. 
The L-/R+ stimulation effects support the Gestalt 
notion that insight is a breaking of constraints 
and a novel reframing of the problem space. Even 
more recently, Chi and Snyder (2012) used tDCS 
as an aid to solving the nine-dot problem whose
spontaneous solution rate is statistically indistin­
guishable from zero. They were able to raise the 
spontaneous solution rate to around 40%. The 
Gestalt notion of insight processing, which funda­
mentally involves restructuring a set of constraints, 
also contains within it the idea of dynamically shift­
ing multiple constraints simultaneously. In direct 
opposition to the inferential framework, the Gestalt 
view of insight processing is highly dynamical and 
nonlinear in nature and can thus be intervened on 
and improved upon.
The insight literature, as explicated within the 
framework of Gestalt psychology, offers a strong 
case for the dynamical, flexible, and insightful 
nature of the human mind. There are robust empiri­
cal grounds to argue that the nature of insight can­
not be collapsed into a form of inferential sequential 
processing, as the computational theory of mind 
camp would claim. As such, it is not sufficient to 
conceptually reduce flow simply to highly automa­
tized implicit behavior (Dietrich, 2004). Rather, 
the phenomena of insight and flow need to be sup­
ported by a mechanism nested within a dynamical 
framework.
This framework exists within the realm of dynam ­
ical systems theory (DST). The fields of psychology, 
cognitive science, and neuroscience have increas­
ingly sought to explain and establish cognition as a 
complex dynamical engine of thought and behavior. 
More specifically, emerging research based in DST 
has generated empirically reliable and testable theo­
ries for the mechanisms of cognitive insight. A com­
prehensive look at these explanations of cognitive 
insight will ultimately be important in detailing the 
actual underlying cognitive process within the cas­
cade of insights occurring during flow.
Self-Organized Criticality and Spontaneous 
Self-Organization
Cognitive insight can be understood as a pro­
cess of emergent self-organization within an open 
system— specifically, the emergence of a new mac­
roscopic cognitive structure. First, an overview of 
DST will be offered, briefly reviewing the notions 
of emergence and self-organizing criticality (SOC). 
A presentation of recent empirical research on 
insight within DST and SOC will serve to provide 
a concrete explanation of the actual underlying cog­
nitive processes constituting the phenomenon of 
cognitive insight. Ultimately, this framework will 
help to properly substantiate a thorough, compre­
hensive, and concrete account of flow as an insight 
cascade.
316
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

The seminal work on DST and, especially, SOC 
is Bak, Tang, and Wiesenfeld’s 1987 chapter in 
which they explain the key concepts of emergence 
and SOC through an investigation of the behavior 
of sand piles (Figure 24.3). Consider a surface with 
an infinite source of sand suspended above it, from 
which a stream descends in a constant manner, as in 
an hourglass. Over time a roughly conic pile forms; 
the micro-interactions between the individual grains 
of sand, as well as between grains and the surface, 
cause the sand to collect in a normal distribution 
under the sand stream. This conical shape emerges, 
without external direction, purely from the interac­
tions of the grains and the surface. This emergent 
structure further constrains the placement of subse­
quent grains of sand in a self-organizing manner: As 
the conic pile rises, the structure becomes inher­
ently unstable, and its ability to constrain the grains 
of sand declines.
The disorder (or entropy) of the system increases; 
this is initially reflected in the occurrence of 
micro-avalanches. Eventually, however, the grow­
ing instability of the system outpaces the ability of 
the micro-avalanches to shore up the pile, and the 
pile collapses in a major avalanche. This is a critical 
period for the pile, because there is the possibility 
that the structure can be permanently lost. However, 
there is also the possibility that the redistribution of 
the sand provides the base for a larger, more stable 
pile. Bak, Tang, and Wiesenfeld generalize this into 
a powerful explanatory model that offers useful 
theoretical and mathematical tools for understand­
ing and explaining complex dynamic phenomena, 
including emergent properties. Hesse and Gross
(2014) review the evidence and articulate the case 
for viewing the brain through this theoretical lens.
Spontaneous self-organization is an observable 
and naturally occurring property within a host of
'"i11" "r t-----r i 
i
Addition of 
Avalanche
sand grains: 
¥ Critical slope 
4 
occurrence:
slope increases 
slope decreases
Figure 24.3. (See Color Insert) Self-organizing criticality 
(SOC): The sand pile model. Growing instability of a system 
(i.e., increased entropy due to addition of sand grains) will 
results in a critical period (or slope) where the system will 
spontaneously restructure itself (i.e., redistribution of sand pile); 
in other words, demonstrate the phenomenon of emergent and 
spontaneous self-organization.
natural phenomena that abide by the principles 
of nonlinear dynamics. Among other examples, 
self-organization has been shown to underlie the 
emergent organizational behavior of fluid (Lorenz, 
1963), lasers (Haken, 1983), single-cell organisms 
(Webster & Goodwin, 1996), and molecular net­
works (Sardanyes & Sole, 2006; Stephen, Dixon, & 
Isenhower, 2009). In line with the Gestalt intuitions, 
dynamic processes, as described by synergetics, have 
been observed to play a role in pattern recognition 
(Haken, 1980). As such, nonlinear dynamics have 
been posited as underlying major processes in the 
brain (Crick, 1979; Haken, 1980). Empirical find­
ings in the realm of cognitive science lend strong 
support to this notion, whereby self-organization 
has served to explain locomotion (Kugler & Turvey, 
1987; Swenson & Turvey, 1991), timing behav­
ior (Kelso, 1995), as well as reaching (Mottet & 
Bootsma, 1999; Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower,
2009). The growing body of recent complexity the­
ory research has yielded strong grounds for theorists 
to propose the involvement of nonlinear dynami­
cal processes in higher-order cognition (Stephen 
& Dixon, 2009; Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 
2009; Thelen & Smith, 1994; Van Orden, Holden, 
& Turvey, 2003, 2005). For instance, recent work 
on cortical neural networks and the propagation of 
neural activity showed critical neuronal avalanches 
to spontaneously arise in a self-organizing fashion 
when the cortical network was in a critical state 
(Beggs & Plenz, 2003, 2004)— an instantiation 
of the classic SOC sand pile phenomenon (Bak, 
Tang, & Wiesenfeld, 1987). Furthermore, neu­
ronal avalanches have been claimed to correlate 
with optimal transmission and storage of informa­
tion (Beggs, 2008; Beggs & Plenz, 2003, 2004; 
Haldeman & Beggs, 2005; Hsu & Beggs, 2006; 
Plenz & Thiagarajan, 2007), large network stabil­
ity (Bertschinger & Natschlager, 2004), maximal 
sensitivity to sensory stimuli (Kinouchi & Copelli,
2006), and optimal computational capabilities 
(Bonachela et al., 2010; Legenstein & Maas, 2007). 
Given our review of the Gestalt approach to insight, 
it is plausible that insight is a complex dynamic phe­
nomenon that could be well understood using these 
theoretical tools.
One key example of this is the work of Stephen 
and Dixon, in a series of chapters on insight. Their 
fruitful application of DST and SOC to the phe­
nomenon of insight clearly illustrates a strong 
connection between insight and flow. The actual 
process by which a complex open system engages 
in structural reorganization can be explained by
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
317

synergetics, a systems theory that describes how 
macroscopic structures can naturally and sponta­
neously arise and evolve in a self-organized fashion 
from the interaction of microscopic subsystems 
(Haken, 1980). The process of self-organization 
is, as mentioned earlier, triggered by entropy over­
whelming the system. More specifically, the event 
of entropy levels reaching system threshold causes 
the system to enter into a state of critical instabil­
ity (Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009). The 
approach toward critical instability causes the loos­
ening and breaking of the existing constraints of the 
system, dissolving the configuration of previously 
coherent subcomponents, and allowing for these 
subsystems to freely interact. This micro-level inter­
action is capable of yielding different global system 
configurations or “modes” (Haken, 1980) at the 
macro level. And of these emergent modes, the most 
effective of the dissipative structures will be assumed 
as the new macroscopic organization of the total 
system, more capable of dispersing entropy. Thus, 
the phenomenon of self-organization can be under­
stood as arising out of the spontaneous breaking and 
reforming of constraints within an open complex 
system (Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009), to 
attain a more ordered state. It follows that this pro­
cess of breaking and reforming of constraints can 
be predicted by an increase in entropy, followed 
by a decrease in entropy— a pattern or sequence of 
changes that in nonlinear dynamics is considered a 
“phase transition” (Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower,
2009). A look at the recent work born out of the 
dynam ical systems theory o f cognition (DSTC) will 
serve to bridge the gap between dynamic lower- 
level processes and high-level cognitive structures 
(Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009). Specifically, 
this theory frames the phenomenon of cognitive 
insight as an instance of emergent self-organization. 
Establishing the underlying cognitive process of 
insight will serve to solidify a concrete under­
standing of how flow operates as a cascade of self- 
perpetuating cognitive insights.
Dynamical Systems Theory 
of Cognition: The Mechanism 
of Insight and Flow
Dynamical theory fundamentally conceives that 
changes in behavior at the macro scale are generated 
from changes occurring at the micro scale. When 
applied to the realm of psychology, this conceptu­
alization of cognition implies that the emergence 
of macroscopic cognitive structures might be gen­
erated from microscopic changes or fluctuations
(Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009). Stephen 
and Dixon (2009) propose this mechanistic frame­
work as underlying the phenomenon of cognitive 
insight: insight is an instance of self-organization 
from which emerges a new macroscopic cognitive 
structure. This complex emergent processing is 
highly rooted within a tight dynamical system of 
interaction, coupling agent and action with his or 
her immediate surroundings.
Empirical support for the DSTC was exemplified 
by the gear-system paradigm (Stephen & Dixon, 
2009; Stephen, Dixon, & Isenhower, 2009). This 
paradigm involved presenting a series of gear sys­
tems, one at a time, to participants on a computer 
screen. A gear system is composed of a set of inter­
locking gears, forming a pathway of gears from the 
initial gear to the final gear. Solving a gear-system 
problem meant correctly determining the turning 
direction of the final gear, given the initial gear turn­
ing direction, as indicated by an arrow. Participants 
received immediate accuracy feedback on their pre­
dictions upon completion of each gear-system prob­
lem before being presented with the next problem. 
The vast majority of individuals began solving via 
the strategy of force-tracing. Force-tracing involves 
physically moving one’s fingers in a set of radial 
motions as a way of facilitating one’s mental tracing 
of the path of motion that spans the gear-system. 
Force-tracing can be both measured and mathemat­
ically quantified. The gear-system paradigm is apt 
for the study of this self-organization framework 
because the task ultimately requires a change in 
representation. In other words, as the demands of 
the gear rotation tasks increase, the individual must 
shift strategies to maintain his performance level. 
This shift in strategy is marked by the discovery o f 
alternation, a fundamentally different approach to 
solving the problems that no longer relies on finger­
tracing motion. The alternation strategy emerges 
out of the discovery that the gear turning direction 
alternates between clockwise motion and counter­
clockwise motion in sequence down the path. Thus, 
given the information of the initial gear turning 
direction and the length of the gear-system path, 
participants adopt this more efficient strategy by 
embodying the relational information between the 
component parts of the entire gear system (Dixon 
& Bangert, 2002). Pure insight problems have been 
argued to necessitate both an abrupt discontinuity 
in initial problem-solving approach and an essential 
restructuring of the problem representation in order 
to fulfill solution criteria (Chronicle, MacGregor, 
& Ormerod, 2004; Weisberg, 1996). The observed
318
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

shift away from direct bodily interactions (force­
tracing strategy) and toward relational informa­
tion (alternation strategy) can be understood as 
an abrupt discontinuity of initial problem-solving 
approach, in combination with an instance of fun­
damental restructuring of the gear-system problem 
space. The emergence of the alternation strategy 
thus provides a concrete instance of pure insight 
problem-solving.
In accordance with the theory of emergent self­
organization outlined earlier, it was predicted that 
a sharp increase in entropy, followed by a sharp 
decrease in entropy, would occur right before the 
discovery of the alternation strategy. This pattern of 
entropy behavior was found to reliably predict the 
phase transition from force-tracing strategy to alter­
nation strategy in participants. Because this strat­
egy was a more effective offloading mechanism of 
entropy, it verified an instance of self-organizational 
spontaneous emergence.
In the Gestalt language, the increase and decrease 
in entropy describes the act of temporarily breaking 
frame in order to provide for a restructuring of con­
straints. The necessary unconstrained, unmediated 
interaction among the more featural components 
constitutes the spontaneous bottom-up behavior 
that generates new interactional relations amidst 
the parts, which the more higher-up Gestalt pro­
cessing can pick up on and constrain anew. The 
DSTC provides not only a comprehensive cognitive 
process underlying insight, which can be quantified 
and tested, but also robust empirical findings that 
demonstrate what the Gestalt theorists suggested 
all along, without having had the conceptual tools 
to formalize it (Epstein, 1988; Shaw & Turvey, 
1981): Insight is a highly nonlinear, implicit, and 
procedural process that emerges in a spontaneous, 
self-organizing fashion. The DSTC homes in on the 
essential dynamical coupling and interactive rela­
tionship of cognition, action, and environment.
Network Theory
Network 
theory 
complements 
the 
DSTC 
work by Stephen and Dixon (2009), supplement­
ing dynamical theory with an explicit structural 
mechanism for the proposed process of cognitive 
insight. More precisely, network theory understands 
insightful processing to be a reconfiguration of the 
total network, specifically adopting the configura­
tion and behavior of a small-world network.
A network can be understood as a set of compo­
nent nodes, between which a series of clusters and 
connections determine the overall configuration of
the total network. These configuration properties 
can be expressed by a networks clustering coeffi­
cient and average path length values. A reconfigu­
ration of the network is understood as a change in 
these nodes or links, a process that is capable of 
establishing a new set of relations within the net­
work (Schilling, 2005). Not all networks share 
the same configuration properties. In fact, “small- 
world” networks embody distinct network behav­
ior compared to other network structures, due to 
their unique set of configuration properties, resid­
ing structurally between a highly structured large- 
world network and a random network (Figure 
24.4). The large-world network is characterized by a 
high clustering coefficient value and a high average 
path length value. Whereas the high clustering pro­
vides dense connectivity between similar nodes in 
the network, the large average path length makes it 
globally sparse and thus highly inefficient. By con­
trast, the random network is characterized by both 
a low clustering coefficient value and a low average 
path-length value. As a result, the random network 
is highly efficient, but lacks resiliency. Small-world 
network structural properties fall between these 
two aforementioned network extremes, and thus 
embody elements of both network configurations. 
Specifically, small-world network properties are 
marked by high clustering and low average path 
length. As such, small-world networks are uniquely 
balanced between efficiency and resiliency.
The specific property enabling this is the pres­
ence of a small set of random or atypical long-range 
links spanning the network, which act to connect 
more disparate nodes and clusters. The formation of 
long-range connections establishes a rewiring of the 
total network that results in a decrease in average 
path length significantly greater than the decrease 
in clustering. This is how the rewiring pattern yields 
a more efficient network overall, while maintaining 
a high degree of resiliency. In addition, this recon­
figuration affects the ease of propagation of infor­
mation, as measured by the network’s diffusion rate. 
Due to the existence of unique long-range links 
in small-world networks, small-world networks 
demonstrate a faster rate of diffusion than large- 
world networks, nearly as fast as that of a random 
network (Watts, 1999). Importantly, the sudden 
drop in average path length yields the promotion 
and facilitation of further search and discovery of 
relationships between nodes and clusters previously 
not established within the network. The dramatic 
increase in search propagation and connection for­
mation marks an intensified rate of diffusion whose
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
319

Regular network 
Small-world network 
Random network
Figure 24.4. Network structure diagrams.
continued effect self-perpetuates in the absence of 
any continuous external prompt (Schilling, 2005). 
This self-perpetuation could serve as the basis for 
the momentum of the insight cascade proposed to 
be at work in flow.
Understanding 
network 
configurations 
and 
the effects of structural properties on information 
propagation and diffusion helps shed light on the 
developing understanding of cognitive networks 
that span and shape the brain. Cognitive networks 
are purported to exhibit small-world network con­
figurations and behavior. First, cognitive networks 
embody a high degree of clustering. Because creat­
ing and maintaining connections between concepts 
is highly costly in terms of time and effort to the 
cognitive system (Simon, 1955), the system can­
not afford to support many extraneous connections 
beyond those that are essential to the meaning and 
understanding of the cognitive network. As such, 
dense connectivity is maintained between related 
concepts, and sparse connectivity occurs between 
more disparate pieces of information. This kind 
of clustering creates great value for the system: it 
instills structure, order, and meaning within an indi­
vidual s cognitive framework (Bartlett, 1932; Mayer 
& Greeno, 1972). Additionally, to be efficient and 
adaptive, cognitive networks need not use inefficient 
network searches, which may be produced as a con­
sequence of sparse connectivity and resulting high 
average path length. The existence of an atypical 
link in the network allows for a wider set of nodes 
within a more immediate search range, minimizing 
the time, cost, and constraint of search for the sys­
tem. This is particularly relevant to problem-solving
when the solution necessitates searching outside the 
immediate domain of the problem space (Schilling,
2005). It follows that IPS that is highly character­
ized by the need to “look outside the box” should 
benefit from this configuration. Graph theory work 
has in fact been used to analyze known insight prob­
lems and represent their solution process in terms of 
simple network diagrams (Durso, Rea, & Dayton, 
1994; Schilling, 2005). Connectivity properties 
consistently mimicked small-world network con­
figuration behavior, most specifically the moment 
of insight as a characteristic drop in average path 
length. As such, the phenomenon of cognitive 
insight, according to network theory, is proposed to 
be an instance of atypical association significantly 
decreasing the networks average path length, and 
in turn creating a shortcut in ones cognitive net­
work of representations. This macroscopic recon­
figuration of the cognitive network is proposed as 
the explicit structural mechanism that establishes 
a new set of relations between network representa­
tions. As such, it is the mechanism that underlies 
the Gestalt notion of shifting frame— a shift in rela­
tive salience that governs the associations between 
network nodes and clusters. It is important to note 
that network reconfiguration at the macro level is a 
qualitative change in the structure and behavior of 
the total network that, notably, has the potential of 
prompting a cascade of further atypical and insightful 
connections (Schilling, 2005). Total network recon­
figuration is not simply the reorganization of the 
network at the macro level; it is the instantiation of 
a mode of operation that procedurally affords and 
primes the system for further behavior. As such, the
320
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

creation specifically of a small-world network pro­
vides the foundation for initial insightful restruc­
turing, as well as the potential resulting cascade of 
procedurally afforded insights.
Finally, network theory further supplements the 
dynamic systems theory of cognitive insight with 
an account of the phenomenological properties of 
insight— namely, the characteristic sense of unex­
pected and sudden discovery. Network theory pos­
its that the affective perceived moment of insightful 
realization is a function of both the degree of 
unexpectedness of the atypical connection forged, 
as well as the degree to which this connection 
shifts or reconfigures the overall network structure 
(Schilling, 2005). This account serves as a mecha­
nistic explanation of fluency: the increased ease and 
efficiency in processing resulting from the atypical 
link formation underlies the experiential fluency felt 
in conjunction with the “aha!” experience of insight­
ful processing. Not only does this theory highlight 
the phenomenon of insight as being grounded in a 
dynamical spontaneous self-organizing process that 
is qualitatively distinct from incremental learning, 
it also serves to provide an explanation for why an 
accompanying affective response is so consistently 
attributed to the experience of insight and how 
exactly this phenomenological experience of the 
moment of successful discovery manifests itself.
Flow, conceptualized as an insight cascade, can 
now be comprehensively expressed and understood 
in these concrete dynamical terms: Flow is a series 
of instances of cognitive insight, instantiated and 
perpetuated by the formation of long-range atypical 
network connections, serving to establish qualita­
tively novel macroscopic network configurations, 
thereby shifting the constraints of total system 
behavior. Furthermore, this self-perpetuating cas­
cade of insightful processing diffuses spontaneously 
throughout the cognitive network, behaving as a 
self-organizing open complex system that is dynam­
ically embedded in, and in exchange with, its imme­
diate entropic surrounding. This naturally cascading 
phenomenon can be understood as arising out of a 
diffusion of procedural priming, a series of trans­
ferences of mental sets, which serves to procedur­
ally provoke the system into a mode of operation 
that readily affords further insightful processing. In 
this way, SOC processing and small-world connec­
tion mutually afford one another, promoting the 
cultivation of insight cascades fluidly throughout 
the system. This conceptualization of the flow state 
highlights the intense dynamical coupling between 
agent, action, and the environment. This act of
flowing engages the agent in a very powerful form 
of implicit learning (expanded upon in the follow­
ing section) that is phenomenologically laden with 
a sense of meaning and reward, and, importantly, an 
experience of fluency and effortlessness.
Intuition
Another important phenomenological feature of 
both insight and flow is that they are experienced 
as non-deliberative and often ineffable (i.e., sponta­
neous) processes. Therefore in order to understand 
flow better, it is important to integrate an under­
standing of intuitive processing into the current 
model. Intuition is a concept that has been strongly 
developed in the work of Hogarth. He conceptual­
izes intuition as a result of implicit learning, based 
in the tacit, as opposed to deliberate, system, which 
he describes as effortless, reactive, and produc­
ing “approximate” responses. Hogarth specifically 
frames intuition as follows: “the essence of intuitive 
responses is that they are reached with little apparent 
effort and typically without conscious awareness. 
They involve little or no conscious deliberation” 
(2001, p. 14). This aligns with Reber’s suggestion 
that knowledge and intuitive feelings might arise 
out of an implicit learning experience (Reber, 1989, 
1993). This intuitive implicit system contrasts with 
the analytic deliberate system emphasized by the 
computational framework.
Hogarth points out two shortcomings of implicit 
processing. First, as implied earlier, implicit process­
ing yields intuitions that are rarely precise. This is 
because implicit learning specifically suffers from 
the problem of over-fitting. Over-fitting occurs 
when correlational noise from the environment is 
interpreted as being causally relevant to the pattern 
of action. This informs Hogarth’s notion of the ideal 
structure of an environment conducive to effective 
intuition acquisition. First, errors are diagnostic, 
and as such should have a large causal impact on 
performance. Second, the quality of feedback is 
very important. It should be speedy and accurate, 
without noise, delay, or bias. In this way, learning is 
facilitated and over-fitting is reduced, allowing for 
a learning system that tracks less correlational noise 
and more causal signal. Just as a scientific experi­
ment is designed to distinguish cause from corre­
lation by testing for disconfirmation, searching for 
a tight connection between the independent and 
dependent variables, and deconfounding variables, 
Hogarth proposes that the learning environment for 
implicit learning can be set up to do the same. The 
second shortcoming of the implicit learning system
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
321

that Hogarth highlights is that implicit processing 
can only pick up on patterns in actualities exist­
ing in the environment, but is limited in its ability 
to yield patterns regarding potentialities. In other 
words, the implicit system cannot form patterns 
regarding possibilities of action not yet occurring 
in the environment— it cannot engage in counter- 
factual prediction. Overcoming these limitations in 
implicit processing is critical to the acquisition of 
good learning, but moreover is essential for adaptive 
processing.
Hogarth’s work on the cultivation of intuition 
raises some important implications for process­
ing and learning during flow. Importantly, it 
should be noted that the conditions of learning 
that Hogarth outlines mirror the conditions that 
Csikszentmihalyi implicates in flow. A system of 
learning that tightly couples actions and environ­
ment with timely feedback— thus providing high 
error diagnosticity— is a system conducive to culti­
vating flow and good intuitions. This suggests that 
flow is an evolutionary marker indicating when we 
are practicing good implicit learning (i.e. gaining 
intuition into real-world causal patterns, as opposed 
to correlational noise) and consequently promot­
ing a form of highly relevant interaction with the 
environment. Furthermore, where implicit learn­
ing is limited to modeling actuality, the flow state 
promotes the exploration of possibilities, with the 
self-perpetuating diffusion of atypical links across 
the cognitive network prompting new network 
configurations. The flow state, as such, is a highly 
desirable state, as it overcomes the two deficits of 
implicit learning highlighted by Hogarth. Flow is 
a system of processing and cultivating causal pat­
tern recognition in which cognition is stimulated 
to explore possibilities of action. These two ele­
ments are interdependent: exploring possibilities 
allows one to distinguish between actual causation 
and mere empirical generalization. In turn, zeroing- 
in on causation helps guide the insight away from 
being illusory or fantastical. Hence flow is so preva­
lent and beneficial because flow has a massively 
adaptive evolutionary function: It not only yields 
powerful implicit learning, but also provides feed­
back about how good these acquired intuitions and 
learning are.
Flow: Optimal Implicit Learning
Throughout this chapter, an argument for flow 
as optimal implicit learning has been proposed. 
Beyond overcoming the two limitations of implicit
learning as proposed by Hogarth, flow will be spe­
cifically framed as a state that generates a form of 
scaffolded learning. This will be made clearer by 
invoking the work of Vygotsky. Vygotsky describes 
a zone o f  proxim al development (ZPD) or proxim al 
learning (Vygotsky, 1978). He differentiates the 
kind of development or learning instantiated dur­
ing independent problem-solving from the kind of 
development that is gained through problem-solving 
under external guidance. The ZPD is described 
as being the kind of learning that a parent affords 
to a child: Because a parent can provide corrective 
feedback during learning, children are able to meet 
demands beyond those they could tackle on their 
own. Thus, the ZPD is the foundation for a learn­
ing system in which one does one’s best learning. As 
such, proximal learning strongly implicates the phe­
nomenon of skill stretching. It follows that when a 
child takes on the role of the guiding parent— when 
a child internalizes his or her teacher— he or she is 
capable of engaging in the ZPD without this exter­
nal aid. As such, a cognitive system is capable of 
developing its own cognition by entering itself into 
the ZPD. In other words, this process of internaliza­
tion allows the cognitive system to self-scaffold its 
process of learning.
We propose that in the flow state, the insight- 
cascade process is acting to pull one into the ZPD, 
a situation where demand is just beyond skill. 
One’s own insight experience is taking on the role 
of the internalized teacher, helping one to reach 
and scaffold the learning process. In addition, the 
tight system of timely and highly diagnostic feed­
back at play between the actor and his environ­
ment further affords a level of guidance that helps 
maintain the structure of self-scaffolded learning. 
Flow, conceptualized as a self-organized dynami­
cal insight cascade, can be understood as a self- 
perpetuating feedback loop of insightful processing 
occurring within the ZPD. The flow channel is a 
specific instance of the ZPD. The flow phenom­
enon, in DSTC terms, is an attractor for the ZPD; 
it is an emergent, self-organizing process that keeps 
cognition in an internalized state of optimal learn­
ing (Figure 24.5).
We have argued that the flow state is, as Hogarth 
claims, optimal for implicitly learning complex pat­
terns in the environment and distinguishing them 
from correlational ones while exploring possibilities 
of action and learning. Further, it is also the opti­
mal state for learning in general because it causes 
one to enter the ZPD. Flow marks optimal insight, 
an intuitive learning of complex causal patterns,
322
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Skill
Skill
Figure 24.5. The overlap between the flow construct and the zone of proximal development.
supported by the open self-organizing system of 
cognition.
Conclusion
This chapter has offered a comprehensive account 
of the phenomenon of flow, within a cognitive 
scientific framework, to provide accounts for the 
underlying cognitive process and structural mecha­
nism that mediate flow, and to explain why flow is 
a universal psychological occurrence. This concep­
tualization of flow extends beyond the description 
offered by Csikszentmihalyi and provides an expla­
nation for the phenomenological vividness attrib­
uted to the flow experience.
The alternative conceptualization of flow appeals 
to the Gestalt notion of insight, based within 
a dynamical framework, expressed as a form of 
engagement that qualitatively differs from the 
incremental learning of computational inferential 
models. Specifically, flow is expressed as a self- 
perpetuating insight cascade— an extended “aha!” 
This understanding of flow suggests a dynamic 
interplay between the generation of insight prob­
lems and subsequent insight problem-solving, such 
that each instantiation of insightful restructuring 
procedurally primes the agent for further insight­
ful processing. This cascading effect is explained as a 
series of transfers of mental sets and thus exemplifies 
a markedly implicit and procedural form of engage­
ment, and tight coupling between the agent and his 
or her surroundings.
Complexity theory provides an apt framework 
to conceptualize the highly implicit and insightful 
processing occurring during flow. Namely, it frames 
human cognition as a flexible and dynamic engine 
of thought and behavior that behaves as an open 
complex system and evolves as a self-organizing
multi-stable system. Appealing to this framework, 
the DSTC thus explains the phenomenon of cogni­
tive insight as an instance of self-organization from 
which emerges a new macroscopic cognitive struc­
ture. This view emphasizes self-organization, and 
thus the process of insight, involving the spontaneous 
breaking and reforming of constraints, or in other 
words, a requisite micro-level interaction that yields 
the new emergent macro-structures in order to re­
establish order in the system. The DSTC bridges the 
gap between lower-level processes and higher-order 
cognition, and mirrors the Gestalt understanding 
of insightful restructuring. Network theory supple­
ments the DSTC by providing the structural mech­
anism underlying insight, as an instance of atypical 
association. This creation of a small-world network 
that results in a macroscopic reconfiguration is the 
mechanism for shifting frame. Flow thus implicates 
the formation of small-world networks in the brain, 
where each atypical insightful wiring prompts the 
network to search for more atypical associations, 
thus engaging in a self-perpetuating cascade of 
insightful connections.
Understanding flow in terms of enhanced 
insightful processing highlights the skill-stretching 
nature of the phenomenon. In addition to 
enabling the agent to self-scaffold into the ZPD, 
the flow channel is an environment for learning 
that fosters the cultivation of good intuition, dis­
tinguishing correlational noise from causal signal, 
and promotes the exploration of possibilities in 
action. As such, flow is an optimal state to yield 
development of the system. This understanding of 
flow helps explain why it is not only such a preva­
lent phenomenon, but also one that is regarded as 
intrinsically desirable and valued, while yielding 
substantial benefits.
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
323

The phenomenology of flow, as initially out­
lined by Csikszentmihalyi, can now be more richly 
explained. Flow, conceptualized as an insight cas­
cade, is a highly dynamic and complex phenom­
enon that creates a stage whereupon the individual 
can more deeply engage and learn, yet in an effort­
less manner. The qualitative shift in processing 
during flow marks a critical increase in processing 
fluency, matched by the accompanying experiential 
fluency— the phenomenological breakthrough— so 
reliably reported with the “aha!” experience. This 
powerfully gratifying experience that accompanies 
flowing is an evolutionary marker that indicates 
heightened relevance in processing— the deep sense 
of doing precisely the right thing at the right time in 
the right way, or in other words, being in the zone.
Finally, flow is a prototypical example of the 
power of spontaneous thought to enhance and 
develop core cognitive abilities. It is an evolution­
ary marker for a form of self-organized process­
ing that reconfigures brain networks in a way that 
increases the fluency of processing, while improving 
problem-solving and implicit learning. It is neither 
a deliberative form of processing nor an automatic 
form of processing. Flow unfolds effortlessly, but 
fills awareness with optimal experience that is highly 
adaptive and creative in nature. It is perhaps the best 
form of spontaneous thought.
References
Allison, M., & Duncan, M. (1988). Women, work, and flow. 
In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.), 
Optimal experience (pp. 118—137). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bak, P., Tang, C., & Wiesenfeld, K. (1987). Self-organized criti­
cality: An explanation of 1/f noise. Physical Review Letters, 
59(4), 381-384.
Baker-Sennett, 
J., 
& 
Ceci, 
S. 
(1996). 
Cognitive
insights: Examining clue-efficiency and strategies related to 
discovery. Journal of Creative Behaviour, 30, 153—172. 
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 22, 577—609.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and 
social psychology. London: Cambridge University Press.
Beggs, J. M. (2008). The criticality hypothesis: How local cor­
tical networks might optimize information processing. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 366,329—343. 
Beggs, J. M., & Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal avalanches in 
neocortical circuits. The Journal of Neuroscience, 23(35), 
11167-11177.
Beggs, J. M., & Plenz, D. (2004). Neuronal avalanches are 
diverse and precise activity patterns that are table for many 
hours in cortical slice cultures. The Journal of Neuroscience, 
24(22), 5216-5229.
Bertschinger, N., & Natschlager, T. (2004). Real-time computa­
tion at the edge of chaos in recurrent neural networks. Neural 
Computation, 16, 1413—1436.
Bonachela, J. A., de Franciscis, S., Torres, J. J., & Munoz, M. 
A. (2010). Self-organization without conservation: are neu­
ronal avalanches generically critical? Journal of Statistical 
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2010(02), P02015.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Aha! Insight expe­
rience correlates with solution activation in the right hemi­
sphere. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10(3), 730—737.
Bowden, E. M., Jung-Beeman, M., Fleck, J., & Kounios, J. 
(2005). New approaches to demystifying insight. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 9(7), 322-328.
Chronicle, E. P, MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C. (2004). 
What makes an insight problem? The roles of heuristics, goal 
conception, and solution recoding in knowledge-lean prob­
lems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 30(1), 14—27.
Clarke, S. G., & Haworth, J. T. (1994). “Flow” experience in the 
daily lives of sixth-form college students. British Journal of 
Psychology, 85(4), 511-523.
Crick, F. H. (1979). Thinking about the brain. Scientific 
American, 241(3), 219—232.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology 
of discovery and invention. New York: Harper Perennial.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding Flow. Psychology Today, 
30(4), 46-71.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Robinson, R. E. (1990). The art of see­
ing: An interpretation of the aesthetic encounter. Malibu, CA: J. 
Paul Getty Trust.
Dietrich, A. (2004). Neurocognitive mechanisms underlying 
the experience of flow. Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 
746-761.
Dietrich, E., & Markman, A. B. (2003). Discrete thoughts: Why 
cognition must use discrete representations. Mind and 
Language, 18, 95—119.
Dixon, J. A., & Bangert, A. S. (2002). The prehistory of discov­
ery: Precursors of representational change in solving gear- 
system problems. Developmental Psychology, 38, 918-933.
Durso, F. T., Rea, C. B., & Dayton, T. (1994). Graph-theoretic 
confirmation of restructuring during insight. Psychological 
Science, 5(2), 94-98.
Epstein, W. (1988). Has the time come to rehabilitate Gestalt 
theory? Psychological Research, 50, 2—6.
Finger, K. (2002). Mazes and music: Using perceptual processing 
to release verbal overshadowing. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
16, 887-896.
Forster, J., 
Friedman, 
R.S., 
& Liberman, N. 
(2004).
Temporal construal effects on abstract and concrete think­
ing: Consequences for insight and creative cognition. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 177-189.
Goldberg, E., Podell, K., & Lovell, M. (1994). Lateralization 
of frontal lobe functions and cognitive novelty. Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 6, 371.
Haldeman, C., & Beggs, J. M. (2005). Critical branching captures 
activity in living neural networks and maximizes the number 
of metastable states. Physical Review Letters, 94, 058101.
Haken, H. (1980). Synergetics: Are cooperative phenomena 
governed by universal principles? Naturwissenshaften, 67, 
121-128.
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Hesse, J., & Gross, T. (2014). Self-organized criticality as a fun­
damental property of neural systems. Frontiers in Systems 
Neuroscience, 8.
Hogarth, R. (2001). Educating intuition. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
324
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Hsu, D., & Beggs, J. M. (2006). Neuronal avalanches and criti­
cality: A dynamical model for homeostasis. Neurocomputing, 
69, 1134-1136.
Hunt, C., & Carroll, M. A. (2008). Verbal-overshadowing 
effect: How temporal perspective may exacerbate or alle­
viate the processing shift. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
22, 85-94.
Jackson, S. (1995). Factors influencing the occurrence of flow 
state in elite athletes. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 7, 
138-166.
Jackson, S. (1996). Toward a conceptual understanding of flow 
experience in elite athletes. Research Quarterly for Exercise and 
Sport, 67, 76—90.
Jung-Beeman, M., et al. (2004). Neural activity when people 
solve verbal problems with insight. PLoS Biology, 2(4), 
500-510.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The self organization of 
brain and behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kinouchi, O., & Copelli, M. (2006). Optimal dynamical 
range of excitable networks at criticality. Nature Physics, 2, 
348-352.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D. (1999). 
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight 
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 25(6), 1534-1555.
Kohler, W. (1924). Die physischen Gestalten in Ruhe und im sta- 
tionaren Zustand: Eine naturphilosophische Untersuchung. 
Erlangen: Verlag der Philosophichen Akademie.
Kohler, W. (1947). Gestalt psychology: An introduction to new con­
cepts in modern psychology. New York: Liveright.
Kugler, P. N., & Turvey, M. T. (1987). Information, natural 
law, and the self-assembly of rhythmic movement. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Legenstein, R., & Maass, W. (2007). Edge of chaos and predic­
tion of computational performance for neural circuit models. 
Neural Networks, 20, 323—334.
Lewis, M. D. (2005). Bridging emotion theory and neurobiol­
ogy through dynamic systems modeling. Behavioural and 
Brain Sciences, 28, 169—245.
Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of 
Atmospheric Sciences, 20, 130—141.
Macrae, C. N., & Lewis, H. L. (2002). Do I know you? 
Processing orientation and face recognition. Psychological 
Science, 13, 194-196.
Markova, I. S. (2005). Insight in psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Massimini, F., & Carli, M. (1988). The systematic assessment of 
flow in daily experience. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & I. Selega 
Csikszentmihalyi (Eds.), Optimal experience, pp. 266—287. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Greeno, J. G. (1972). Structural differences 
between learning outcomes produced by different instructional 
methods. Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 165-173.
Mayers, P. (1978). Flow in adolescence and its relation to the school 
experience. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Chicago.
Mottet, D., & Bootsma, R. J. (1999). The dynamics of goal- 
directed rhythmical aiming. Biological Cybernetics, 80,
235-245.
Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2002). The concept 
of flow. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook 
of positive psychology (pp. 89-105). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1956). The logic theory machine. 
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-2, 61—79.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1976). Computer science as empir­
ical enquiry: Symbols and search. Communications of the 
Association for Computing Machinery, 19, 113—126.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 12(6), 237—241.
Perry, S. K. (1999). Writing in flow. Cincinnati, OH: Writer’s 
Digest Books.
Plenz, D., & Thiagarajan, T. C. (2007). The organizing prin­
ciples of neuronal avalanches: Cell assemblies in the cortex? 
Trends in Neurosciences, 30(3), 101—110.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219—235.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge: An essay 
on the cognitive unconscious. New York: Oxford University 
Press, p. 32.
Sardanyes, J., & Sole, R. V. (2006). Bifurcations and phase 
transitions in spatially extended two-member hypercycles. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 243, 468—482.
Schilling, M. A. (2005). A “small-world” network model of 
cognitive insight. Creativity Research Journal, 17(2, 3), 
131-154.
Schooler, J. W., McCleod, C., Brooks, K., & Melcher, J. (1993). 
[Individual differences in solving insight and analytical prob­
lems] . Unpublished raw data.
Shaw, R. E., & Turvey, M. T. (1981). Coalitions as models for 
ecosystems: A realist perspective on perceptual organiza­
tion. In M. Kubovy & J. Pomerantz (Eds.), Perceptual orga­
nization (pp. 343—415). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Shernoff, D. J., Csikszentmihalyi, M., Schneider, B., & Shernoff, 
E. T. (2003). Student engagement in high school class­
rooms from the perspective of flow theory. School Psychology 
Quarterly, 18(2), 158-176.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioural model of rational choice. 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69( 1), 99—118.
Stephen, D. G., & Dixon, J. A. (2009). The self-organization 
of insight: Entropy and power laws in problem solving. The 
Journal of Problem Solving, 2(1), 12—101.
Stephen, D. G., Dixon, J. A., Isenhower, R. W. (2009). Dynamics 
of representational change: Entropy, action, and cognition. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 35(6), 1811-1832.
Sternberg, R. J., & Davidson, J. E. (Eds.). (1995). The nature of 
insight. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Swenson, R., & Turvey, M. T. (1991). Thermodynamic rea­
sons for perception-action cycles. Ecological Psychology, 3, 
317-348.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach 
to the development of cognition and action. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Thorndike, E. L. (1932). Reward and punishment in animal 
learning. Comparative Psychological Monographs, 8(4).
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003). 
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331—350.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2005). 
Human cognition and l / f  scaling. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 134, 117—123.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of 
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
J O H N  V E R V A E K E ,  L EO F E R R A R O ,  A N D  A R I A N N E  H E R R E R A - B E N N E T T
32-5

Watts, D. J. (1999). Networks, dynamics, and the small- 
world phenomenon. American Journal of Sociology, 105(2), 
493-527.
Webster, G., & Goodwin, B. (1996). Form and transfor­
mation: Generative and relational principles in biology. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (1996). Prolegomena to theories of insight in 
problem-solving: A taxonomy of problems. In R. J. Sternberg 
&J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 157—196). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wells, A. J. (1988). Variations in mothers’ self-esteem in daily 
life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(4), 
661—668.
Wertheimer, M. (1923). Laws of organization in perceptual 
forms. First published as Untersuchungen zur Lehre von 
der Gestalt II, in Psychologische Forschung, 4, 301—350. 
Translation published in W. Ellis (1938). A source book 
of Gestalt psychology (pp. 71-88). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
32 6
F L O W  AS S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

C H A P T E R
25
Internal Orientation in Aesthetic Experience
Oshin Vartanian
Abstract
There is considerable evidence to suggest that aesthetic experiences engage a distributed set of 
structures in the brain, and likely emerge from the interactions of multiple neural systems. In addition, 
aside from an external (i.e., object-focused) orientation, aesthetic experiences also involve an internal 
(i.e., person-focused) orientation. This internal orientation appears to have two dissociable neural 
components: one component involves the processing of visceral feeling states (i.e., interoception) 
and primarily engages the insula, whereas the other involves the processing of self-referential, 
autobiographical, and narrative information, and is represented by activation in the default mode 
network. Evidence supporting this neural dissociation has provided insights into processes that can lead 
to deep and moving aesthetic experiences.
Key Words: aesthetics, self-referential, interoception, narrative, default mode network
By their very nature, aesthetic judgments—  
broadly defined as evaluative appraisals o f objects— 
include an external orientation. For example, 
whether we are evaluating the attractiveness of 
faces (Chatterjee, Thomas, Smith, & Aguirre, 
2009; Vartanian, Lam, Fisher, Granic, & Goel,
2013), assessing the desirability of consumer goods 
(Reimann, Zaichkowsky, Neuhaus, Bender, & 
Weber, 2010; Van der Laan, De Ridder, Viergever, 
& Smeets, 2012), or pondering the beauty of works 
of art (Ishizu & Zeki, 2011; Nadal, Munar, Capo, 
Rosello, & Cela-Conde, 2008), our attention is 
always directed toward an object. However, phe­
nomenologically, we are also aware that our aes­
thetic experiences extend beyond object-focused 
judgments alone, and include an important internal 
aspect as well. Typically, we gain awareness of this 
inner aspect when we are deeply moved by a work 
of art, a natural scene, or even an idea. Such expe­
riences serve to deepen our interactions with the 
world, and embed our aesthetic experiences within 
our rich emotional and narrative lives.
My aim in this chapter is to draw on findings 
from the nascent field of neuroaesthetics to explore 
the dissociable components of this internal orienta­
tion of aesthetic experiences. Specifically, research 
in neuroaesthetics has shown that the internal ori­
entation of aesthetic experiences is not a unitary 
construct, but rather has two dissociable neural 
and psychological aspects: emotional and auto- 
biographical/narrative. Furthermore, this distinc­
tion has important implications for the structure 
of aesthetic experiences. To make a case for this 
distinction, I will begin by reviewing some of the 
basic findings from meta-analytic studies of the 
neuroaesthetics literature, before discussing a newly 
proposed neurological model for the emergence 
of aesthetic experiences (Chatterjee & Vartanian, 
2014, 2016). I will then discuss a select set of 
studies that have a particular bearing on internal 
orientations in aesthetic experiences, and will end 
by highlighting the relevance of the findings for 
our understanding of the structure of aesthetic 
experiences.
327

Aesthetic Judgment: Distributed Structures 
in the Brain
Perhaps the first important finding to emerge 
from neuroimaging studies of aesthetic experiences 
is that they engage a distributed set of structures in 
the brain (see Pearce et al., 2016). To demonstrate 
this point, I will review the results of three recent 
meta-analyses of the neuroimaging literature on aes­
thetic judgment, each of which has parsed the data 
in a different way, and at the same time has offered 
unique insights into the process. Vartanian and Skov
(2015) conducted a meta-analysis of studies that 
focused on a particular class of stimuli— paintings. 
Specifically, for their meta-analysis, they included 
data from 15 functional magnetic resonance imag­
ing (fMRI) studies that involved viewing of paint­
ings, regardless of task instructions; for example, 
they included studies of passive viewing, active judg­
ment, unrestricted viewing, and memory (recogni­
tion), among others. Their results demonstrated that 
viewing paintings activated a distributed set of struc­
tures in the brain, each likely contributing a specific 
component to the overall experience of viewing art­
works. Perhaps not surprisingly, viewing paintings 
activated regions in the visual cortex, including the 
lingual gyrus and the middle occipital gyrus. These 
activations can be attributed to the processing of 
various early, intermediate, and late visual features 
of the stimuli embedded within paintings, including 
orientation, shape, color, grouping, and categoriza­
tion (see Chatterjee, 2003; Greenlee & Tse, 2008; 
Wandell, Dumoulin, & Brewer, 2009). Although 
not located in the occipital lobes, the inferior tem­
poral cortex has a well-established role in the visual 
representation of form and color (Gross, 1992), and 
likely contributes to these processes while viewing 
paintings as well. Vartanian and Skov (2015) also 
observed activation in the precuneus, likely due to 
its involvement in the visuospatial exploration of 
pictorial stimuli (Cupchik, Vartanian, Crawley, & 
Mikulis, 2009; Fairhall & Ishai, 2008).
The meta-analysis also revealed activation in the 
fusiform gyrus and the parahippocampal place area 
(PPA). The fusiform gyrus is involved in object per­
ception and recognition, and its activation likely 
represents the detection of objects within paint­
ings (e.g., faces) (Grill-Spector & Sayres, 2008; 
Kanwisher & Yovel, 2009). In turn, the PPA is 
involved in the perception and recognition of places 
(Epstein & Kanwisher, 1998), which explains its 
involvement while viewing paintings rich in rep­
resentations of scenes (e.g., landscapes). Also acti­
vated was the anterior temporal lobe (i.e., superior
temporal gyrus), a region within the temporal lobes 
involved not just in semantic memory— including 
our knowledge of objects— but also in higher-order 
conceptual integration of information in relation to 
objects (e.g., how does a knife function?) (Bonner 
& Price, 2013; Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007; 
Peelen & Caramazza, 2012). Its activation while 
viewing paintings suggests that the perception 
of paintings might trigger higher-order semantic 
analysis of the represented objects beyond mere 
recognition.
The results also revealed two additional and theo­
retically interesting sets of activations. First, viewing 
paintings activated the anterior insula bilaterally, 
along with the putamen. The insula is a structure 
in the brains core affective system, and is strongly 
associated with the visceral perception and the 
experience of (typically negative) emotions (Barrett, 
Mesquita, Ochsner, & Gross, 2007; Craig, 2010). 
In turn, the putamen is a structure in the basal gan­
glia, reliably activated by the anticipation of rewards 
(Liu, Hairston, Schrier, & Fan, 2011). Its activa­
tion while viewing paintings could signal their per­
ceived rewarding properties. In addition, however, 
the results also revealed activation in the posterior 
cingulate cortex bilaterally. This region has emerged 
as a key component of the default mode network 
(DMN) involved in mind-wandering (Christoff, 
Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; 
Mason et al., 2007), and its involvement here sug­
gests that viewing paintings— across a variety of task 
instructions— might trigger internalized cognitions.
In another meta-analysis of this literature, Boccia 
et al. (2016) included data from 14 fMRI studies 
that had required participants to make aesthetic 
judgments about artworks. The focus of their meta­
analysis was in some sense narrower than Vartanian 
and Skov’s (2014) meta-analysis because of its focus 
on aesthetic judgment specifically. However, it also 
included data not considered by Vartanian and Skov 
(2015) (e.g., studies involving viewing sculptures). 
Consistent with Vartanian and Skov (2015), Boccia 
et al. s (2016) results demonstrated that, overall, aes­
thetic judgments about artworks activated a distrib­
uted set of regions in the brain bilaterally, including 
the bilateral inferior occipital gyri, lingual and 
parahippocampal gyri, inferior frontal gyri, anterior 
cingulate cortex, amygdala, and insula. Unilaterally, 
the middle frontal gyrus, fusiform gyrus, and precu­
neus were activated in the right hemisphere, and the 
medial frontal gyrus, precentral gyrus, and middle 
occipital gyrus in the left hemisphere. The overlap 
between regions observed in Vartanian and Skov
328
I N T E R N A L  O R I E N T A T I O N  I N  A E S T H E T I C  E X P E R I E N C E

(2014) and Boccia et al. (2016) is readily apparent, 
suggesting again that exposure to visual art (mostly 
occurring in the context of aesthetic judgment) 
engages structures in the brain involved in percep­
tion, emotion, and valuation.
However, the novel contribution of Boccia et al. 
(2016) involved further analysis of the data broken 
down by categories of paintings, namely portraits, 
scenes, abstract paintings, and body sculptures. 
This enabled the authors to isolate regions in the 
ventral visual stream that were differentially sensi­
tive to the specific content of artworks. The results 
revealed that aesthetic judgment of portraits acti­
vated the fusiform face area (FFA), the inferior 
occipital gyrus, as well as the amygdala. In turn, for 
scenes, the activated regions included clusters in the 
PPA, the retrosplenial cortex, and the lingual gyrus. 
Abstract paintings activated the posterior cingulate 
cortex bilaterally, whereas body sculptures activated 
bilateral fusiform body areas, supplementary motor 
areas, the inferior frontal gyri, the hippocampi 
and insula, the lingual and inferior occipital gyri, 
inferior frontal gyrus, and superior parietal lobule 
in the right hemisphere. These category-specific 
activations revealed that in the course of the aes­
thetic judgment of artworks, the brain is sensitive 
to the specific content of the stimuli. For example, 
and predictably, whereas portraits are more likely 
to activate the FFA, scenes are more likely to acti­
vate the PPA. However, of particular interest here, 
the posterior cingulate cortex, a part of the DM N 
also activated in Vartanian and Skov’s (2014) meta­
analysis, was associated with viewing abstract art­
works specifically. It is possible that due to their 
reduced perceptual constraints, viewing abstract 
paintings might be a particularly potent trigger for
an internal orientation in thinking, compared to 
viewing paintings that are rich in representational 
content, which tend to direct thinking toward 
object recognition and identification (see Cupchik 
et al., 2009). This possibility is consistent with the 
idea that non-representational art has the ability to 
facilitate mind-wandering, in part because it lacks 
representational content that anchors perception to 
object recognition and identification.
The idea that the content of paintings can have 
an effect on mind-wandering was examined by 
Wang, Mo, Vartanian, Cant, and Cupchik (2015), 
who presented their subjects with traditional 
Chinese landscape paintings and realistic oil land­
scape paintings, and asked them to rate each paint­
ing on a number of different dimensions, including 
mind-wandering (Experiment 1). Critically, unlike 
realistic oil landscape paintings that aim to convey 
nature as precisely as possible, traditional Chinese 
landscape paintings aim to convey an experien­
tial sense of “being in nature” rather than “seeing 
nature” (Law, 2011) (Figure 25.1). A prominent 
technique in this type of painting is referred to 
as 
“drawing-blank,” which involves applying 
pressure to the brush in such a way that it leaves 
white streaks (i.e., blank spaces) on the canvass, 
meant to encourage deeper interaction with the 
artwork. As hypothesized, traditional Chinese 
landscape paintings were found to evoke more 
mind-wandering than realistic oil landscape paint­
ings, suggesting that when cues for object recog­
nition are reduced, mind-wandering is facilitated. 
In addition, aesthetic judgment of portraits also 
activated the amygdala, another important region 
in the brain’s core emotion network (Barrett et al.,
2007). This is consistent with the well-established
Figure 25.1. (See Color Insert) Examples of traditional Chinese and realistic old landscape paintings. Adapted with permission from 
Wang et al. (2015).
O S H I N  V A R T A N I A N
329

ability of faces to convey affective information, 
which in turn might trigger reciprocal empathic 
responses 
in the viewer 
(see 
Chatterjee 
& 
Vartanian, 2014, 2016).
Finally, Brown, Goa, Tisdelle, Eickhoff, & Liotti 
(2011) conducted a meta-analysis of 93 fMRI and 
positron emission tomography (PET) studies of 
positive-valence appraisal across sensory modali­
ties. They intentionally focused on different sensory 
modalities because they were motivated to find core 
universal processes underlying aesthetic evaluation 
across the senses. As such, they included studies that 
involved the appraisal of the valence of perceived 
objects in the visual, auditory, gustatory, and olfac­
tory domains. In addition, within each modality 
they included a wide range of stimuli. For example, 
within vision they selected studies that involved 
evaluations of pictures, artworks, images of food, 
erotic images, and images of loved ones (such as 
infants and romantic partners). Their results dem­
onstrated that although a set of regions was sensitive 
to aesthetic evaluation, the region activated most 
reliably across a ll modalities was the right anterior 
insula (Barrett et al., 2007; Craig, 2010). Based on 
this finding, Brown et al. (2011) argued that at its 
core, aesthetic judgment consists of the appraisal of 
the valence of perceived objects. In addition, they 
also hypothesized that the neural system deployed 
for this purpose likely originally evolved for the 
appraisal of objects of survival advantage (e.g., 
food), and was later co-opted for the experience of 
objects that satisfy social needs, such as artworks 
(see also Feist, 2007).
In summary, the results of the three meta­
analyses discussed here reveal that aesthetic judg­
ments activate a distributed network of structures 
in the brain, each of which appears to contribute to 
a specific sub-process supporting the behavior. Not 
only was the anterior insula shown to be activated in 
studies of positive-valence appraisal (Brown et al.,
2011), but it was also activated in studies involv­
ing exposure to paintings regardless of task demands 
(Vartanian & Skov, 2014) as well as studies of aes­
thetic judgment (Boccia et al., 2016). This suggests 
that viewing and rating stimuli such as artworks 
have the ability to generate an affective response 
in the viewer, perhaps automatically. The involve­
ment of the insula could represent the importance 
of visceral feeling states (i.e., interoception) (Craig, 
2001) in aesthetic experiences.
In addition, the results of Vartanian and Skov
(2014) revealed activation in the bilateral poste­
rior cingulate in response to viewing paintings.
This is consistent with the suggestion that exposure 
to art can trigger an internal mental orientation. 
Interestingly, when the data were broken down 
and analyzed in category-specific ways, it was the 
aesthetic judgment of abstract artworks that was 
shown to activate the posterior cingulate cortex 
bilaterally (Boccia et al., 2016). This suggests that 
specific categories of art might be stronger triggers 
of the DM N than others. Next, I will turn to how 
these structures come together to support aesthetic 
experiences.
Aesthetic Experiences: Three Interacting 
Systems
Thus far I have reviewed some meta-analytic 
findings from the field of neuroaesthetics to dem­
onstrate that aesthetic evaluations and exposure 
to artworks engage a distributed set of structures 
in the brain. Chatterjee and Vartanian (2014,
2016) have recently argued that this distributed set 
of brain structures can be broadly organized within 
three neural systems: emotion-valuation, sensory- 
motor, and meaning-knowledge (Figure 25.2). 
According to this view, aesthetic experiences are an 
emergent property of the interaction of these sys­
tems in the brain. A brief review of Chatterjee and 
Vartanians (2014, 2016) tripartite system will be 
presented next.
With respect to the emotion-valuation system, 
numerous studies have shown that the aesthetic 
evaluation of a broad category of cultural artifacts 
(e.g., paintings, architecture, sculptures, music) 
activates the same neural systems that are activated 
while evaluating primary reinforcers (e.g., food,
Figure 25.2. (See Color Insert) The aesthetic triad. According to 
this framework, aesthetic experiences are an emergent property 
of the interaction of the sensory-motor, emotion-valuation, and 
knowledge-meaning neural systems. Reprinted, with permission, 
from Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18 ©2014 by Cell Press.
330
I N T E R N A L  O R I E N T A T I O N  I N  A E S T H E T I C  E X P E R I E N C E

drink), including the nucleus accumbens, the dor­
sal striatum, and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) 
(Kampe, Frith, Dolan, & Frith, 2001; O ’Doherty 
et al., 2003; Winston, O ’Doherty, Kilner, Perrett, 
& Dolan, 2007). In fact, a system involving the 
OFC and striatal neurons may underlie the valu­
ation of rewards irrespective of the modality giving 
rise to the rewarding stimuli (Montague & Berns, 
2002). This observation has given rise to the notion 
of a “common currency” for choice that transcends 
domains. In this sense, the involvement of these 
regions in aesthetic judgment likely represents a 
specific example of their more general role in evalu­
ative judgments involving an affective component.
With respect to the sensory-motor system, 
it should come as no surprise that the aesthetic 
evaluation of objects engages regions of the brain 
involved in sensation and perception. More inter­
esting, perhaps, is the observation that aesthetic 
experiences can also involve the motor system that 
taps into the extended mirror neuron system. This 
system is engaged when people infer the intent 
of artistic gestures, or observe the consequences 
of actions (Cattaneo & Rizzolatti, 2009; Gallese, 
Fadiga, Fogassi, & Rizzolatti, 1996). This subtle 
motor engagement represents an embodied ele­
ment of our empathetic responses to (visual) art. 
Drawing on the literature that has implicated the 
mirror neuron system in aesthetic interactions with 
artworks, Freedberg and Gallese (2007) have argued 
that our understanding of aesthetic experiences 
would be incomplete without seriously taking into 
consideration the role of the mirror neuron system 
in the process. This line of thinking is further cor­
roborated by cutting-edge and innovative research 
involving the collection of physiological data from 
museum-goers in the course of interacting with 
artworks in actual museum settings (Trondle & 
Tschacher, 2012; Tschacher et al., 2012). Indeed, 
this research has shown that the perception of art­
works has a profound effect on the physiology of 
the viewers, providing additional data for the argu­
ment that there is a notable embodied element in 
aesthetic experiences.
Finally, the meaning-knowledge system encom­
passes all the top-down and contextual factors that 
are known to influence aesthetic experiences. Here 
I will focus on two such factors. The first is exper­
tise, typically measured in the form of formal train­
ing in a relevant domain in the arts. For example, in 
the domain of architecture, it has been shown that 
architects and non-architects differ in their affec­
tive responses when assessing the aesthetic value
of buildings (Kirk, Skov, Christensen, & Nygaard, 
2009). In addition, there are eye-movement data to 
suggest that experts view aesthetic products (e.g., 
paintings and other design objects) differently 
than non-experts, displaying greater sensitivity to 
their structural and compositional properties than 
non-experts (Locher, 2014; Nodine, Locher, & 
Krupinski, 1993). Second, our experience of art­
works extends beyond their perceptual features, and 
involves attributions of factors such as authenticity 
(Newman & Bloom, 2012) and source of origin 
(e.g., from a museum vs. computer-generated; Kirk, 
Skov, Hulme, Christensen, & Zeki, 2009). Indeed, 
knowledge regarding authenticity also affects the 
neural response to art. For example, Huang, Bridge, 
Kemp, and Parker (2011) presented participants 
with portraits that were labeled as either authentic 
Rembrandts or fakes. Authentic paintings evoked 
greater OFC activity, whereas fakes evoked greater 
neural activity in the frontopolar cortex and the 
right precuneus. Indeed, recent years have witnessed 
a greater emphasis on the role of the meaning- 
knowledge system in aesthetic experiences (Bullot 
&Reber, 2013).
Importantly, not all aesthetic experiences neces­
sarily draw equally from each of the three systems. 
In addition, although aesthetic experiences can 
encompass explicit aesthetic judgments, they are not 
limited to them. Specifically, aesthetic emotions, as 
byproducts of how we interact with objects, can 
lead to aesthetic experiences without the necessity 
of explicit judgment (see Leder, Belke, Oeberst, & 
Augustin, 2004). As will be shown in the follow­
ing, this model can accommodate the emergence of 
internal orientations early or later in the course of 
interaction with visual stimuli, including artworks.
Internal Orientation: Two Components
The field of empirical aesthetics has recently been 
criticized on the grounds that historically, many 
experiments conducted therein have focused on a 
combination of seemingly artificial stimuli (e.g., ran­
dom polygons) and subtle emotions (e.g., arousal), 
rather than moving and profound encounters 
involving real artworks (Silvia, 2012). This criticism 
is valid, and in recent years the field has embraced 
the use of methodological innovations that enable 
one to collect data in naturalistic settings while 
people are engaged with artworks outside of rigid 
laboratory settings. Even within the narrow confines 
of neuroimaging settings, efforts have been made 
to better understand people’s deeper experiences 
within aesthetic contexts. Perhaps not surprisingly,
O S H I N  V A R T A N I A N
331

the shift toward the elicitation of depth in aesthetic 
encounters has led to novel discoveries that had not 
surfaced in earlier studies that were primarily focused 
on object-oriented aesthetic judgments. Here I will 
review a select set of studies that I believe have made 
important contributions to our understanding of 
internal orientations in aesthetic experiences, in the 
process highlighting the dissociable contributions of 
the insula and the DM N to this experience.
Using a passive viewing paradigm, Cupchik et al. 
(2009) presented their participants with representa­
tional paintings under two conditions. In the aes­
thetic condition they were instructed to “approach 
the paintings in a subjective and engaged manner, 
experiencing the mood of the work and the feel­
ings it evokes, and to focus on its colours, tones, 
composition, and shapes” (p. 86). In contrast, in the 
pragm atic condition they were instructed to “apply 
an everyday informational criterion for viewing the 
paintings, and to approach the images in an objec­
tive and detached manner to obtain information 
about the content of the painting and visual nar­
rative” (p. 86). The pragmatic condition was meant 
to represent the way in which people typically 
perceive objects in their everyday lives (i.e., with 
the goal of object identification), whereas the aes­
thetic condition was meant to capture interactions 
with artwork in explicitly aesthetic contexts (e.g., 
museum settings), involving subjective reactions 
to their stylistic and structural properties. In addi­
tion, the researchers opted to use representational 
paintings specifically because they are well suited for 
affective evocation as well as object recognition—  
the primary foci of their study. In turn, the baseline 
blocks consisted of non-representational paintings. 
Although they lacked representational content, the 
baseline paintings incorporated variations in color, 
shape, and form, thereby enabling a comparison of 
each experimental condition with the baseline con­
dition (to isolate areas involved in viewing represen­
tational content under varying task instructions).
When the aesthetic condition was contrasted with 
the baseline condition, activations were observed in 
the bilateral insula. In turn, when the pragmatic 
condition was contrasted with the baseline condi­
tion, activations were observed in the right fusiform 
gyrus (BA 37). In addition, significant activations 
were detected in the bilateral occipital gyri in both 
the aesthetic and pragmatic conditions compared 
to baseline. The direct comparison of aesthetic and 
pragmatic conditions revealed greater activation in 
the left lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) (BA 10) in 
the aesthetic condition. The results suggest that
engaging in an aesthetic orientation that explicitly 
emphasizes a focus on the mood and the feelings 
that artworks evoke in the observer activates the 
insula, consistent with this regions role in the expe­
rience of emotion. Importantly, research involv­
ing other media (e.g., sculptures) has corroborated 
the involvement of the insula in aesthetic evalua­
tion (e.g., Di Dio, Macaluso, & Rizzolatti, 2007), 
consistent with the results of Brown et al.’s (2011) 
meta-analysis that isolated this regions involvement 
in valence-based appraisals.
In turn, the activation observed in the left lat­
eral PFC (BA 10) when the aesthetic condition was 
contrasted directly with the pragmatic condition 
highlights top-down control in directing percep­
tion toward aesthetic orientation. This interpreta­
tion is consistent with two functions associated 
with BA 10. First, the lateral PFC (BA 10) has 
been shown to play a role in the top-down con­
trol of cognition (Ridderinkhof, Ullsperger, Crone, 
& Niewenhuis, 2004) and the maintenance of a 
main goal while performing concurrent sub-goals 
(Koechlin et al., 1999). In addition, lateral PFC 
has also been shown to be involved in higher- 
order self-referential processing and the evalua­
tion of internally generated information (Burgess, 
Dumontheil, & Gilbert, 2007; Christoff, Ream, 
Geddes, & Gabrieli, 2003; Northoff et al., 2006). 
In summary, the results of Cupchik et al. (2009) 
suggest that whereas the aesthetic orientation that 
people typically assume when viewing artworks 
activates the insula, the active assumption of that 
orientation likely requires the engagement of the 
lateral PFC (BA 10).
Another study that was deigned explicitly to 
probe the neural response to moving art was con­
ducted by Vessel, Starr, and Rubin (2012), who 
presented a diverse set of paintings to participants 
in the fMRI scanner, accompanied by the instruc­
tion to “give your gut-level response, based on how 
much you find the painting beautiful, compelling, 
or powerful... .  Respond on the basis of how much 
this image ‘moves’ you. What is most important is 
for you to indicate what works you find powerful, 
pleasing, or profound” (p. 3). Procedurally, the rat­
ings were conducted using a 1-4 scale that asked 
participants “how strongly does this painting move 
you?” Their analyses revealed suppressed deactiva­
tion of regions that constitute the DM N, including 
the medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior cin­
gulate cortex, only when participants viewed paint­
ings that they rated as most moving (i.e., level 4) but 
not otherwise. Equally important, they did not
332
I N T E R N A L  O R I E N T A T I O N  I N  A E S T H E T I C  E X P E R I E N C E

observe a linear increase in activation in the DM N 
as a function of increasing ratings (i.e., from 1 to 
4). Their results suggested that only our most moving 
aesthetic experiences involve the integration of sen­
sory and emotional reactions linked with personal 
relevance— a process known to engage the DMN.
That there should be something special about 
our most moving aesthetic experiences is consis­
tent with several contemporary theoretical models 
of aesthetic experience, including recently proposed 
dual-process models according to which artworks 
can be processed aesthetically using automatic or 
controlled processes, with the relative contribu­
tion of the two systems determining the depth of 
one’s aesthetic experience (e.g., Graf & Landwehr,
2015). Specifically, processing performed imme­
diately upon encountering an aesthetic object is 
likely to be bottom-up and stimulus-driven, giving 
rise to aesthetic evaluations of pleasure or displea­
sure. In turn, more elaborate top-down processing 
can emerge, giving rise to fluency-based aesthetic 
evaluations (e.g., interest, boredom, confusion). 
In many ways, this dual-process model is consis­
tent with information-processing models that also 
predict that more elementary stimulus-driven func­
tions performed on artworks are likely to occur 
early following exposure, whereas deeper and more 
elaborate processing is likely to occur later in the 
information-processing sequence of operations 
(Chatterjee, 2003; Leder et al., 2004).
Testing these models requires high temporal res­
olution studies of brain activity following exposure 
to art. Neuroimaging methods that allow examin­
ing the temporal aspects of aesthetic evaluation, 
such as magnetoencephalography (MEG), enable 
the assessment of neural responses with a tempo­
ral fidelity not possible with fMRI. Munar et al. 
(2012) used MEG to study brain activity when 
participants rated a diverse array of visual images as 
“beautiful” or “not beautiful” (i.e., binary response). 
Their results demonstrated that activity in the right 
lateral OFC within 300-400 milliseconds follow­
ing the presentation of the stimulus was greater 
for images rated as “not beautiful” than as “beau­
tiful.” This indicates that aesthetic judgments of 
beauty that do not require elaborate processing are 
associated with brain activity occurring rapidly in 
the brain. In turn, Cela-Conde et al. (2013) used 
MEG to study the functional connectivity dynam­
ics underlying aesthetic appreciation. The research­
ers focused on early and delayed temporal epochs 
following the presentation of artworks— one within 
250 milliseconds and one between 1,000 and 1,500
milliseconds, respectively— and found dissocia­
ble patterns of neural activity and connectivity in 
relation to early and delayed phases. Importantly, 
activity in the DM N corresponded mainly to the 
delayed phase. The authors argued that whereas the 
early phase of aesthetic evaluation involves rapid 
judgment of a stimulus as “beautiful” or “not beau­
tiful,” it is the delayed phase that engages a deeper 
level of processing in terms of why we find a stimu­
lus beautiful. This interpretation is consistent with 
predictions derived from contemporary theoretical 
models of aesthetic experience, according to which 
one would indeed expect activation in the DM N to 
come online later, rather than earlier, in the course 
of processing artworks.
However, here it is important to emphasize that 
internal orientations in the course of aesthetic expe­
rience need not necessarily be delayed responses. For 
example, using electroencephalographic (EEG) evi­
dence, Noguchi and Murota (2013) have recently 
shown that sensory (bottom-up) and contextual 
(top-down) integration can occur within 200- 
300 milliseconds of seeing an artwork. In addi­
tion, the majority of the studies that were included 
in Vartanian and Skov’s (2014) meta-analysis of 
viewing paintings had stimulus presentation dura­
tions in the fMRI not exceeding a few seconds. 
Nevertheless, the analysis revealed activation in the 
bilateral posterior cingulate cortex. This suggests 
that the three neural systems can interact early or 
late in the service of forming an aesthetic judgment, 
rather than necessarily exerting their effects sequen­
tially (see Vartanian & Chatterjee, 2014, 2016).
Summary and Implications
In this chapter I have argued that the inter­
nal (i.e., person-focused) orientation in aesthetic 
experience likely involves two dissociable compo­
nents: one component is represented by activation 
in the insula, and likely involves the processing of 
visceral feeling states (i.e., interoception) in the ser­
vice of aesthetic experiences. The second component 
is represented by activation in the DM N, and likely 
involves the processing of self-referential, autobio­
graphical, and narrative information in the service 
of aesthetic experiences. These two components—  
emotive and narrative— appear to capture the 
breadth of what is understood by internal orienta­
tions in aesthetic experiences. This neural dissocia­
tion has enriched our understanding of the structure 
of aesthetic experiences, and has provided insights 
into processes that can lead to deep and moving aes­
thetic experiences— an area of contemporary focus
O S H I N  V A R T A N I A N
333

in empirical and theoretical aesthetics (see Cupchik,
2016). Further exploration of the contributions 
of not only these regions, but also the large-scale 
salience and default-mode networks, would appear 
to be a particularly promising avenue for future 
research (see Bressler & Menon, 2010).
For example, investigators have begun to probe 
the neural and psychological after-effects of aes­
thetic experiences. These effects are important 
because they could help explain how and why aes­
thetic episodes— including exposure to moving 
art— can have lingering effects on our cognition 
following the termination of the aesthetic interac­
tion. For example, Wang et al. (2015) investigated 
the calming effect induced by viewing traditional 
Chinese landscape paintings on cognitive con­
trol— measured by performance on the flanker 
task administered immediately following exposure 
to the artworks (Experiment 2). As noted earlier, 
they demonstrated that subjectively, traditional 
Chinese landscape paintings induce greater lev­
els of relaxation and mind-wandering, coupled 
with lower levels of object-oriented absorption 
and recognition in viewers, compared to realistic 
oil landscape paintings (Experiment 1). In turn, 
traditional Chinese landscape paintings placed 
greater demands on the brain’s attention and work­
ing memory networks during the flanker task than 
did switching from realistic oil landscape paintings. 
Future studies could build on this line of research 
by exploring the differential after-effects of emotive 
versus narrative internal orientations on cognition. 
If this dissociation proves reliable in future experi­
ments, it could inform our models of the structure 
of aesthetic experiences.
References
Barrett, L. F., Mesquita, B., Ochsner, K. N., & Gross, J. J. (2007). 
The experience of emotion. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 
373-403.
Boccia, M., Barbetti, S., Piccardi, L., Guariglia, C., Ferlazzo, 
F., Giannini, A. M., & Zaidel, D. W. (2016). Where does 
brain neural activation in aesthetic responses to visual art 
occur? Meta-analytic evidence from neuroimaging studies. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 60, 65-71.
Bonner, M. F., & Price, A. R. (2013). Where is the anterior tem­
poral lobe and what does it do? Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 
4213-4215.
Bressler, S., & Menon, V. (2010). Large-scale brain networks 
in cognition: Emerging methods and principles. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 14, 277-290.
Brown, S., Goa, X., Tisdelle, L., Eickhoff, S. B., & Liotti, 
M. (2011). Naturalizing aesthetics: Brain areas for aes­
thetic appraisal across sensory modalities. Neuroimage, 58, 
250-258.
Bullot, N. J., & Reber, R. (2013). A psycho-historical research 
program for the integrative science of art. Behavioural and 
Brain Sciences, 36, 163-180.
Burgess, P. W., Dumontheil, I., & Gilbert, S. J. (2007). The gate­
way hypothesis of rostral prefrontal cortex (area 10) func­
tion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 290-298.
Cattaneo, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009). The mirror neuron sys­
tem. Archives of Neurology, 66, 557-560.
Chatterjee, A. (2003). Prospects for a cognitive neuroscience of 
visual aesthetics. Bulletin of Psychology and the Arts, 4, 55-60.
Chatterjee, A., Thomas, A., Smith, S. E., & Aguirre, G. 
K. (2009). The neural response to facial attractiveness. 
Neuropsychology, 23, 135-143.
Chatterjee, A., & Vartanian, O. (2014). Neuroaesthetics. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 18, 370-375.
Chatterjee, A., & Vartanian, O. (2016). Neuroscience of aes­
thetics. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1369, 
172-194.
Cela-Conde, C. J., Garcia-Pietro, J., Ramasco, J. J., Mirasso, C. 
R., Bajo, R., Munar, E., Flexas, A., del-Pozo, F., & Maestu, F. 
(2013). Dynamics of brain networks in the aesthetic appre­
ciation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 
220(Suppl. 2), 10454-10461.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 106, 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Ream, J. M., Geddes, L. P., & Gabrieli, J. D. 
(2003). Evaluating self- generated information: Anterior 
prefrontal contributions to human cognition. Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 117, 1161-1168.
Craig, A. D. (2001). Interoception: The sense of the physiologi­
cal condition of the body. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
13, 500-505.
Craig, A. D. (2010). The sentient self. Brain Structure & 
Function, 214, 563-577.
Cupchik, G. C. (2016). The aesthetics of emotion: Up the 
down staircase of the mind-body. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Cupchik, G. C., Vartanian, O., Crawley, A., & Mikulis, D. J. 
(2009). Viewing artworks: Contributions of cognitive con­
trol and perceptual facilitation to aesthetic experience. Brain 
and Cognition, 70, 84-91.
Di Dio, C., Macaluso, E., & Rizzolatti, G. (2007). Brain 
response to classical and renaissance sculptures. PloS Biology, 
11, z1201.
Epstein, R., & Kanwisher, N. (1998). A cortical representation 
of the local visual environment. Nature, 392, 598-601.
Fairhall, S. L., & Ishai, A. (2008). Neural correlates of object 
indeterminacy in art compositions. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 17, 923-932.
Feist, G. (2007). An evolutionary model of artistic and musi­
cal creativity. In C. Martindale, P. Locher, & V. M. Petrov 
(Eds.), Evolutionary and neurocognitive approaches to aes­
thetics, creativity and the arts (pp. 15-30). Amityville, NY: 
Baywood.
Freedberg, D., & Gallese, V. (2007). Motion, emotion and 
empathy in esthetic experience. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
11, 197-203.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996). 
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 119, 
593-609.
334
I N T E R N A L  O R I E N T A T I O N  I N  A E S T H E T I C  E X P E R I E N C E

Graf, L. K. M., & Landwehr, J. R. (2015). A dual-process per­
spective on fluency-based aesthetics: The pleasure-interest 
model of aesthetic liking. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 19, 395—410.
Greenlee, M. W., &Tse, R U. (2008). Functional neuroanatomy 
of the human visual system: A review of functional MRI 
studies. In B. Lorenz & F.-X. Borruat (Eds.), Pediatric oph­
thalmology, neuro-ophthalmology, genetics (Essentials in oph­
thalmology) (pp. 119-138). New York: Springer.
Grill-Spector, K., & Sayres, R. (2008). Object recogni­
tion: Insights from advances in fMRI methods. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 17, 73-79.
Gross, C. G. (1992). Representation of visual stimuli in infe­
rior temporal cortex. Philosophical Transactions: Biological 
Sciences, 335, 3-10.
Huang, M., Bridge, H., Kemp, M. J., & Parker, A. J. (2011). 
Human cortical activity evoked by the assignment of 
authenticity when viewing works of art. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 5, 134.
Ishizu, T., & S. Zeki. 2011. Toward a brain-based theory of 
beauty. PLoS ONE, 6, e21852.
Kampe, K. K. W., Frith, C. D., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, U. (2001). 
Reward value of attractiveness and gaze. Nature, 413, 589.
Kanwisher, N., & Yovel, G. (2009). Cortical specialization for 
face perception in humans. In J. T. Cacioppo & G. G. 
Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of neuroscience for the behav­
ioral sciences (pp. 841-858). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Kirk, U., Skov, M., Christensen, M. S., & Nygaard, N. (2009). 
Brain correlates of aesthetic expertise: A parametric fMRI 
study. Brain and Cognition, 69, 306-315.
Kirk, U., Skov, M., Hulme, O., Christensen, M. S., & Zeki, 
S. (2009). Modulation of aesthetic value by semantic con­
text: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 44, 1125-1132.
Koechlin, E., Basso, G., Pietrini, P, Panzer, S., & Grafman, J. 
(1999). The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in human 
cognition. Nature, 339, 148-151.
Law, S. S.-M. (2011). Being in traditional Chinese landscape 
painting. Journal of Intercultural Studies, 32, 369-382.
Leder, H., Belke, B., Oeberst, A., & Augustin, D. (2004). A 
model of aesthetic appreciation and aesthetic judgments. 
British Journal of Psychology, 95, 489-508.
Liu, X., Hairston, J., Schrier, M., & Fan, J. (2011). Common and 
distinct networks underlying reward valence and processing 
stages: A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35, 1219-1236.
Locher, P (2014). Empirical investigation of the elements 
of composition in paintings: A painting as stimulus. In P 
P L. Tinio & J. K. Smith (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook 
of the psychology of aesthetics and the arts (pp. 221-242). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
Montague, P R., & Berns, G. S. (2002). Neural economics and 
the biological substrates of valuation. Neuron, 36, 265-284.
Munar, E., Nadal, M., Rossello, J., Flexas, A., Moratti, S., 
Maestu, F., Marty, G., & Cela-Conde, C. J. (2012). Lateral 
orbitofrontal cortex involvement in initial negative aesthetic 
impression formation. PLoS ONE, 7, e38152.
Nadal, M., Munar, E., Capo, M. A., Rosello, J., & Cela-Conde, 
C. J. (2008). Towards a framework for the study of the
neural correlates of aesthetic preference. Spatial Vision, 21, 
379-396.
Newman, G. E., & Bloom, P (2012). Art and authenticity: The 
importance of originals in judgments of value. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 558-569.
Nodine, C., Locher, P, & Krupinski, E. (1993). The role of for­
mal art training on the perception and aesthetic judgment of 
art compositions. Leonardo, 26, 219-227.
Noguchi, Y., & Murota, M. (2013). Temporal dynamics of neu­
ral activity in an integration of visual and contextual infor­
mation in an esthetic preference task. Neuropsychologia, 51, 
1077-1084.
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greek, M., Bermpohl, F., 
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential 
processing in our brain: A meta-analysis of imaging studies 
on the self. Neuroimage, 31, 440—457.
O’Doherty, J., Winston, J. S., Critchley, H., Perrett, D. I., 
Burt, D. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Beauty in a smile: The 
role of medial orbitofrontal cortex in facial attractiveness. 
Neuropsychologia, 41, 147-155.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do 
you know what you know? The representation of semantic 
knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
8, 976-987.
Pearce, M. T., Zaidel, D. W., Vartanian, O., Skov, M., Leder, H., 
Chatterjee, A., & Nadal, M. (2016). Neuroaesthetics: The 
cognitive neuroscience of aesthetic experience. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 11, 265-279.
Peelen, M. V., & Caramazza, A. (2012). Conceptual object rep­
resentations in human anterior temporal cortex. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 32, 15728-15736.
Reimann, M., Zaichkowsky, J., Neuhaus, C., Bender, T., & 
Weber, B. (2010). Aesthetic package design: A behavioral, 
neural, and psychological investigation. Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 20, 431—441.
Ridderinkhof, K. R., Ullsperger, M., Crone, E. A., & 
Niewenhuis, S. (2004). The role of the medial frontal cortex 
in cognitive control. Science, 306, 443-447.
Silvia, P J. (2012). Human emotions and aesthetic experi­
ence. In A. Shimamura & S. Palmer (Eds.), Aesthetic sci­
ence: Connecting minds, brains, and experience (pp. 250-275). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tschacher, W., Greenwood, S., Kirchberg, V., Wintzerith, S., van 
den Berg, K., &Trondle, M. (2012). Physiological correlates 
of aesthetic perception in a museum. Psychology of Aesthetics, 
Creativity, and the Arts, 6, 96-103.
Trondle, M., & Tschacher, W. (2012). The physiology of phe­
nomenology: The effects of artworks. Empirical Studies of the 
Arts, 30, 79-117.
Van der Laan, L. N., De Ridder, D. T. D., Viergever, M. A., & 
Smeets, P A. M. (2012). Appearance matters: Neural correlates 
of food choice and packaging aesthetics. PLoS One, 7, e4l738.
Vartanian, O., Lam, E., Fisher, M., Granic, J., & Goel, V. (2013). 
Middle temporal gyrus encodes individual differences in per­
ceived facial attractiveness. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, 
and the Arts, 7, 38-47.
Vartanian, O., & Skov, M. (2014). Neural correlates of view­
ing paintings: Evidence from a quantitative meta-analysis 
of functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Brain and 
Cognition, 87, 52-56.
Vessel, E. A., Starr, G. G., & Rubin, N. (2012). The brain on 
art: Intense aesthetic experience activates the default mode 
network. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, Article 66.
O S H I N  V A R T A N I A N
335

Wandell, B. A., Dumoulin, S. O., & Brewer, A. A. (2009). 
Visual cortex in humans. In L. R. Squire (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of neuroscience (Vol. 10, pp. 251-257). 
Oxford: Academic Press.
Wang, T., Mo, L., Vartanian, O., Cant, J. S., & Cupchik, 
G. (2015). An investigation of the neural substrates of
mind wandering induced by viewing traditional Chinese 
landscape paintings. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience., 8, 
Article 1018.
Winston, J. S., O’Doherty, J., Kilner, J. M., Perrett, D. I., & 
Dolan, R. J. (2007). Brain systems for assessing facial attrac­
tiveness. Neuropsychologia, 45, 195-206.
336
I N T E R N A L  O R I E N T A T I O N  I N  A E S T H E T I C  E X P E R I E N C E

C H A P T E R
26
Neuropsychopharmacology of Flexible 
and Creative Thinking
David Q. Beversdorf
Abstract
Many factors affect performance on tasks associated with creativity. Stress is one of the more established 
of these factors impacting performance, most likely mediated by effects on neurotransmitter systems. 
This chapter discusses the literature on the effects of stress, the noradrenergic system, the dopaminergic 
system, and other pharmacological factors on creativity. This chapter will also discuss the effects of 
norepinephrine and dopamine on other related aspects of cognition, such as working memory and set 
shifting. The effects on divergent and convergent task performance will also be discussed, as well as the 
need for greater understanding of the optimization of creativity performance.
Key W ords: creativity, convergent, divergent, stress, norepinephrine, dopamine, working memory, 
set shifting
In order to understand the neural mechanisms 
involved in creativity, it is important to also 
understand the conditions that affect optimal per­
formance on creativity tasks. For this purpose, an 
understanding of the neuropsychopharmacology 
of creativity is critical. Furthermore, better under­
standing of the neuropsychopharmacology of cre­
ativity may also allow a greater opportunity for 
intervention in particular settings. Most research 
in this area thus far has focused on the catechol- 
aminergic systems— the dopaminergic system 
and the noradrenergic system— but evidence is 
beginning to be explored for other systems as 
well. A greater volume of literature exists for the 
pharmacological effects on other executive func­
tions highly interrelated with creativity, such as 
set-shifting and working memory. However, some 
evidence suggests that the distinctions between 
creativity and these other executive functions may 
also be quite critical, as will be discussed in the 
following.
The Noradrenergic System
The noradrenergic system has a range of behav­
ioral effects. The noradrenergic system is critical 
in arousal (Coull, Frith, Dolan, Frackowiak, & 
Grasby, 1997; Coull, Jones, Egan, Frith, & Maze 
2004; Smith & Nutt, 1996). The prefrontal cortex, 
important in a range of types of cognitive flexibil­
ity (Duncan, Burgess, & Emslie, 1995; Eslinger 
& Grattan, 1993; Karnath & Wallesch, 1992; 
Robbins, 2007; Vikki, 1992), projects fibers to the 
locus coeruleus in primates (Arnsten & Goldman- 
Rakic, 1984), which contains the majority of nor­
adrenergic neurons that project throughout the 
central nervous system (Barnes & Pompeiano, 
1991) (Figure 26.1). Cognitive flexibility as assessed 
by verbal problem-solving tasks, such as anagrams 
and the compound remote associates task (Bowden 
& Jung-Beeman, 2003), involves a search through a 
wide conceptual space in order to identify a solution 
(“unconstrained flexibility”), and is often utilized in 
creativity-related research. Generally, performance
3 3 7

Figure 26.1. (See Color Insert) Noradrenergic pathways. The locus coeruleus (LC) projects posteriorly to the cerebellum and up to 
the thalamus (thal) and amygdala (amyg), as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular tract, also terminating posteriorly 
at the hippocampus (Heimer, 1995). The descending fibers to the spinal cord are also shown. Not shown is the lateral tegmental 
noradrenergic system, which also projects to the amygdala and down to the spinal cord. Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. 
(2013). Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots o f cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology 
and neuropsychology (pp. 284—304). New York: Oxford University Press.
on such tasks improves with decreased noradrener­
gic activity (Alexander, Hillier, Smith, Tivarus, & 
Beversdorf, 2007; Beversdorf, Hughes, Steinberg, 
Lewis, & Heilman, 1999; Beversdorf, White, 
Cheever, Hughes, & Bornstein, 2002).
Other cognitive flexibility tasks, such as the 
Wisconsin Cart Sorting Test (Heaton, 1981), 
involve set-shifting between a limited range of 
options (“constrained flexibility”), and may not 
be modulated by the noradrenergic system in the 
same manner, but instead may potentially benefit 
from increased noradrenergic activity (Aston-Jones 
& Cohen, 2005; Usher, Cohen, Servan-Schreiber, 
Rajkowski, & Aston-Jones, 1999). Decreased nor­
adrenergic activity appears to benefit tasks such 
as solving anagrams when subjects are struggling 
or challenged by stressors (Alexander et al., 2007; 
Campbell, Tivarus, M. E., Hillier, A., Beversdorf
2008), whereas increased set switching on a two- 
alternative forced choice task is associated with 
increased 
noradrenergic 
tone 
in 
non-human 
primates (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005; Usher 
etal., 1999).
“Constrained” flexibility can be further subdi­
vided into intradimensional and extradimensional 
set-shifting 
(Robbins, 
2007). 
Intradimensional 
shifts require shifting to responses to novel sets of 
stimuli from within the same sensory domain (such 
as shifting from choosing between two odors to
responding to two novel odors), whereas extradi­
mensional shifts require shifting to stimuli from 
a different sensory domain (such as shifting from 
choosing between two odors to responding to 
two textures). The dopaminergic system appears 
to affect intradimensional set-shifting (Robbins,
2007), while the noradrenergic system, specifically 
by action on the al receptor, appears to modu­
late performance on extradimensional set-shifting 
(Lapiz & Morilak, 2006; Robbins, 2007). The (J- 
adrenergic receptors in the noradrenergic system, 
though, appear to modulate “unconstrained” flex­
ibility (Alexander et al., 2007; Beversdorf et al., 
1999, 2002). A systematic exploration of the 
effects of the noradrenergic system on intradimen­
sional and extradimensional set-shifting as well as 
creative problem-solving is needed to better char­
acterize these contrasting effects. Exploration of 
such comparisons has been initiated in an animal 
model, revealing no effects of ^-adrenergic antago­
nists on reversal learning, intradimensional set- 
shifting, or extradimensional set-shifting. However, 
significant benefit occurs for the requirement for 
the rodent to shift to a novel solution in order to 
obtain reward (Hecht, Will, Schachtman, Welby, & 
Beversdorf, 2014).
Previous work in humans has explored the 
effects of the ^-adrenergic blocker propranolol, a 
drug that specifically blocks ^-adrenergic receptors
338
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

throughout the brain as well as in the periphery, 
without affecting other noradrenergic receptors, on 
convergent tasks among “unconstrained cognitive 
flexibility” tasks involving problem-solving, where 
the end product of the task involving cognitive flex­
ibility is the production of a single correct solution 
to a problem. Examples include finding the single 
correct response on the compound remote associ­
ates task, or the correct word that solves an anagram 
(Alexander et al., 2007; Campbell et al., 2008). 
However, effects are not known on divergent tasks 
among the “unconstrained cognitive flexibility” 
tasks, where subjects are required to produce mul­
tiple alternative responses. Noradrenergic agents 
are also known to have a range of other cognitive 
effects, including effects on motor learning (Foster, 
Good, Fowlkes, & Sawaki, 2006), response inhibi­
tion (Chamberlain, Muller, Blackwell, Robbins, & 
Sahakian, 2006b), working memory, and emotional 
memory (Chamberlain et al., 2006a).
The noradrenergic effect on emotional memory 
deserves particular comment, due to a potentially 
important clinical role. An enhancement of mem­
ory due to emotional arousal may contribute to the 
development of intrusive memories in clinical con­
ditions such as post-traumatic stress disorder (Ehlers 
et al., 2002; Ehlers, Hackmann, & Michael, 2004; 
Smith & Beversdorf, 2008), and centrally acting (J- 
adrenergic receptor antagonists are known to reduce 
this memory enhancement effect (Cahill, Prins, 
Weber, & McGaugh, 1994; van Stegeren, Everaerd, 
Cahill, McGaugh, & Gooren, 1998). Research has 
explored the role of propranolol in the develop­
ment of post-traumatic stress disorder, by interfer­
ing with reconsolidation (Pitman et al., 2002; Vaiva 
et al., 2003). al antagonists have similarly revealed 
benefits in patients with post-traumatic stress dis­
order (Arnsten, 2007). More recently, proprano­
lol has been used to block the return of fear when 
combined with exposure therapy in phobias (Kroes 
et al., 2015). The relationship between creativity 
and the emotional effects of the noradrenergic sys­
tem are in need of further exploration.
In the periphery, a2 adrenergic agonists inhibit 
the release of norepinephrine presynaptically, 
which suggests that they would have a similar 
effect as the postsynaptic ^-adrenergic antago­
nists. However, a2 agonists have distinct cogni­
tive effects. High-dose clonidine, an a2 agonist, 
has been shown to improve immediate spatial 
memory in aged monkeys (Arnsten, Cai, & 
Goldman-Ra, 1988; Arnsten & Leslie, 1991), an 
effect also found in younger monkeys (Franowicz
& Arnsten, 1999), and believed to be mediated by 
action at the prefrontal cortex (Li, Mao, Wang, & 
Mei, 1999). Lower doses of clonidine, those that 
are typically utilized clinically in humans, dem­
onstrate varying results at varying doses, includ­
ing impaired visual working memory, impulsive 
responses on planning tasks, and varying effects 
on spatial working memory (Coull, Middleton, 
Robbins, & Sahakian, 1995; Jakala et al., 1999). 
Pharmacological stimulation of the postsynaptic 
a2A subtype of adrenoreceptors decreases noise 
and results in beneficial effects for attention defi­
cit disorder patients (Brennan & Arnsten, 2008). 
However, a2 agonists do not appear to have the 
same effect on creative verbal problem-solving 
as occurs with ^-adrenergic antagonists (Choi, 
Novak, Hillier, Votolato, & Beversdorf, 2006).
The cognitive effects of stress are mediated by 
pharmacological systems, and as such, discussion of 
stress and pharmacological effects are intertwined. 
Stress is an important factor long known to impair 
performance on tasks requiring creativity in healthy 
individuals (Martindale & Greenough, 
1973). 
Stress is known to increase the activity of the norad­
renergic system (Kvetnansky, Pacak, Sabban, Kopin, 
& Goldstein, 1998; Ward et al., 1983), as well as 
the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis. 
Drugs that block the noradrenergic system in the 
brain, specifically via action on ^-adrenergic recep­
tors, have long been used to mitigate stress-induced 
impairment in performance on tasks including 
public speaking or test taking in anxiety-prone 
individuals (Faigel, 1991; Lader, 1988; Laverdue & 
Boulenger, 1991). Exploration of these mechanisms 
will allow a greater understanding of the processing 
of information involved in creativity. Furthermore, 
research involving healthy adolescents with a his­
tory of stress-induced cognitive impairment during 
exams has demonstrated that treatment with the 
^-adrenergic antagonist propranolol significantly 
improved scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test 
(SAT) (Faigel, 1991). However, the effects of stress 
and the noradrenergic system on cognition are not 
limited to patients with known stress-induced cog­
nitive impairment. As noted earlier, stress has long 
been known to impair performance on tasks requir­
ing creativity in healthy individuals (Martindale & 
Greenough, 1973). Therefore, the role of action 
on the (2-adrenergic receptors during “uncon­
strained” cognitive flexibility has received recent 
attention in creativity research in healthy individu­
als, along with the effects of stress. Administration 
of a well-characterized social evaluative stressor
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
339

involving public speaking and mental arithmetic, 
the Trier Social Stress Test (Kirschbaum, Pirke, & 
Hellhammer, 1993), resulted in impaired perfor­
mance on creative verbal problem-solving requiring 
flexibility of access to lexical, semantic, and associa­
tive networks in individuals without any history of 
anxiety-related disorders (Alexander et al., 2007). 
This impairment was abolished by the administra­
tion of propranolol (Alexander et al., 2007). This 
effect on individuals without any history of an 
anxiety-related disorder suggests that the effects 
of stress and the noradrenergic system represent 
a fundamental aspect regulating cognitive per­
formance, not a phenomenon limited to specific 
patient populations. However, it should be noted 
that the effect of propranolol in this study does 
not exclusively implicate the noradrenergic system, 
since propranolol has also been shown to block the 
corticosterone-induced impairment of working 
memory (Roozendaal, McReynolds, & McGaugh,
2004). Furthermore, the administration of corti­
sol is associated with a number of effects, includ­
ing impaired memory (de Quervain, Roozendaal, 
Nitsch, McGaugh, & Hock, 2000; Het, Ramlow, 
Wolf, 2005), and enhanced response inhibition 
(Shields, Bonner, & Moons, 2015). In fact, action 
on the prefrontal cortex corticotropin-releasing fac­
tor receptor 1 has been recently identified as the 
target involved in stress-induced executive dysfunc­
tion, including reversal learning and temporal order 
memory (Uribe-Marino et al., 2016). Therefore, 
future work must systematically disentangle the 
roles of the adrenergic system and the HPA axis in 
the effect of stress on cognitive processes associated 
with creativity.
As described in the preceding, the locus coe- 
ruleus projects to the majority of the central ner­
vous system, sending efferents throughout the 
brain (Barnes & Pompeiano, 1991) (Figure 26.1), 
thus supporting an effect on a distributed function 
such as creativity. Effects of the noradrenergic sys­
tem outside the setting of stress, however, are more 
dependent on the situation. For example, perfor­
mance on an anagram task is better after admin­
istration of the centrally and peripherally acting 
^-adrenergic antagonist propranolol than after the 
noradrenergic agonist ephedrine (Beversdorf et al., 
1999; Heilman, Nadeau, & Beversdorf, 2003). 
Performance on the anagram task is also better 
after the administration of propranolol than after 
the peripheral-only ^-adrenergic antagonist nado­
lol (Beversdorf et al., 2002), suggesting that this 
effect of propranolol is mediated centrally, rather
than as a result of peripheral feedback. Central 
mechanisms are consistent with the effect of nor­
epinephrine on the signal-to-noise ratio of neuro­
nal activity within the cerebral cortex (Hasselmo, 
Linster, Patil, Ma, & Cecik, 1997), as well as the 
correlation between the electronic coupling, or 
coherent firing of interconnected noradrener­
gic neurons in the monkey cortex and propor­
tions of goal-directed versus exploratory behavior 
(Usher et al., 1999). However, in both anagram 
studies without stressors, 
while performance 
on propranolol was better than on ephedrine or 
nadolol, it did not differ significantly from pla­
cebo (Beversdorf et al., 1999, 2002). Subsequent 
research examined how task difficulty might relate 
to the drug’s effect (Campbell et al., 2008). A drug 
proposed to benefit a broad search of a network 
might be expected to yield a greater benefit when 
problems are more challenging, requiring greater 
access to the “noise” in the signal-to-noise ratio in 
order to solve the problem, as is discussed further 
later in this chapter. In this exploration, proprano­
lol was found to be beneficial for a range of verbal 
problem-solving tasks requiring network flexibility 
when the subject was struggling, but did not con­
fer benefit (and in some cases even impaired per­
formance) when the subject was solving problems 
with ease (Campbell et al., 2008). The benefit was 
seen for the subjects who had the greatest difficulty 
solving the problems, and for the most difficult 
problems across all subjects (Campbell et al., 2008). 
Also, consistent with this, performance on creativ­
ity tasks has been found to be better in the setting 
of “leaky sensory gating,” as indicated by the P50 
ERP (Zabelina, O ’Leary, Pornpattananangkul, 
Nusslock, & Beeman, 2015), which is of particu­
lar interest given recent evidence from neuroim­
aging studies that demonstrate increased gain in 
the precision of cortical representations associated 
with both markers of baseline catecholamine levels 
and administration of the norepinephrine trans­
porter blocker atomoxetine (Warren et al., 2016). 
Propranolol can also benefit performance on ver­
bal problem-solving for the easiest problems in 
situations where there is upregulated activity of the 
noradrenergic system due to cocaine withdrawal 
(Kelley, Yeager, Pepper, & Beversdorf, 2005; 
Kelley, Yeager, Pepper, Bornstein, & Beversdorf, 
2007) and psychosocial stress (Alexander et al., 
2007), or where there is a physiological or ana­
tomical alteration of the language network, result­
ing in loss of flexibility due to conditions such 
as autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (language
340
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

network: Beversdorf et al., 2007a; convergent 
task effects: Beversdorf, Carpenter, Miller, Cios, 
& Hillier, 2008; Zamzow, Ferguson, Ragsdale, 
Lewis, 
& 
Beversdorf, 
2017; 
divergent 
task 
effects: Beversdorf et al., 2011), and benefits are 
also seen for naming in Brocas aphasia due to 
stroke (Beversdorf et al., 2007b). More recently, 
these benefits in ASD with propranolol have also 
been observed in the social domain (Zamzow 
et al., 2014; Zamzow et al., 2016).
The variation in the effect of noradrenergic drugs 
between patient groups, as observed in cocaine 
withdrawal, ASD, and aphasia, may also be impor­
tant in the use of adrenergic drugs in attention 
deficit disorder. Early theories proposed that arousal 
and optimal performance might be best described 
by an inverted U-shaped curve (Yerkes & Dodson, 
1908), suggesting such a relationship for the norad­
renergic system. While markedly increased arousal 
or noradrenergic tone might result in hyper-arousal 
and inability to perform a task in most individuals, 
a person with attention deficit disorder might be, 
at baseline, at a suboptimal, underaroused, point 
on the inverted U-shaped curve associated with low 
noradrenergic tone and may require stimulants to 
perform optimally. Animal data suggest that there is 
an optimal point of tonic activity of the locus coe- 
ruleus that tends to support the emergence of phasic 
activity, associated with focused or selective atten­
tion (Aston-Jones, Rajkowski, & Cohen, 1999; 
Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). Noradrenergic trans­
mission is known to be genetically weaker in some 
patients with attention deficit disorder (Arnsten, 
2007). The effects of drugs on creativity in this pop­
ulation warrant further study. Preliminary evidence 
suggests that the effect of stimulants on creativity 
is limited (Farah, Haimm, Sankoorikal, Smith, & 
Chatterjee, 2009).
The relationship between noradrenergic tone and 
performance on creative verbal problem-solving tasks 
can also be observed in the performance impacts of 
alterations in noradrenergic tone induced by changes 
in posture (Lipnicki & Byrne, 2005), sleep phase 
(Stickgold, Hobson, Fosse, & Fosse, 2001), and 
vagal nerve stimulation (Ghacibeh, Shenker, Shenal, 
Uthman, & Heilman, 2006). Rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep, a state associated with decreased nor­
adrenergic activity, enhances integration of weakly 
associated information for creative problem-solv­
ing (Cai, Mednick, Harrison, Kanady, & Mednick 
2009; Stickgold et al., 2001) and is associated with 
high levels of spontaneous thought akin to those 
experienced in waking restful states (Fox, Nijeboer,
Solo monova, Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013). These 
effects appear to be specific to the noradrenergic 
system and not due to general anti-anxiety effects, 
since such cognitive effects do not appear to occur 
with non-adrenergic anxiolytics (Silver, Hughes, 
Bornstein, & Beversdorf, 2004).
Evidence from models derived from activity in 
brain slice preparations support an effect of nor­
epinephrine on the signal-to-noise ratio of neuro­
nal activity within the cerebral cortex (Hasselmo 
et al., 1997). Presumably, propranolol increases 
access to “noise,” which in this case would be 
represented by increased associational input that 
might be adaptive for solving more difficult prob­
lems where the most immediate response is not 
optimal (Alexander et al., 2007). In one popu­
lation characterized by decreased flexibility of 
network access (Beversdorf et al., 2007a), a poten­
tial neuroimaging marker has been observed. 
Decreased functional connectivity as measured by 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
(i.e., a decrease in the synchrony of activation 
between activated brain regions) is observed for 
long distance cortico-cortical connections dur­
ing language and executive function tasks in ASD 
(Just, Cherkassky, Keller, & Minshew, 2004; Just, 
Cherkassky, Keller, Kana, & Minshew, 2007), as 
well as in other conditions believed to be related 
to the under-connectivity between distant cortical 
regions in ASD (Belmonte et al., 2004). Recent 
evidence suggests 
that propranolol increases 
functional connectivity in ASD, lending some 
support to the proposed mechanism of action 
of propranolol on network access (Narayanan 
et al., 2010). It is not clear whether the noradren­
ergic system is dysregulated in ASD (Martchek, 
Thevarkunnel, Bauman, Blatt, & Kemper, 2006; 
Minderaa, Anderson, Volkmar, Akkerhuis, & 
Cohen, 1994). However, others have proposed 
that the positive behavioral effects of febrile ill­
ness in ASD (Curran et al., 2007) may be related 
to the normalization of a developmentally dysreg­
ulated noradrenergic system in ASD (Mehler & 
Purpura, 2009). Regardless of the baseline activity 
of the noradrenergic system in ASD, the network 
rigidity in ASD (Beversdorf et al., 2007a), as well 
as the suggested effect or propranolol on flexible 
access in sematic space (Campbell et al., 2008), 
raises the possibility of the potential for benefit 
from noradrenergic agents in ASD. Furthermore, 
uncontrolled studies tracking response in a series 
of cases have suggested a benefit in both social 
and language domains in ASD with ^-adrenergic
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
34i

antagonists (Ratey et al., 1987), in addition to the 
benefits observed in the single-dose psychophar- 
macological challenge studies described in the 
preceding. The effect of propranolol on task per­
formance has not yet been incorporated in imag­
ing studies, as the previous imaging study assessed 
functional connectivity with fMRI (fcMRI) dur­
ing a task where all subjects performed at ceiling 
(Narayanan et al., 2010). Effects on resting state 
connectivity, particularly on the default mode 
network, depend on the subnetwork examined 
(Hegarty II et al., 2017).
Less is known about the specific cognitive effects 
of pi and p2 adrenergic receptors. However, in one 
animal study, endogenous pi selective activation 
impaired working memory (Ramos et al., 2005). 
A subsequent study demonstrated that p2 selective 
agonists enhance working memory in aging animals 
(Ramos, Colgan, Nou, & Arnsten, 2008), suggest­
ing opposing effects between pi and p2 receptors on 
working memory, and possibly explaining the lack 
of effect of the non-specific p-antagonist propranolol 
on working memory in previous research (Arnsten 
& Goldman-Rakic, 1985; Li & Mei, 1994). Further 
research will be necessary to better understand the 
specific cognitive effects due to action at selective 
subtypes of p-adrenergic (pi and p2) receptors.
The Dopaminergic System
The dopaminergic system has a range of cogni­
tive effects, including aspects of executive function 
closely related to creativity, in addition to its well- 
known effects on the motor system. Research in 
animal models has demonstrated varying effects of 
dopaminergic agents on set-shifting tasks, differ­
ing according to which receptor subtype each agent 
impacts (Floresco et al., 2005). Among set-shifting 
tasks, this effect appears to be specific to intradimen- 
sional set shifting (Robbins, 2007). Whereas agonists 
for both D1 and D2 receptors did not affect set shift­
ing, D2 antagonists impaired set shifting in rodents 
(Floresco, 
Ghods-Sharifi, 
Vexelman, 
Magyar., 
2006; Stefani & Moghaddam, 2005), an effect also 
observed in humans (Mehta, Manes, Magnolfi, 
Sahakian, & Robbins, 2004). In further support of 
a role of the dopaminergic system in executive func­
tion, the ability to maintain and flexibly alter cog­
nitive representations in response to environmental 
demands is known to be impaired in Parkinsons 
disease (Cools, 2006). Computational models pro­
pose that phasic stimulation of D2 receptors in the 
striatum drives flexible adaptation of cognitive rep­
resentations, which are maintained by the prefrontal
cortex (Cohen, Braver, & Brown, 2002), which con­
trasts with the effect on priming, which appears to be 
mediated by D1 receptors (Roesch-Ely et al., 2006; 
Pederzolli et al., 2008). Receptor specificity of effects 
on creativity is not known. It should be noted that 
the interaction between dopaminergic agonists and 
Parkinsons disease and their effect on cognition are 
complex for set-shifting as well as working memory. 
Early in Parkinsons disease, greater dopaminergic 
depletion in the dorsal striatum leads to impaired 
adaptation in responses and updating in working 
memory, which is improved by L-dopa, while work­
ing memory itself benefits less from the administra­
tion of L-dopa. However, L-dopa also can excessively 
enhance reward biases due to effects on the relatively 
intact ventral striatum (Cools, 2006). These other 
cognitive effects of the dopaminergic system are dis­
cussed further later in the chapter.
Regarding effects on other related executive func­
tions, in healthy subjects those with lower working 
memory capacity tend to benefit from increased 
prefrontal function with dopaminergic stimulation 
(Gibbs & D ’Esposito, 2005; Kimberg, D ’Esposito, 
& Farah, 1997). This is likely related to the fact that 
dopamine synthesis capacity in the striatum is related 
to working memory capacity, such that those with 
the least working memory capacity also have less 
dopamine, and therefore benefit from dopaminegic 
stimulation (Cools, Gibbs, Miyakawa, Jagust, & 
D ’Esposito, 2008), suggesting an inverted U-shaped 
relationship between performance and dopaminergic 
function. In animal models this effect on working 
memory appears to be mediated by action at the D 1 
receptor (Arnsten, Cai, Murphy, & Goldman-Rakic, 
1994; Sawaguchi & Goldman-Rakic, 1991; Williams 
& Goldman-Rakic, 1995). Dopamine also appears 
to be critical for a range of other aspects of cogni­
tion involving frontal-subcortical circuits, including 
the temporal coupling of deliberation and execution 
during decision-making, as dopamine replacement 
reverses the delay specific to decision-related hesita­
tions, independent of motor slowing, in situations 
requiring decision-making in uncertainty in patients 
with Parkinsons disease (Pessiglione et al., 2005).
Another critical role of dopamine has recently 
become apparent with the development of patholog­
ical gambling in the setting of treatment with dopa­
minergic agonists (Dodd et al., 2005; Gallagher, 
O ’Sullivan, Evans, Lees, & Schrag, 2007). This has 
contributed to a greater understanding of the roles 
of dopamine in decision-making, revealing that 
dopamine neurons encode the difference between 
expected and received rewards, and interact with
342
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

other neurotransmitter systems to regulate such deci­
sion making (Nakamura, Matsumoto, & Hikosaka,
2008), likely related to the enhanced reward bias 
from effects on the relatively intact ventral striatum 
described in the preceding (Cools, 2006). The rela­
tionship between this effect of dopamine and cre­
ativity is also in need of further exploration.
Early interest in the role of the dopaminergic sys­
tem in creativity came from research examining the 
effects on the semantic network in priming studies, 
since the ability to search within the semantic network 
is a critical component of both semantic priming and 
verbal creativity tasks. In 1996, Kischka and colleagues 
demonstrated in a priming experiment in healthy 
individuals that word recognition occured more rap­
idly when presented 700 milliseconds after exposure 
to another directly related or indirectly related word. 
However, after administration of L-dopa, the precur­
sor for dopamine, only words presented after directly 
related words were recognized quickly. A role of the 
dopaminergic system in the restriction of the seman­
tic network in priming was proposed. Spreading acti­
vation of either a directly or indirectly related word 
facilitated word recognition without L-dopa, but only 
the directly related word facilitated word recogni­
tion with L-dopa (Kischka et al., 1996). This effect 
appears to be sensitive to the time between the ini­
tial and target stimuli, likely a reflection of the effects 
of the timing of spreading activation. Subsequent 
research by Angwin et al. (2004) demonstrated that
L-dopa affected both direct and indirect priming with 
an interstimulus interval of 500 milliseconds, but 
had no affect at 250 milliseconds. This finding would 
seem consistent with what might be expected with 
an effect on a widely distributed network (Alexander 
et al., 2007; Campbell et al., 2008). However, since 
L-dopa is a dopamine precursor, it remained unclear 
as to which specific dopamine receptors might be 
responsible for the priming effect. Studies in healthy 
volunteers (Roesch-Ely et al., 2006) as well as patients 
with Parkinsons disease (Pederzolli et al., 2008) sug­
gest that the priming effect is mediated by action on 
the D1 receptor.
In order to begin to examine how dopaminergic 
agents might affect semantic networks, the effect of 
L-dopa on functional connectivity during fMRI was 
examined using a non-priming language task: a word 
categorization task. An isolated increase in connectiv­
ity was observed with L-dopa between the left fusiform 
gyrus and the receptive language areas, with no other 
region pairs affected (Tivarus, Hillier, Schmalbrock, & 
Beversdorf, 2008). Since the left fusiform gyrus is con­
sidered the visual word form receptive area (Beversdorf 
et al., 1997), this would appear to fit with the effects 
on priming, as the interaction between this fusiform 
area (critical for visual word form recognition) and 
Wernickes area (critical for processing word mean­
ing) would be essential for priming effects. However, 
since the predominant target among cortical areas 
for dopaminergic projecting fibers is the frontal lobe
Figure 26.2. (See Color Insert) Dopaminergic pathways. Projections from the substantia nigra (SN) to the striatum are 
demonstrated, as are projections from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the amygdala (amyg), ventral striatum, and frontal 
cortex (Heimer, 1995). Not shown are the tuberoinfundibular and posterior hypothalamic dopaminergic systems. Reproduced by 
permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots o f cognitive 
neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and neuropsychology (pp. 284-304). New York: Oxford University Press.
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
343

(Hall et al., 1994; Lidow, Goldman-Rakic, Gallager, 
& Rakic, 1991) (Figure 26.2), such an effect of L- 
dopa on these posterior regions seems unexpected. 
Subsequent evidence using independent component 
analysis of fMRI data during language tasks suggests 
that the posterior effects of L-dopa may be mediated 
indirectly by the fronto-thalamic connections from 
the areas containing the frontal projections of the 
dopaminergic fibers (Kim, Goel, Tivarus, Hillier, & 
Beversdorf, 2010). Subsequent fMRI studies exam­
ining the effect of L-dopa during priming revealed 
changes in region-of-interest (ROI) activation with 
drug in the dorsal prefrontal cortex, medially and later­
ally, anterior cingulate, left frontal operculum, and left 
middle temporal gyrus (Copland, McMahon, Silburn, 
& de Zubicaray, 2009), which also may suggest an 
indirect frontal-posterior interaction.
However, in consideration of the research based 
on administration of L-dopa, it must be noted 
that L-dopa is also a precursor to norepinephrine. 
Further study has been initiated in hopes of disen­
tangling the potential effects of the dopaminergic 
and noradrenergic systems on priming and creativ­
ity in problem-solving, both of which are known 
to be sensitive to the action of catecholaminergic 
agents (dopamine and norepinephrine) on seman­
tic networks (Campbell et al., 2008; Kischka et al., 
1996). Dopaminergic agonists were found to have 
no effect on creativity in verbal problem-solving 
(Smyth & Beversdorf, 2007), and noradrener­
gic agents did not appear to affect priming in the 
manner observed with dopaminergic agents (Cios, 
Miller, Hillier, A., Tivarus, & Beversdorf, 2009). 
This appears to suggest a role for the dopaminer­
gic system (but not the noradrenergic system) on 
automatic searches of the semantic network, such 
as in word recognition (Cios et al., 2009; Kischka 
et al., 1996), and a role for the noradrenergic system 
(but not the dopaminergic system) on controlled 
searches of the semantic network, such as during 
verbal problem-solving (Campbell et al., 2008; 
Smyth & Beversdorf, 2007).
Despite these findings, other recent research has 
suggested a more direct relationship between the 
dopaminergic system and creativity. Studies exam­
ining rate of eye-blink, proposed to be a marker of 
dopaminergic activity (Groman et al., 2014), dem­
onstrated an inverted U-shaped relationship between 
eye-blink rate and creativity as assessed by an alter­
nate uses task (AUT) and the remote associates task 
(RAT) (Chermahini & Hommel, 2010). Genetic 
studies demonstrate a relationship between D2 
receptor polymorphisms and a composite creativity
score, as well as performance on verbal creativity, as 
assessed by object use fluency and sentence fluency 
from three words (Reuter, Roth, Holve, & Hennig,
2006). Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene 
polymorphisms, critical for the metabolism of both 
norepinephrine and dopamine, have been shown to 
affect performance on insight-based problem-solv­
ing tasks (Jiang, Shang, & Su, 2015). Additionally, 
gray matter volume in dopaminergic subcortical 
regions as well as the right dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex were found to be positively associated with 
divergent thinking performance (fluency for unusual 
uses and unimaginable things) with voxel-based mor­
phometry using MRI (Takeuchi et al., 2010), and a 
negative association was observed in the relationship 
between thalamic D2 receptor densities and perfor­
mance on verbal, figural, and numerical fluency tasks 
with receptor binding studies using positron emis­
sion tomography (PET) (de Manzano, Cervenka, 
Karabanov, Farde, & Ullen, 2010). A report of a 
single case describing changes in artistic behavior 
with dopaminergic agonists in Parkinsons disease has 
also been cited as evidence for a relationship between 
the dopaminergic system and creativity (Kulisevsky, 
Pagonabarraga, & Martinez-Corral, 2009). However, 
the potential for this pathology having effects on 
interest in (as well as obsession with) artistic output, 
as well as potential effects on style in such cases, is 
hard to disentangle from other aspects of creativity 
(Chatterjee et al., 2006). Enhanced performance 
on several creativity-associated tasks, though, has 
recently been reported under dopaminergic therapy 
in Parkinsons disease (Faust-Socher, Kenett, Cohen, 
Hassin-Baer, & Inzelberg, 2014). While this array of 
indirect supportive data for a role for the dopaminer­
gic system in creativity is of interest, the distinction 
between the roles of the noradrenergic and dopami­
nergic systems in creativity is in need of further study.
Other Systems
Neurons in the nucleus basalis, medial septal 
nucleus, and the diagonal band of Broca in the basal 
forebrain are the main sources of cholinergic pro­
jection throughout the neocortex and hippocampus 
(Selden, Gitelman, Salamon-Murayama, Parrish, 
& Mesulam, 1998) (Figure 26.3). The cholinergic 
system is another neurotransmitter system involved 
in modulating the signal-to-noise ratio within the 
cortex by suppressing background intrinsic cortical 
activity (Hasselmo & Bower, 1992), thus modulat­
ing the efficiency of cortical processing of sensory 
or associational information (Sarter & Bruno,
1997). Acetylcholine is particularly important for
344
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

Figure 26.3. (See Color Insert) Cholinergic pathways. Cortical projections from the basal forebrain are demonstrated to the cingulate 
and pericingulate cortex, as well as the mesial frontal cortex along a mesial pericingular tract, and laterally through the external capsule 
and claustrum to the capsular region and lateral neocortex (Selden et al., 1998). Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). 
Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots o f cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 284-304). New York: Oxford University Press.
attentional performance (Sarter & Bruno, 2001). 
Studies in rodents demonstrate that acetylcholine is 
critical for both top-down and bottom-up process­
ing of stimuli, mediated by action on the prefrontal 
cortex (Gill, Sarter, & Givens, 2000; Newman & 
McGaughy, 2008).
Cholinergic dysfunction has been used as a 
model for Alzheimer’s disease (Whitehouse et al., 
1982) due to the significant degeneration of the 
cholinergic neurons in these patients. Among the 
two main subtypes of acetylcholine receptors, mus­
carinic receptors have been clearly demonstrated to 
interfere with encoding of new information, with 
less of an effect on previously stored information 
(Hasselmo & Wyble, 1997). Blockade of nicotinic 
receptors has also revealed significant effects on 
memory in an age-dependent manner (Newhouse, 
Potter, Corwin, & Lenox, 1992, 1994). However, 
despite clear effects on signal-to-noise ratio in the 
cortex, as well as memory effects, neither mus­
carinic nor nicotinic blockade resulted in effects 
on the type of unconstrained cognitive flexibility 
modulated by the noradrenergic system (Smyth & 
Beversdorf, in preparation).
Our understanding of the role of individual 
neurotransmitter systems in cognition has sig­
nificantly progressed in recent years. However, 
these systems do not act in isolation. Complex 
interactions occur between them, which are only
beginning to be understood. For example, action 
at D2 dopaminergic receptors and at NM DA 
glutamate receptors appear to interact in their 
effects on set-shifting (Floresco, Magyar, Ghods- 
Sharifi, Vexelman, & Tse, 2005; Floresco, Ghods- 
Sharifi, Vexelman, & Magyar, 2006; Stefani & 
Moghaddam, 2005). Also, as described earlier, 
the dopaminergic system appears to preferentially 
affect 
intradimensional 
set-shifting 
(Robbins,
2007), while the noradrenergic system, specifically 
by action on the al adrenergic receptor, appears to 
preferentially modulate performance on extradi- 
mensional set-shifting (Lapiz & Morilak, 2006; 
Robbins, 2007). Noradrenergic innervation of 
dopaminergic neurons, by action on al adren­
ergic receptors, is known to directly inhibit the 
activity of the dopaminergic neurons (Paladini & 
Williams, 2004). In addition, the effects of drugs 
on cognition also depend on location of action 
when isolated brain regions are studied (Cools & 
Robbins, 2004). Finally, the mechanism by which 
the regulatory neurotransmitters act is beginning 
to be more fully understood, with potential tar­
gets for intervention at these second messenger 
systems, which are the downstream intracellu­
lar pathways that are triggered by the binding of 
the neurotransmitter at the extracellular receptor 
(Arnsten, 2007, 2009). These factors will all need 
to be accounted for in future studies of creativity.
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
3 4 5

Figure 26.4. (See Color Insert) Serotonergic pathways. The dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN) project posteriorly to the cerebellum 
and intracerebellar nuclei, and up to the thalamus (thal), with projections also to the amygdala (amyg), hippocampus (hippo), 
hypothalamus, olfactory and entorhinal cortices, then to the ventral striatum, as well as throughout the neocortex along a pericingular 
tract, also terminating posteriorly at the hippocampus (Heimer, 1995). Not shown are the caudal raphe nuclei, which also project 
to the cerebellum and intracerebellar nuclei, and down to the spinal cord. Reproduced by permission from Beversdorf, D. Q. (2013). 
Neuropsychopharmacology and cognition. In A. Chatterjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots o f cognitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 284-304). New York: Oxford University Press.
The serotonergic system, with neurons in the 
dorsal raphe nucleus projecting throughout the 
forebrain and neocortex (Figure 26.4), has long 
been known for its effects on mood and various 
psychiatric conditions, and is also responsive to 
stress (Malyszko, Urano, Takada, & Takada, 1994). 
However, recent research is revealing that the 
serotonergic system and its interaction with other 
neurotransmitter systems serve important cogni­
tive roles as well. Recent evidence suggests that the 
balance between the serotonergic and dopaminer­
gic systems appears to be critical for the process­
ing of reward and punishment (Krantz, Kasper, & 
Lanzenberger, 2010). The firing of midbrain dopa­
mine neurons shows a firing pattern that reflects 
the magnitude and probability of rewards (Roesch, 
Calu, & Schoenbaum, 2007; Schultz, 2007). While 
tryptophan depletion enhances punishment predic­
tion but does not affect reward prediction (Cools, 
Robinson, & Sahakian, 2008), serotonergic neu­
rons appear to signal reward value (Nakamura et al.,
2008). Furthermore, prefrontal serotonin depletion 
affects reversal learning, but not set-shifting (Clarke 
et al., 2005). A potential role in creativity is also 
suggested for the serotonergic system. Performance 
on figural and numeric creativity tasks has been 
associated with polymorphisms of the tryptophan 
hydroxylase gene TPH1 (Reuter, Roth, Holve, &
Hennig, 2006), and both the number solved and 
the prevalence of use of insight on the compound 
remote associates task was positively associated 
with high positive mood (Subramaniam, Kounios, 
Parrish, & Jung-Beeman, 2008), also suggesting a 
role of the serotonergic system.
Future Directions
As our understanding of neurotransmitter inter­
actions, localized effects, and other types of neu­
rotransmitters and neuropeptides grows, it also will 
need to be integrated with our advances in under­
standing of epigenetic regulatory factors, in order to 
fully understand how complex phenomena such as 
creativity are carried out in the brain. Furthermore, 
the recently reported effects of transcranial direct- 
current stimulation on creativity task performance 
(Colombo, Bartesaghi, Simonelli, & Anton, 2015; 
Green et al., 2017; Milano et al., 2016) may relate 
to critical underlying regional neuropharmacologi- 
cal mechanisms.
In addition to the patient populations described 
earlier, where certain aspects of creative performance 
may be affected, recent evidence has demonstrated 
relationships between genetic markers for schizo­
phrenia, bipolar disorder, and professional affilia­
tions associated with creativity in a large population 
study (Andreasen, 2005, 2008; Power et al., 2015).
3 4 6
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

Better understanding of modulatory effects on the 
performance on creativity tasks may result in clini­
cal benefits for patients with a wide variety of clini­
cal syndromes. This understanding also may allow 
for the possibility of optimization of performance, 
for example, how to overcome effects on cogni­
tion induced by stressful situations where creativ­
ity may be impaired. Finally, non-pharmacological 
approaches that are likely related to pharmacological 
systems will have increasing importance, as several 
studies have shown positive effects of meditation on 
performance on creativity tasks (Ding, Tang, Tang, 
& Posner, 2014).
References
Alexander, J. K., Hillier, A., Smith, R. M., Tivarus, M. E., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2007). Noradrenergic modulation 
of cognitive flexibility during stress. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 19, 468-478.
Andreasen, N. C. (2005). The creating brain: The neuroscience of 
genius. New York: Dana Press.
Andreasen, N. C. (2008). The relationship between creativity 
and mood disorders. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 10, 
251-255.
Angwin, A. J., Chenery, H. J., Copland, D. A., Arnott, W. 
L., Murdoch, B. E., & Silburn, P. A. (2004). Dopamine 
and semantic activation: An investigation of masked 
direct and indirect priming. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 10, 15-25.
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2007). Catecholamine and second messenger 
influences on prefrontal cortical networks of “representa­
tional knowledge”: A rational bridge between genetics and 
the symptoms of mental illness. Cerebral Cortex, 17, i6-il5. 
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2009). Ameliorating prefrontal cortical dys­
function in mental illness: Inhibition of phosphotidyl 
inositol-protein kinase C signaling. Psychopharmacology, 202,
445-455.
Arnsten, A. F., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1984). Selective pre­
frontal cortical projections to the region of the locus coeru- 
leus and raphe nuclei in the rhesus monkey. Brain Research, 
306, 9-18.
Arnsten, A. F., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1985). Alpha-2 adren­
ergic mechanisms in prefrontal cortex associated with cog­
nitive decline in aged non-human primates. Science, 230, 
1273-1276.
Arnsten, A. F. T., Cai, J. X., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1988). 
The alpha-2 adrenergic agonist guanfacine improves mem­
ory in aged monkeys without sedative or hypotensive side 
effects: Evidence for alpha-2 receptor subtypes. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 8, 4287-4298.
Arnsten, A. F., Cai, J. X., Murphy, B. F., & Goldman-Rakic,
P. S. (1994). Dopamine D1 receptor mechanisms in the 
cognitive performance of young adult and aged monkeys. 
Psychopharmacology (Berlin), 116, 143-151.
Arnsten, A. F. T., & Feslie, F. M. (1991). Behavioral and 
receptor binding analysis of the alpha-2 adrenergic ago­
nist, 5-bromo-6 [2-imidazoline-2-yl amino] quinoxaline 
(uk-14304): Evidence for cognitive enhancement at an 
alpha-2-adrenoreceptor subtype. Neuropharmacology, 30, 
1279-1289.
Aston-Jones, G., & Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative theory 
of locus coeruleus-norpeinephrine function: Adaptive gain 
and optimal performance. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
28, 403-450.
Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., & Cohen, J. (1999). Role 
of locus coeruleus in attention and behavioral flexibility. 
Biological Psychiatry, 46, 1309-1320.
Barnes, C. A., & Pompeiano, M. (1991). Neurobiology of the 
locus coeruleus. Progress in Brain Research, 88, 307-321.
Belmonte, M. K., Allen, G., Beckel-Mitchener, A., Boulanger, 
F. M., Carper, R. A., & Webb, S. J. (2004). Autism and 
abnormal development of brain connectivity. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 24, 9228-9231.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Carpenter, A. F., Miller, R. F., Cios, J. S., & 
Hillier, A. (2008). Effect of propranolol on verbal problem 
solving in autism spectrum disorder. Neurocase, 14, 378-383.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Hughes, J. H., Steinberg, B. A., Fewis, F. 
D., & Heilman, K. M. (1999). Noradrenergic modulation 
of cognitive flexibility in problem solving. NeuroReport, 10, 
2763-2767.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Narayanan, A., Hillier, A., & Hughes, J. 
D. (2007a). Network model of decreased context utiliza­
tion in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 37, 1040-1048.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Ratcliffe, N. R., Rhodes, C. H., & Reeves, 
A. G. (1997). Pure alexia: Clinical-pathologic evidence 
for a lateralized visual language association cortex. Clinical 
Neuropathology, 16, 328-331.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Saklayen, S., Higgins, K. F., Bodner, K. E., 
Kanne, S. M., & Christ, S. E. (2011). Effect of proprano­
lol on word fluency in autism. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology, 24, 11-17.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Sharma, U. K., Phillips, N. N., Notestine, M. 
A., Slivka, A. P., Friedman, N. M., Schneider, S. F., Nagaraja, 
H. N., & Hillier, A. (2007b). Effect of propranolol on nam­
ing in chronic Brocas aphasia with anomia. Neurocase, 13, 
256-259.
Beversdorf, D. Q., White, D. M., Cheever, D. C., Hughes, J. 
D., & Bornstein, R. A. (2002). Central beta-adrenergic 
blockers modulation of cognitive flexibility. NeuroReport, 13, 
2505-2507.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Normative data for 
144 compound remote associate problems. Behavior Research 
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35, 634-639.
Brennan, A. R., & Arnsten, A. F. T. (2008). Neuronal mecha­
nisms underlying attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: the 
influence of arousal on prefrontal cortical function. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1129, 236-245.
Cahill, F., Prins, B., Weber, M., & McGaugh, J. F. (1994). (T 
Adrenergic activation and memory for emotional events. 
Nature, 371, 702-704.
Cai, D. J., Mednick, S. A., Harrison, E. M., Kanady, J. C., & 
Mednick, S. C. (2009). REM, not incubation, improves 
creativity by priming associative networks. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the U SA, 106,10130-10134.
Campbell, H. F., Tivarus, M. E., Hillier, A., & Beversdorf, 
D. Q. (2008). Increased task difficulty results in greater 
impact of noradrenergic modulation of cognitive flexibility. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior, 88, 222-229.
Chamberlain, S. R., Muller, U., Blackwell, A. D., Clark, F., 
Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. (2006a). Neurochemical 
modulation of response inhibition and probabilistic learning 
in humans. Science, 311, 861-863.
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
347

Chamberlain, S. R., Muller, U., Blackwell, A. D., Robbins, T. 
W., & Sahakian, B. (2006b). Noradrenergic modulation 
of working memory and emotional memory in humans. 
Psychopharmacology, 188, 397-407.
Chatterjee, A., Hamilton, R. H., & Amorapanth, R X. (2006). 
Art produced by a patient with Parkinson’s disease. Behavioral 
Neurology, 17, 105-108.
Chermahini, S. A., & Hommel, B. (2010). The (b)link between 
creativity and dopamine: spontaneous eye blink rates pre­
dict and dissociated divergent and convergent thinking. 
Cognition, 115, 458-465,
Choi, Y., Novak, J., Hillier, A., Votolato, N. A., & Beversdorf, D.
Q. (2006). The effect of a-2 adrenergic agonists on memory 
and cognitive flexibility. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 
19, 204-207.
Cios, J. S., Miller, R. R, Hillier, A., Tivarus, M. E., & Beversdorf, 
D. Q. (2009). Lack of noradrenergic modulation of indirect 
semantic priming. Behavioral Neurology, 21, 137-143.
Clarke, H. F., Walker, S. C., Crofts, H. S., Dailey, J. W., Robbins, 
T. W., & Roberts, A. C. (2005). Prefrontal serotonin deple­
tion affects reversal learning but not attentional set shifting. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 532-538.
Cohen, J. D., Braver, T. S., & Brown, J. W. (2002). Computational 
perspectives in dopamine function in prefrontal cortex. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 223-229.
Colombo, B., Bartesaghi, N., Simonelli, L., & Antonietti, A. 
(2015). The combined effects of neurostimulation and prim­
ing on creative thinking: A preliminary tDCS study on dor­
solateral prefrontal cortex. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
9, 403. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00403
Cools, R. (2006). Dopaminergic modulation of cognitive 
function-implications for L-DOPA treatment in Parkinson’s 
disease. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 1-23.
Cools, R., Gibbs, S. E., Miyakawa, A., Jagust, W., & D’Esposito, 
M. (2008). Working memory capacity predicts dopa­
mine synthesis capacity in the human striatum. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 28, 1208-1212.
Cools, R., & Robbins, T. W. (2004). Chemistry of the adaptive 
mind. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 
Series A: Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, 
362, 2871-2888.
Cools, R., Robinson, O. J., & Sahakian, B. (2008). Acute 
tryptophan depletion in healthy volunteers enhances pun­
ishment prediction but does not affect reward prediction. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 33, 2291-2299.
Copland, D. A., McMahon, K. L., Silburn, P A., & de Zubicaray, 
G. I. (2009). Dopaminergic neruomodulation of semantic 
priming: A 4T fMRI study with levodopa. Cerebral Cortex, 
19, 2651-2658.
Coull, J. T., Frith, C. D., Dolan, R. J., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & 
Grasby, P M. (1997). The neural correlates of the noradren­
ergic modulation of human attention, arousal and learning. 
European Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 589-598.
Coull, J. T., Jones, M. E. P, Egan, T. D., Frith, C. D., & Maze, 
M. (2004). Attentional effects of noradrenaline vary with 
arousal level: Selective activation of thalamic pulvinar in 
humans. Neuroimage, 22, 315-322.
Coull, J. T., Middleton, H. C., Robbins, T. W., & Sahakian, B. 
J. (1995). Contrasting effects of clonidine and diazepam on 
tests of working memory and planning. Psychopharmacology, 
120, 311-321.
Curran, L. K., Newschaffer, C. J., Lee, L., Crawford, S. O., 
Johnston, M. V., & Zimmerman, A. W. (2007). Behaviors
associated with fever in children with autism spectrum disor­
ders. Pediatrics, 120, el 386-el 392.
De Manzano, O., Cervenka, S., Karabanov, A., Farde, L., & 
Ullen, F. (2010). Thinking outside a less intact box: Thalamic 
dopamine D2 receptor densities are negatively related to psy­
chometric creativity in healthy individuals. Plos One, 5(5), 
el0670. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.OO 10670
De Quervain, D. J. F., Roozendaal, B., Nitsch, R. M., McGaugh, 
J. L., & Hock, C. (2000). Acute cortisone administra­
tion impairs retrieval of long-term declarative memory in 
humans. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 313-314.
Ding, X.,Tang, Y. Y., Tang, R., & Posner, M. I. (2014). Improving 
creativity performance by short-term meditation. Behavioral 
Brain Functions, 10, 9. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-10-9
Dodd, M. L., Klos, K. J., Bower, J. H., Geda, Y. E., Josephs, K. 
A., & Ahlskog, J. E. (2005). Pathological gambling caused by 
drugs used to treat Parkinson disease. Archives of Neurology, 
62, 1377-1381.
Duncan, J., Burgess, P, & Emslie, H. (1995). Fluid intelligence 
after frontal lobe lesions. Neuropsychologia, 33, 261-268.
Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., & Michael, T. (2004). Intrusive 
re-experiencing 
in 
post-traumatic 
stress 
disorder: 
Phenomenology, theory, and therapy. Memory, 12, 403—415.
Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., Steil, R., Clohessy, S., Wenninger, K., 
& Winter, H. (2002). The nature of intrusive memories after 
trauma: The warning signal hypothesis. Behavioral Research 
and Therapy, 40, 995-1002.
Eslinger, P J., & Grattan, L. M. (1993). Frontal lobe and frontal- 
striatal substrates for different forms of human cognitive flex­
ibility. Neuropsychologia, 31, 17-28.
Faigel, H. C. (1991). The effect of beta blockade on stress- 
induced cognitive dysfunction in adolescents. Clinical 
Pediatrics, 30, 441-445.
Farah, M. J., Haimm, C., Sankoorikal, G., Smith, M. E., & 
Chatterjee, A. (2009). When we enhance cognition with 
Adderall, do we sacrifice creativity? A preliminary study. 
Psychopharmacology, 202, 541-547.
Faust-Socher, A., Kenett, Y. N., Cohen, O. S., Hassin-Baer, 
S., & Inzelberg, R. (2014). Enhanced creative thinking 
under dopaminergic therapy in Parkinson disease. Annals of 
Neurology, 75, 935-942.
Floresco, S. B., Ghods-Sharifi, S., Vexelman, C., & Magyar, O. 
(2006). Dissociable roles for the nucleus accumbens core and 
shell in regulating set shifting. Journal of Neuroscience, 26,
2449-2457.
Floresco, S. B., Magyar, O., Ghods-Sharifi, S., Vexelman, C., & 
Tse, M. T. L. (2005). Multiple dopamine receptor subtypes 
in the medial prefrontal cortex of the rat regulate set-shifting. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 31, 297-309.
Foster, D. J., Good, D. C., Fowlkes, A., & Sawaki, L. (2006). 
Atomoxetine enhances a short-term model of plasticity in 
humans. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 87, 
216-221.
Fox, K. C., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., 
& Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412.
Franowicz, J. S., & Arnsten, A. F. T. (1999). Treatment with the 
noradrenergic alpha-2 agonist clonidine, but not diazepam, 
improves spatial working memory in normal rhesus mon­
keys. Neuropsychopharmacology, 21, 611-621.
Gallagher, D. A., O’Sullivan, S. S., Evans, A. H., Lees, A. L., 
& Schrag, A. (2007). Pathological gambling in Parkinson’s
348
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

disease: risk factors and differences from dopaminergic dys- 
regulation. An analysis of published case series. Movement 
Disorders, 22, 1757-1763.
Ghacibeh, G. A., Shenker, J. I., Shenal, B., Uthman, B. M., & 
Heilman, K. M. (2006). Effect of vagus nerve stimulation 
on creativity and cognitive flexibility. Epilepsy and Behavior,
8, 720-725.
Gibbs, S. E., & D’Esposito, M. (2005). Individual capacity 
differences predict working memory performance and pre­
frontal activity following dopamine receptor stimulation. 
Cognitive and Affective Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 212-221.
Gill, T. M., Sarter, M., & Givens, B. (2000). Sustained visual 
attention 
performance-associated 
prefrontal 
neuronal 
activity evidence for cholinergic modulation. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 20, 4745-4757.
Green, A. E., Spiegel, K. A., Giangrande, E. J., Weinberger, A. 
B., Gallagher, N. M., & Turkeltaub, P. E. (2017). Thinking 
cap plus thinking zaps: tDCS of frontopolar cortex improves 
creative analogical reasoning and facilitates conscious aug­
mentation of state creativity and verb generation. Cerebral 
Cortex, 27, 2628-2639.
Groman, S. M., Hames, A. S., Seu, E., Tran, S., Clark, T. A., 
Harpster, S. N., Crawford, M., Burtner, J. L., Feiler, K., 
Roth, R. H., Elsworth, J. D., London, E. D., & Jentsch, J. 
D. (2014). In the blink of an eye: relating positive-feedback 
sensitivity to striatal dopamine D2-line receptors through 
blink rate. Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 14443-14454.
Hall, H., Sedvall, G., Magnusson, O., Kopp, J., Halldin, C., & 
Farde, L. (1994). Distribution of D l- and D2-dopamine 
receptors, and dopamine and its metabolites in the human 
brain. Neuropsychopharmacology, 11, 245-256.
Hasselmo, M. E., & Bower, J. M. (1992). Cholinergic suppression 
specific to intrinsic not afferent fiber synapses in rat piriform 
(olfactory) cortex. Trends in Neuroscience, 67, 1222-1229.
Hasselmo, M. E., Linster, C., Patil, M., Ma, D., & Cecik, M. 
(1997). Noradrenergic suppression of synaptic transmis­
sion may influence cortical signal-to-noise ratio. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 77, 3326-3339.
Hasselmo, M. E., & Wyble, B. P (1997). Simulation of the effects of 
scopolamine on free recall and recognition in a network model 
of the hippocampus. Behavoural Brain Research, 89, 1-34.
Heaton, R. K. (1981). Wisconsin card sort test manual. Odessa, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hecht, P. M., Will, M. J., Schachtman, T. R., Welby, L. M., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2014). Beta-adrenergic antagonist effects 
on a novel cognitive flexibility task in rodents. Behavioral 
Brain Research, 260, 148-154.
Hegarty II, J. P., Ferguson, B. J., Zamzow, R. M., Rohowetz, 
L. J., Johnson, J. D., Christ, S. E., & Beversdorf, D. Q. 
(2017). Beta-adrenergic antagonism modulates functional 
connectivity in the default mode network of individuals with 
and without autism spectrum disorder. Brain Imaging and 
Behavior, 11, 1278-1289.
Heilman, K. M., Nadeau, S. E., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2003). 
Creative innovation: Possible brain mechanisms. Neurocase,
9, 369-379.
Heimer, L. (1995). The Human brain and spinal cord, 2nd ed. 
New York; Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Het, S., Ramlow, G., & Wolf, O. T. (2005). A meta-analytic 
review of the effects of acute cortisol administration on 
human memory. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 771-784.
Jakala, P., Riekkinen, M., Sirvi, J., Koivisto, E., Kejonen, K., 
Vanhanen, M., & Riekkinen, P. Jr. (1999). Guanfacine,
but not clonidine, improves planning and working mem­
ory performance in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology, 20, 
460-470.
Jiang, W., Shang, S., & Su, Y. (2015). Genetic influences 
on insight problem solving: the role of catechol-O- 
methyltransferase (COMT) gene polymorphisms. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 6, 1569. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01569.
Just, M. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Keller, T. A., Kana, R. K., & 
Minshew, N. J. (2007). Functional and anatomical cortical 
underconnectivity in autism: Evidence from an fMRI study 
of an executive function task and corpus callosum mor­
phometry. Cerebral Cortex, 17, 951-961.
Just, M. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Keller, T. A., & Minshew, N. J.
(2004) . Cortical activation and synchronization during sen­
tence comprehension in high-functioning autism: evidence 
of underconnectivity. Brain, 127, 1811-1821.
Karnath, H. O., & Wallesch, C. W. (1992). Inflexibility of men­
tal planning: A characteristic disorder with prefrontal lobe 
lesions. Neuropsychologia, 30, 1011-1016.
Kelley, B. J., Yeager, K. R., Pepper, T. H., & Beversdorf, D. Q.
(2005) . Cognitive impairment in acute cocaine withdrawal. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 18, 108-112.
Kelley, B. J., Yeager, K. R., Pepper, T. H., Bornstein, R. A., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2007). The effect of propranolol on cog­
nitive flexibility and memory in acute cocaine withdrawal. 
Neurocase, 13, 320-327.
Kim, N., Goel, P. K., Tivarus, M., Hillier, A., & Beversdorf, D. 
Q. (2010). Independent component analysis of the effect 
of L-dopa on fMRI of language processing. Plos One, 5(8), 
el 1933. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011933.
Kimberg, D. Y., D’Esposito, M., & Farah, M. J. (1997). Effects 
of bromocriptine on human subjects depend on working 
memory capacity. Neuroreport, 8, 3581-3585.
Kirschbaum, C., Pirke, K. M., & Hellhammer, D. H. (1993). 
The “Trier Social Stress Test”: A tool for investigating 
psychobiological stress responses in a laboratory setting. 
Neuropsychobiology, 28, 76-81.
Kischka, U., Kammer, T. H., Maier, S., Weisbord, M., Thimm, M., 
& Spitzer, M. (1996). Dopaminergic modulation of semantic 
network activation. Neuropsychologia, 34, 1107-1113.
Krantz, G. S., Kasper, S., Lanzenberger, R. (2010). Reward and 
the serotonergic system. Neuroscience, 166, 1023-1035.
Kroes, M. C., Tona, K. D., den Uden, H. E., Vogel, S., van 
Wingen, G. A., & Fernandez, G. (2016). How administra­
tion of the beta-blocker propranolol before extinction can 
prevent the return of fear. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41, 
1569-1578.
Kulisevsky, J., Pagonabarraga, J., & Martinez-Corral, M. (2009). 
Changes in artistic style and behaviour in Parkinson’s dis­
ease: dopamine and creativity. Journal of Neurology, 256, 
816-819.
Kvetnansky, R., Pacak, K., Sabban, E. L., Kopin, I. J., & 
Goldstein, D. S. (1998). Stressor specificity of peripheral 
catecholaminergic activation. Advances in Pharmacology, 42, 
556-560.
Lader, M. (1988). Beta-adrenergic antagonists in neuropsychia­
try: An update. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 49, 213-223.
Lapiz, M. D. S., & Morilak, D. A. (2006). Noradrenergic modu­
lation of cognitive function in rat medial prefrontal cortex as 
measured by attentional set shifting capability. Neuroscience, 
137, 1039-1049.
Laverdue, B., & Boulenger, J. P. (1991). Medications beta- 
bloquantes et anxiete: Un interet therapeutique certain.
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
349

[Beta-blocking drugs and anxiety: A proven therapeutic 
value.] L’Encephale, 17, 481-492.
Li, B. M., Mao, Z. M., Wang, M., & Mei, Z. T. (1999). Alpha- 
2 adrenergic modulation of prefrontal cortical neuronal 
activity related to spatial working memory in monkeys. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 21, 601-610.
Li, B.-M., & Mei, Z.-T. (1994). Delayed response deficit 
induced by local injection of the alpha-2 adrenergic antago­
nist yohimbine into the dosolateral prefrontal cortex in 
young adult monkeys. Behavioral and Neural Biology, 62, 
134-139.
Lidow, M., Goldman-Rakic, P., Gallager, D., & Rakic, R (1991). 
Distribution of dopaminergic receptors in the primate cere­
bral cortex: Quantitative autoradiographic analysis using 
(H3) raclopide, (H3) spiperone and (H3) SCH23390. 
Neuroscience, 40, 657-671.
Lipnicki, D. M., & Byrne, D. G. (2005). Thinking on your 
back: Solving anagrams faster when supine than when stand­
ing. Cognitive Brain Research, 24, 719-722.
Martchek, M., Thevarkunnel, S., Bauman, M., Blatt, G., & 
Kemper, T. (2006). Lack of evidence of neuropathology in 
the locus coeruleus in autism. Acta Neuropathologica, 111, 
497-499.
Martindale, C., & Greenough, J. (1973), The differential effect 
of increased arousal on creative and intellectual performance. 
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 123, 329-335.
Mehler, M. E, & Purpura, D. P. (2009). Autism, fever, epi- 
genetics and the locus coeruleus. Brain Research Reviews, 59, 
388-392.
Mehta, M. A., Manes, E E, Magnolfi, G., Sahakian, B. J., & 
Robbins, T. W. (2004). Impaired set-shifting and dissociable 
effects on tests of spatial working memory following the 
dopamine D2 receptor antagonist sulpiride in human volun­
teers. Psychopharmacolgy, 176, 331-342.
Milano, N., Goldman, A., Woods, A., Williamson, J., Acosta, L., 
Lamb, D., & Zhang, H., Heilman, K. (2016). The influence 
of right and left frontotemporal stimulation on visuospatial 
creativity. Neurology, 86, Supplement P4.051.
Minderaa, R. B., Anderson, G. M., Volkmar, E R., Akkerhuis, 
G. W., & Cohen, D. J. (1994). Noradrenergic and adrener­
gic functioning in autism. Biological Psychiatry, 36, 237-241.
Malyszko, J., Urano, T., Takada, Y., & Takada, A. (1994). Time- 
dependent changes in platelet aggregation, fibrinolytic activ­
ity, and peripheral serotonergic measures in rats subjected to 
water immersion restraint stress. Homeostasis, 24, 236-242.
Nakamura, K., Matsumoto, M., & Hikosaka, O. (2008). 
Reward-dependent modulation of neural activity in the 
primate dorsal raphe nucleus. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 
5331-5343.
Narayanan, A., White, C. A., Saklayen, S., Scaduto, M. 
J., Carpenter, A. L., Abduljalil, A., Schmalbrock, P., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2010). Effect of propranolol on func­
tional connectivity in autism spectrum disorder. Brain 
Imaging and Behavior, 4, 189-197.
Newhouse, P. A., Potter, A., Corwin, J., & Lenox, R. (1992). 
Acute nicotinic blockade produces cognitive impairment in 
normal humans. Psychopharmacology, 108, 480-484.
Newhouse, P. A., Potter, A., Corwin, J., & Lenox, R. (1994). 
Age-related effects of the nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine 
on cognition and behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology, 10, 
93-107.
Newman, L. A., & McGaughy, J. (2008). Cholinergic deaffer- 
entation of prefrontal cortex increases sensitivity to cross- 
modal distractors during a sustained attention task. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 28, 2642-2650.
Paladini, C. A., & Williams, J. T. (2004). Noradrenergic inhibi­
tion of midbrain dopamine neurons. Journal of Neuroscience,
24, 4568-4575.
Pederzolli, A. S., Tivarus, M. E., Agrawal, P., Kostyk, S. K., 
Thomas, K. M., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2008). Dopaminergic 
modulation of semantic priming in Parkinson disease. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 21, 134-137.
Pessiglione, M., Czernecki, V., Pillon, B., Dubois, B., Schiipback, 
M., Agid, Y., & Tremblay, L. (2005). An effect of dopamine 
depletion on decision-making: The temporal coupling of 
deliberation and execution. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
17, 1886-1896.
Pitman, R. K., Sanders, K. M., Zusman, R. M., Healy, A. R., 
Cheema, F., Lasko, N. B., Cahill, L., & Orr, S. P. (2002). 
Pilot study of secondary prevention of posttraumatic stress 
disorder with propranolol. Biological Psychiatry, 51 ,189-192.
Power, R. A., Steinberg, S., Bjornsdottir, G., Rietveld, C. 
A., Abdellaoui, A., Nivard, M. M., Johannesson, M., 
Galesloot, T. E., Hottenga, J. J., Willemsen, G., Cesarini, 
D., Benjamin, D. J., Magnusson, P. K. E., Ullen, F., 
Tiemeier, H., Hofman, A., van Rooij, F. J. A., Walters, G. B., 
Sigurdsson, E., Thorgeirsson, T. E., Ingason, A., Helgason, 
A., Kong, A., Kiemeney, L. A., Koellinger, P, Boomsma, 
D. I., Gudbjartsson, D., Stefansson, H., & Stefansson, K. 
(2015). Polygenic risk scores for schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder predict creativity. Nature Neuroscience, 18, 953-955.
Ramos, B. P, Colgan, L. A., Nou, E., & Arnsten, A. F. T. (2008). 
(32 adrenergic agonist, clenbuterol, enhances working mem­
ory performance in aging animals. Neurobiology of Aging, 29, 
1060-1069.
Ramos, B. P, Colgan, L., Nou, E., Ovaria, S., Wilson, S. R., & 
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2005). The beta-1 adrenergic antagonist, 
betaxolol, improves working memory performance in rats 
and monkeys. Biological Psychiatry, 58, 894-900.
Ratey, J. J., Bemporad, J., Sorgi, P., Bick, P., Polakoff, S., 
O’Driscoll, G., & Mikkelsen, E. (1987). Brief report: Open 
trial effects of beta-blockers on speech and social behaviors 
in 8 autistic adults. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 17, 439-446.
Reuter, M., Roth, S., Holve, K., & Hennig, J. (2006). 
Identification of first candidate gene for creativity: A pilot 
study. Brain Research, 1069, 190-197.
Robbins, T. W. (2007). Shifting and stopping: Fronto-striatal 
substrates, neurochemical modulation and clinical implica­
tions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B: Biological Sciences, 362, 917-932.
Roesch, M. R., Calu, D. J., & Schoenbaum, G. (2007). 
Dopamine neurons encode the better option in rats between 
deciding between differently delayed or sized rewards. Nature 
Neuroscience, 10, 1615-1624.
Roesch-Ely, D., Weiland, S., Scheffel, H., Schwaninger, M., 
Hundemer, H.-P., Kolter, T., & Weisbrod, M. (2006). 
Dopaminergic modulation of semantic priming in healthy 
volunteers. Biological Psychiatry, 60, 604-611.
Roozendaal, B., McReynolds, J. R., & McGaugh, J. L. (2004). 
The basolateral amygdala interacts with the medial pre­
frontal cortex in regulating glucocorticoid effects on
350
N E U R O P S Y C H O P H A R M A C O L O G Y  OF F L E X I B L E  A N D  C R E A T I V E  T H I N K I N G

working memory impairment. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 
1385-1392.
Sarter, M., & Bruno, J. P. (1997). Cognitive functions of cortical 
acetylcholine: Toward a unifying hypothesis. Brain Research 
Reviews, 23, 28-46.
Sarter, M., & Bruno, J. P. (2001). The cognitive neuroscience 
of sustained attention: Where top-down meets bottom-up. 
Brain Research Reviews, 35, 146-160.
Sawaguchi, T., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1991). D1 dopamine 
receptors in prefrontal cortex: Involvement in working mem­
ory. Science, 251, 947-950.
Schultz, W. (2007). Multiple dopamine functions at different 
time courses. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 30, 259-288.
Selden, N. R., Gitelman, D. R., Salamon-Murayama, N., 
Parrish, T. B., & Mesulam, M.-M. (1998). Trajectories of 
cholinergic pathways within the cerebral hemispheres of the 
brain. Brain, 121, 2249-2257.
Shields, G. S., Bonner, C., & Moons, W. G. (2015). Does cor­
tisol influence core executive functions? A meta-analysis of 
acute cortisol administration effects on working memory, 
inhibition, and set-shifting. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 58, 
91-103.
Silver, J. A., Hughes, J. D., Bornstein, R. A., & Beversdorf, D. Q. 
(2004). Effect of anxiolytics on cognitive flexibility in prob­
lem solving. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 17, 93-97.
Smith, A., & Nutt, D. (1996). Noradrenaline and attention 
lapses. Nature, 380, 291.
Smith, R. M., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2008). Effects of semantic 
relatedness on recall of stimuli preceding emotional odd­
balls. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 
14, 620-628.
Smyth, S. F., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2007). Lack of dopaminergic 
modulation of cognitive flexibility. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology, 20, 225-229.
Smyth, S. F., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (in preparation). Muscarinic 
and nicotinic modulation of memory but not cognitive 
flexibility.
Stefani, M. R., & Moghaddam, B. (2005). Systemic and pre­
frontal cortical NMDA receptor blockade differentially 
affect discrimination learning and set-shift ability in rats. 
Behavioral Neuroscience, 119, 420-428.
Stickgold, R., Hobson, J. A., Fosse, R., & Fosse, M. (2001). 
Sleep, learning, and dreams: off-line memory reprocessing. 
Science, 294, 1052-1057.
Subramaniam, K., Kounios, J., Parrish, T. B., & Jung-Beeman, 
M. (2008). A brain mechanism for facilitation of insight 
by positive affect. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 
415-432.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Sassa, Y., Hashizume, H., Sekiguchi, A., 
Fukushima, A., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Regional gray 
matter volume of dopaminergic system associate with creativ­
ity: Evidence from voxel-based morphometry. Neuro image, 
51, 578-585.
Tivarus, M. E., Hillier, A., Schmalbrock, P, & Beversdorf, D. Q. 
(2008). Functional connectivity in an fMRI study of seman­
tic and phonological processes and the effect of L-dopa. 
Brain and Languge, 104, 42-50.
Uribe-Marino, A., Gassen, N. C., Wiesbeck, M. F., Balsevich, 
G., Santarelli, S., Solfrank, B., Dournes, C., Fries, G. R., 
Masana, M., Labermeier, C., Wang. X. D., Hafner, K.,
Schmid, B., Rein, T., Chen, A., Deussing, J. M., & Schmidt, 
M. V. (2016). Prefrontal cortex corticotropin-releasing factor 
receptor 1 conveys acute stress-induced executive dysfunc­
tion. Biological Psychiatry, 80, 743-753.
Usher, M., Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., Rajkowski, J., & 
Aston-Jones, G. (1999). The role of locus coeruleus in the 
regulation of cognitive performance. Science, 283, 549-554.
Vaiva, G., Ducrocq, F., Jezequel, K., Averland, B., Lestavel, P., 
Brunet, A., & Marmar, C. R. (2003). Immediate treatment 
with propranolol decreases posttraumatic stress disorder two 
months after trauma. Biological Psychaiatry, 54, 947-949.
van Stegeren, A. H., Everaerd, W., Cahill, L., McGaugh, J. 
L., & Gooren, L. J. G. (1998). Memory for emotional 
events: Differential effects of centrally versus peripherally act­
ing (2-blocking agents. Psychopharmacology, 138, 305-310.
Vikki, J. (1992). Cognitive flexibility and mental programming 
after closed head injuries and anterior and posterior cerebral 
excisions. Neuropsychologia, 30, 807-814.
Ward, M. M., Metford, I. N., Parker, S. D., Chesney, M. A., 
Taylor, C. B., Keegan, D. L., & Barchas, J. D. (1983). 
Epinephrine and norepinephrine responses in continuously 
collected human plasma to a series of stressors. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 45, 471-486.
Warren, C. M., Eldar, E., van den Brink, R. L., Tona, K. D., van der 
Wee, N. J., Giltay, E. J., van Noorden, M. S., Bosch, J. A, Wilson,
R. A., Cohen, J. D., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2016). Catecholamine- 
mediated increases in gain enhance the precision of cortical repre­
sentations. Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 5699-5708.
Whitehouse, P J., Price, D. L., Strubble, R. G., Clark, A. W., 
Coyle, J. T., DeLong, M. R. (1982). Alzheimer’s disease 
and senile dementia: Loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. 
Science, 215, 1237-1239.
Williams, G., & Goldman-Rakic, P. (1995). Modulation of 
memory fields by dopamine D 1 receptors in prefrontal cor­
tex. Nature, 376, 549-550.
Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation of strength 
of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18, 458-482.
Zabelina, D. L., O’Leary, D., Pornpattananangkul, N., Nusslock, 
R., & Beeman, M. (2015). Creativity and sensory gating 
indexed by the P50: Selective versus leaky sensory gating in 
divergent thinkers and creative achievers. Neuropsychologia, 
69, 77-84.
Zamzow, R. M., Christ, S. E., Saklayen, S. S., Moffitt, A. J., 
Bodner, K. E., Higgins, K. F., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2014). 
Effect of propranolol on facial scanning in autism spectrum 
disorder: A preliminary investigation. Journal of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology, 36, 431—445.
Zamzow, R. M., Ferguson, B. J., Ragsdale, A. S., Lewis M. L., & 
Beversdorf, D. Q. (2017). Effects of acute beta-adrenergic 
antagonism on verbal problem solving in autism spectrum 
disorder and exploration of treatment response markers. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 39, 
596-606.
Zamzow, R. M., Ferguson, B. J., Stichter, J. P., Porges, E. C., 
Ragsdale, A. S., Lewis, M. L., & Beversdorf, D. Q. (2016). 
Effects of propranolol on conversational reciprocity in autism 
spectrum disorder: A pilot, double-blinded, single-dose psy- 
chopharmacological challenge study. Psychopharmacology, 
233, 1171-1178.
D A V I D  Q. B E V E R S D O R F
351


P A R T
Sleep, Dreaming, 
and Memory


C H A P T E R
27
Dreaming Is an Intensified Form 
of Mind-Wandering, Based in an Augmented 
Portion of the Default Network
G. William Domhoff
Abstract
This chapter argues that dreaming is an intensified form of mind-wandering that makes use of embodied 
simulation. It further hypothesizes that the neural network that enables dreaming is very likely an 
augmented portion of the default network. This network is activated whenever there is (1) a mature 
and intact neural substrate that can support the cognitive process of dreaming; (2) an adequate level of 
cortical activation; (3) an occlusion of external stimuli; (4) a cognitively mature imagination system (a 
necessity indicated by the virtual lack of dreaming in preschoolers and its relative paucity until ages 8-9); 
and (5) the loss of conscious self-control, which may be neurologically mediated in the final step in a 
complex process by the decoupling of the dorsal attentional network from the anterior portions of the 
default network. If this testable theory proves to be correct, then dreaming may be the quintessential 
cognitive simulation.
Key Words: dreaming, dream, mind-wandering, cognition, default network
Introduction
The serendipitous discovery of a strong correla­
tion between dreaming and rapid eye movements 
(REM) in 1953 provided the context for the gradual 
realization that dreaming could be best understood 
as a form of internally mediated thought (Aserinsky, 
1996; Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953, 1955). The 
further discovery a few years later that these eyes 
movements were part of one stage of sleep (REM 
sleep), within a very regular sleep cycle, reinforced 
the notion that dreaming was one event within a 
sleep-wake cycle that is largely independent of ordi­
nary environmental stimuli (Dement & Kleitman, 
1957a, 1957b).
Moreover, subsequent research also revealed that 
dreaming is not solely linked to REM sleep, or even 
to sleep. Awakenings from REM sleep are more 
likely to lead to long and vivid dream reports, but 
long and vivid reports can be recalled from non­
rapid eye movement (NREM) 2 awakenings as well,
especially late in the sleep period, or after spontane­
ous NREM morning awakenings (Cicogna, Natale, 
Occhionero, & Bosinelli, 1998; Herman, Ellman, 
& Roffwarg, 1978; Pivik & Foulkes, 1968) There 
is also solid evidence that dreaming can occur dur­
ing sleep onset and briefly during periods of mind­
wandering (Foulkes, 1985; Foulkes & Schmidt, 
1983; Foulkes & Vogel, 1965). The most important 
implication of these varied findings is that dreaming 
depends on an adequate level of brain activation in 
the absence of external distractions, not on the neu­
rophysiology of a particular sleep stage (Antrobus, 
1986; Antrobus, Kondo, & Reinsel, 1995; Foulkes, 
1985; Wamsley et al., 2007; Zimmerman, 1970).
Soon after the basics of the sleep cycle were 
established, sleep and dream researchers learned 
that they could not trigger dreams or very often 
and reliably influence them with either pre-sleep 
stimuli, such as fear-arousing or sensual mov­
ies, or with concurrent stimuli administered
355

during REM, such as sounds or the whisper­
ing of the names of significant people in the 
dreamers’ lives (Berger, 1963; Dement, 1965; 
Dement & Wolpert, 1958; Foulkes, 1966, 1996; 
Rechtschaffen, 1978). For example, only 5% of 
179 awakenings showed any sign of incorporation 
in a large-scale study comparing the influence of 
neutral and affect-arousing pre-sleep films on the 
REM reports of 24 adult participants (Foulkes 
& Rechtschaffen, 1964); similar results were 
obtained in a study of boys between ages 7 and 
11 (Foulkes, Pivik, Steadman, Spear, & Symonds, 
1967). Moreover, the impact of external stimuli 
on dreams may be exaggerated because the criteria 
for incorporation are very loose in some of these 
studies, including alleged metaphoric expressions 
of the stimulus (see Arkin & Antrobus, 1991, for 
a critical review).
Pre-sleep suggestions to dream about a specific 
topic also proved to be nearly futile, and the few 
meager results were tempered by the impossibility 
of confirming affirmative reports by participants 
who might be overly eager to please researchers 
(Domhoff, 1985, pp. 84-88; see also Griffin & 
Foulkes, 1977, for a well-controlled study with null 
results). However, one well-controlled study did 
find that participants often dreamed about topics 
they had been asked to try not to think about; an 
innovative control was added in that the partici­
pants did not know they would be asked about their 
dreams until they opened a sealed envelope when 
they awakened the next day (Wegner, Wenzlaff, & 
Kozak, 2004).
Even during-sleep suggestions related to the 
dreamers current concerns have very little impact. 
For example, in one study, seven male participants 
each slept in the lab on three experimental nights 
to see if their REM dream reports would incorpo­
rate recorded words, some of which related to their 
current concerns, as determined by pre-sleep ques­
tioning, and some of which did not (Hoelscher, 
Klinger, & Barta, 1981, p. 89). Although 56 of 59 
REM awakenings yielded dream reports, indepen­
dent judges agreed that there were only 13 incor­
porations, 10 of which involved repeated words 
related to one of the participants’ personal concerns. 
However, it was also judged that five of the con­
cerns and all three of the non-concerns appeared in 
dreams in which these stimuli were not suggested, 
which reduced the number of likely incorporated 
suggestions to five (Hoelscher et al., 1981, p. 90).
Based on a consideration of the laboratory dream 
research literature over a period of nearly 40 years,
a dream researcher who conducted several studies 
that tried to influence dream content later con­
cluded: “Probably the most general conclusion to 
be reached from a wide variety of disparate stimuli 
employed and analyses undertaken is that dreams 
are relatively autonomous, or ‘isolated,’ mental phe­
nomena, in that they are not readily susceptible to 
either induction or modification by immediate pre­
sleep manipulation, at least those within the realm 
of possibility in ethical human experimentation” 
(Foulkes, 1996, p. 614). On the few occasions when 
stimuli seem to be incorporated, “the narrative 
seems to determine the fate of the stimulus, rather 
than the stimulus determining the fate of the narra­
tive,” which again shows the stimulus-independent 
nature of dreaming (Foulkes & Domhoff, 2014,
p. 168).
Nor do significant events of the previous day very 
often have an effect on dream content. In three care­
ful studies of this issue, two in the laboratory, one 
based on dreams written down at home in the morn­
ing, blind judges could not match the participants’ 
pre-sleep verbal reports of their activities or major 
concerns of the day with dream reports from night 
awakenings from REM periods or morning reports 
at home (Roussy, 1998; Roussy et al., 2000; Roussy 
et al., 1996). Thus, the generally unsuccessful search 
for specific stimuli, significant daily events, or even 
current concerns that can influence the dreams of 
the subsequent night has demonstrated that dream­
ing is a form of internally mediated thought that 
occurs when the mind is not being directed by 
internal or external stimuli, which makes it simi­
lar in nature to mind-wandering and daydreaming 
(Antrobus, Singer, Goldstein, & Fortgang, 1970; 
Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 
2009; Mason et al., 2007; Singer, 1966).
More recently, the equally serendipitous discov­
ery of the default network and its relationship to 
mind-wandering opened a new chapter in dream 
research because several dream researchers soon 
noticed that the default network shared regions with 
the network that is activated in REM sleep (e.g., 
Domhoff, 2011; Hartmann, 2011; Pace-Schott,
2011). When the mind-wandering supported by 
the default network is conceptualized in terms of 
simulation, which is defined as “a particular kind or 
subset of thinking that involves imaginatively plac­
ing oneself in a hypothetical scenario and explor­
ing possible outcomes,” then the potential link to 
dreaming is clear (Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 
2008, p. 42). Mind-wandering and dreaming both 
involve thinking that is turned inward to personal
356
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

concerns and often jumps from topic to topic 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2006, 2015).
Evidence from dream studies further suggests 
that dreams are “embodied” simulations, in which 
there is not only mental imagery and narrative 
flow, but also an activation of secondary sensorim­
otor and visual areas that have to do with percep­
tions and actions. They are also embodied in the 
further sense that the imagery involved in simula­
tion is subjectively “felt” as the experienced body 
in action (Bergen, 2012; Gibbs, 2006; Niedenthal, 
Winkielman, Mondillon, & Vermeulen, 2009). 
Dreaming may even be the quintessential embodied 
simulation because it often includes a vivid sensory 
environment and intense interpersonal interactions, 
and sometimes unfolds over a period of 15-30 min­
utes. From this perspective, dreams are dramatiza­
tions that have parallels with theatrical plays. The 
dreamer and the other characters are usually engaged 
in one or another activity (e.g., looking, walking) or 
a social interaction (e.g., criticizing, hugging), and 
sometimes express thoughts or emotions. The sense 
of being a participant in (or observer of) an event is 
a defining feature of dreaming. In all these regards, 
dreaming has nothing to do with hallucinations, psy­
chotic states, or drug states, nor with the other kinds 
of mental experiences that can occur during sleep or 
upon awakening (e.g., night terrors and sleep paraly­
sis) (e.g., Arkin, 1981; Boselli, Parrino, Smerieri, 
& Terzano, 1998; Broughton, 1968; Cheyne & 
Pennycook, 2013; Fisher, Kahn, Edwards, & Davis, 
1973; Santomauro & French, 2009).
Combining what is 
known 
from labora­
tory dream studies and neurocognitive studies, it 
seems likely that the neural network for dreaming 
becomes operative whenever there is (1) a mature 
and intact default network that can support the 
cognitive process of dreaming, a qualification that 
allows for the impact of lesions on the functioning 
of this network; (2) an adequate level of cortical 
activation, which is provided by subcortical ascend­
ing pathways and crucial regions in the hypothala­
mus; (3) an occlusion of external stimuli, which 
likely happens in the posterior thalamus, but may 
include some gating in primary sensorimotor areas; 
(4) a cognitively mature imagination system, a 
necessity indicated by the relative lack of dreaming 
in preschoolers and its infrequency until ages 9 - 
11; and (5) the loss of conscious self-control, which 
may be neurologically mediated as the final step in 
a complex process by the decoupling of the dorsal 
attentional network from the anterior portions of 
the default network.
Although dreams are often thought of as dis­
jointed and highly bizarre, several laboratory studies 
showed that they are far more coherent and faithful 
to waking life than is usually recognized by psychol­
ogists and neuroscientists not familiar with the lit­
erature on dreams. For example, the largest study of 
adult REM dream content in the sleep laboratory, 
based on 635 dream reports collected “for a variety 
of experimental purposes” in a series of investiga­
tions over a period of seven years between I960 and 
1967, concluded that “dreaming consciousness” is a 
“remarkably faithful replica of waking life” (Snyder, 
1970, p. 133).
Nor are there many differences between dream 
reports collected in sleep labs and those collected in 
non-lab settings, except in the case of several aggres­
sion indicators, as best shown in studies that used 
the same participants in both settings (Domhoff & 
Schneider, 1999; Hall, 1966b; Strauch & Meier, 
1996; Weisz & Foulkes, 1970; Zepelin, 1972). So- 
called “typical dreams,” such as flying, losing teeth, 
or appearing inappropriately dressed in public, 
which many people report they have experienced, 
are actually extremely rare, less than 1% of dreams 
in each instance in both lab and non-lab stud­
ies (Barrett, 1991; Domhoff, 1996; Snyder, 1970; 
Strauch & Meier, 1996). “Recurrent dreams” are 
less than 2% of all dreams, and the appearance of 
everyday issues such as politics, economics, and reli­
gion is also very infrequent (Desjardins & Zadra, 
2006; Domhoff & Schneider, 2008; Hall, 1951; 
Hartmann, 2000).
In the most detailed lab study of unusual and 
anomalous characteristics of dream reports, the 
investigators concluded that their results “empha­
size the rarity of the bizarre in dreams” because 
major distortions of actual waking experiences 
reach a high of only 16.7% of all the activities and 
social interactions, and of only 6.2% and 7.8% for 
all characters and physical surroundings (Dorus, 
Dorus, & Rechtschaffen, 1971, p. 367). The figures 
for the most improbable category of event (those 
never experienced by the dreamer in waking life) 
were 4.9% of all physical surroundings, 1.3% of 
all characters, and 6.8% of all activities and social 
interactions. Similar findings were reported in other 
lab and non-lab studies (Hall, 1966a; Revonsuo 
& Salmivalli, 1995; Snyder, 1970; Strauch & 
Meier, 1996).
Moreover, other studies suggest that there may 
be only small differences between dream reports and 
drifting waking thought in terms of bizarreness. For 
example, a study comparing REM reports to streams
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
357

of waking thought recorded in a darkened room 
found that there were more abrupt topic changes 
or scene changes (“discontinuities”) in the waking 
sample than in REM reports, which makes the use 
of scene changes a problematic indicator of more 
frequent bizarreness in dreaming. In addition, there 
were as many “improbable combinations,” such as 
unusual juxtapositions of objects, in waking as in 
REM. The REM dream reports only were higher 
on “improbable identities,” such as metamorpho­
ses and blended characters (Reinsel, Antrobus, & 
Wollman, 1992, p. 173).
Frequent topic changes also are found in labora­
tory studies of mind-wandering, even when partici­
pants are asked to focus on a visual discrimination 
task on a computer screen (Mason et al., 2007). 
Inattention while carrying out these and other cog­
nitive tests in the laboratory leads to impairments in 
executive-system abilities, which may have parallels 
with any impairments in thinking during dreaming. 
The authors of one review of the literature charac­
terize the findings as evidence for a “restless mind” 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). The same authors 
describe mind-wandering as “a state of decoupled 
information processing, which occurs because of 
a shift of attention from the immediate environ­
ment,” a statement that might apply to dreaming as 
well (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006, p. 956).
It is also notable that 29 college students (13 
men, 16 women), who were signaled randomly over 
a period of seven days by means of a pager, judged 
that one-third of all their thoughts were “spontane­
ous,” meaning that those thoughts were not directed 
and had arisen unexpectedly (Klinger, 1999, 2009; 
Klinger & Cox, 1987-1988). Demonstrating that 
spontaneous thoughts can be highly unusual, 21% 
of the reports analyzed in one of these analyses had 
aspects that were physically impossible, and many 
thoughts were judged as disconnected. In addition, 
9% of the 1,425 thought samples had “more than 
a trace” of dreamlike thought and another 16% 
had a “trace” of such thought (Klinger & Cox, 
1987-1988, p. 124). Importantly, there were also 
wide individual differences in how much think­
ing was reported to be deliberate or spontaneous 
in these studies. For two-thirds of the participants, 
the majority of their thoughts were deliberate and 
intentional, but for the other one-third the major­
ity of their thoughts were spontaneous (Klinger, 
1999, 2009).
The findings in field studies of mind-wandering 
dovetail with the inadvertent discovery of brief epi­
sodes of dreaming during periods of drifting waking
thought during practice sessions in the sleep lab, 
which were meant to prepare participants to focus 
on their most recent thoughts during sleep awak­
enings (Foulkes, 1985, pp. 71-72). Participants 
reclined in a moderately lighted room, with instruc­
tions to relax but stay awake, and with their wake­
fulness monitored by EEG and EMG recordings. 
They then responded to random verbal requests 
from the experimenters to report “the very last 
thing going through your mind just before I called 
you” (Foulkes, 1985, p. 71). To the researchers’ sur­
prise, they learned that 24% of sampled thoughts 
reported by 16 women college students were 
described as visual and dramatic, and were experi­
enced as dreams (Foulkes & Scott, 1973).
In a replication study with 10 men and 10 
women, who were asked to report their thoughts 
after 12 random calls in sessions of 45-60 minutes, 
19% of the probes led to reports in which the par­
ticipants “experienced multimodal sensory imagina­
tion that was dramatic in form and which, for the 
moment at least, was experienced as reality rather 
than imagination” (Foulkes, 1985, p. 72; Foulkes 
& Fleisher, 1975, for the first report of the replica­
tion study). The investigators further learned that 
20% of the probes demonstrated involvement in 
“what might be called m indwandering (the subject 
is not controlling his thoughts, but he is aware he 
is in the laboratory . . .).” No instances of objec­
tive or self-reported sleep were recorded during this 
study (Foulkes & Fleisher, 1975, p. 70). The origi­
nal findings were replicated for a second time as a 
preliminary part of a study of dream reports from 
sleep-onset, REM sleep, and NREM sleep, but the 
results were not formally published (Foulkes, 1985, 
p. 89, footnote 39, and pp. 70-77 for a summary of 
all three studies).
Systematic quantitative studies of dream con­
tent reveal that there is considerable psychological 
meaning in dream content in terms of correspon­
dences with waking demographic and psychologi­
cal variables, such as nationality, gender, age, and 
major personal waking concerns (Domhoff, 1996, 
2003; Pesant & Zadra, 2006; Zadra & Domhoff, 
2016). This point is also demonstrated by the 
consistency of dream content over months, years, 
or decades in studies of all or parts of about 25 
different dream series, which were kept by a wide 
range of individuals for their own reasons without 
any intention of later providing them to dream 
researchers. These dream series are an archival 
form of data that can be classified as a non-reactive 
measure because they are not influenced by the
358
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

demand characteristics implicit in any experimen­
tal setting or the expectancies of experimenters and 
participants when they enter into an experimental 
study (Orne, 1962; Rosenthal & Ambady, 1995; 
Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1969; Webb, Campbell, 
Schwartz, Sechrest, & Grove, 1981). Nor are the 
results from studying dream series influenced by 
autocorrelation (i.e., the lack of independence 
among a series of responses from a single indi­
vidual), as shown by a study of content findings 
from four different dream series using the Wald- 
Walkowitz (1940) runs test to test for randomness. 
Overall, 125 runs tests were carried out, which 
resulted in six statistically significant results, five 
at the .05 level and one at the .01 level. The per­
centages of statistically significant differences that 
were found— 4.8% at the .05 level and 0.8% at the 
.01 level— are close to what would be expected by 
chance (Domhoff & Schneider, 2015).
Detailed content analyses of about a dozen dream 
series, which led to a series of inferences that could 
be accepted or rejected by the dreamer and other 
respondents, demonstrate that there is continu­
ity between many of the conceptions and personal 
concerns expressed by individuals in dreaming and 
waking thought, with the frequency of the appear­
ance of a person or activity shown to be a reliable 
index of the intensity of a personal concern. The 
best-established continuities for individuals involve 
the main people in a dreamer s life and the nature of 
the social interactions with them. There also is solid 
evidence for continuity with many of the dreamers 
main interests and activities (Bulkeley, 2012, 2014; 
Domhoff, 1996, 2003). However, this general find­
ing must be qualified in certain ways.
First, the continuity is not with day-to-day 
events or the activities of any given day, but with 
personal concerns, as best shown in three closely 
related studies of this issue discussed earlier in the 
chapter (Roussy, 1998; Roussy et al., 2000; Roussy 
et al., 1996). Second, the continuity usually is with 
both thought and behavior, but sometimes it is only 
with waking thought. Third, there are dream ele­
ments that are not continuous with waking concep­
tions and concerns. It is these discontinuous aspects 
of dream content that may be the products of figu­
rative thinking (as yet unsupported for dreaming) 
or impaired cognitive functioning (as yet unspeci­
fied and not studied). It may be that 20%-30% of 
dream reports are “adventure dreams,” with no obvi­
ous connections to the dreamers waking personal 
concerns (Domhoff, Meyer-Gomes, & Schredl, 
2005-2006; Foulkes, 1999, p. 136).
The general findings on consistency and con­
tinuity suggest that there may be another level of 
meaning in dreaming, namely, a degree of lawful­
ness in at least some of its aspects. This conclusion 
is based on a comparison of the relationships found 
in waking social networks with the social networks 
found in five dream series, ranging in size from 
208 to 423 dream reports, three from women, two 
from men. The study found that the “same proper­
ties apply to dream social networks” (Schweickert, 
2007, p. 279); that is, waking social networks 
and networks of dream characters are both “small 
world” networks in that they are characterized by 
a combination of features, such as short paths to 
other people via shared connections, a tendency 
for two people who are known by another person 
to know each other, and a tendency for the people 
who appear frequently to appear together (Han, 
Schweickert, Xi, & Viau-Quesnela, 2015). In addi­
tion, both waking and dreaming social networks 
share a strong tendency for a few characters to be 
more central to the overall network than others and 
for a large number of characters to be connected in 
a large general component, although the size of the 
general component varied greatly for the five dream 
series that were studied (Han, Schweickert, Xi, & 
Viau-Quesnela, 2015).
The findings with the first five dreamers were 
replicated and extended through a comparison 
of the waking social network and the network of 
dream characters in a series of 4,254 dream reports 
written over a 41-year period by a middle-aged 
woman. The results were compared with the find­
ings from the dreamers waking social network, 
which was constructed from a questionnaire in 
which she rated how well each possible pair of 
people actually knew each other in waking life and 
how emotionally close they were on a 1 (low) to 5 
(high) scale (Han, 2014, p. 36). She also rated her 
own emotional closeness to each person on the same 
5-point scale. In all, there were 120 characters that 
appeared in her dreams that were known personally 
by the dreamer— 9 immediate family members, 55 
other relatives, 28 friends, 9 boyfriends, 14 cowork­
ers, and 5 miscellaneous characters.
The dream and waking social networks were 
similar in several important ways, starting with the 
fact that the “density” of the networks, defined as 
the percentage of all possible connections that actu­
ally appeared, was .16 in the waking network and 
.14 in the dreaming network (Han, 2014, p. 47). 
A centrality measure based on how connected a 
person is to other well-connected people revealed a
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
359

high correlation between the dream and waking-life 
networks.
However, her network of dream characters more 
often brought together immediate family members, 
other relatives, and friends than was the case in wak­
ing life, although this difference did not hold true 
for her coworkers (Han, 2014, pp. 48-49). Very 
importantly, the people who were emotionally close 
to the dreamer in waking life tended to appear in 
dreams together, even though they were not in the 
same social networks in waking life (Han, 2014, 
p. 50).
There are also unexpected findings on the dreams 
of children and adolescents based on longitudinal 
and cross-sectional laboratory studies of many doz­
ens of participants. Preschool and young elementary 
school children awakened in the sleep lab report 
dreams after only 15%-20% of REM awakenings, 
and their dream reports differ in complexity and 
content from those of adults, even though their ver­
bal skills are excellent and there is every indication 
that they were comfortable in the laboratory set­
ting (Foulkes, 1982; Foulkes, Hollifield, Sullivan, 
Bradley, & Terry, 1990). Moreover, childrens dream 
reports are not adultlike in frequency, length, and 
form until ages 9-11, and the content is not regu­
larly connected to everyday emotional preoccupa­
tions and interests until ages 11-13 (Foulkes, 1982, 
1999; Foulkes, Hollifield, Sullivan, Bradley, & Terry, 
1990). In addition to the cross-sectional replication 
of the original longitudinal results for children ages 
5-8 by the same investigator (Foulkes et al., 1990), 
the results for children ages 9-15 were later rep­
licated in a six-year longitudinal study (Strauch, 
2004, 2005; Strauch & Lederbogen, 1999).
Although the results with children were totally 
unexpected, they are consistent with several differ­
ent sets of findings concerning preschool childrens 
cognitive abilities. To begin with, only half of chil­
drens statements about an event are narratives by 
age 3, albeit limited ones, but by age five or six 
many children can tell a story, usually a personal 
one, that contains a beginning, middle, and end 
(Reese, 2013, pp. 197-198; Taylor, 2013, p. 803). 
In addition, there is continuing narrative develop­
ment after ages 5-6; in one study, children age 7 
included only three of the eight basic elements that 
are part of a well-developed narrative, but by age 11 
they included six of the eight. Similarly, childrens 
ability to engage in “pretend dramatic play is typi­
cally delayed until age four in five in preschool envi­
ronments” (Nelson, 2007, p. 170). Before that age 
they seem to lack the ability to simulate versions of
past and future events, which is considered essential 
to imagination, defined as the “capacity to mentally 
transcend time, place, and/or circumstance to think 
about what might have been, plan and anticipate 
the future, create fictional worlds, and consider 
remote and close alternatives to actual experiences” 
(Taylor, 2013, p. 791).
Then, too, personal (autobiographical, auotono- 
etic) memories only gradually develop and become 
organized into an autobiographical self around 
age 6 (Bauer, 2013, pp. 521-522; Gopnik, 2009, 
Chapter 5; Tulving, 2005); that is, personal epi­
sodic memories for specific events slowly evolve 
into a more personal type of memory that has feel­
ing components and a sense of subjective experi­
encing or re-experiencing, in which the memories 
are “infused with a sense of personal involvement” 
(Bauer, 2013, p. 521). Studies that included spe­
cific questions about conscious thoughts found that 
preschool children, in contrast to those ages 6-7 
and older, do not seem to have much awareness of a 
spontaneous inner mental life (Eisbach, 2013b, for 
a review and synthesis).
Between ages 3 and 6, preschool children under­
stand many aspects of thinking quite well, but “they 
don’t understand that your thoughts can be inter­
nally generated,” or that “thoughts can simply fol­
low the logic of your internal experiences instead of 
being triggered from the outside” (Gopnik, 2009, 
p. 152). Apparently due to this inability to con­
sciously experience their own thinking, preschool 
children “don’t experience their lives as a single 
timeline stretching back into the past and forward 
into future,” or “feel immersed in a constant stream 
of changing thoughts and feelings” (Gopnik, 2009, 
p. 153). As a result, it is not until around age 6 that 
children have “the basics of autobiographical mem­
ory,” along with an inner mental life and “a roughly 
adult understanding of consciousness” (Gopnik, 
2009, p. 156). Moreover, only 44% of children 
understand mind-wandering at ages 6-7, compared 
to 86% by ages 10-11 (Eisbach, 2013a, Table 2). 
Linking back to the capacity for imagination, it may 
be that imagination plays a role in children’s gradual 
conscious understanding of mental flow, including 
mind-wandering (Eisbach, 2013b, pp. 370-372).
Finally, the ability to produce mental imag­
ery seems to be lacking in preschool children, 
which seems to be yet another reason why pre­
school children seldom dream. This conclusion is 
derived from numerous different types of detailed 
studies of visual mental imagery that are too 
complex to be summarized within the confines
360
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

of this chapter (Frick, Hansen, & Newcombe, 
2013, pp. 386-387, 395; Frick, Mohring, & 
Newcombe, 2014, pp. 536-538; Gopnik, 2009, 
p. 152; Kosslyn, Margolis, Barrett, Goldknopfan, 
& Daly, 1990, p. 995). However, it is important 
to stress that deficiencies in the “ability to trans­
form mental representations” may have more 
general implications in terms of preschoolers’ cog­
nitive capacities because they may be important 
in “understanding other people’s mental states 
and even physical events” (Frick, Mohring, & 
Newcombe, 2014, p. 539).
The absence of visual imagery in people who 
are born blind, or lose their sight before ages 5-7, 
also lends support to the hypothesis that the ability 
to generate mental imagery is not fully developed 
until after age 6 or 7 (Kerr, 1993; Kirtley, 1975). 
This is best demonstrated by the fact that people 
who become blind after age 7 “continue to be able 
while awake to conjure up [visual] mental images of 
persons, objects, and events, and they continue to 
dream in [visual] imagery” (Foulkes, 1999, p. 15). 
Since this generalization includes visual dream 
images of people they met after they became blind, 
it seems likely that they have retained a develop- 
mentally acquired system of visual imagery that is 
independent of their visual perceptual capabilities 
(Kerr, 1993, pp. 30-35).
It is noteworthy that narrative, imaginative, and 
mental imagery abilities were found to be lacking 
in waking tests that were carried out in conjunction 
with the longitudinal and cross-sectional dream 
studies (Foulkes, 1982; Foulkes et al., 1990). For 
example, children ages 5-7 were able to produce 
only simple narrative scenes without chronology or 
sequence, but at age 8 they were able to generate 
a narrative with continuity in two temporal units, 
along with evidence of causality (Foulkes et al., 
1990, pp. 456, 461). A greater ability to produce 
complex imaginative narratives in response to the 
story prompts correlated with the participants’ 
overall rate of dream recall when age was held con­
stant and also at age 8, when the correlation with 
the total score on the imaginative narrative test was 
.45 (Foulkes et al., 1990, p. 458). Nor did the men­
tal imagery tests used in the cross-sectional study 
show the ability to create mental imagery at age 5; 
the investigators concluded that “the possibility of 
kinematic imaging emerges somewhere between 
5 and 8 years of age, rather than being generally 
well-developed in 5-year-olds” (Foulkes, Sullivan, 
Hollifield, & Bradley, 1989, p. 450). Furthermore, 
the one good and consistent predictor of the
frequency of dream reporting in children ages 5-8 
is visual spatial skills, as best measured by the Block 
Design test of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children and the Embedded Figures Test (Foulkes, 
1982; Foulkes et al., 1990).
Taken together, the gradual development of 
narrative skills, imagination, mental imagery, and 
an autobiographical self may help to explain why 
preschool children seldom dream and why the 
dream reports of children ages 5-7 often lack a 
sense of sequence, complexity, and kinetic imagery. 
However, the fact that the default network is not 
very well developed until ages 10-11 may be a fac­
tor as well, a possibility that is considered as part 
of the ensuing discussion of the role of the default 
network in supporting dreaming.
The Default Network and Dreaming
The possibility that the default network, or an 
augmented portion of it, is the basis for dreaming 
has been demonstrated by comparing the consen­
sus results from default network studies with the 
findings from six REM imaging studies; this meta­
analysis showed that many regions of the default 
network are activated during REM, in conjunction 
with the lingual gyrus and other areas in the sec­
ondary visual cortex, which are thought to support 
mental imagery, along with the caudate nucleus, 
which supports the initiation of skilled actions (Fox, 
Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff,
2013). However, the fact remains that the sample 
size for the REM meta-analysis is relatively small, 
which leads to the hope that future neuroimaging 
studies of dreaming will lead to a larger pool of 
studies from which to draw.
The inclusion of networks for mental imagery 
within the default network is crucial because vivid 
mental imagery is one of the striking characteristics 
of dreams (Moulton & Kosslyn, 2011, p. 98). In 
addition, there are overlaps between the default net­
work and the social brain, with one comprehensive 
synthesis concluding that parts of the social brain 
are the “social-affective part” of the default network 
(Amft, Bzdok, Laird, Fox, & Schilbach, 2015). 
Then, too, the wide range of thoughts related to 
the past, present, and future that can arise during 
drifting waking thought and dreaming may be pos­
sible because there is a “striking overlap between the 
cortical network that mediates contextual associa­
tive thinking” and the default network (Bar, 2011, 
p. 17, including his Figure 2.3). In addition, the 
inclusion of language areas in the temporal lobes 
within the default network is consistent with the
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
361

frequency and specificity of language use in dreams 
(Foulkes et al., 1993; Meier, 1993).
There is one particularly notable absence from 
the REM network when it is compared with the 
waking default network: the posterior cingulate cor­
tex. Although there is a “posterior cingulate cortex/ 
lingual gyrus” cluster in the results from the meta­
analysis, the bulk of the cluster is in the lingual 
gyrus, and the posterior cingulate cortex parts of the 
cluster are more lateral in the brain than the typical 
activations in the waking default network, which 
tend to be along the midline/medial aspect. There 
is also a significant cluster of mid-posterior cingu­
late cortex deactivation during REM. The absence 
of the posterior cingulate cortex may indicate that 
the environment is not being monitored for poten­
tial threats (Pace-Schott, 2007, p. 139). Then, too, 
the absence of the posterior cingulate cortex, which 
seems to be involved in retrieving past episodic 
memories, may help explain the rarity of episodic 
memories in dream reports (Baylor & Cavallero, 
2001; Fosse, Hobson, & Stickgold, 2003).
There are two distinct subsystems within the 
default network, which are connected by two hubs, 
the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex and the poste­
rior cingulate cortex. The first of the two subsys­
tems, the “dorsal medial prefrontal cortex system,” 
which includes the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, 
the temporoparietal junction, the lateral tempo­
ral cortex, and the temporal pole of the temporal 
lobe, is preferentially activated by instructions to 
think about the persons present situation or pres­
ent mental state (“present self”). The second sub­
system, called the medial temporal lobe system, 
which includes the ventral medial prefrontal cor­
tex, posterior inferior parietal lobule, retrosplenial 
cortex, parahippocampal cortex, and hippocampal 
formation, is preferentially activated by thinking 
about personal situations and decisions in the future 
(“future self”) (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, 
Poulin, & Buckner, 2010, pp. 554, 559). These 
results were supported and augmented in a later 
meta-analytic study (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
& Spreng, 2014).
The imaging studies that established the rela­
tionship between the default network and dreaming 
concentrated their attention on REM because of its 
strong relationship with dreaming. However, REM 
is an imperfect proxy for the putative neural network 
for dreaming because of the evidence that dream­
ing also can occur during the sleep-onset process, 
NREM 2, and in brief episodes during long periods 
of mind-wandering. Several studies of the transition
to sleep show that the default network is still active 
at sleep onset and into NREM 2, before slow-wave 
sleep occurs (e.g., Horovitz, 2008; Horovitz et al., 
2009; Larson-Prior et al., 2009). Importantly, the 
largest and most detailed fMRI study of the neuro­
physiology of the sleep-onset process not only con­
firmed and extended the earlier findings, but also 
showed the same decoupling of the anterior default 
network from the dorsal attentional network that is 
found in waking mind-wandering studies that are 
discussed later in this chapter (Samann et al., 2011).
None of these studies involves awakenings, but 
their findings concerning the continuing functional 
connectivity of the default network fit with several 
studies demonstrating varying amounts of dreaming 
at different points in the sleep-onset process (Foulkes, 
Spear, & Symonds, 1966; Foulkes & Vogel, 1965; 
Hayashi, Katoh, & Hori, 1999; Hori, Hayashi, & 
Morikawa, 1994). Although there are more “fleeting 
progressions of visual imagery or dissociated images 
and thoughts” during sleep onset than during REM 
periods, the “typical” report during the sleep-onset 
period is a dream that is “no less well organized than 
its REM-period counterpart” (Foulkes & Vogel, 
1965, p. 238). Once participants no longer subjec­
tively felt they were awake and in control of their 
thoughts, most of their reports could not be dis­
tinguished from REM dream reports, even though 
they were not always formally asleep based on the 
standard criteria for sleep (Foulkes & Vogel, 1965, 
p. 239). However, there were wide individual dif­
ferences in the frequency with which they dreamed 
in the different stages of the sleep-onset process. For 
example, five participants dreamed during the first 
two stages, both of which include alpha patterns, and 
four participants dreamed only during the last two 
stages, which are dominated by theta waves (Foulkes 
& Vogel, 1965, p. 237).
Similarly, most reports from NREM 2 are 
dreams, not rambling thoughts. Two studies showed 
that the auditory awakening thresholds are “approx­
imately equal” for REM and NREM 2, and both 
were lower than for slow-wave sleep (Rechtschaffen, 
Hauri, & Zeitlin, 1966; Zimmerman, 1970). 
Moreover, even the NREM 2 reports that were not 
dreams provide evidence for the functioning of the 
default network because they seem similar to “that 
large portion of our waking thought which wanders 
in seemingly disorganized, drifting, non-directed 
fashion whenever we are not attending to exter­
nal stimuli or actively working out a problem or a 
daydream” (Rechtschaffen, Verdone, & Wheaton, 
1963, p. 411). In addition, all-night MEG sleep
362
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

recordings from four participants found that some 
of the same regions active during REM sleep are 
also differentially active in NREM 2; the research­
ers speculated that the dorsal medial prefrontal cor­
tex may be the “geographic center” for dreaming in 
both REM and NREM 2 (Ioannides, Kostopoulos, 
Liu, & Fenwick, 2009, pp. 455, 465).
Based on the findings on the considerable 
similarity of dreams during sleep onset, NREM 2 
sleep, REM sleep, and brief episodes of dreaming 
during mind-wandering, along with the evidence 
for the involvement of the default network in all 
these instances, it seems likely that the main issue 
in understanding dreaming is the degree to which 
the default network is the ascendant brain network.
The Transition into Mind-Wandering 
and Dreaming
The transition into mind-wandering and dream­
ing is a complex process that at the outset involves 
the relative deactivation of the frontoparietal net­
work and the sensory networks with which it has 
strong connections. The importance of the fron­
toparietal network in this process is evidenced by 
its connectivity correlation of .70 with the default 
network, which reflects their close working rela­
tionship (Lee et al., 2012). The nature of their 
interaction is demonstrated in an experimental 
study that used transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) to alter the relationship between them, as 
demonstrated through changes in brain activa­
tion examined with the simultaneous use of fMRI 
(Chen, Oathes, Chang, Bradley, & Zhou, 2013). 
Excitatory TMS to the anterior portion of the fron­
toparietal network decreased its connectivity to the 
default network. On the other hand, inhibitory 
stimulation of the anterior portion of the fronto­
parietal network by TMS increased the activation 
level of the default network (Chen, Oathes, Chang, 
Bradley, & Zhou, 2013).
When the default network becomes more active 
in relation to the frontoparietal network, the drift 
into more intense mind-wandering and dreaming 
very likely involves a gradual deactivation in the 
dorsal attentional network, which works closely 
with the frontoparietal network in maintaining 
a focused alertness. The reciprocal relationship 
between focused attention and drifting waking 
thought is reflected in the -.7 4  correlation between 
the dorsal attentional network and the default net­
work, and the -.20 correlation between the default 
network and the ventral attentional network, which 
is involved in modulating the relationships among
the frontoparietal network, the dorsal attentional 
network, and the default network (Lee et al., 2012).
The relationship between the default network 
and the dorsal attentional network was one impor­
tant dimension of a combined EEG/fMRI study of 
shifts in mental states, which showed that it is the 
posterior part of the default network that decouples 
from the dorsal attentional network; this decou­
pling led to the “strongest” inverse relationship 
between the two networks, which was between the 
anterior portions of the default network and the 
dorsal attentional network (Chang, Liu, Chen, Liu, 
& Duyn, 2013, p. 230). At the same time as the 
posterior portions of the default network and the 
dorsal attentional network are decoupling, the ante­
rior regions of the default network become more 
connected and activated, which very likely leads to 
intensified mind-wandering and dreaming.
In addition, the decoupling of the anterior 
portions of the default network from the dorsal 
attentional network is accompanied by a similar dis­
connection from the thalamic region in the salience 
network, a network that is essential in preparing the 
body for action in response to both internal and 
external alerting signals (Menon & Uddin, 2010; 
Seeley et al., 2007). Still, the salience network, 
with hubs in the anterior cingulate cortex and right 
insula, can bring the brain to instant attention by 
sending signals to the frontoparietal and dorsal 
attentional networks, which in turn deactivate the 
default network (Chang et al., 2013; Chen et al., 
2013; Di & Biswal, 2015; Parvizi, Rangarajan, 
Shirer, Desai, & Grecius, 2013). The importance 
of the salience network in regaining focused atten­
tion also is revealed by the fact that patients with 
traumatic brain injuries cannot shift away from the 
default network as rapidly as other people (Bonnelle 
et al., 2012).
Based on the way in which the frontoparietal 
network becomes relatively decoupled from the 
default network, along with the decoupling of the 
anterior portions of the default network from the 
dorsal attentional network and the salience network, 
it seems plausible to hypothesize that the anterior 
portions of the default network are at the center of 
the “neural network for dreaming” delineated in 
the meta-analysis that compared six REM imag­
ing studies with the canonical default network (Fox 
et al., 2013). This hypothesis is strengthened by the 
work on the “dorsal medial prefrontal cortex sys­
tem” because it includes the dorsal medial prefron­
tal cortex, the temporoparietal junction, and the 
lateral temporal cortex (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler,
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
363

Sepulcre, Poulin, & Buckner, 2010). This area is at 
the heart of the waking self-system, which has been 
studied extensively with neuroimaging methodolo­
gies (e.g., Amft, Bzdok, Laird, Fox, & Schilbach, 
2015; D ’Argembeau et al., 2012; Di & Biswal, 
2014; Heatherton, 2010; Jenkins & Mitchell, 
2011). This fact may explain why the dreamer is 
usually at the center of dream scenarios, which very 
often express (to repeat a point made earlier) per­
sonal conceptions and concerns according to sys­
tematic studies of dream content (Domhoff, 1996, 
2003, 2011; Domhoff & Fox, 2015).
The Development of the Default Network
If the default network is indeed the central com­
ponent in the neural network for dreaming, then 
its very gradual development between infancy and 
preadolescence may help to explain the low levels 
of dreaming in young children and the relative 
simplicity of their dream content. Although the 
default network can be detected in infants, it is not 
very well developed in the preschool years, perhaps 
reflecting the localized regional structure of many 
brain networks at that age (Amso & Casey, 2006; 
Gao et al., 2009). In addition, the myelination so 
essential to major increases in the speed with which 
neuronal connections operate is not yet complete in 
many areas. Notably, myelination is not function­
ally complete until ages 5-7 in the parietal lobes, 
which contain important regions of the default net­
work (Janowsky & Carper, 1996).
The developmental changes in the default net­
work have been studied in a cross-sectional study of 
66 American participants ages 7-9, 54 participants 
ages 10-15, and 91 who were 19-31. The research 
showed gradual changes in terms of increased 
within-network connectivity and integration, along 
with increased segregation from other networks. 
This adds up to a dramatically different picture by 
ages 10-11, when most of the major hubs in the 
network are finally connected (Fair et al., 2008; Fair 
et al., 2009). These findings have been replicated in 
a cross-sectional study of 447 Brazilian participants 
ages 7-15 that come from a wider socioeconomic 
spectrum (Sato et al., 2014).
The results from these two studies have been rep­
licated, extended, and refined in a longitudinal study 
of both the default and frontoparietal networks in 
45 participants (24 girls, 21 boys) aged 10-13. The 
investigators first of all found that “by age 10, the 
basic functional architecture of the default mode 
network is in place,” and more generally that the 
“participants’ functional networks resembled those
found in mature adults in previous work” (Sherman 
et al., 2014, pp. 151, 154). The fact that the default 
network is in many ways similar between ages 10 
and 13 is consistent with the finding in both lab and 
non-lab studies that the frequency of dream recall 
and the content of dream reports become more 
adultlike during preadolescence (Foulkes, 1982; 
Strauch, 2005; Strauch & Meier, 1996). However, a 
correlation does not demonstrate causation, and in 
addition, this one is only impressionistic and quali­
tative. But it may be striking enough to encourage 
future imaging studies of preadolescents and ado­
lescents that include the collection of dream reports 
from the same participants.
At the same time that the default network 
becomes more adultlike, significant changes are also 
happening at the cognitive level in the central exec­
utive network (which is supported by the frontopa­
rietal network). Specifically, it is changing at ages 
10-11 from a unitary network to the “related yet 
separable” network that characterizes the adult exec­
utive network. This is shown in a study of 135 chil­
dren ages 8 years 3 months to 10 years 3 months, 
who were tested on working memory, inhibition, 
and attention-shifting measures twice over a two- 
year period (Brydges, Fox, Reid, & Anderson,
2014). It therefore appears that adultlike dream­
ing is a cognitive achievement based on the devel­
opment of the central executive network and the 
imagination/mind-wandering network (supported 
by the default network). Their separate integrative 
developments are accompanied by the achievement 
of a closer working relationship between them dur­
ing preadolescence.
Evidence from Neurological Studies
Patients in neurological studies add a vital sub­
jective dimension to the evidence for the role of 
an augmented portion of the default network in 
dreaming through verbal reports on the presence, 
absence, or distortion of their usual dreaming fol­
lowing focal brain lesions. It is their testimony that 
ultimately shows whether or not this network has to 
be functional for normal dreaming to occur. Among 
several findings that could be discussed, three are of 
basic importance because they show what areas of 
the brain are not necessary for dreaming, what areas 
are essential to dreaming, and what areas have the 
same function in dreaming as they do in waking life.
The most important systematic findings on 
what areas of the brain are not necessary for dream­
ing, all of which fall outside the default network, 
emerged from a neuropsychological study of 361
364
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

newly admitted neurological patients in the late 
1980s (Solms, 1997). In this study, each patient 
was questioned during the intake interview about 
any possible changes in the frequency and nature of 
their dreaming. The findings from interviews and 
questionnaires were compared with findings from 
neurological tests and CT scans. There was a pri­
mary emphasis on patients with focal brain lesions 
so that hypotheses about the role of specific regions 
of the brain in dreaming could be tested. In the 
case of the 200 patients that reported no changes 
in their dreaming, they had lesions in regions that 
are essential to sensation, locomotion, and higher- 
order executive functions: the primary visual cortex, 
the primary sensorimotor cortices, and the dorsolat­
eral prefrontal cortex (Solms, 1997, pp. 153-154, 
219-223, 237).
Conversely, several studies of the temporary or 
permanent loss of dreaming, or of a large reduc­
tion in the frequency of dreaming, involve lesions 
in three different brain areas, all of which are part 
of the default network and are active during REM 
sleep: the ventromedial regions in the frontal lobe; 
areas in the parietal lobe; and the temporopari­
etal junction (Solms, 1997, Table 2.2, pp. 11-15, 
and Chapter 4). The importance of the ventrome­
dial region in dreaming was first established for 
REM-era dream researchers by two different stud­
ies of over a dozen lobotomized schizophrenics in 
a hospital sleep laboratory, which showed that all 
but one of them did not dream, but continued to 
sleep normally (Jus, Jus, Gautier, et al., 1973; Jus, 
Jus, Villeneuve, et al., 1973). In addition to the two 
laboratory studies, the large-scale clinical study of 
361 new neurological cases found eight cases of 
non-dreaming patients who suffered neurological 
damage in “precisely the same region” that was the 
focus of lobotomies— “a circumscribed lesion just 
anterior to the frontal horn of the ventricle, in the 
lower medial quadrant of the frontal lobe” (Solms, 
1997, p. 145).
Forty-seven cases examined with CT scans in 
this clinical neurology study showed that inju­
ries to either parietal lobe can sometimes, but not 
always, lead to the loss of dreaming; this finding is 
consistent with several cases in the historical litera­
ture (Solms, 1997, pp. 141-145). This large-scale 
study also found a few cases suggesting that lesions 
localized to the temporoparietal junction might be 
sufficient to lead to the loss of dreaming, but the 
researcher concluded that this possibility should 
“be treated with caution” due to the small number 
of cases (Solms, 1997, p. 143). Later, however, this
possibility was supported by two studies of indi­
vidual patients (Bischof & Basset, 2004; Poza & 
Marti-Masso, 2006).
Neurological patients who report changes in the 
visual imagery in their dreams, such as the complete 
loss of visual imagery or the inability to represent 
movement, are important because their lesions in 
specific areas of the secondary and tertiary visual 
cortices provide specific evidence that the neu­
ral network for dreaming shares regions with the 
same neural substrate that subserves waking mental 
imagery. The most solid and convincing evidence 
for this point comes from sleep laboratory studies 
of two patients, one with Turner’s syndrome, which 
sometimes affects areas that generate visual imag­
ery, and the other with a lesion in the right hemi­
sphere. The lack of any visual imagery in the patient 
with Turners syndrome and the presence of only 
static visual imagery in the other patient were veri­
fied by their inability to carry out mental imagery 
tasks on standard cognitive tests (Kerr & Foulkes, 
1981; Kerr, Foulkes, & Jurkovic, 1978). Their lack 
of visual imagery in dreaming was then revealed 
through REM sleep awakenings. These two labo­
ratory studies lend credence to several cases in the 
clinical neurology study showing changes in visual 
aspects of dreaming consistent with their brain 
lesions, and to cases going back to the 1880s of 
patients who reported specific impairments in the 
visual aspects of their dreaming that corresponded 
with similar impairments in their waking vision 
(Solms, 1997, Chapters 2 and 3).
When this clinical evidence is combined with 
the results of imaging studies, the case for the 
default network as the central component in the 
neural network for dreaming is greatly strength­
ened. But more studies clearly need to be carried 
out before these important findings can be viewed 
as fully established.
Are Dreams Usefiil Non-adaptations?
The many replicated lab and non-lab findings con­
cerning the process of dreaming, such as the periodic 
regularity of REM dreaming and the fact of dream­
ing at sleep onset, during late-night NREM, and even 
occasionally in drifting waking thought, along with 
the lack of dreaming in young children and the con­
sistency of dream content over years and decades in 
individual cases, do not fit with the idea that dream­
ing has any adaptive function (e.g., Antrobus, 1993; 
Blagrove, 2000; Domhoff, 2003, Chapter 6; Foulkes, 
1993). However, the issue of adaptation may be 
approachable from a new angle if the default network
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
365

proves to have adaptive value due to the new asso­
ciations and ideas it provides via mind-wandering 
and daydreaming, a possibility that is still being 
debated (e.g., Baird et al., 2012; Kane & McVay, 
2012; Mooneyham & Schooler, 2013; Smallwood & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2013; Takeuchi et al., 2012).
More specifically, it might be that new ideas can 
emerge shortly after spontaneous morning awaken­
ings, whether people were dreaming or not, because 
the default network is likely more activated than 
the regions of the prefrontal cortex that support 
executive functions. According to this hypothesis, 
the alleged benefits of sleep on post-awakening cre­
ativity and scores on creativity tests are more likely 
a result of the activation of the default network 
and the drifting waking thoughts that it supports. 
If mind-wandering does turn out to have adap­
tive value, then the rare occasions when new ideas 
emerge from dreams would be an example of how 
“non-adaptations” can be useful to individuals and 
cultures. In other words, it may be that there has 
been selection for mind-wandering and daydream­
ing because they make it possible to rethink the 
past and plan for the future, but it is unlikely that 
dreaming is more than the accidental activation of 
an augmented portion of the default network.
Even if dreams are simply dramatic byproducts 
that simulate a persons conceptions and concerns, 
the fact remains that they have been put to use by 
people in many different times and places as crucial 
aspects of religious and healing ceremonies, which 
means that they have an emergent cultural function 
due to human inventiveness. Thus, the psychologi­
cal meaning that can be extracted from many dream 
reports and the cultural usefulness of dreams must 
be distinguished from each other and from the issue 
of adaptive function in order to develop an adequate 
theory of dreams
Acknowledgments
This chapter draws upon arguments and findings 
that are more fully developed in my The Emergence o f 
Dreaming: M ind-W andering, E m bodied Sim ulation, 
a n d  The D efault N etw ork (Oxford University Press,
2018). My thanks to Kalina Christoff and Kieran 
Fox for their very helpful additions and corrections 
to the original version of this chapter.
References
Amft, M., Bzdok, D., Laird, A., Fox, P., & Schilbach, L. (2015).
Definition and characterization of an extended social-
affective default network. Brain Structure & Function, 220,
1031-1049.
Amso, D., & Casey, B. J. (2006). Beyond what develops 
when: Neuroimaging may inform how cognition changes 
with development. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
15, 24-29.
Andrews-Hanna, J., Reidler, J., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., & 
Buckner, R. (2010). Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network Neuron, 65, 550-562.
Andrews-Hanna, J., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). The 
default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Science, 1316, 29-52.
Antrobus, J. (1986). Dreaming: Cortical activation and percep­
tual thresholds. Journal of Mind and Behavior, 7, 193-212.
Antrobus, J. (1993). Dreaming: Could we do without it? In A. 
Moffitt, M. Kramer & R. Hoffmann (Eds.), The functions 
of dreaming (pp. 549-558). Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Antrobus, J., Kondo, T., & Reinsel, R. (1995). Dreaming in the 
late morning: Summation of REM and diurnal cortical acti­
vation. Consciousness & Cognition, 4, 275-299.
Antrobus, J., Singer, J. L., Goldstein, S., & Fortgang, M. (1970). 
Mindwandering and cognitive structure. Transactions of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 32, 242-252.
Arkin, A. (1981). Sleep talking: Psychology and psychophysiology. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Arkin, A., & Antrobus, J. (1991). The effects of external stimuli 
applied prior to and during sleep on sleep experience. In S. J. 
Ellman & J. S. Antrobus (Eds.), The mind in sleep: Psychology 
and psychophysiology (2nd ed., pp. 265-307). New York: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Aserinsky, E. (1996). Memories of famous neuropsycholo­
gists: The discovery of REM sleep. Journal of the History of 
the Neurosciences, 5(3), 213-227.
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring peri­
ods of eye motility, and concomitant phenomena, during 
sleep. Science, 118, IT3-274.
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1955). Two types of ocular motil­
ity occuring in sleep. Journal of Applied Physiology, 8, 1-10.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M., Kam, J., Franklin, M., & 
Schooler, J. (2012). Inspired by distraction: Mind wander­
ing facilitates creative incubation. Psychological Science, 23, 
1117-1122.
Bar, M. (2011). The proactive brain. In M. Bar (Ed.), Predictions 
in the brain: Using our past to generate a future (pp. 13-26). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, D. (1991). Flying dreams and lucidity: An empirical test 
of their relationship. Dreaming, 1, 129-134.
Bauer, P (2013). Memory. In P Zelazo (Ed.), The Oxford hand­
book of developmental psychology, Vol. 1: Body and mind (pp. 
503-541). New York: Oxford University Press.
Baylor, G., & Cavallero, C. (2001). Memory sources associ­
ated with REM and NREM dream reports throughout the 
night: A new look at the data. Sleep, 24, 165-170.
Bergen, B. (2012). Louder than words: The new science of how the 
mind makes meaning. New York: Basic Books.
Berger, R. J. (1963). Experimental modification of dream 
content by meaningful verbal stimuli. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 109{463), 722-740.
Bischof, M., & Basset, C. (2004). Total dream loss: A distinct 
neuropsychological dysfunction after bilateral PCA stroke. 
Annals of Neurology, 56, 583-586.
Blagrove, M. (2000). Dreams have meaning but no function. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 910.
3 66
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Bonnelle, V., Ham, T., Leech, R., Kinnunen, K. M., Mehta, M. 
A., Greenwood, R. J., et al. (2012). Salience network integ­
rity predicts default mode network function after traumatic 
brain injury. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences, 
109,4690-4695.
Boselli, M., Parrino, L., Smerieri, A., & Terzano, M. (1998). 
Effect of age on EEG arousal in normal sleep. Sleep, 21, 
351-357.
Broughton, R. (1968). Sleep disorders: Disorders of arousal? 
Science, 159, 1070-1078.
Brydges, C. R., Fox, A. M., Reid, C. L., & Anderson, M. 
(2014). The differentiation of executive functions in middle 
and late childhood: A longitudinal latent-variable analysis. 
Intelligence, 47, 34—43.
Bulkeley, K. (2012). Dreaming in adolescence: A “blind” word 
search of a teenage girl’s dream series. Dreaming, 22, 240-252.
Bulkeley, K. (2014). Digital dream analysis: A revised method. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 29, 159-170.
Chang, C., Liu, Z., Chen, M., Liu, X., & Duyn, J. (2013). EEG 
correlates of time-varying BOLD functional connectivity. 
Neuroimage, 72, 227-236.
Chen, A., Oathes, D., Chang, C., Bradley, T., & Zhou, Z.-W. 
(2013). Causal interactions between fronto-parietal central 
executive and default-mode networks in humans. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 19944-19949.
Cheyne, J. A., & Pennycook, G. (2013). Sleep paralysis postedi- 
sode distress: Modeling potential effects of episode charac­
teristics, general psychological distress, beliefs, and cognitive 
style. Clinical Psychological Science, 1, 135-148.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & Schooler, 
J. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI reveals default 
network and executive system contributions to mind wan­
dering;. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 
106, 8719-8724.
Cicogna, P., Natale, V., Occhionero, M., & Bosinelli, M. (1998). 
A comparison of mental activity during sleep onset and 
morning awakening. Sleep, 21(5), 462—470.
D’Argembeau, A., Jedidi, H., Balteau, E., Bahri, M., Phillips, C., 
& Salmon, E. (2012). Valuing one’s self: Medial prefrontal 
involvement in epistemic and emotive investments in self­
views. Cerebral Cortex, 22, 659-667.
Dement, W. (1965). An essay on dreams: The role of physiology 
in understanding their nature. In T. Newcomb (Ed.), New 
directions in psychology II (pp. 135-257). New York: Holt, 
Rinehart, and Winston.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957a). Cyclic variations in EEG 
during sleep and their relation to eye movements, body 
motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 9, 673-690.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957b). The relation of eye move­
ments during sleep to dream activity: An objective method 
for the study of dreaming. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
53, 339-346.
Dement, W., & Wolpert, E. (1958). The relation of eye move­
ment, body motility, and external stimuli to dream content. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44, 543-555.
Desjardins, S., & Zadra, A. (2006). Is the threat simulation 
theory threatened by recurrent dreams? Consciouness and 
Cognition, 15, 470-474.
Di, X., & Biswal, B. (2014). Identifying the default mode net­
work structure using dynamic causal modeling on resting- 
state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage, 
86, 53-59.
Di, X., & Biswal, B. B. (2015). Dynamic brain functional 
connectivity modulated by resting-state networks. Brain 
Structure & Function, 220, 37-46.
Domhoff, 
G. 
W. 
(1985). 
The 
mystique 
of dreams. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Domhoff, G. W. (1996). Finding meaning in dreams: A quantita­
tive approach. New York: Plenum.
Domhoff, G. W. (2003). The scientific study of dreams: Neural 
networks, 
cognitive development, 
and content analysis. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Domhoff, G. W. (2011). The neural substrate for dreaming: Is 
it a subsystem of the default network? Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20, 1163-1174.
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. R. C. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 342-353.
Domhoff, G. W., Meyer-Gomes, K., & Schredl, M. (2005- 
2006). Dreams as the expression of conceptions and con­
cerns: A comparison of German and American college 
students. Imagination, Cognition & Personality, 25, 269-282.
Domhoff, G. W., & Schneider, A. (1999). Much ado about very 
little: The small effect sizes when home and laboratory col­
lected dreams are compared. Dreaming, 9, 139-151.
Domhoff, G. W., & Schneider, A. (2008). Studying dream con­
tent using the archive and search engine on DreamBank.net. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 1238-1247.
Domhoff, G. W., & Schneider, A. (2015). Assessing autocorrela­
tion in studies using the Hall and Van de Castle coding sys­
tem to study individual dream series. Dreaming, 25, 70-79.
Dorus, E., Dorus, W., & Rechtschaffen, A. (1971). The inci­
dence of novelty in dreams. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
25, 364-368.
Eisbach, 
A. 
O. 
(2013a). 
“Catching” 
a 
Wandering
Mind: Developmental Changes in the Reporting of OJf-Task 
Thoughts. Paper presented at the Society for Research on 
Child Development.
Eisbach, A. O. (2013b). What children understand about the 
flow of mental life. In M. Taylor (Ed.), The Oxford hand­
book of the development of imagination (pp. 359-375). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Fair, D., Cohen, A. L., Dosenbach, N., Church, J. A., Miezin, 
F. M., Barch, D. M., et al. (2008). The maturing architec­
ture of the brain’s default network. Proceeding of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 105, 4028-4032.
Fair, D., Cohen, A. L., Power, J., Dosenbach, N., Church, J. 
A., Miezin, F. M., et al. (2009). Functional brain networks 
develop from a “local to distributed” organization. PLoS 
Biology, 5, 1-14. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.l000381
Fisher, C., Kahn, E., Edwards, A., & Davis, D. (1973). A 
psychophysiological study of nightmares and night ter­
rors: Physiological aspects of the Stage 4 night tenor. Journal 
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 157, 75-98.
Fosse, R., Hobson, J. A., & Stickgold, R. (2003). Dreaming 
and episodic memory: A functional dissociation? Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 1-9.
Foulkes, D. (1966). The psychology of sleep. New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons.
Foulkes, D. (1982). Childrens dreams: Longitudinal Studies. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Foulkes, D. (1985). Dreaming: A cognitive-psychological analysis. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Foulkes, D. (1993). Data constraints on theorizing about 
dream function. In A. Moffitt, M. Kramer & R. Hoffmann
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
367

(Eds.), The junctions of dreaming (pp. 11-20). Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Foulkes, D. (1996). Dream research: 1953-1993. Sleep, 19, 
609-624.
Foulkes, D. (1999). Childrens dreaming and the development of 
consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Foulkes, D., & Domhoff, G. W. (2014). Bottom-up or top-down 
in dream neuroscience? A top-down critique of two bottom- 
up studies. Consciousness and Cognition, 27, 168-171.
Foulkes, D., & Fleisher, S. (1975). Mental activity in relaxed 
wakefulness. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 84, 66-75.
Foulkes, D., Hollifield, M., Sullivan, B., Bradley, L., & Terry, 
R. (1990). REM dreaming and cognitive skills at ages 5- 
8: A cross-sectional study. International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 13, 447—465.
Foulkes, D., Meier, B., Strauch, I., Kerr, N., Bradley, L., & 
Hollifield, M. (1993). Linguistic phenomena and language 
selection in the REM dreams of German-English bilinguals. 
International Journal of Psychology, 28(6), 871-891.
Foulkes, D., Pivik, R. T., Steadman, H., Spear, P., & Symonds, J. 
(1967). Dreams of the male child: An EEG study. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 72, 457—467.
Foulkes, D., & Rechtschaffen, A. (1964). Presleep determinants 
of dream content: Effects of two films. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 19, 983-1005.
Foulkes, D., & Schmidt, M. (1983). Temporal sequence and 
unit comparison composition in dream reports from differ­
ent stages of sleep. Sleep, 6, 265-280.
Foulkes, D., & Scott, E. (1973). An above-zero baseline for the 
incidence of momentarily hallucinatory mentation. Sleep 
Research, 2, 108.
Foulkes, D., Spear, P., & Symonds, J. (1966). Individual differ­
ences in mental activity at sleep onset. Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 71, 280-286.
Foulkes, D., Sullivan, B., Hollifield, M., & Bradley, L. (1989). 
Mental rotation, age, and conservation. Journal of Genetic 
Psychology, 150, 449-451.
Foulkes, D., & Vogel, G. (1965). Mental activity at sleep onset. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 70, 231-243.
Fox, K. R. C., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., & 
Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: Evidence 
from functional neuroimaging and first-person content 
reports Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7(Article 412), 1- 
18. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412. eCollection 02013.
Frick, A., Hansen, M., & Newcombe, N. (2013). Development 
of mental rotation in 3- to 5-year-old children. Cognitive 
Development, 28, 386-399.
Frick, A., Mohring, W., & Newcombe, N. S. (2014). 
Development of mental transformation abilities. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 18, 536-542.
Gao, W., Zhu, H., Giovanello, K., Smith, J. K., Shen, D., 
Gilmore, J., et al. (2009). Evidence on the emergence of 
the brain’s default network from 2-week-old to 2-year- 
old healthy pediatric subjects. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 106, 6790-6795.
Gibbs, 
R. 
(2006). 
Embodiment 
and cognitive 
science. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gopnik, A. (2009). The philosophical baby: What childrens 
minds tell us about truth, love, and the meaning of life. 
New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.
Griffin, M., & Foulkes, D. (1977). Deliberate presleep control of 
dream content: An experimental study. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 45, 660-662.
Hall, C. (1951). What people dream about. Scientific American, 
184, 60-63.
Hall, C. (1966a). A comparison of the dreams of four groups 
of hospitalized mental patients with each other and with a 
normal population. Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 
143, 135-139.
Hall, C. (1966b). Studies of dreams collected in the laboratory and 
at home. Santa Cruz, CA: Institute of Dream Research.
Han, H. (2014). Structural and longitudinal analysis of cognitive 
social networks in dreams. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN.
Han, H., Schweickert, R., Xi, Z., & Viau-Quesnela, C. (2015). 
The cognitive social network in dreams: Transitivity, assor- 
tativity, and giant component proportion are monotonic. 
Cognitive Science, doi: 10.1111/cogs. 12244.
Hartmann, E. (2000). We do not dream of the 3 R’s: Implications 
for the nature of dreaming mentation. Dreaming-, 10, 
103-110.
Hartmann, E. (2011). The nature and Junctions of dreaming. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hayashi, M., Katoh, K., & Hori,T. (1999). Hypnagogic imagery 
and EEG activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 88, 676-678.
Heatherton, T. (2010). Building a social brain. In P. Reuter- 
Lorenz, K. Baynes, G. Mangun & E. Phelps (Eds.), The 
cognitive neuroscience of mind (pp. 173-188). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Herman, J., Ellman, S. J., & Roffwarg, H. (1978). The problem 
of NREM dream recall reexamined. In A. Arkin, J. Antrobus 
& S. J. Ellman (Eds.), The mind in sleep: Psychology and psy­
chophysiology (pp. 59-62). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Hoelscher, T., Klinger, E., & Barta, S. (1981). Incorporation of 
concern- and nonconcern-related verbal stimuli into dream 
content. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 90, 88-91.
Hori, T., Hayashi, M., & Morikawa, T. (1994). Topographic 
EEG changes and the hypnagogic experience. In R. Ogilvie 
& J. Harsh (Eds.), Sleep onset: Normal and abnormal processes 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Horovitz, S. (2008). Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during 
resting wakefulness and light sleep: A simultaneous EEG- 
fMRI study. Human Brain Mapping, 29, 671-682.
Horovitz, S., Braun, A., Carr, W., Picchioni, D., Balkin, T., 
Fukunaga, M., et al. (2009). Decoupling of the brain’s 
default mode network during deep sleep. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences USA, 106, 11376-11381.
Ioannides, A., Kostopoulos, K., Liu, L., & Fenwick, P. (2009). 
MEG identifies dorsal medial brain activations during sleep. 
Neuroimage, 44, 455-468.
Janowsky, J., & Carper, R. (1996). Is there a neural basis for 
cognitive transitions in school-age children? In A. Sameroff 
& M. Haith (Eds.), The five to seven year shift (pp. 33-60). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jenkins, A., & Mitchell, J. (2011). Medial prefrontal cortex sub­
serves diverse forms of self-reflection. Social Neuroscience, 6, 
211-218.
Jus, A., Jus, K., Gautier, J., Villeneuve, A., Pires, P., Lachance, 
R., et al. (1973). Dream reports after reserpine in chronic 
lobotomized schizophrenic patients. Vie medicale au Canada 
francais, 2, 843-848.
Jus, A., Jus, K., Villeneuve, A., Pires, A., Lachance, R., Fortier, 
J., et al. (1973). Studies on dream recall in chronic schizo­
phrenic patients after prefrontal lobotomy. Biological 
Psychiatry, 6, 275-293.
368
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

Kane, M., & McVay, J. (2012). What mind wandering reveals 
about executive-control abilities and failures. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 27, 348-354
Kerr, N. (1993). Mental imagery, dreams, and perception. In D. 
Foulkes & C. Cavallero (Eds.), Dreaming as cognition (pp. 
18-37). New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Kerr, N., & Foulkes, D. (1981). Right hemispheric mediation 
of dream visualization: A case study. Cortex, 77, 603-610.
Kerr, N., Foulkes, D., & Jurkovic, G. (1978). Reported absence 
of visual dream imagery in a normally sighted subject with 
Turner’s syndrome. Journal of Mental Imagery, 2, 247-264.
Kirtley, 
D. 
(1975). 
The 
psychology 
of 
blindness. 
Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Klinger, E. (1999). Thought flow: Properties and mechanisms 
underlying shifts in content. In J. Singer & P. Salovey (Eds.), 
At play in the fields of consciousness (pp. 29-50). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klinger, E. (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. Markman, W. Klein & J. Suhr (Eds.), 
Handbook of imagination and mental simulation (pp. 225- 
239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. (1987-1988). Dimensions of thought 
flow in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 
7, 105-128.
Kosslyn, S., Margolis, J., Barrett, A., Goldknopfan, E., & 
Daly, P. (1990). Age differences in imagery abilities. Child 
Development, 61 995-1010.
Larson-Prior, L., Zempel, J., Nolan, T., Prior, F., Snyder, A., 
& Raichle, M. (2009). Cortical network functional con­
nectivity in the descent to sleep. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 106, 4489-4494.
Lee, M., Hacker, C., Snyder, A., Corbetta, M., Zhang, D., 
& Leuthardt, E. (2012). Clustering of resting state net­
works. PLoS One, 7, e40370. doi: 40310.41371/journal. 
pone.0040370.
Mason, M., Norton, M., Van Horn, J., Wenger, D., Grafton, 
S., & Macrae, N. (2007). Wandering minds: The default 
network and stimulus-independent thought. Science, 315, 
393-395.
Meier, B. (1993). Speech and thinking in dreams. In C. Cavallero 
& D. Foulkes (Eds.), Dreaming as cognition (pp. 58-76). 
New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Menon, V., & Uddin, L. (2010). Saliency, switching, attention 
and control: A network model of insula function. Brain 
Structure & Function, 214, 655-667.
Mooneyham, B., & Schooler, J. (2013). The costs and benefits of 
mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 67, 11-18.
Moulton, S. T., & Kosslyn, S. (2011). Imagining predic­
tions: Mental imagery as mental emulation. In M. Bar (Ed.), 
Predictions in the brain: Using our past to generate a future (pp. 
95-106). New York: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, K. (2007). Young minds in social worlds: Experience, mean­
ing, and memory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Niedenthal, P., Winkielman, P., Mondillon, L., & Vermeulen, 
N. (2009). Embodiment of emotion concepts. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1120-1136.
Orne, M. (1962). On the social psychology of the psychologi­
cal experiment: With particular reference to demand char­
acteristics and their implications. American Psychologist, 17, 
776-783.
Pace-Schott, E. (2007). The frontal lobes and dreaming. In 
D. Barrett & P. McNamara (Eds.), The new science of
dreaming: Bioloigical aspects (Vol. 1, pp. 115-154). Westport, 
CT: Praeger/Greewood.
Pace-Schott, E. (2011). The neurobiology of dreaming. In 
M. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. Dement (Eds.), Principles 
and practices of sleep medicine (5th ed., pp. 563-575). 
Philadelphia: Elsevier.
Parvizi, J., Rangarajan, V., Shirer, W., Desai, N., & Grecius, 
M. (2013). The will to persevere induced by electrical 
stimulation of the human cingulate gyrus. Neuron, 80, 
1359-1367.
Pesant, N., & Zadra, A. (2006). Dream content and psycho­
logical well-being: A longitudinal study of the continuity 
hypothesis. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62(1), 111—121.
Pivik, R. T., & Foulkes, D. (1968). NREM mentation: Relation 
to personality, orientation time, and time of night. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 32, 144-151.
Poza, J., & Marti-Masso, J. (2006). Total dream loss second­
ary to left temporo-occipital brain injury. Neurologia, 21, 
152-154.
Rechtschaffen, A. (1978). The single-mindedness and isolation 
of dreams. Sleep, 1, 97-109.
Rechtschaffen, A., Hauri, P., & Zeitlin, M. (1966). Auditory 
awakening thresholds in REM and NREM sleep stages 
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 22, 927-942.
Rechtschaffen, A., Verdone, P., & Wheaton, J. (1963). Reports of 
mental activity during sleep. Canadian Psychiatric Association 
Journal, 8, 409—414.
Reese, E. (2013). Culture, narrative, and imagination. In 
M. Taylor (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of the develop­
ment of imagination (pp. 196-211). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Reinsel, R., Antrobus, J., & Wollman, M. (1992). Bizarreness in 
dreams and waking fantasy. In J. S. Antrobus & M. Bertini 
(Eds.), The neuropsychology of sleep and dreaming (pp. 157— 
184). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Revonsuo, A., & Salmivalli, C. (1995). A content analysis of 
bizarre elements in dreams. Dreaming, 5, 169-187.
Rosenthal, R., & Ambady, N. (1995). Experimenter effects. In 
A. Manstead & M. Hewstone (Eds.), Encyclopedia of social 
psychology (pp. 230-235). Oxford: Blackwell.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. (1969). Artifact in behavioral 
research. New York: Academic Press.
Roussy, F. (1998). Testing the notion of continuity between waking 
experience and REM dream content. Unpublished disserta­
tion, University of Ottawa.
Roussy, F., Brunette, M., Mercier, P., Gonthier, I., Grenier, J., 
Sirois-Berliss, M., et al. (2000). Daily events and dream 
content: Unsuccessful matching attempts. Dreaming,
10, 77-83.
Roussy, F., Camirand, C., Foulkes, D., De Koninck, J., Loftis, 
M., & Kerr, N. (1996). Does early-night REM dream con­
tent reliably reflect presleep state of mind? Dreaming, 6, 
121-130.
Samann, P., Wehrle, R., Hoehn, D., Spoormaker, V., Peters, H., 
Tully, C., et al. (2011). Development of the brain’s default 
mode network from wakefulness to slow wave sleep. Cerebral 
Cortex, 21, 2082-2093.
Santomauro, J., & French, C. (2009). Terror in the night. The 
Psychologist, 22, 672-675.
Sato, J. R., Salum, G. A., Gadelha, A., Picon, F. A., Pan, P. 
M., et al. (2014). Age effects on the default mode and con­
trol networks in typically developing children. Journal of 
Psychiatric Research, 58, 89-95.
G. W I L L I A M  D O M H O F F
369

Schacter, D., Addis, D., & Buckner, R. (2008). Episodic simu­
lation of future events: Concepts, data, and applications. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 39-60.
Schweickert, R. (2007). Social networks of characters in dreams. 
In D. Barrett & R McNamara (Eds.), The new science of 
dreaming: Cultural and theoretical perspectives (Vol. 3, pp. 
277-297). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Seeley, W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A., Keller, J., Glover, G., 
Kenna, H., et al. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectiv­
ity networks for salience processing and executive control. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 2349-2356.
Sherman, L. E., Rudie, J. D., Pfeifer, J. H., Masten, C. L., 
McNealy, K., & Dapretto, M. (2014). Development of the 
default mode and central executive networks across early 
adolescence: A longitudinal study. Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 10, 148-159.
Singer, J. L. (1966). Daydreaming. New York: Random House.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(441), 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00441.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946-958.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. (2015). The science of mind wan­
dering: Empirically navigating the stream of consciousness. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487-518.
Snyder, F. (1970). The phenomenology of dreaming. In L. 
Madow & L. Snow (Eds.), The psychodynamic implications of 
the physiological studies on dreams (pp. 124-151). Springfield, 
IL: Thomas.
Solms, M. (1997). The neuropsychology of dreams: A clinico- 
anatomicalstudy. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Strauch, I. (2004). Traume im Ubergang von der Kindheit ins 
Jugendalter: Ergebnisse einer Langzeitstudie. Bern: Huber.
Strauch, I. (2005). REM dreaming in the transition from late 
childhood to adolescence: A longitudinal study. Dreaming, 
15, 155-169.
Strauch, I., & Lederbogen, S. (1999). The home dreams and 
waking fantasies of boys and girls ages 9-15. Dreaming, 9, 
153-161.
Strauch, I., & Meier, B. (1996). In search of dreams: Results of 
experimental dream research. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Takeuchi, H., Taki, Y., Hashizume, H., Sassa, Y., Nagase, T., 
Nouchi, R., et al. (2012). The association between resting 
functional connectivity and creativity. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 
2921-2929.
Taylor, M. (2013). Imagination. In P D. Zelazo (Ed.), 
The Oxford handbook of developmental psychology, Vol. 
1: Body and mind (pp. 793-831). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Tulving, E. (2005). Episodic memory and autonoesis. In H. 
S. Terrace & J. Metcalife (Eds.), The missing link in cog­
nition: Origins of self reflective consciousness (pp. 3-56). 
New York: Ocford University Press.
Wald, A., & Wolfowitz, J. (1940). On a test whether two sam­
ples are from the same population. Annals of Mathematical 
Statistics, 11, 147-162.
Wamsley, E., Hirota, Y., Tucker, M., Smith, M., Doan, T., & 
Antrobus, J. (2007). Circadian and ultradian influences on 
dreaming: A dual rhythm model. Brain Research Bulletin, 71, 
347-354.
Webb, E., Campbell, D., Schwartz, R., Sechrest, L., & Grove, 
J. (1981). Nonreactive measures in the social sciences. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Wegner, D. M., Wenzlaff, R. M., & Kozak, M. (2004). Dream 
rebound: The return of suppressed thoughts in dreams. 
Psychological Science, 15, 232-236.
Weisz, R., & Foulkes, D. (1970). Home and laboratory 
dreams collected under uniform sampling conditions. 
Psychophysiology, 6, 588-596.
Zadra, A., & Domhoff, G. W. (2016). Dream content: 
Quantitative findings. In M. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. Dement 
(Eds.), Principles and practices of sleep medicine (6th ed., pp. 
515-522). Philadelphia: Elsevier.
Zepelin, H. (1972). Comparison of dreams recalled in the labora­
tory and at home. Paper presented at the Association for the 
Psychophysiological Study of Sleep, Chicago.
Zimmerman, W. B. (1970). Sleep mentation and auditory awak­
ening thresholds. Psychophysiology, 6, 540-549.
370
D R E A M I N G  IS A N  I N T E N S I F I E D  F O R M  OF M I N D - W A N D E R I N G

C H A P T E R
28
Neural Correlates of Self-Generated Imagery 
and Cognition Throughout the Sleep Cycle
Kieran C. R. Fox and Manesh Girn
Abstract
Humans have been aware for thousands of years that sleep comes in many forms, accompanied 
by different kinds of mental content. This chapter reviews the first-person report literature on the 
frequency and type of content experienced in various stages of sleep, showing that different sleep 
stages are dissociable at the subjective level. It then relates these subjective differences to the growing 
literature differentiating the various sleep stages at the neurophysiological level, including evidence 
from electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and functional neuroimaging. The authors suggest that there 
is emerging evidence for relationships between sleep stage, neurophysiological activity, and subjective 
experiences. Specifically, they emphasize that functional neuroimaging work suggests a parallel between 
activation and deactivation of default network and visual network brain areas and the varying frequency 
and intensity of imagery and dream mentation across sleep stages; additionally, frontoparietal control 
network activity across sleep stages may parallel levels of cognitive control and meta-awareness.
Key W ords: sleep, dream, default network, frontoparietal control network, neurophysiology, 
electrophysiology, neurochemistry, neuroimaging
Introduction: The Multiplicity of Sleep
Awareness of the subjective multiplicity of sleep 
goes back thousands of years— at least as far as 
the ancient Indian philosophical texts known as 
the Upanishads, composed around the sixth cen­
tury b c e  (Deutsch & Dalvi, 2004; Hume, 1921; 
Prabhavananda, Manchester, & Isherwood, 1984; 
Sharma, 
2012). 
Ancient 
Indian 
philosophers 
clearly recognized a distinction between dream­
less sleep, dreaming, and even “lucid” dreaming—  
being aware that one is dreaming while dreaming 
(Prabhavananda Manchester, & Isherwood, 1984; 
Sharma, 2012). In the West, Aristotle made strik­
ingly prescient observations for his time: he recog­
nized both dreamless and dreaming sleep; described 
what we today call sleep-onset hypnagogic imagery; 
correctly hypothesized that dreaming represents the 
activity of our perceptual faculties in the absence of 
external inputs; and even recognized the possibility
of lucid dreaming (Aristoteles & Gallop, 1996; 
Barbera, 2008). And at least one thousand years 
ago, Tibetan Buddhist practitioners had developed 
sophisticated cognitive practices geared toward 
increasing metacognitive awareness during dream­
less sleep and dreaming (Gillespie, 1988; Wangyal,
1998). These traditions began a fruitful mapping of 
quantitative and qualitative psychological (i|/) differ­
ences throughout the sleep cycle.
Western science began to finally put these obser­
vations on a firmer footing in the mid-twentieth 
century, with the discovery that surface-recorded 
brain electrical potentials could dissociate between 
several sleep stages (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953, 
1955; 
Dement 
& 
Kleitman, 
1957a, 
1957b; 
Monroe, Rechtschaffen, Foulkes, & Jensen, 1965). 
This research, the first to definitively identify neu- 
robiological (O) markers related to particular cogni­
tive states (i|/) during sleep, led to the well-known
37i

classification of sleep into rapid eye movement 
(REM) and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) 
stages (Rechtschaffen & Kales, 1968), with four 
major stages generally recognized by contemporary 
researchers (NREM 1, 2, 3-4, and REM).
These stages have not been equally recognized 
or researched over the past few decades. REM and 
NREM (the latter of which had not been carefully 
differentiated into substages, and was generally 
known as “slow wave sleep,” [SWS]) were inten­
sively investigated from the beginning of modern 
sleep and dream science in the 1950s. It was rapidly 
recognized that these stages were characterized by 
differences in subjective experience— most notably, 
by the high frequency of dream reports following 
awakening from REM, but the relative paucity of 
such reports following awakenings from NREM 
(reviewed by Nielsen, 1999, 2000).
A pair of more marginal and difficult to inves­
tigate stages were largely ignored until relatively 
recently: NREM 1 (sleep onset) and so-called “lucid 
dreaming,” in which one is aware of the fact that 
one is dreaming while dreaming (LaBerge, Nagel, 
Dement, & Zarcone Jr., 1981). Detailed investi­
gation of the electrophysiological substages and 
phenomenological content of NREM 1, although 
inaugurated in the 1960s (Foulkes, Spear, & 
Symonds, 1966; Foulkes & Vogel, 1965; Vogel, 
Foulkes, & Trosman, 1966), was not conducted in 
earnest until the 1990s (Hayashi, Katoh, & Hori, 
1999; Hori, Hayashi, & Morikawa, 1994; Tanaka, 
Hayashi, & Hori, 1996, 1997). Lucid REM sleep 
dreaming (LREM) still remains controversial to 
many researchers; pioneering but tenuous polysom- 
nographic research from the 1980s (Fenwick et al., 
1984; LaBerge, 1980; LaBerge, Levitan, & Dement, 
1986; LaBerge, Nagel, Dement, 
& Zarcone, 
1981) has continued to be replicated and extended, 
however (Holzinger, LaBerge, & Levitan, 2006; 
LaBerge & Levitan, 1995; Voss, Holzmann, Tuin, 
& Hobson, 2009), as well as investigated with more 
sophisticated methods, such as combined electroen­
cephalography and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (EEG-fMRI) (Dresler et al., 2011; Dresler 
et al., 2012) and transcranial direct current stimula­
tion (Stumbrys, Erlacher, & Schredl, 2013).
In this chapter, we aim to briefly review what 
is known about the differentiability of sleep stages 
according to various neurophysiological methods and 
markers, and to relate these neurophysiological dif­
ferences to variations in subjective experience across 
the sleep cycle as indicated by first-person reports.
Sleep Mentation as Self-Generated Thought
We and others have argued at length elsewhere 
that mentation during sleep, particularly dream­
ing per se, can be viewed as an intensified form of 
waking self-generated thought or mind-wandering 
(Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 
2016; Domhoff, 2011; Domhoff & Fox, 2015; 
Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff,
2013); see also Domhoff, Chapter 27 in this vol­
ume). The basis for this claim is twofold: both the 
subjective experience of dreaming and its neuro­
physiological correlates (as indexed by REM sleep) 
parallel those of waking mind-wandering and 
related forms of self-generated thought.
Waking self-generated thought is typically char­
acterized by auditory and visual imagery, ubiqui­
tous affect, a strong focus on current concerns 
and social interactions, and varying degrees of 
narrative structure (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
& Spreng, 2014; Fox et al., 2013; Fox, Spreng, 
Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015); see 
also Stawarczyk, Chapter 16 in this volume). The 
same statements can be made about REM sleep 
mentation, with the qualification that these char­
acteristics in fact tend to be heightened or exag­
gerated in dreaming: The audiovisual world is 
fully present and immersive, emotions are often 
more intense and perhaps more ubiquitous, social 
characters are more numerous and interactions 
with them more elaborate, and narrative struc­
ture is extended over time and in more complex 
ways (Domhoff & Fox, 2015; Fox et al., 2013; 
Windt, 2010).
A similar parallel is observed at the neurophysi­
ological level. Waking self-generated thought, as 
compared to active focus on a task or external stim­
ulus, is associated with a relatively consistent pattern 
of brain activations centered on the default network 
and extending into medial occipital areas involved 
in visual imagery, as well as some executive brain 
regions tied to the frontoparietal control network 
(Fox et al., 2015). When our group meta-analyzed 
functional neuroimaging studies of REM sleep, 
during which dreaming occurs approximately 80% 
of the time (Hobson, Pace-Schott, & Stickgold,
2000), we found that many of the same brain areas 
implicated in waking self-generated thought were 
even more strongly recruited during REM sleep, 
including the medial prefrontal cortex, numerous 
medial temporal lobe structures, and medial occipi­
tal areas (Fox et al., 2013). Additionally, by slightly 
relaxing statistical thresholds, further overlap in the
372
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

inferior parietal lobule, another key default network 
region, was revealed (Domhoff & Fox, 2015).
Overall, these results suggested to us that 
dreaming, and its most common neurophysiologi­
cal correlate, REM sleep, show an overall inten­
sification or amplification of both the subjective 
qualities and neural recruitment associated with 
waking self-generated cognition (cf. Fig. 3 in Fox 
et ah, 2013, as well as Domhoff, Chapter 27 in 
this volume). Due to the fact that the NREM 
sleep stages are also characterized by variable lev­
els of cognitive activity and dream experience, 
determining their general neural correlates pres­
ents an attractive target for research: A general 
understanding of these neural substrates would 
allow further examination of the hypothesis that 
self-generated thought has a common brain basis, 
independent of the particular conscious state in 
which it takes place. Reviewing the general neu­
ral correlates of the NREM sleep stages, and how 
they might fit into the spectrum of self-generated 
cognition across wake and dreaming, is therefore 
the main aim of this chapter.
Sleep Can Be Meaningfully Dissociated 
into Stages
The preceding overview only hints at the enor­
mous body of work that has been conducted over 
the past 60 years within a paradigm whose core 
assumption is that sleep stages can be meaningfully 
dissociated and more or less independently inves­
tigated. Loomis and colleagues (Loomis, Harvey, 
& Hobart, 1935; Loomis, Harvey, & Hobart, 
1937) were the first to provide detailed descrip­
tions of distinct neurophysiological stages in nor­
mal human sleep, and much subsequent work has 
followed, corroborated, and expanded on these 
efforts. What are the criteria upon which these 
sleep stages are distinguished— and are they valid?
Nielsen (2014) rightly points out that the wide­
spread use of standard sleep-stage scoring criteria 
(Rechtschaffen & Kales, 1968) has led to an artifi­
cially categorical view of sleep stages, accompanied 
by tacit assumptions of both mutual exclusivity and 
abrupt transitions. Even the narrow use of just a few 
electrophysiological markers cannot support such a 
view; and of the hundreds of potential physiologi­
cal and neural markers that fluctuate throughout 
the sleep-wake cycle, only a select few are routinely 
employed to differentiate sleep stages (Nielsen,
2014). These facts should put us on guard against 
any facile reification of distinct sleep stages.
A key question therefore needs to be asked: Are 
sleep stages a fact of neurophysiology or an investi­
gative convenience? The answer, we believe, is that 
they are somewhere in between. While keeping the 
preceding caveats firmly in mind and refraining from 
reifying classification schemes as actual entities, we 
agree with the conclusions of various comprehen­
sive reviews of this issue (e.g., Hobson et al., 2000; 
Nielsen, 2000): persuasive evidence argues for the 
distinctiveness of sleep stages in general. Although 
the various major sleep stages share features in com­
mon, can oscillate back and forth unpredictably, 
and may hybridize and give rise to not easily clas­
sified transitional stages (Nielsen, 2014), mean­
ingful (if tentative) statements can nonetheless be 
made about their characteristic patterns of phenom­
enology, electrophysiology, and neurochemistry 
(Hobson et al., 2000; Nielsen, 2000).
In the following sections we present these mul­
tiple lines of evidence in support of the utility and 
plausibility of distinctive (if not entirely mutually 
exclusive) sleep stages. We argue that these neuro­
physiological and phenomenological idiosyncrasies 
lead to the strong and testable hypothesis that pat­
terns of brain activation, as measured by relatively 
non-invasive functional neuroimaging methods 
like fMRI and positron emission tomography 
(PET), should vary accordingly across the NREM 
and REM sleep stages. Moreover, the finding that 
REM sleep (with high chances of dreaming) shares 
many neural correlates with waking self-generated 
thought (Domhoff, 2011; Domhoff & Fox, 2015; 
Fox et al., 2013), coupled with the knowledge that 
self-generated thought frequency and vividness 
differ markedly across sleep stages (Hobson et al., 
2000; Nielsen, 2000), leads to the even stronger 
hypothesis that specific brain areas involved in self­
generated thought should show corresponding acti­
vation and deactivation throughout the sleep cycle 
in concert with subjectively experienced differences 
in content.
The body of this chapter provides an overview 
of all neuroimaging studies of sleep and dream­
ing in humans, in an effort to synthesize what has 
been learned from two decades of investigations of 
brain activations and deactivations throughout the 
sleep cycle. The aim is not to argue for strict one- 
to-one isomorphisms between mental states (y) 
and neuromarkers (O), but rather to summarize 
the current evidence for broad but intriguing cor­
respondences between first- and third-person levels 
of description.
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
373

General Evidence for Psychological and 
Neurophysiological Differences Across 
Sleep Stages
Phenomenological Dissociation 
of Sleep Stages
The subjectively experienced 
(“phenomeno­
logical” for our purposes) differences in the experi­
ence of sleep stages have been noted for millennia 
(Aristoteles & Gallop, 1996)(Deutsch & Dalvi, 
2004; Sharma, 2012; Thompson, 2014), but sys­
tematic research using large, representative samples 
has taken place mostly in the past few decades 
(Domhoff, 2003; Nielsen, 2000). Although many 
methodological difficulties (and almost as many 
theoretical deadlocks) have burdened this otherwise 
burgeoning field, some general conclusions can be 
cautiously drawn regarding differences in the fre­
quency, quality, and content of mentation across 
sleep stages.
Nielsen (1999, 2000) has thoroughly summa­
rized this literature, highlighting the critical distinc­
tion between cognitive activity in general (which can 
include thought-like mentation, isolated flashes of 
imagery, and so on) and truly immersive and hal­
lucinatory dream ing proper (a particular subset of 
cognitive activity). Whereas cognitive activity is 
fairly prevalent throughout all sleep stages (at least 
40% of awakenings from any given sleep stage will 
lead to a report of some kind of cognitive activity; 
Nielsen, 1999), dreaming proper is largely restricted
Table 28.1 Approximate Frequency of Subjective 
Reports of Cognitive Activity and Dreaming Across 
Sleep Stages
Sleep Stage
Cognitive
Activity
Dreaming
Predominant 
EEG Rhythm
NREM 1 
(sleep onset)
-40%
-35%
Alpha, theta
NREM 2
50%
-15%-25%
Theta, spindles 
(beta)
NREM 3-4 
(SWS)
40-50%
-10%
Delta
REM
80%
80%
Theta, beta
LREM
100%
100%
Theta, beta, 
gamma
EEG: electroencephalography; LREM: lucid REM; NREM: non­
rapid eye movement; REM: rapid eye movement; SO: sleep onset; 
SWS: slow-wave sleep.
Table based upon comprehensive reviews by Nielsen (1999,
2000) and Hobson et al. (2000).
to REM sleep and certain substages of NREM 1 
sleep onset, and is comparatively rare during other 
NREM sleep stages (Table 28.1).
Electrophysiological Dissociation 
of Sleep Stages
The first and best-known neurophysiological 
(O) division of sleep is based on scalp electrode 
recordings of pooled neuronal electrical potentials, 
presumed to represent primarily the summation of 
postsynaptic potentials throughout dendritic arbors 
and cell somata, and to a lesser extent, synchronous 
discharge (action potential firing) of populations 
of neurons (Buzsaki, Anastassiou, & Koch, 2012; 
Olejniczak, 2006).
The central findings regarding EEG correlates of 
sleep are summarized in Table 28.1 and Figure 28.1. 
Briefly, resting (eyes-closed) wakefulness is charac­
terized by alpha rhythms (8-12 Hz); the transition 
to NREM 1 (sleep onset) is defined by the grad­
ual disappearance of alpha and the appearance of 
theta (4-7 Hz) ripples and rolling eye movements. 
NREM 2 begins when high-frequency spindles 
(in the beta frequency; 12.5-30 Hz) and large- 
amplitude K-complexes appear frequently in the 
EEG. NREM 3-4, or SWS, is characterized instead 
by very slow delta band (0.5-4 Hz) activity, syn­
chronized in large-amplitude waves. Finally, REM 
sleep involves a return to highly desynchronized and 
low-amplitude activity, predominantly in the theta 
and beta bands, similar to active wakefulness. Lucid 
REM sleep, in the few investigations so far con­
ducted, involves an EEG pattern similar to REM 
sleep but with increased power in the gamma (>30 
Hz) band (Voss et al., 2014; Voss et al., 2009). As 
these electrophysiological differences are well vali­
dated and expertly reviewed elsewhere (Antrobus, 
1991; Silber et al., 2007; Williams, Karacan, & 
Hursch, 1974), they are not discussed further here.
Neurochemical Dissociation o f Sleep Stages
The patterns of neurochemical activity through­
out the sleep-wake cycle are exceedingly complex 
and consequently poorly understood. At least a 
dozen major neurotransmitters are involved in 
regulating NREM and REM, by virtue of either 
increased or decreased activity (compared to wak­
ing) during various sleep stages, but many second­
ary players with less clear roles are also involved 
(Gottesmann, 1999; Hobson et al., 2000; Kahn, 
Pace-Schott, & Hobson, 1997; Lena et al., 2005; 
Pace-Schott & Hobson, 2002; Stenberg, 2007). 
Moreover, changes in neurotransmitter levels are
374
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

Stage
Sub
stages1
EEG Signature
EEG Signature Wave­
form
Wake
1
Alpha wave 
train
2
Alpha wave 
intermittent 
(>50%)
NREM 1
3
Alpha wave 
intermittent 
(<50%)
iYAVW^^Vv^ —''
4
EEG flattening 
(<20 pV)
--------- —
—
5
Theta ripples
6
Vertex sharp 
wave (<200 
pV)
—
--------------
7
> 1 Vertex 
sharp wave 
(<200 pV)
8
Incomplete
spindle
NREM 2
9
Complete
Spindle
NREM 3-4
Delta
yirVVVvA
REM
Theta
Figure 28.1. (See Color Insert) Main electrophysiological 
correlates of each sleep stage. NREM 1 substages are included, 
as is eyes-closed waking rest, for comparison. Note the 
easily differentiable EEG signature accompanying each sleep 
stage. Reproduced from Stenstrom, Fox, et al. (2012).
far from a uniform phenomenon throughout the 
brain: region-by-transmitter interactions have in 
some cases been experimentally demonstrated (e.g., 
for dopamine: Lena et al., 2005), and it seems 
likely that activity levels for other neurotransmit­
ters will also vary, based not just on sleep stage, 
but also which region of the brain is being inves­
tigated. These complexities are further exacerbated 
by the existence of many receptor subtypes for each 
neurotransmitter, and the concomitant (and often 
unknown— at least for sleep) differences in down­
stream effects caused by the actions of a single 
neurotransmitter (Monti & Monti, 2007). A final 
and major difficulty is that implanting record­
ing electrodes directly into the subcortical nuclei 
responsible for manufacturing and/or disseminat­
ing these neurotransmitters is the ideal method of 
investigation— an approach typically precluded in 
humans. Almost everything that is known about the
neurochemistry of sleep has therefore been drawn 
from studies of animals with variable phylogenetic 
proximity to humans, such as rats, cats, rabbits, and 
monkeys (Gottesmann, 1999; Jones, 1991, 2005; 
Lena et al., 2005; Stenberg, 2007).
The enormous difficulty of studying the neu­
rochemistry of sleep and dreaming have thus far 
precluded the formulation of a clear model of 
each neurotransmitter’s relative activity through­
out NREM and REM sleep stages, much less what 
the functional implications of such neurochemical 
heterogeneity might be. Nonetheless, decades of 
research have yielded some broad trends, which we 
summarize in Table 28.2.
Although a stage-by-stage model is premature 
given the current limits of our knowledge, broad 
trends can distinguish waking at least from REM 
and NREM sleep. Generally speaking, all major 
neurotransmitters show some level of tonic activity 
during waking; conversely, all of these neurotrans­
mitters show a greater or lesser decrease of activity 
during various NREM stages of sleep (it should be 
noted, however, that much of this data is derived 
only from the later stages of “slow-wave” NREM 
sleep). Finally, REM sleep shows an intermediate 
pattern: most neuro transmitter activity is decreased
Table 28.2 Neurochemical Profiles of the Various 
Stages of Sleep as Compared to Waking
Neurotransmitter
State
REM
(t Dreaming)
NREM 
(f Dreaming)
ACh
t t
i
Asp
i
u
DA
t t
i
GABA
?
?
Glu
w
i
HA
w
i
NE
w
i
5-HT
w
i
ACh: acetylcholine; Asp: aspartate; DA: dopamine: GABA: y-amino 
butyric acid; Glu: glutamate; HA: histamine; NE: norepinephrine/ 
noradrenaline; NREM: non-rapid-eye-movement sleep;
REM: rapid-eye-movement sleep; 5-HT: serotonin; SWS: slow 
wave sleep.
Based on data from Gottesmann (1999); Hobson (2009); Lena et al. 
(2005); E. F. Pace-Schott & Hobson (2002).
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
375

relative to waking, but notably, acetylcholine and 
dopamine levels appear to be elevated (Table 28.2).
Functional Neuroimaging of Sleep and 
Dreaming: A Fourth Line of Evidence 
Overview
The preceding sections have highlighted some 
of the key evidence supporting the hypothesis 
that stages of sleep are dissociable in terms of their 
(1) phenomenology, (2) electrophysiology, and 
more provisionally, (3) neurochemistry. These many 
heterogeneities across sleep stages lead to the strong 
and testable hypothesis that brain activations and 
deactivations, as detected with non-invasive func­
tional neuroimaging modalities, might also show 
dissociable patterns throughout the sleep cycle. 
Functional neuroimaging therefore provides a 
fourth line of evidence that could either corroborate 
(or possibly contradict) the ample body of research 
suggesting phenomenological and neurophysiologi­
cal dissociability. As noted earlier, the phenomeno­
logical variations in self-generated thought across 
sleep stages further suggest that differential acti­
vation patterns, if they exist, should exhibit some 
relationship with the numerous regions implicated 
in self-generated thought in waking (Fox et al.,
2015) and REM sleep (Fox et al., 2013).
Despite a profusion of neuroimaging studies 
elucidating the neural basis of sleep and dream­
ing (Desseilles, Dang-Vu, Sterpenich, & Schwartz, 
2011; Maquet, 2010; Pace-Schott, 2007), no com­
prehensive overview has been conducted in recent 
years. While distinctive patterns of observed brain 
activity appear to largely parallel the differential 
subjective content reported from laboratory awak­
enings across the various sleep stages, there has yet to 
be any systematic attempt to specifically relate these 
particular patterns of brain activity to differing first- 
person experiences. Recently, we conducted such a 
meta-analysis and review of subjective content for 
REM sleep and dreaming (Fox et al., 2013); here, 
we expand upon those results to include functional 
neuroimaging and subjective report data from all 
sleep stages, in a preliminary attempt to relate sub­
jective experience, electrophysiology, neurochemis­
try, and brain blood-flow-related activity across each 
sleep stage.
Literature Review
In order to ensure that our review was com­
prehensive, we scoured Google Scholar, PubMed, 
and Psyclnfo online databases for any study whose 
title or abstract included keywords such as “PET,”
“fMRI,” and “neuroimaging,” in combination with 
keywords such as “sleep,” “dreaming,” “NREM,” 
or “REM.” The reference list of each study found 
was also consulted, as was the bibliography of a 
major review of functional neuroimaging of sleep 
(Hobson et al., 2000). Our search yielded 58 func­
tional neuroimaging (PET or fMRI) studies of 
REM and NREM sleep. We limit our discussion 
here to studies that employed a baseline of resting 
wakefulness (either pre- or post-sleep)— in order 
to minimize the confounding effects of various 
tasks and baseline conditions— and to studies that 
involved neurologically and psychiatrically healthy 
participants. We also avoid discussing studies that 
introduced extraneous factors (e.g., auditory stim­
ulation during sleep) or pharmacological agents. 
A total of 16 studies were ultimately consulted 
(Table 28.3), many of which examined more than 
a single sleep stage.
Neural Correlates of NREM 1 Sleep
As discussed earlier, NREM 1 sleep is a highly 
heterogeneous sleep stage that can be divided into 
various substages with varying degrees of visual 
imagery and cognitive activity. These fine-scale sub­
divisions on short timescales (or the order of sec­
onds or tens of seconds) mean that it is not possible 
for present functional neuroimaging technologies, 
with their generally poor temporal resolution, to 
adequately resolve NREM 1 substages.
Nonetheless, a handful of studies (Andrade 
et al., 2011; Kaufmann et al., 2006; Kjaer, Law, 
Wiltschiotz, Paulson, & Madsen, 2002; Picchioni 
et al., 2008) have investigated the neural correlates 
of NREM 1 (broadly defined) with some intrigu­
ing preliminary results. For instance, the first 
PET study of NREM 1 found that, compared to 
a baseline of resting wakefulness, NREM 1 sleep 
showed greater activation in numerous visual 
areas, including the fusiform gyrus (BA 19), and 
the middle occipital gyrus bilaterally (BA 18/19) 
(Kjaer et al., 2002). Another study also found evi­
dence for medial occipital activation in the cuneus 
(Kaufmann et al., 2006). Functional connectivity 
analyses, using the hippocampus as a seed region, 
have also found increased connectivity with various 
visual regions, including the fusiform gyrus and the 
middle and superior occipital gyri (Andrade et al., 
2011). Most studies of NREM 1 to date therefore 
show evidence for increased activation of, or cou­
pling with, widespread visual regions (although 
for an exception to this trend, see the results of 
Picchioni et al., 2008).
376
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

Table 28.3 Functional Neuroimaging Studies of Sleep Reviewed
Study
Modality
N
Stage(s) Investigated
Sleep
Deprivation?
Maquet et al. (1996)
PET
11
REM
Y
Braun et al. (1997)
PET
37
SWS, REM
Y
Maquet et al. (1997)
PET
11
SWS
Y
Nofzinger et al. (1997)
PET
6
REM
N
Braun et al. (1998)
PET
10
REM
Y
Kajimura et al. (1999)
PET
18
SWS
Y
Finelli et al. (2000)
PET
8
REM
Y
Maquet et al. (2000)
PET
5
REM
N
Peigneux et al. (2001)
PET
12
REM
N
Balkin et al. (2002)
PET
27
NREM2
Y
Kjaer et al. (2002)
PET
8
NREM1
N
Maquet et al. (2005)
PET
22
SWS, REM
N
Kaufmann et al. (2006)
fMRI
9
NREM1, NREM2, SWS
Y
Picchioni et al. (2008)
fMRI
4
NREM1
N
Andrade et al. (2011)
fMRI
25
NREM1, NREM2, SWS
N
Koike et al. (2011)
fMRI
12
NREM2, SWS, REM
N
fMRI: functional magnetic resonance imaging; N: no; NREM: non-rapid eye movement sleep; PET: positron emission 
tomography; REM: rapid eye movement sleep; SWS: slow wave sleep; Y: yes.
Concurrent with this tentative evidence for 
visual cortical activation in NREM 1, most stud­
ies have found evidence for deactivation of pre­
frontal executive regions, including in the superior 
frontal gyrus (BA 6) (Kjaer et al., 2002; Picchioni 
et al., 2008) and middle frontal gyrus (BAs 9 and 
10) (Kaufmann et al., 2006; Picchioni et al., 2008).
Neural Correlates of NREM 2 Sleep
Similar to NREM 1, only a small handful of 
studies have investigated “pure” NREM 2 (Andrade 
et al., 2011; Balkin et al., 2002; Kaufmann et al., 
2006; Koike, Kan, Misaki, & Miyauchi, 2011). 
Unlike NREM 1, however, a general pattern of 
activations is less easily discernible. For instance, 
one study found widespread activations during 
NREM 2, including in medial (BA 9) and lateral 
(BAs 10 and 46) prefrontal areas, anterior cingulate 
and insula, and a variety of subcortical and brain­
stem regions (Balkin et al., 2002). In stark contrast, 
another study found almost exclusively deactivations
throughout the brain associated with NREM 2, 
including in the prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal 
lobule, superior temporal gyrus, insula, and various 
thalamic nuclei; indeed, only a single significant 
activation in the inferior frontal gyrus was observed 
(Kaufmann et al., 2006). Adding to this confusing 
picture, a study examining hippocampal functional 
connectivity throughout the brain found that there 
were no greater areas of connectivity for waking ver­
sus NREM 2, but, conversely, that a wide variety 
of regions showed increased coupling with hippo­
campus during NREM 2 versus waking, including 
many regions implicated in waking self-generated 
thought (Fox et al., 2015), such as the posterior 
cingulate cortex, lingual gyrus, inferior parietal 
lobule, temporopolar cortex, and insula (Andrade 
et al., 2011).
The neural correlates of NREM 2 sleep therefore 
remain elusive and the limited data available difficult 
to synthesize. Part of the problem may be the inter­
mediate (and by implication, highly variable) levels
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
377

of cognitive activity and dreaming present in NREM 
2, which might be related to the similar variability 
of results observed in neuroimaging studies; that is, 
two given segments of sleep both scored as NREM 
2 based on relatively superficial similarities among 
EEG markers, and then pooled in neuroimaging 
analyses, might in fact be characterized by very dif­
ferent psychological content depending on the sub­
jects recruited as well as the time of night (Cavallero, 
Cicogna, Natale, & Occhionero, 1992; Cicogna, 
Natale, Occhionero, & Bosinelli, 1998) and there­
fore might result in correspondingly distinctive pat­
terns of brain recruitment (as observed in the studies 
to date). Further neuroimaging research into the 
neural basis of NREM 2 accompanied by collection 
of mentation reports following laboratory awaken­
ings would greatly help to clarify this situation.
Neural Correlates of NREM 3-4 
Sleep (SWS)
In contrast to NREM 1 and NREM 2, NREM 
3-4 (SWS) has been characterized mostly by wide­
spread deactivations (relative to waking) throughout 
the brain (Andrade et al., 2011; Braun et al., 1997; 
Maquet et al., 1997; Maquet et al., 2005). For 
instance, Braun and colleagues (1997) found deac­
tivations in SWS in prefrontal executive regions, 
such as the dorsolateral (BA 46) and ventrolateral 
(BA 11) prefrontal cortex, as well as in a variety of 
regions implicated in waking self-generated thought 
(Fox et al., 2015), including the medial prefrontal 
cortex (BA 10), temporopolar cortex (BA 38), and 
anterior insula. Widespread deactivations were also 
observed in subcortical structures, including the 
basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellum (Braun 
et al., 1997). Similarly, Maquet and colleagues
(1997) found SWS to be negatively correlated with 
regional cerebral blood flow in prefrontal areas such 
as the orbitofrontal cortex (BA 11/25) and anterior 
cingulate cortex (BA 24), as well as some visual areas 
like the precuneus (BA 19/7) and a variety of sub­
cortical structures. Maquet and colleagues (2005) 
found further evidence for deactivations pre­
dominantly in executive, default, and visual areas. 
Finally, a connectivity study using the hippocampus 
as the seed region found widespread reductions in 
functional connectivity during SWS as compared to 
waking, again primarily in prefrontal regions and 
default network areas such as the inferior parietal 
lobule, medial prefrontal cortex, and posterior cin­
gulate cortex (Andrade et al., 2011).
The predominant pattern in SWS, based on the 
limited evidence to date, is deactivation (and/or
disintegration of functional connectivity) through­
out the brain— especially in prefrontal executive 
areas, default network regions, and subcortical 
structures.
Neural Correlates of REM Sleep
REM sleep has been associated with the recruit­
ment of widespread brain regions (Braun et al., 1997; 
Braun et al., 1998; Finelli et al., 2000; Maquet et al., 
1996; Maquet et al., 2005; Peigneux et al., 2001). 
A sufficient number of studies have been conducted to 
allow for a preliminary meta-analysis of brain activa­
tions during REM sleep, which we recently executed 
in an effort to quantitatively assess the consistency of 
these activations (Fox et al., 2013). Combining our 
meta-analytic results with a qualitative assessment of 
individual studies, REM sleep appears to be associated 
with activation of the medial temporal lobe bilater­
ally; multiple regions within the default mode net­
work, including clusters in medial prefrontal cortex 
(BA 24 and 9/32), dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (BA 
9), and orbitofrontal cortex (BA 25); and numerous 
visual network areas, centered on the lingual gyrus 
(BA 18/19) (Domhoff & Fox, 2015; Fox et al., 2013). 
Deactivations are most salient in prefrontal executive 
regions, including the dorsolateral (Braun et al., 1997; 
Braun et al., 1998; Maquet et al., 1996) and ventro­
lateral prefrontal cortex (Braun et al., 1997; Braun 
et al., 1998; Maquet et al., 2005).
Neural Correlates of Lucid REM 
(LREM) Sleep
Only a single study to date has compared neural 
correlates of lucid REM sleep to regular REM sleep 
(Dresler et al., 2012), and this study relied on data 
from a single subject able to attain dream lucidity 
repeatedly in the scanner. Nonetheless, results of 
this pioneering (if tentative) study are intriguing. 
LREM, compared to standard, non-lucid REM 
sleep, was associated most notably with increased 
activation of default, visual, and frontoparietal con­
trol network regions (Dresler et al., 2012). These 
heightened activations are commensurate with the 
subjective qualities of LREM sleep, discussed fur­
ther in the following sections.
Discussion
Default and Visual Network Activation 
and Their Relationship to Self Generated 
Thought and Imagery Throughout 
the Sleep Cycle
Dreaming can be thought of as an uncon­
strained, hyper-associative, and highly immersive
378
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

form of self-generated thought that is largely 
detached from external sensory inputs (Christoff 
et ah, 2016; Fox et al., 2013; Windt, 2010). We 
therefore might expect that areas involved in 
memory recall and recombination, self-referential 
thinking, and audiovisual imagery would show 
heightened recruitment compared to a restful 
waking baseline in all sleep stages that have some 
appreciable amount of thought or dream content 
(especially REM sleep, but also potentially stages 
NREM 1 and NREM 2).
Generally speaking, the NREM sleep stages 
are associated with considerably lower rates of 
dreaming than REM sleep (see Table 28.1)—  
and the mentation that does occur tends to be 
less visuospatial and immersive, and more of a 
conceptually focused inner monologue (Hobson 
et al., 2000; Nielsen, 2000; Nir & Tononi, 2010). 
During NREM 1, however, highly vivid visual 
imagery and occasionally full-blown (if short­
lived) dreaming can occur (Hayashi et al., 1999; 
Hori et al., 1994; Nielsen, 1992; Stenstrom, Fox, 
Solomonova, & Nielsen, 2012). Consistent with 
these phenomenological reports, NREM 1 is pri­
marily associated with the activation of secondary 
and tertiary visual regions, including the fusiform 
gyri bilaterally, the middle occipital gyrus (BA 19), 
and the cuneus (BA 18). Absent, however, are any 
notable activations in default network regions; 
this absence of activation, however, can be rec­
onciled with the typical brevity and diminished 
sense of self (compared to other sleep stage menta­
tion reports) that characterize sleep onset imagery 
(Cicogna et al., 1998).
Late in the night, when REM sleep predomi­
nates in the sleep cycle, NREM 2 can give rise to 
a high frequency of immersive dream experiences 
indistinguishable from REM sleep reports (Cicogna 
et al., 1998). Cognitive activity of some kind is rela­
tively frequent during early-night NREM 2 (-50% 
of awakenings), but dreaming proper is more rare, 
reported from roughly 15%—25% of NREM 2 
awakenings (Goodenough, Lewis, Shapiro, Jaret, 
& Sleser, 1965; Nielsen, 1999, 2000). As discussed 
earlier, however, the neuroimaging results concern­
ing NREM 2 are somewhat contradictory and do 
not lend themselves to any clear synthesis as of 
yet. Future work placing greater emphasis on first- 
person reports and substage specificity may clarify 
this situation.
The frequency of dream experience is lowest by 
far in NREM 3-4 (SWS) (Hobson et al., 2000; 
Nielsen, 2000). Indeed, considerable numbers
of participants can never recall cognitive activity 
or dreaming of any kind from SWS awakenings, 
despite multiple nights spent in the laboratory 
(Cavallero et al., 1992). Consistent with this very 
modest level of self-generated thought, SWS gener­
ally shows deactivation throughout major default 
network hubs, including medial prefrontal cortex 
and posterior cingulate cortex. Deactivations are 
also frequently reported in multiple subcortical 
brain areas, including the hypothalamus, thala­
mus, and pons. These subcortical deactivations 
are consistent with the overall decreased arousal 
and blockade of sensory inputs in SWS (Hobson 
et al., 2000).
REM, the sleep stage with by far the highest rates 
of dreaming (80%-90% of the time; Hobson et al.,
2000), shows heightened activation in numerous 
regions implicated in self-generated thought and 
imagery (Fox et al., 2015), especially widespread 
activation of the medial prefrontal cortex, the 
medial temporal lobe, and medial occipital areas 
(Domhoff & Fox, 2015; Fox et al., 2013). All of 
these activations are consistent with the endogenous 
generation of a self-referential narrative situated in a 
largely visual imaginal world.
These overall trends in activation patterns 
across the sleep stages are paralleled by changes 
in functional connectivity: connectivity among 
default mode network hubs, for instance, decreases 
monotonically 
throughout 
the 
NREM 
sleep 
stages (Samann et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2015). 
Consistent with these results, PET investigations 
have found a mono tonic decrease in cerebral energy 
metabolism across NREM stages 1-3 (Maquet, 
1995), whereas energy metabolism in REM sleep is 
equal to (Braun et al., 1997; Madsen et al., 1991; 
Maquet et al., 1990) or higher than (Buchsbaum 
et al., 1989; Heiss, Pawlik, Herholz, Wagner, & 
Wienhard, 1985) waking rest.
Finally, lucid REM sleep (LREM), in stark 
contrast to NREM sleep, shows activations greater 
even than non-lucid REM sleep in many regions. 
The most striking difference is the reappearance 
of activity in the frontoparietal control network, 
discussed in more detail in the following section. 
Also apparent is heightened activity in areas already 
hyperactive in REM sleep, including medial pre­
frontal cortex and a large swath of medial occipito­
parietal cortex— potentially explained by anecdotal 
reports that lucid REM sleep experiences are much 
more vivid and detailed than regular REM dreams 
(Dresler et al., 2012; Green, 1968; Sergio, 1988; 
Yuschak, 2006).
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
379

Prefrontal Executive Deactivation,
Cognitive Control, and Meta-Awareness 
Throughout the Sleep Cycle
As discussed elsewhere (Fox et al., 2015), wak­
ing self-generated thought involves a co-activation 
of default network areas alongside executive fronto­
parietal control network regions, most notably the 
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, rostrolateral pre­
frontal cortex, and anterior inferior parietal lobule. 
These results are not particularly difficult to ratio­
nalize when it is recalled that cognitive control and 
meta-awareness, two of the principal functions tied 
to the latter network, are in fact quite prevalent in 
waking self-generated thought (Christoff, Gordon, 
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Christoff 
et al., 2016; Klinger, 1978, 2008; Klinger & Cox, 
1987; Klinger & Kroll-Mensing, 1995; Kroll- 
Mensing, 1992; Seli, Risko, Smilek, & Schacter, 
2016)— even if lower than in typical externally 
directed cognition and tasks.
Conversely, executive and metacognitive func­
tioning is largely absent or deficient in NREM 
and REM sleep cognition. Although dream reports 
show strong thematic continuity with the emotional 
and personal concerns of waking life (Cartwright, 
Lloyd, Knight, & Trenholme, 1984; Fox et al., 
2013; Kuiken, Dunn, & LoVerso, 2008), actual 
goal-related thinking or top-down control and plan­
ning are rare. Further, activities involving sustained 
top-down control of attention, such as reading, 
writing, or using a phone or computer, occur only 
very rarely in dreams (Hartmann, 1996; Schredl, 
2000). Although logical and paralogical thinking 
indeed take place in sleep and dreaming (Hall & 
Van de Castle, 1966; Kahn & Hobson, 2005), over­
all such thinking is only peripherally goal-related at 
best, and is deficient in many other respects (Kahn 
& Hobson, 2005).
Metacognitive functioning is similarly compro­
mised. Natural rates of meta-awareness of ones 
true state during sleep (i.e., lucid dreaming or lucid 
sleep) are estimated to be only about 1%, even in 
experienced lucid dreamers (Schredl & Erlacher, 
2004, 2011; Snyder & Gackenbach, 1988), and 
might occur only a handful of times throughout the 
entire lifespan in normal individuals (Barrett, 1991; 
Zadra, Donderi, & Pihl, 1992). Moreover, employ­
ing a variety of interventions in an effort to increase 
meta-awareness during sleep (including psychologi­
cal training, pharmacological agents, and external 
electrical stimulation), even among highly moti­
vated participants, tends to result in only very mod­
est and poorly validated gains (Stumbrys, Erlacher,
Schadlich, 
& Schredl, 2012). Meta-awareness 
of other features of experience, such as bizarre or 
impossible situations and discontinuities of time 
and place (Dorus, Dorus, & Rechtschaffen, 1971), 
is likewise compromised (Kahn & Hobson, 2005).
Consistent with these many executive and meta­
cognitive deficiencies throughout the sleep cycle, all 
sleep stages show at least some evidence for deac­
tivation of prefrontal executive regions critical to 
cognitive control and meta-awareness. In stark con­
trast to these results throughout the rest of the sleep 
cycle, the unusual state of lucid REM (LREM) sleep 
instead shows activation of frontoparietal control 
network regions, including rostrolateral and dor­
solateral prefrontal cortices, as well as in the ante­
rior inferior parietal lobule bilaterally— consistent 
with restored cognitive control and meta-awareness 
(Dresler et al., 2012; Fox & Christoff, 2014).
Limitations
Four major limitations of our discussion should 
be emphasized. The first is that the subjective reports 
of nighttime dreaming and cognition have been 
collected largely independently of the functional 
neuroimaging data that speak to brain recruitment 
during the various sleep stages; that is, although dif­
ferences in subjective experience across sleep stages 
are in general reliable and well-replicated (Hobson 
et al., 2000; Nielsen, 1999, 2000), the studies that 
have used functional neuroimaging to examine 
these same sleep stages have rarely actually collected 
dream or mentation reports from their participants 
(for instance, of the eight studies we reviewed of 
REM sleep, only one confirmed dreaming had 
indeed been taking place in the REM sleep peri­
ods examined in the PET scanner: Maquet et al., 
1996). In the absence of such reports collected 
directly following functional neuroimaging of sleep 
and dreaming, any putative relationship between 
sleep stage neurophysiology and subjective con­
tent remains, at best, inferential and probabilistic. 
The obvious solution to this problem is for future 
functional neuroimaging studies of sleep to actively 
awaken and interrogate participants as to their sub­
jective experiences across various sleep stages. The 
putative links between subjective experiences and 
brain activation discussed here are therefore almost 
entirely inferential and are based on statistical aver­
ages of content reports generated in independent 
studies that did not use PET or MRI scans to assess 
brain activation. The apparent linkages we speculate 
on here are therefore, at best, crude approximations 
of average experiential intensity and average brain
380
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

activation across many different subjects. Although 
intriguing, these correspondences need to be further 
explored and corroborated with more detailed and 
targeted research before they can be considered reli­
able, much less definitive.
A second major concern is the small number of 
studies that have so far investigated any given sleep 
stage. Although we took pains to search the literature 
thoroughly and review every well-controlled and 
rigorously executed study, nonetheless the field of 
neuroimaging of sleep remains small. Accumulating 
research in this domain, however, will gradually 
mitigate this concern, as more powerful and repre­
sentative syntheses become possible.
Third is the fact that a full half of all studies 
we consulted sleep-deprived their participants the 
night before brain scanning in order to facilitate the 
maximum amount of sleep in the scanner. Aside 
from non-specific effects, such as stress, sleep depri­
vation is known to affect the architecture and EEG 
correlates of the sleep cycle (Borbely, Baumann, 
Brandeis, Strauch, & Lehmann, 1981), and might 
therefore influence neuroimaging measures of brain 
recruitment as well. In principle, this concern could 
be addressed by comparing brain activation and 
deactivation for given sleep stages across studies 
that did and did not employ sleep deprivation, but 
a much larger body of research is required before 
any such comparison is possible.
A fourth and final concern that should be reit­
erated is that sleep stages are probably as much a 
convenient abstraction as they are a concrete neu­
rophysiological fact; that is, while not strictly cat­
egorical, general differentiation between distinct 
sleep stages is justifiable and represents a valid and 
useful explanatory tool. We refer the reader back to 
the introductory material for a more detailed con­
sideration of this important issue.
Conclusions
We have here provided some new evidence in 
favor of the view that sleep stages can be differ­
entiated at the neurophysiological level, based on 
an overview of functional neuroimaging studies 
across every stage of the sleep cycle. We have pre­
sented preliminary evidence that subjective expe­
riences and neurophysiological markers covary 
across the sleep cycle, with the most intriguing 
finding being that default network and visual net­
work activation might track the occurrence and 
immersiveness of self-generated thought, whereas 
frontoparietal control network deactivation might 
track the general loss of cognitive control over,
and meta-awareness of, ones psychological state. 
Overall, these results provide an intriguing exam­
ple of complex, but nonetheless coherent, pat­
terns of brain-mind isomorphism (Cacioppo & 
Tassinary, 1990). We hope that this tentative syn­
thesis will serve as a useful stepping-stone on the 
path to a much deeper understanding of sleep and 
dream neurophysiology.
References
Andrade, K. C., Spoormaker, V. I., Dresler, M., Wehrle, R., 
Holsboer, F., Samann, R G., & Czisch, M. (2011). Sleep 
spindles and hippocampal functional connectivity in 
human NREM sleep. The Journal of Neuroscience, 3/(28), 
10331-10339.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes and dynamic control. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1316(f), 29-32.
Antrobus, J. (1991). Dreaming: Cognitive processes during cor­
tical activation and high afferent thresholds. Psychological 
Review, 98( 1), 96.
Aristoteles, & Gallop, D. (1996). Aristotle on Sleep and Dreams: A 
Text and Translation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Press. 
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1933). Regularly occurring peri­
ods of eye motility, and concomitant phenomena, during 
sleep. Science, 118(3062), 273-274.
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1955). A motility cycle in sleep­
ing infants as manifested by ocular and gross bodily activity. 
Journal of Applied Physiology, 5(1), 11-18.
Balkin, T. J., Braun, A. R., Wesensten, N. J., Jeffries, K., Varga, 
M., Baldwin, P., . . . Herscovitch, R (2002). The process of 
awakening: A PET study of regional brain activity patterns 
mediating the re-establishment of alertness and conscious­
ness. Brain, 725(10), 2308-2319.
Barbera, J. (2008). Sleep and dreaming in Greek and Roman 
philosophy. Sleep Medicine, 9(8), 906-910.
Barrett, D. (1991). Flying dreams and lucidity: An empirical 
study of their relationship. Dreaming, 1(2), 129.
Borbely, A. A., Baumann, F., Brandeis, D., Strauch, I., & 
Lehmann, D. (1981). Sleep deprivation: Effect on sleep 
stages and EEG power density in man. Electroencephalography 
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 51(5), 483-493.
Braun, A. R., Balkin, T., Wesensten, N., Carson, R., Varga, M., 
Baldwin, P., . . . Herscovitch, P. (1997). Regional cerebral 
blood flow throughout the sleep-wake cycle. Brain, 120(7), 
1173-1197.
Braun, A. R., Balkin, T. J., Wesensten, N. J., Gwadry, F., Carson,
R. 
E., Varga, M., . . . Herscovitch, P. (1998). Dissociated 
pattern of activity in visual cortices and their projections dur­
ing human rapid eye movement sleep. Science, 279(5347), 
91-95. doi: 10.1126/science.279.5347.91 
Buchsbaum, M. S., Gillin, J. C., Wu, J., Hazlett, E., Sicotte, N., 
Dupont, R. M., & Bunney, W. E. (1989). Regional cerebral 
glucose metabolic rate in human sleep assessed by positron 
emission tomography. Life Sciences, 45(15), 1349-1356. 
Buzsaki, G., Anastassiou, C. A., & Koch, C. (2012). The origin 
of extracellular fields and currents: EEG, ECoG, LFP and 
spikes. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(6), 407—420. 
Cacioppo, J. T., & Tassinary, L. G. (1990). Inferring psycho­
logical significance from physiological signals. American 
Psychologist, 45(1), 16.
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
381

Cartwright, R. D., Lloyd, S., Knight, S., &Trenholme, I. (1984). 
Broken dreams: A study of the effects of divorce and depres­
sion on dream content. Psychiatry, 47(3), 251-239.
Cavallero, C., Cicogna, R, Natale, V., & Occhionero, M. (1992). 
Slow wave sleep dreaming. Sleep, 15(6), 562-566.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U S A ,, 206(21), 8719-8724. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 77(11), 718-731.
Cicogna, P., Natale, V., Occhionero, M., & Bosinelli, M. (1998). 
A comparison of mental activity during sleep onset and 
morning awakening. Sleep, 21(5), 462—470.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957a). Cyclic variations in EEG 
during sleep and their relation to eye movements, body 
motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 9(4), 673-690.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957b). The relation of eye move­
ments during sleep to dream activity: An objective method 
for the study of dreaming. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
53(5), 339.
Desseilles, M., Dang-Vu, T. T., Sterpenich, V., & Schwartz, S. 
(2011). Cognitive and emotional processes during dream­
ing: A neuroimaging view. Conscious Cognition, 20(4), 998- 
1008. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2010.10.005
Deutsch, E., & Dalvi, R. (2004). The essential Vedanta: A new 
source book of Advaita Vedanta. Lanham, MD: World 
Wisdom Books.
Domhoff, G. W. (2003). The scientific study of dreams: Neural 
networks, 
cognitive development, 
and content analysis. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Domhoff, G. W. (2011). The neural substrate for dream­
ing: Is it a subsystem of the default network? Consciousness 
and 
Cognition, 
20(4), 
1163-1174. 
doi: 
10.1016/
j.concog.2011.03.001
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. R. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 342-353.
Dorus, E., Dorus, W., & Rechtschaffen, A. (1971). The inci­
dence of novelty in dreams. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
25(4), 364-368.
Dresler, M., Koch, S. P., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Holsboer, 
F., Steiger, A., . . . Czisch, M. (2011). Dreamed movement 
elicits activation in the sensorimotor cortex. Current Biology, 
22(21), 1833-1837.
Dresler, M., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Koch, S. P., Holsboer, 
F., Steiger, A., . . . Czisch, M. (2012). Neural correlates of 
dream lucidity obtained from contrasting lucid versus non- 
lucid REM sleep: A combined EEG/fMRI case study. Sleep, 
35(7), 1017.
Fenwick, P., Schatzman, M., Worsley, A., Adams, J., Stone, S., & 
Baker, A. (1984). Lucid dreaming: correspondence between 
dreamed and actual events in one subject during REM sleep. 
Biological Psychology, 18(4), 243-252.
Finelli, L. A., Landolt, H. P., Buck, A., Roth, C., Berthold, 
T., Borbely, A. A., & Achermann, P. (2000). Functional 
neuroanatomy of human sleep states after zolpidem and
placebo: A H2150-PET study. Journal of Sleep Research, 
9(2), 161-173.
Foulkes, D., Spear, R S., & Symonds, J. D. (1966). Individual 
differences in mental activity at sleep onset. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 71(4), 280.
Foulkes, D., & Vogel, G. (1965). Mental activity at sleep onset. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 70(4), 231.
Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilita­
tion of spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition 
helps the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & 
C. D. Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience of metacognition 
(pp. 293-319). Berlin: Springer.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Gillespie, G. (1988). Lucid dreams in Tibetan Buddhism. In J. 
Gackenbach & S. R LaBerge (Eds.), Conscious mind, sleeping 
brain (pp. 27-66). New York: Plenum Press.
Goodenough, D. R., Lewis, H. B., Shapiro, A., Jaret, L., & 
Sleser, I. (1965). Dream reporting following abrupt and 
gradual awakenings from different types of sleep. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 2(2), 170.
Gottesmann, C. (1999). Neurophysiological support of con­
sciousness during waking and sleep. Progress in Neurobiology, 
59(5), 469-508.
Green, C. E. (1968). Lucid dreams. London: Hamish 
Hamilton.
Hall, C. S., & Van de Castle, R. L. (1966). The content analysis of 
dreams. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
Hartmann, E. (1996). We do not dream of the Three R’s: A study 
and implications. Sleep Research, 25, 136.
Hayashi, M., Katoh, K., & Hori, T. (1999). Hypnagogic imag­
ery and EEG activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 88(2), 
676-678.
Heiss, W.-D., Pawlik, G., Herholz, K., Wagner, R., & Wienhard, 
K. (1985). Regional cerebral glucose metabolism in man 
during wakefulness, sleep, and dreaming. Brain Research, 
327(1), 362-366.
Hobson, J. A. (2009). REM sleep and dreaming: Towards a 
theory of protoconsciousness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
10(11), 803-813. doi: 10.1038/nrn27l6
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000). 
Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience of 
conscious states. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 793-842.
Holzinger, B., LaBerge, S. P., & Levitan, L. 
(2006). 
Psychophysiological correlates of lucid dreaming. Dreaming, 
16(2), 88.
Hori, T., Hayashi, M., & Morikawa, T. (1994). Topographical 
EEG changes and the hypnagogic experience. In R. D. 
Ogilvie & J. Harsh (Eds.), Sleep Onset: Normal and Abnormal 
Processes (pp. 237-253).
Hume, R. E. (1921). The thirteen principal Upanishads. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jones, B. (1991). Paradoxical sleep and its chemical/structural 
substrates in the brain. Neuroscience, 40(5), 637-656.
382
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

Jones, B. (2005). From waking to sleeping: Neuronal and chemi­
cal substrates. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 26(11), 
578-586.
Kahn, D., & Hobson, J. A. (2005). State-dependent thinking: A 
comparison of waking and dreaming thought. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 14(3), 429-438.
Kahn, D., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Hobson, J. A. (1997). 
Consciousness in waking and dreaming: The roles of neuro­
nal oscillation and neuromodulation in determining similari­
ties and differences. Neuroscience, 78(1), 13-38.
Kajimura, N., Uchiyama, M., Takayama, Y., Uchida, S., Uema, 
T., Kato, M., . . . Ogawa, K. (1999). Activity of midbrain 
reticular formation and neocortex during the progres­
sion of human non-rapid eye movement sleep. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 19(22), 10065-10073.
Kaufmann, C., Wehrle, R., Wetter, T. C., Holsboer, F., Auer, D. 
R, Pollmacher, T., & Czisch, M. (2006). Brain activation 
and hypothalamic functional connectivity during human 
non-rapid eye movement sleep: An EEG/fMRI study. Brain, 
129(Pt 3), 655-667. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh686
Kjaer, T. W., Law, I., Wiltschiotz, G., Paulson, O. B., & Madsen, 
P L. (2002). Regional cerebral blood flow during light 
sleep: A H2150-PET study. Journal of Sleep Research, 11(3), 
201-207.
Klinger, E. (1978). Modes of normal conscious flow. In K. S. 
Pope & J. L. Singer (Eds.), The stream of consciousness (pp. 
225-258). Berlin: Springer.
Klinger, E. (2008). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P Klein, & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-239). New York: Psychology Press.
Klinger, E., & Cox, W. M. (1987). Dimensions of thought flow 
in everyday life. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 7(2), 
105-128.
Klinger, E., & Kroll-Mensing, D. (1995). Idiothetic assess­
ment experience sampling and motivational analysis. In J. 
N. Butcher (Ed.), Clinical personality assessment: Practical 
approaches (pp. 267-277). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koike, T., Kan, S., Misaki, M., & Miyauchi, S. (2011). 
Connectivity pattern changes in default-mode network 
with deep non-REM and REM sleep. Neuroscience Research, 
69(4), 322-330.
Kroll-Mensing, D. (1992). Differentiating anxiety and depres­
sion: An experience sampling analysis. Unpublished PhD dis­
sertation, University of Minnesota.
Kuiken, D., Dunn, S., & LoVerso, T. (2008). Expressive writ­
ing about dreams that follow trauma and loss. Dreaming, 
18(2), 77.
LaBerge, S. P (1980). Lucid dreaming as a learnable skill: A case 
study. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 51(3f), 1039-1042.
LaBerge, S. P, & Levitan, L. (1995). Validity established of 
DreamLight cues for eliciting lucid dreaming. Dreaming, 
5(3), 159.
LaBerge, S. P, Levitan, L., & Dement, W. C. (1986). Lucid 
dreaming: Physiological correlates of consciousness during 
REM sleep. Journal of Mind and Behavior, 7, 251-258.
LaBerge, S. P, Nagel, L. E., Dement, W. C., & Zarcone, V. P, Jr. 
(1981). Lucid dreaming verified by volitional communica­
tion during REM sleep. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 52(3), 
727-732.
Lena, I., Parrot, S., Deschaux, O., Muffat-Joly, S., Sauvinet, V., 
Renaud, B .,. .. Gottesmann, C. (2005). Variations in extra­
cellular levels of dopamine, noradrenaline, glutamate, and
aspartate across the sleep-wake cycle in the medial prefrontal 
cortex and nucleus accumbens of freely moving rats. Journal 
of Neuroscience Research, 81(6), 891-899.
Loomis, A. L., Harvey, E. N., & Hobart, G. (1935). Further 
observations on the potential rhythms of the cerebral cortex 
during sleep. Science, 82, 198-200.
Loomis, A. L., Harvey, E. N., & Hobart, G. (1937). Cerebral 
states during sleep, as studied by human brain potentials. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 21(2), 127.
Madsen, P, Schmidt, J., Wildschiodtz, G., Friberg, L., Holm, S., 
Vorstrup, S., & Lassen, N. (1991). Cerebral 0 2  metabolism 
and cerebral blood flow in humans during deep and rapid- 
eye-movement sleep. Journal of Applied Physiology, 70(6), 
2597-2601.
Maquet, P (1995). Sleep function (s) and cerebral metabolism. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 69(1), 75-83.
Maquet, P (2010). Understanding non rapid eye movement sleep 
through neuroimaging. WorldJournal of Biological Psychiatry, 
f f(Suppl 1), 9-15. doi: 10.3109/15622971003637736
Maquet, P, Degueldre, C., Delfiore, G., Aerts, J., Peters, J.-M., 
Luxen, A., & Franck, G. (1997). Functional neuroanatomy 
of human slow wave sleep. The Journal of Neuroscience, 17(8), 
2807-2812.
Maquet, P, Dive, D., Salmon, E., Sadzot, B., Franco, G., 
Poirrier, R., . . . Franck, G. (1990). Cerebral glucose utiliza­
tion during sleep-wake cycle in man determined by positron 
emission tomography and [18 F] 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose 
method. Brain Research, 513(1), 136-143.
Maquet, P, Laureys, S., Peigneux, P, Fuchs, S., Petiau, C., 
Phillips, C., Aerts, J., Del Fiore, G., Degueldre, C., 
Meulemans, T., & Luxen, A. (2000). Experience-dependent 
changes in cerebral activation during human REM sleep. 
Nature Neuroscience, 3(8), 831-836.
Maquet, P, Peters, J.-M., Aerts, J., Delfiore, G., Degueldre, C., 
Luxen, A., & Franck, G. (1996). Functional neuroanatomy 
of human rapid-eye-movement sleep and dreaming. Nature, 
383(6596), 163-166.
Maquet, P, Ruby, P, Maudoux, A., Albouy, G., Sterpenich, V., 
Dang-Vu,T.,... Peigneux, P (2005). Human cognition dur­
ing REM sleep and the activity profile within frontal and 
parietal cortices: A reappraisal of functional neuroimaging 
data. Progress in Brain Research, 150, 219-595.
Monroe, L. J., Rechtschaffen, A., Foulkes, D., & Jensen, J. 
(1965). Discriminability of REM and NREM reports. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2(3), 456.
Monti, J. M., & Monti, D. (2007). The involvement of dopa­
mine in the modulation of sleep and waking. Sleep Medicine 
Reviews, 11(2), 113-133.
Nielsen, T. A. (1992). A self-observational study of spontaneous 
hypnagogic imagery using the upright napping procedure. 
Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 11(4), 353-366.
Nielsen, T. A. (1999). Mentation during sleep: The NREM/ 
REM distinction. In R. Lydie & H. A. Baghdoyan (Eds.), 
Handbook of behavioral state control: Cellular and molecular 
mechanisms (pp. 101-129). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Nielsen, T. A. (2000). A review of mentation in REM and 
NREM sleep: “ “ 
REM sleep as a possible reconciliation of 
two opposing models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(06), 
851-866.
Nielsen, T. A. (2014). What is the current status of your “covert 
REM process” theory, especially in the light of the new pro­
toconsciousness hypothesis? In N. Tranquillo (Ed.), Dream 
consciousnes (pp. 175-180). Berlin: Springer.
K I E R A N  C. R. F OX A N D  M A N E S H  G I R N
383

Nir, Y., & Tononi, G. (2010). Dreaming and the brain: From 
phenomenology to neurophysiology. Trends in Cognitive 
Science,, 14(2), 88-100. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.12.001
Nofzinger, E. A., Mintun, M. A., Wiseman, M., Kupfer, D. J., & 
Moore, R. Y. (1997). Forebrain activation in REM sleep: an 
FDG PET study. Brain Research, 770(1), 192-201.
Olejniczak, P. (2006). Neurophysiologic basis of EEG. Journal of 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 23(3), 186-189.
Pace-Schott, E. F. (2007). The frontal lobes and dreaming. In D. 
Barrett & P. McNamara (Eds.), The New Science of Dreaming 
(pp. 115-154). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger Publishers.
Pace-Schott, E. F., & Hobson, J. A. (2002). The neurobiology of 
sleep: Genetics, cellular physiology and subcortical networks. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 591-605.
Peigneux, P, Laureys, S., Fuchs, S., Delbeuck, X., Degueldre, 
C., Aerts, J., . . . Maquet, P. (2001). Generation of rapid eye 
movements during paradoxical sleep in humans. [Research 
Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. Neuroimage, 14(3), 701-708. 
doi: 10.1006/nimg.2001.0874
Picchioni, D., Fukunaga, M., Carr, W. S., Braun, A. R., Balkin, 
T. J., Duyn, J. H., & Horovitz, S. G. (2008). fMRI dif­
ferences between early and late stage-1 sleep. Neuroscience 
Letters, 441(1), 
81-85. 
doi: 
10.10l6/j.neulet.2008. 
06.010
Prabhavananda, S., Manchester, F., & Isherwood, C. (1984). 
The Upanishads: Breath of the eternal. York Beach, ME: The 
Teitan Press.
Rechtschaffen, A., & Kales, A. (Eds.) (1968). A manual of stan­
dardized terminology, techniques and scoring system for sleep 
stages of human subjects. Los Angeles: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Samann, P. G., Wehrle, R., Hoehn, D., Spoormaker, V. I., Peters, 
H., Tully, C., . . . Czisch, M. (2011). Development of the 
brain’s default mode network from wakefulness to slow wave 
sleep. Cerebral Cortex, 21, 2082-2093.
Schredl, M. (2000). Continuity between waking life and dream­
ing: Are all waking activities reflected equally often in 
dreams? Perceptual and Motor Skills, 90(3), 844-846.
Schredl, M., & Erlacher, D. (2004). Lucid dreaming frequency 
and personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 37(7), 
1463-1473. doi: 10.10l6/j.paid.2004.02.003
Schredl, M., & Erlacher, D. (2011). Frequency of lucid dream­
ing in a representative German sample. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 112(1), 104-108.
Seli, P., Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). Mind­
wandering with and without intention. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 20(8), 605-617.
Sergio, W. (1988). Use of DMAE (2-dimethylaminoethanol) in 
the induction of lucid dreams. Medical Hypotheses, 26(4), 
255-257.
Sharma, A. (2012). Sleep as a state of consciousness in Advaita 
Vedanta. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Silber, M. H., Ancoli-Israel, S., Bonnet, M. H., Chokroverty,
S. , Grigg-Damberger, M. M., Hirshkowitz, M., . . . Penzel,
T. (2007). The visual scoring of sleep in adults. Journal of 
Clinical Sleep Medicine, 3(2), 121-131.
Snyder, T. J., & Gackenbach, J. (1988). Individual differences 
associated with lucid dreaming. In J. Gackenbach & S. 
LaBerge (Eds.), Conscious mind, sleeping brain (pp. 221- 
259). Berlin: Springer.
Stenberg, D. (2007). Neuroanatomy and neurochemistry of sleep. 
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 6¥(10), 1187-1204.
Stenstrom, P., Fox, K. C. R., Solomonova, E., & Nielsen, T. 
A. (2012). Mentation during sleep onset theat bursts in 
a trained participant: A role for NREM stage 1 sleep in 
memory processing? International Journal of Dream Research, 
5(1), 37-46.
Stumbrys,T., Erlacher, D., Schadlich, M., & Schredl, M. (2012). 
Induction of lucid dreams: A systematic review of evidence. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 21(3), 1456-1475.
Stumbrys, T., Erlacher, D., & Schredl, M. (2013). Testing 
the involvement of the prefrontal cortex in lucid dream­
ing: A tDCS study. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(4), 
1214-1222.
Tanaka, H., Hayashi, M., & Hori, T. (1996). Statistical features 
of hypnagogic EEG measured by a new scoring system. Sleep, 
190), 731-738.
Tanaka, H., Hayashi, M., & Hori, T. (1997). Topographical 
characteristics and principal component structure of the 
hypnagogic EEG. Sleep, 20(7), 523-534.
Thompson, E. (2014). Waking, dreaming, being: Self and 
consciousness in neuroscience, meditation, and philosophy. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Vogel, G., Foulkes, D., & Trosman, H. (1966). Ego func­
tions and dreaming during sleep onset. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 14(3), 238-248.
Voss, U., Holzmann, R., Hobson, A., Paulus, W., Koppehele- 
Gossel, J., Klimke, A., & Nitsche, M. A. (2014). Induction of 
self awareness in dreams through frontal low current stimula­
tion of gamma activity. Nature Neuroscience, 17(6), 810-812.
Voss, U., Holzmann, R., Tuin, I., & Hobson, J. A. (2009). 
Lucid dreaming: A state of consciousness with features 
of both waking and non-lucid dreaming. Sleep, 32(9), 
1191-1200.
Wangyal, T. (1998). The Tibetan yogas of dream and sleep. 
Boston: Snow Lion Publications.
Williams, R. L., Karacan, I., & Hursch, C. J. (1974). 
Electroencephalography (EEG) of human sleep: Clinical appli­
cations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wilson, R. S., Mayhew, S. D., Rollings, D. T., Goldstone, A., 
Przezdzik, I., Arvanitis, T. N., & Bagshaw, A. P. (2015). 
Influence of epoch length on measurement of dynamic func­
tional connectivity in wakefulness and behavioural validation 
in sleep. Neuroimage, 112, 169-179.
Windt, J. M. (2010). The immersive spatiotemporal hallucina­
tion model of dreaming. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 9(2), 295-316. doi: 10.1007/s 11097-010-9163-1
Yuschak, T. (2006). Advanced lucid dreaming. New York: Lulu 
Enterprises.
Zadra, A. L., Donderi, D., & Pihl, R. O. (1992). Efficacy of 
lucid dream induction for lucid and non-lucid dreamers. 
Dreaming, 2(2), 85.
384
N E U R A L  C O R R E L A T E S  OF S E L F - G E N E R A T E D  I M A G E R Y  A N D  C O G N I T I O N

C H A P T E R
29
Spontaneous Thought, Insight, 
and Control in Lucid Dreams
Jennifer M. Windt and Ursula Voss
Abstract
Dreams are sometimes described as an intensified form of spontaneous waking thought. Lucid 
dreams may seem to be a counterexample, because metacognitive insight into the fact that one is now 
dreaming is often associated with the ability to deliberately control the ongoing dream. This chapter 
uses conceptual considerations and empirical research findings to argue that lucid dreaming is in fact 
a promising and rich target for the future investigation of spontaneous thought. In particular, the 
investigation of dream lucidity can shed light on the relationship between metacognitive insight and 
control, on the one hand, and the spontaneous, largely imagistic cognitive processes that underlie the 
formation of dream imagery, on the other hand. In some cases, even lucid insight itself can be described 
as the outcome of spontaneous processes, rather than as resulting from conscious and deliberate 
reasoning. This raises new questions about the relationship between metacognitive awareness and 
spontaneous thought.
Key Words: lucid dreams, insight, metacognition, control, consciousness, self-consciousness, spontaneous 
thought, REM sleep
There is one very remarkable thing in dreams, 
for which I believe no one can give a reason. 
It is the formation of visions by a spontaneous 
organization carried out in a moment— a for­
mation more elegant than any which we can 
attain by much thought while awake. To the 
sleeper there often occur visions of great build­
ings which he has never seen, while it would 
be difficult for me, while awake, to form an 
idea of even the smallest house different from 
those I have seen, without a great amount of 
thought. [ . . . ] Even such unnatural things 
as flying men and innumerable other mon­
strosities can be pictured more skillfully than 
a waking person can do, except with much 
thought. They are sought by the waker; they 
offer themselves to the sleeper. There must 
therefore necessarily be some architectural and 
harmonious principle, I know not what, in our
mind, which, when freed from separating ideas 
by judgment, turns to compounding them.
— Leibniz (1956, Vol. I, pp. 177-178)
Dreams are often described as a paradigmatic 
example of spontaneous thought, or even as an 
intensified 
form 
of waking 
mind-wandering 
(Domhoff, 2011; Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, 
Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013; see also Domhoff, 
Chapter 27 in this volume). Here, we approach 
this topic from the perspective of lucid dreaming, 
which we argue is a key target for the investigation 
of spontaneous cognitive processes in sleep.
This strategy might seem surprising. Lucid 
dreams are characterized by metacognitive insight 
into the fact that one is now dreaming, which is 
typically associated with the ability to control the 
ongoing dream, as well as with dissociative phe­
nomena, such as seeing oneself from the outside
3 8 5

(Voss & Hobson, 2015; Voss, Schermelleh-Engel, 
Windt, Frenzel, & Hobson, 2013). For this reason, 
dream lucidity might seem to be an obvious coun­
terexample to the claim that dreaming is a form of 
spontaneous thought. One possibility could be that 
dream control, coupled with metacognitive insight, 
suppresses the spontaneous processes that under­
lie non-lucid dreaming. If this were the case, lucid 
control dreams would be a subgroup of dreams in 
which the element of spontaneity has been lost or 
at least greatly reduced. A slightly stronger view 
would be that the example of lucid dreaming casts 
doubt on the claim that dreaming in general can 
be described as a form of spontaneous thought. 
In both cases, the investigation of lucid dreaming 
could not meaningfully contribute to a discussion 
of spontaneous thought.
In this chapter, we argue that the opposite is 
true. Contrary to first appearances, lucid dreams are 
in fact a rich target phenomenon for investigating, 
both conceptually and experimentally, spontaneous 
cognitive processes in sleep, as well as their interplay 
with volitional control, metacognitive insight, and 
dissociative phenomena. Lucid dreams show that 
metacognitive insight and control are not neces­
sarily opposed to spontaneity, but that the two can 
coexist alongside one another. Dissociation plays a 
particularly important role in this context, as it is 
itself the outcome of spontaneous cognitive process­
ing, but nonetheless may facilitate the occurrence of 
insight and control.
We begin by offering some general considerations 
on the description of dreaming as a form of sponta­
neous thought. In the second section of the chapter, 
we give an overview of the main empirical findings 
on lucid dreaming, with special emphasis on the 
role of cognition and volition as key determinants 
of lucidity, as well as on the underlying neurophysi­
ological processes. We suggest that the spontaneous 
aspects of dream lucidity are most probably related 
to the involvement of not only cortical but also sub­
cortical brain structures. The third section raises a 
number of more general theoretical questions about 
the relationship between lucid insight, dream con­
trol, and the subjectively realistic and often unex­
pected elements of lucid dreams. We conclude that 
lucid dreams are spontaneously occurring mental 
states in which lower-level imagistic cognitive pro­
cessing is largely unpredictable and beyond the 
reach of volitional control. This explains both the 
continuity between lucid and non-lucid dreams and 
why lucid insight is often accompanied by illogical 
thought. The fourth and last section raises questions
and challenges for future research, with a specific 
focus on the comparison between lucid dreams and 
spontaneous thought in wakefulness.
Is Dreaming a Kind of Spontaneous 
Thought?
Spontaneous thought is sometimes used as a blan­
ket term for a range of mental activities involving 
mind-wandering, daydreaming, and creativity. All 
of these are commonly contrasted with goal-directed 
thought (Christoff, Gordon, Smith, Vartanian, & 
Mandel, 2011; Fox & Christoff, 2014; Christoff 
et al., 2016) and are described as being largely 
independent of sensory stimuli and ongoing tasks 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). While the early 
literature focused on the detrimental effects of 
mind-wandering on cognitive performance and 
mood (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Schooler 
et al., 2011), the newer literature emphasizes pos­
sible benefits, such as creativity, future planning, 
and memory consolidation (Fox & Christoff, 2014; 
McMillan, Kaufman, & Singer, 2013; Smallwood 
& Andrews-Hanna, 2013; Smallwood & Schooler,
2015). Philosophers have been slow to consider 
empirical research on mind-wandering, but a dis­
cussion on the nature of mind-wandering and its 
relationship to attention, goal-directed thought, 
and cognitive agency is now slowly taking shape 
(Carruthers, 2015; Dorsch, 2015; Irving, 2016; 
Metzinger 2013, 2015). For now, we wish to 
remain noncommittal about the details of these dif­
ferent emerging positions; rather than starting out 
with a closely circumscribed notion of spontane­
ous thought and mind-wandering, we begin with a 
fairly loose working definition, with the hope that 
our discussion of lucid dreaming can help fill in the 
details.
With this restriction in mind, we will (unless 
explicitly indicated otherwise) use the terms sponta­
neous thought and m ind-w andering interchangeably 
to denote conscious cognitive processes (including 
memories and emotions) that are largely deter­
mined by intrinsic brain activation and only weakly 
constrained by ongoing tasks and the demands of 
the external environment (Smallwood & Schooler, 
2015; Christoff et al., 2016).1 Importantly, episodes 
of spontaneous thought involve phenomenal con­
sciousness. There can be something it is like to expe­
rience a vivid daydream even if one does not realize 
that ones thoughts have wandered away from the 
task at hand; the episode still has subjective, qualita­
tive character. At least retrospectively, after the day­
dream has terminated, one will also often be able to
386
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

report its occurrence and describe its subjective or 
qualitative character— even though the exact con­
tents and the subtle phenomenological details can 
be strangely elusive (for the difference between self- 
and probe-caught episodes of mind-wandering, see 
Schooler et ah, 2011; for a general discussion of the 
difficulty of reporting spontaneous fantasies, see 
Schwitzgebel, 2011; Windt, 2015a, Chapter 4).
All of this is, it would seem, directly applicable to 
dreaming. Even though (with the exception of lucid 
dreaming) we do not realize that we are dreaming 
while we are dreaming, dreams are reportable expe­
riences. This is compatible with saying that most 
dreams are in fact forgotten; the main point is that 
under appropriate conditions— such as following 
timed awakenings in the sleep laboratory— dreams 
and other experiences occurring in sleep can be 
remembered and reported (Windt, 2013, 2015a, b).
Dreams are also commonly taken to be a paradig­
matic example of subjective or phenomenal experi­
ence unfolding almost completely independently of 
sensory input and motor output (Metzinger, 2004; 
Revonsuo, 2006). Mind-wandering involves sen­
sory attenuation, a dampening, as it were, of envi­
ronmental and peripheral bodily stimuli (Kam & 
Handy, 2013). During dreaming, this disconnection 
is even stronger. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep 
paralysis mostly prevents the outward enactment 
of movements experienced within the dream, and 
responsiveness to environmental stimuli is greatly 
reduced or even absent (Hobson et al., 2000). This 
is not quite to say that dreaming is entirely inde­
pendent of contemporaneous sensory stimuli—  
dream experience continues to be modulated by 
bodily sensations (Nielsen, 1993), and sounds or 
smells in the sleepers environment can also leave 
their mark on dreams (Rahimi et al., 2015; Schredl 
et al., 2009; for discussion and further references, 
see Windt 2015a, Chapter 8; Windt, 2017). But 
where the daydreaming mind is briefly distracted, 
as it were, by its own musings, sleep is the natu­
rally and regularly occurring state in which we come 
closest to almost completely losing our perceptual 
and cognitive grip on our surroundings.
While the onset and timing of sleep can, to 
an extent, be deliberately controlled, dreaming 
itself is typically held to be involuntary and per­
haps even incontrollable. The opposition between 
dreaming and volitional control has a long his­
tory, and philosophers have traditionally found the 
unruly nature of dreaming to be quite disturbing. 
Augustine (1991) famously wondered whether he 
was morally responsible for sins committed in his
dreams, such as adultery, but finally decided that 
he was not. The chasm between sleep and wakeful­
ness was just too great, he thought, for dreams to 
be a cause of moral concern. The involuntariness 
of dreaming is also connected to the epistemo­
logical problem of dream skepticism: it is precisely 
because dreams confront us with a seemingly realis­
tic, mind-independent world that they are thought 
to be deceptive (Descartes, 2013). Others, perhaps 
most notably Leibniz (1956), were fascinated by 
the spontaneous character of dreams, but also by 
their vivacity and creativity, which were thought to 
exceed the imaginative abilities of the waking mind. 
But the predominant view is that dreaming is a state 
of cognitive deficiency resulting from a loss of criti­
cal thought and volition, comparable to pathologi­
cal wake states such as hallucinations and delusions 
(Hobson, 1999; see Windt & Noreika, 2011, for 
discussion and further references).
The involuntary and allegedly deceptive charac­
ter of dreaming is closely related to the vividness 
of dream imagery and the intensity of dream emo­
tions. But this also points to a difference between 
dreaming and waking mind-wandering. Dreams are 
immersive in a way that even vivid daydreams are 
not (Fox et al., 2013); while the ongoing flow of 
sensory perception prevents us from getting com­
pletely lost in a daydream, we feel more robustly 
present in our dreams in part because there are less 
competing sensory stimuli, as well as fewer critical 
thoughts that could counteract this feeling of pres­
ence (Windt, 2015a, Chapter 12).
While scientific dream research long suffered 
from the lack of a commonly agreed-upon definition, 
there is now increasing agreement that dreaming is 
a kind of conscious mental simulation (Revonsuo 
Tuominen, & Valli, 2015a, 2015b). According to 
these simulation views, dreaming involves the expe­
rience of being a self in a world. While the details 
differ, this convergence is an important step toward 
a unified theory of dreaming.2 At the same time, 
the description of dreaming as involving world 
simulation is, however, antithetical to the claim that 
dreaming is a kind of spontaneous thought, at least 
where this is understood as a phenomenological 
claim. Because of their immersive character as well 
as their apparent uncontrollability, dreams feel dis­
tinctly unlike waking thoughts. Importantly, to ask 
whether dream ing is a spontaneous thought process is 
different from asking whether spontaneous thoughts 
occur in dreams. The first question, unlike the sec­
ond one, is not about whether in a dream, the 
dream self, or the character with which I identify
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
387

in the dream, experiences spontaneous thoughts, 
or indeed any thoughts at all; it asks whether the 
process of dreaming as such can be meaningfully 
described as a kind of thinking.3 Dreaming involves 
spontaneous mental activity during sleep, but on 
the phenomenological level of description, it is not 
a kind of thinking. Only the thoughts experienced 
by the dream self, within the dream, are thoughts in 
this phenomenological sense.
This move minimizes conceptual ambiguity. As 
noted earlier, there is a long tradition, both in philos­
ophy and in scientific dream research, of describing 
dreaming as a state of cognitive deficiency in which 
conscious thought and self-reflection are either 
completely absent or, if present, are irrational and 
confused, resembling wake-state delusions and con­
fabulation (Hobson, 1999; Hobson, Pace-Schott, 
& Stickgold, 2000; Metzinger, 2004). Roughly, if 
dreaming is itself conceived of as a kind of thinking, 
this leaves little room for conscious thought pro­
cesses occurring within the dream (McGinn, 2009; 
empirical support for this view comes from Fosse, 
Stickgold, & Hobson, 2001, 2004). This view, how­
ever, is likely too restrictive: Even non-lucid dreams 
often involve the phenomenology of thinking 
(Kahan, 2001; Kahn & Hobson, 2005; see Windt, 
2015a, Chapter 9, for discussion and further refer­
ences). By reserving the term conscious thought for 
thoughts experienced within a dream and by the 
dream self, we want to propose that investigating 
the relationship between conscious thought and 
the lower-level, largely imagistic cognitive processes 
that make up the experienced dream world and the 
dream self is a worthwhile project.4
What about spontaneity? As noted earlier, spon­
taneous thought is standardly contrasted with atten­
tion and goal-directedness (Christoff et ah, 2011), 
though this does not exclude the possibility that 
mind-wandering can still be guided by uncon­
scious goals. According to Smallwood and Schooler
(2015), the crucial factor is that in mind-wander­
ing, thought contents are self-generated, mean­
ing that they are determined intrinsically, rather 
than directly cued by sensory input. We have to 
tread carefully here though, because the notion of 
self-generated, conscious mental activity is, again, 
ambiguous. On the strongest reading, we might 
want to say that for a mental state to be self-gen­
erated, it must be experienced as being generated 
by oneself and as actually being under one’s con­
trol. Metzinger (2013, 2015) argues that cognitive 
agency of this sort is exactly what is lost in epi­
sodes of mind-wandering. As he puts it, “during
full-blown episodes of mind-wandering, we are not 
epistemic agents, neither as controllers of attentional 
focus nor as deliberate thinkers of thoughts, and we 
have forgotten about our agentive abilities” (p. 282,
2015). He casts mind-wandering as a subpersonal 
process, akin to breathing: It is not something we, 
as persons, do; it is something that happens to us, 
that we cannot control, and of whose occurrence we 
are typically unaware. It is only after gaining meta- 
cognitive insight into the fact that our minds have 
wandered that we once again acquire the ability for 
self-determined thought and cognitive agency. But 
because this also terminates the episode itself, mind­
wandering cannot be described as a .regenerated or 
.redetermined process.
What we need to describe spontaneous thoughts 
as ^//-generated, then, is a weaker reading of sponta­
neity that encompasses internally generated behav­
iors and not just personal-level mental actions. 
Hanna and Thompson (2003) appear to take this 
kind of view, writing that “subjective experience 
is partially constituted by its being at once under­
determined or uncontrolled by external influences 
(inner plasticity), and also self-determining or self­
controlling (inner purposiveness)” (p. 137). Using 
largely automatic shifts in multi-stable images (such 
as switching back and forth between two interpre­
tations of Wittgensteins duck-rabbit) as an exam­
ple, they explain that the spontaneity of conscious 
experience is “constituted by the fourfold fact that 
the precise, qualitative character of conscious states 
(1) is not determined by anything external to the 
conscious subject; (2) is self-generated; (3) is not 
self-generated by a prior conscious intention; and 
yet (4) can under some conditions be controlled by 
a conscious intention” (p. 147). What they mean 
by self-generated but nonetheless spontaneous 
mental states is consequently more inclusive than 
Metzinger s sense; it encompasses lower-level shifts 
in brain dynamics as well as attempts to deliberately 
bring these about. Spontaneous thought is not nec­
essarily sub-personal, but can even be guided by 
intentions, as long as these intentions themselves 
are formed, as it were, on the fly.
Here, we opt for this weaker type of account, in 
which spontaneity refers to conscious mental events 
that subjectively are experienced as internally caused 
or self-determined, rather than being tightly con­
strained either by ongoing tasks and environmen­
tal stimuli or by pre-existing conscious intentions. 
This notion of spontaneity will be most useful for 
cases that nonetheless have the potential for coming 
under our deliberate control; spontaneous mental
388
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

events are not in fact guided by previous intentions, 
but they could be. Moreover, because spontaneity 
of this type is a phenomenological notion, there is 
no requirement that the experience of spontaneity 
be veridical: even though I experience my thoughts, 
for instance, as unfolding independently of external 
conditions and previous intentions, this impression 
could be false; I might simply fail to be aware of 
what is actually causing the shifts in my ongoing 
experience. Subjective impressions of spontaneity 
can be deceptive.
This distinction between the first-person phe­
nomenological reading of spontaneity and the 
third-person epistemological one is important for 
methodological reasons: For investigating the con­
tents of mind-wandering episodes, but also dreams, 
one has to rely on self-report, and so the participant s 
own judgment will be crucial for identifying spon­
taneous mental processes and distinguishing them 
from those that were experienced as deliberately 
controlled or directly prompted by external sensory 
stimuli. An interesting next step, then, would be to 
investigate the extent to which subjectively sponta­
neous daydreams are in fact closely modulated by 
external sensory cues.
How does this phenomenological conception of 
spontaneity apply to the case of sleep and dream­
ing? On the one hand, the occurrence of sleep and 
dreaming is certainly spontaneous in the sense of 
being internally rather than externally regulated. 
On the other hand, the timing and duration of sleep 
and dreaming are highly ordered processes. Sleep is 
governed by a circadian rhythm, and sleep architec­
ture is made up of cyclically recurring sleep stages. 
The timing of sleep is mostly driven internally and 
to a lesser degree is modulated by external influ­
ences, such as lighting. The timing of sleep can also 
be controlled deliberately, but only to an extent. To 
be sure, I can intend to go to sleep and dream and 
to deliberately stay awake beyond my bedtime. It is 
noteworthy, however, that such attempts to delib­
erately control the onset of sleep can also be dis­
ruptive and may even be one of the factors leading 
to insomnia. As Espie and colleagues (2006) put 
it, “sleep-wake automaticity can be inhibited by 
selectively attending to sleep, by explicitly intend­
ing to sleep, and by introducing effort into the sleep 
engagement process” (p. 217).
Something similar seems to be true for dream­
ing. The sleep-stage correlates of dreaming remain 
controversial and it is now commonly recognized 
that dreams occur in all stages of sleep (Nielsen, 
2000, 2014; Windt et al., 2016). Yet if we focus on
the example of REM-sleep dreams, it is clear that 
the timing and duration of dreaming are again sys­
tematically controlled and intrinsically orchestrated. 
Dream reports increase in length as the duration of 
REM periods increases throughout the night, and 
generally, dream reports from the second half of the 
night are more vivid and emotionally intense, as 
well as longer than reports from the first half of the 
night (Domhoff, 2013; Kramer, 2013). The rhyth­
mic and carefully orchestrated timing of sleep and 
dreaming appears to set them apart from spontane­
ous waking thoughts, which do not seem to adhere 
to any close schedule, either internal or external.5
Do the contents of dreams have a similarly 
ordered nature as the timing and duration of 
dreaming? It is now increasingly clear that the dif­
ferent stages of sleep contribute to different kinds 
of memory consolidation (Diekelmann & Born, 
2010; Stickgold, 2005), even though the exact 
mechanisms underlying the formation of dream 
content remain unclear. In some accounts, the con­
tents of dreams are without specific function or 
meaning, the product of random, brain-stem driven 
activation (Hobson et al., 2000). But there is also 
much evidence that dream content has an ordered 
nature, for instance by being continuous with wak­
ing experiences, thoughts, and concerns (Domhoff,
2013). Research on the so-called dream-lag effect 
suggests that there is a temporal pattern for the 
incorporation of waking memories in dreams, such 
that we are most likely to dream of events experi­
enced the preceding day (“day residue”), but also of 
those experienced 5-7 days before, and less likely 
to dream of events from days 2-4 before (see van 
Rijn et al., 2015, for discussion and further refer­
ences). This effect is specific to REM-sleep dreams. 
Moreover, the memory sources of sleep mentation 
become increasingly remote throughout the night, 
often involving semantically related memories 
from different periods of ones life (such as two pets 
that one had at different times; Stenstrom, Fox, 
Solomonova, & Nielsen, 2012; see also Verdone, 
1965). Currently, however, too little is known about 
the contents of dreams and their relation to waking 
life events to reach any final verdict on this question.
Another relevant distinction is between the con­
tent of dreams and the formal features of dreaming. 
Broadly speaking, content analysis is interested in 
the topics one dreams about and their relation to 
current concerns or real-life experiences (Domhoff,
2013), whereas formal analysis focuses on the types 
of imagery (visual, auditory, etc.) and emotions 
associated with these contents (Hobson, 1988). It
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
389

is noteworthy that the formal features of dreaming 
seem to be much more generic than the contents 
of dreaming, which are harder to predict and more 
idiosyncratic. Movement sensations, for instance, 
are described almost as frequently in the dreams of 
congenital paraplegics as they are in those of healthy 
participants (Voss, Tuin, Schermelleh-Engel, & 
Hobson, 2011). By comparison, the contents of 
dreaming are much harder to predict— and this 
unpredictability is a major challenge to the scien­
tific investigation of dreaming and its contribution, 
if any, to memory consolidation in sleep. Generally, 
the most promising targets for investigating spon­
taneous conscious processes will be those that have 
the highest degree of inter-individual variation, 
have the potential to be deliberately controlled, and 
are the hardest to predict. This is likely the case for 
the content of dreaming, but not for its formal fea­
tures, nor for its timing and duration.
This is why dream lucidity is directly relevant to 
questions concerning the spontaneity of dreaming. 
Dream lucidity is often associated with the ability to 
control the ongoing dream at will. As will become 
clear later, the clearest examples of dream control 
concern the contents rather than the formal fea­
tures of lucid dreams; and often, control is exercised 
in response to spontaneously formed intentions. 
At the same time, the ability of experienced lucid 
dreamers to act upon previously formed intentions 
can turn specific forms of dream content into a sys­
tematically investigable and to an extent predictable 
target for laboratory dream research. We now turn 
to a brief summary of the main research findings on 
dream lucidity.
Lucid Dreaming: A Brief Review of the 
Main Scientific Findings
Lucid dreaming is associated with changes in 
subjective experience and cognitive functioning 
that are atypical for ordinary REM-sleep dreams. 
In its purest form, a lucid dream is accompanied 
by insight into the fact that one is dreaming while 
the dream continues, meaning that the dreamer is 
aware of the fact that what they are now experienc­
ing is virtual, not real. A less conservative yet empir­
ically substantiated definition includes dreams that 
are additionally accompanied by heightened con­
trol and/or dissociative elements (see Voss et al., 
2013; Voss & Hobson, 2015, for discussion and 
further references). Lucid dreams may be entered 
from wakefulness by means of meditative relaxation 
or hypnagogic/hypnopompic states during sleep 
onset (wake-initiated lucid dreams, or WILDs) or
develop spontaneously out of REM sleep (REM- 
initiated lucid dreams, sometimes also referred to 
as dream-initiated LDs, or DILDs; see LaBerge, 
1990). Even though the frequency of lucid dream­
ing can be augmented through autosuggestion and 
training, it has not, so far, been possible to reliably 
predict the timing of a lucid dream, and the success 
rate for different lucid dream induction techniques 
is still comparatively small (Stumbrys, Erlacher, 
Schadlich, & Schredl, 2012).
Especially during childhood and early adoles­
cence, lucid dreams appear to occur spontaneously 
and without previous effort or intent (Schredl et al., 
2012; Voss et al., 2012). In adulthood, REM- 
initiated lucid dreams are much less frequent, and 
in our experience, many participants experience 
this method as more difficult to master successfully. 
Once lucid, adults also find lucidity more difficult 
to maintain. Especially for participants with no pre­
vious lucid dream experience, lucid dreams appear 
to be much easier to initiate from wakefulness, and 
so this method enjoys great popularity. We there­
fore assume that most lucid dream reports posted 
on Internet platforms refer to WILD dreams in 
which the dreamer uses either meditative relaxation 
or hypnagogic/hypnopompic states to enter a lucid 
dream during sleep onset.
With regard to emotion, it is noteworthy that 
many lucid dreams reported on Internet platforms 
and in the lucid dream literature are described as 
positive or even euphoric. By contrast, the major­
ity of lucid dreams investigated in laboratory stud­
ies are emotionally neutral (Voss et al., 2013; Voss 
et al., 2014), suggesting that an effect of lucidity on 
emotions cannot be considered conclusively estab­
lished. According to the participants in our study 
(Voss et al., 2013), lucid dreams occurring in the 
laboratory were generally also shorter and more dif­
ficult to maintain than those experienced at home. 
Further, they were all initiated from REM sleep.
Several different interpretations are available. 
One is that the difference in emotional tone is due 
to an underlying contrast between REM-initiated 
lucid dreams and WILDs. Another is that the sleep­
ing environment influences the emotional tone of 
lucid dreams independently of whether they were 
initiated from wakefulness or from REM sleep. 
A third possible explanation could be that the 
euphoria anecdotally ascribed to lucid dreams actu­
ally sets in after awakening. In this reading, the 
dreamer would experience euphoria about just hav­
ing been able to produce a lucid dream, but these 
positive emotions would not necessarily have been
390
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

present in the dream itself. For subjects awakened 
directly following a REM phase in the laboratory, 
the experimental protocol and the perceived pres­
sure to produce and report a lucid dream may coun­
teract this euphoria. The positive emotional tone of 
lucid dreams would then be an artifact of the sleep­
ing environment and the conditions under which 
the dream is reported. This question has not, to our 
knowledge, been investigated experimentally, but it 
would fit in well with the fact that timed awaken­
ings in the sleep laboratory are generally regarded 
as the gold standard for gathering reliable dream 
reports.6
Scientifically, REM-initiated lucid dreams are 
very appealing because they present a unique oppor­
tunity to study the neuro- and electrophysiological 
correlates of emerging metacognitive awareness and 
executive ego functions (e.g. logical thought, self­
reflection, decision-making, and volition) against 
a background of a steady state (i.e., a relatively 
stable state of arousal). Lucidity is plausibly related 
to a change in self-related processing and (meta-) 
cognitive functioning (Metzinger, 2004; Windt & 
Metzinger, 2007). For lucid dreams emerging from 
non-lucid REM-sleep dreams, it therefore becomes 
possible to contrast the transition between different 
levels of subjective experience and cognitive func­
tioning, as well as their neural correlates. By con­
trast, because WILDs are set against a background 
state that is ambiguous and constantly fluctuating 
between wakefulness and sleep onset, the assign­
ment of subjective (dream report) and objective 
(neuroimaging data, EEG) data represents an even 
greater challenge than for REM-initiated lucid 
dreams. With regard to REM-initiated lucid dreams, 
data from different laboratories have identified sev­
eral typical patterns of brain activation, including 
a frontal REM-atypical increase in lower gamma 
frequency band activity (Voss, Holzmann, Tuin, & 
Hobson, 2009), as well as an augmented activation 
of frontotemporal (Dresler et al., 2012) and fron- 
topolar cortical areas (Filevich, Dresler, Brick, & 
Kuhn, 2015).
History of Lucid Dreaming
Dreams involving metacognitive insight into the 
fact that one is now dreaming have been known 
since antiquity (Aristotle, 1996), but first became a 
target of experimental research in the late nineteenth 
century (Maury, 1861; Saint-Denys, 1982). The 
term lucid dream ing was coined by van Eeden at the 
beginning of the twentieth century. Van Eeden was 
mainly interested in using lucid dreams as a vehicle
for self-experimentation and self-observation, for 
instance for describing the sheer variety of dreams 
and sleep-related conscious experiences (van Eeden, 
1913; see also Arnold-Forster, 1921). The crucial 
step toward the laboratory-based scientific inves­
tigation of lucid dreaming occurred in the 1980s. 
Stephen LaBerge (1985, 1990) in the United States 
and Keith Hearne (1978) in Great Britain intro­
duced a methodological approach enabling an out­
side observer to monitor the progression of lucid 
dreams via voluntary eye movements made by the 
dreamer. By conducting a previously arranged pat­
tern of gaze shifts (for instance, right, left, right, left) 
in their lucid dreams, participants can control their 
actual eye movements; these eye movement patterns 
then show up on electro-oculogram (EOG) record­
ings of eye muscle movements. When participants 
confirm, after awakening, that they indeed were 
lucid and performed the gaze shifts within their 
dream, the foregoing sleep phases can be scored 
as lucid (so-called signal-verified lucid dreams). In 
Germany, it was primarily Paul Tholey (Tholey & 
Utecht, 1987) who focused on the scientific aspects 
of lucid dreams. He introduced the German word 
“Klartraum,” which can be roughly translated as 
“clear dream” and is meant to describe the overall 
clarity of reasoning and of dream imagery in the 
lucid dream state.
These early developments notwithstanding, the 
scientific study of lucid dreaming did not receive 
the recognition it deserved until the early twenty- 
first century. Instead, lucidity was mostly ascribed 
to parapsychology and esotericism, perhaps owing 
to the strong interest it received in these circles (e.g., 
Green, 1968). A long-held belief in the scientific 
community was that lucid dreams were not sleep 
phenomena per se, but instead were somnolent 
experiences arising out of brief arousals (Hartmann, 
1975). This assumption is appealing at first sight 
and may indeed accurately characterize at least a 
subgroup of WILDs. However, at least for REM- 
initiated lucid dreams, this view has been refuted. 
As recent electroencephalograph (EEG) (Voss et al.,
2009) and fMRI studies (Dresler et al., 2012) show, 
these lucid dreams alter REM sleep without sus­
pending the state of sleep. There is now solid sci­
entific evidence for saying that REM-initiated lucid 
dreams are genuine sleep phenomena, rather than 
artifacts of intermittent awakenings from sleep.
Definitions of Lucid Dreaming
Up until now, several definitions of lucid 
dreaming have existed alongside each other. Major
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
391

differences in existing definitions pertain to the level 
of voluntary control and overall cognitive function­
ing, including the availability of waking memory 
and critical reasoning ability. Some authors regard 
insight into the fact that one is now dreaming as 
the sole defining feature (LaBerge, 1985), whereas 
others apply a broader definition of lucid dreams as 
involving full intellectual clarity, including the avail­
ability of autobiographic memory sources, the abil­
ity to actively control the dream, as well as an overall 
increase in the intensity of multimodal hallucina­
tory imagery (Tart, 1988). An important question 
is whether the coexistence of these factors is strictly 
necessary, or if any of these factors is sufficient for 
classifying a dream as lucid even when it occurs in 
isolation from the other factors. Can a dream be 
called lucid only when the dreamer reports having 
exercised dream control, for instance by altering 
the course of the dream? If yes, how much control 
would be needed to do so? And would dream con­
trol be sufficient to score a dream as lucid even if the 
report did not explicitly describe that the dreamer 
was aware that she had been dreaming?
With the help of the Lucidity and Consciousness 
in Dreams scale (LuCiD scale; Voss et al., 2013), 
we attempted to construct a tool that identifies the 
different determinants of consciousness in dreams 
and allows for their measurable quantification. The 
LuCiD scale was developed by an interdisciplin­
ary team of researchers from psychology (Ursula 
Voss and Clemens Frenzel), philosophy (Jennifer 
Windt), statistics (Karin Schermelleh-Engel), and 
psychiatry (Allan Hobson). Its purpose was to put 
theory-based assumptions about dream lucidity to 
the test and establish concrete differences between 
normal REM sleep dreams and lucid dreams. 
Structural factor analysis revealed that unam­
biguous lucid dreams (i.e., those accompanied by 
insight) were also reported to contain control over 
the dream plot as well as dissociative experiences. In 
lucid dreams, dreamers typically also were able to 
voluntarily change objects (control), and they often 
saw themselves from the outside, reminiscent of 
autoscopic phenomena or out-of-body experiences 
(OBEs; see Blanke & Mohr, 2005). Often, partici­
pants reported having experienced the dream as an 
observer rather than actively participating in the 
dream, for instance saying that the dream “played out 
like a movie.” We concluded that the three factors 
that most clearly distinguish lucid dreams (where 
this refers to dreams identified as lucid by our par­
ticipants) from non-lucid ones are (1) insight into 
the fact that one is currently dreaming, (2) control
over the dream plot, and (3) dissociation akin to 
de-personalization and de-realization.7 These three 
factors are correlated, meaning that in the majority 
of lucid dreams, they will occur together.
Still, this is not the same as saying that any or 
all of these factors are strictly necessary for lucidity 
to occur. Statistically speaking, it is possible that a 
dream can be considered as lucid even in the absence 
of insight but, instead, in the presence of only dis­
sociation and control. For now, however, this point 
is primarily of theoretical interest. For methodologi­
cal reasons, we assume that insight is a core factor 
of lucidity, meaning that while explicit insight may 
or may not co-occur with control and dissociation, 
a dream cannot be scored as lucid unless the dream 
report explicitly describes that the dreamer real­
ized, in the dream, that she was now dreaming. This 
assumption is also in line with the fact that in all 
studies conducted thus far, the categorization of a 
dream as lucid was based at least in part on subjects’ 
claims that they had achieved insight in their dream 
(for discussion, see Windt, 2015a, Chapter 4).
Finally, it is important to note that the factors 
of insight, control, and dissociation are themselves 
internally complex and can vary by degree. For 
instance, lucid dreamers may be able to control 
their own actions, but not those of other dream 
characters; or dreamers may know they are dream­
ing but not realize the full consequences of this fact. 
Therefore, we must also ask how much of lucid 
insight, control, and/or dissociative elements suf­
fice to justify the label “lucid,” and one advantage 
of the LuCiD scale is that it allows us to tease apart 
these different factors. Being able to determine the 
quantitative level of different aspects of dream expe­
rience is an important research target because it 
enables not just an empirically informed definition 
of lucid dreaming, but also its measurability and 
predictability (Noreika, Windt, Lenggenhager, & 
Karim, 2010; Voss & Hobson, 2015; Voss & Voss,
2014). It is also a condition for transferring insights 
from the investigation of dream lucidity to clinically 
relevant altered conscious states such as locked-in- 
syndrome or vegetative state (see, for instance, 
Naro, Bramanti, Leo, Russo, & Calabro, 2016).
Brain-Physiologic Correlates of Lucid 
Dreaming
In the tradition of Freud, sleep is often still 
defined as a state of unconsciousness. The question 
of whether dreams are conscious experiences occur­
ring in sleep dominated the philosophical discus­
sion of sleep and dreaming well into the twentieth
392
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

century (Dennett, 1976; Malcolm, 1962). Today, 
most accept that dreams are phenomenal states; 
they have qualitative or subjective character, mean­
ing there is something it is like to dream, and not 
just to remember having dreamed (see Windt, 
2013, for discussion). Moreover, since the discovery 
of REM sleep and its correlation with dreaming in 
the 1950s (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953; Dement 
& Kleitman, 1957), dreams have turned into a tar­
get of scientific investigation. The science of lucid 
dreaming is the next and latest step in this devel­
opment. The investigation of dream lucidity and 
its contrast with non-lucid dreams is particularly 
promising because the method of signal-verified 
lucid dreaming, combined with retrospective dream 
reports, allows researchers not only to determine 
when specific types of dream experience— such as 
performing a gymnastics routine (Erlacher et ah, 
2013) or clenching one’s fist (Dresler et al., 2012)—  
are occurring in real time, but also to time their 
duration and identify their neural correlates.
Our studies on lucid dreams show that con­
sciousness in sleep is also susceptible to experi­
mental manipulation, allowing us to go beyond 
correlation to investigate the causal contribution 
of different brain activation patterns to conscious 
experience in sleep. This shows that changes in the 
level of experience of the type that accompany the 
onset of lucidity can be initiated not only spontane­
ously or with the help of different cognitive meth­
ods such as autosuggestion (Voss et al., 2009), but 
also via electrical stimulation of relevant brain areas 
(Voss et al., 2014). Importantly, this is even the case 
when participants are not themselves experienced 
lucid dreamers and do not use any of the cognitive 
techniques that are typically used to induce lucidity. 
Results on electrophysiology and subjective expe­
rience in lucid and non-lucid dreams suggest that 
lucid dreaming represents an extraordinary state of 
consciousness in which EEG correlates of waking 
coexist with those typical for REM sleep dreaming 
(Voss et al., 2009; Voss et al., 2014).
Figure 29.1 shows that at the cortical level, 
frontal and temporal areas appear to be activated 
to a degree that is atypical of ordinary REM sleep 
(Dresler et al., 2012; Voss et al., 2009), especially in 
the lower gamma frequency band centered around 
40 Hz (Voss et al., 2009). Although much reduced 
from waking, 40 Hz activity over the frontal, dorso­
lateral, and prefrontal cortices is more akin to waking 
than to sleep. As is the case for 40 Hz activity, these 
areas are associated with executive functions such 
as planning, voluntary action, and decision-making
(Baddeley, 1992; Goleman & Davidson, 1979; 
Scott & Schoenberg, 2011; Stuss, 2011).
At the same time, lucid dreaming is accompa­
nied by a clearly REM sleep-like pattern in lower 
frequencies. Figure 29.2 illustrates the similarity 
between ordinary REM-sleep dreams and lucid 
ones, as well the clear distinction of both from wake­
fulness. The frequency-specific activation underly­
ing non-lucid REM-sleep dreams and lucid dreams 
diverges only in the higher frequency bands, begin­
ning around 32 Hz. By contrast, wakefulness (eyes 
closed) is characterized by comparatively reduced 
activity in the lower frequency bands up to about 
6 Hz and a peak in alpha activity between 8 and 12 
Hz. Because we corrected for eye movements, this 
difference between wakefulness and both non-lucid 
REM sleep dreams and lucid dreams cannot be due 
to oculomotor activity. This should not be taken to 
imply that REM sleep is devoid of alpha activity; it 
means only that the pattern of alpha activity differs 
between REM sleep, lucid dreams, and wakefulness.
Finally, aside from the cortical changes observed 
in lucid dreams, recent studies suggest that subcor­
tical structures are involved. Evidence for the par­
ticipation of the cortico-thalamic-limbic network 
comes from patients who have suffered a thalamic 
stroke and subsequently report emotionally disturb­
ing lucid dreams (Sagnier et al., 2015). The authors 
suggest that “this anxious and emotional context 
probably influenced the emergence of lucid dreams 
that could be explained by limbic cortical and sub­
cortical structures” (p. 771). While this report relies 
on data from only two patients, it raises the question 
of whether thalamic processes may typically serve 
to suppress lucid dreams or make their occurrence 
unlikely. The frequency of autoscopic elements in 
lucid dreams additionally suggests an involvement 
of subcortical structures (Kaliuzhna, Vibert, Grivaz, 
& Blanke, 2015). Autoscopy is closely related to 
out-of-body experiences (OBEs). It refers to a broad 
range of visual hallucinations of a bodily image, for 
example seeing a doppelganger or seeing oneself 
as if from the outside, often from an elevated per­
spective (as in OBEs). The autoscopic, visual image 
may be a more or less accurate duplicate of one’s 
real body (Brugger et al., 1997). Although scientific 
reports are scarce, it appears as if at least transient 
dysfunctions in limbic and thalamic structures were 
involved (Brugger et al., 1997; Blanke et al., 2004).
In our study, the coexistence of apparently con­
trary activation patterns initially led to the char­
acterization of lucidity as involving a hybrid state 
between sleep and wakefulness (Hobson & Voss,
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
393

Figure 29.1. (See Color Insert) Standardized current source density power (CSD) in a waking participant with eyes closed (top), 
during a lucid dream (middle), and during ordinary REM sleep (bottom). Topographical images are based on movement-free EEG 
episodes and were corrected for eye movements. WEC refers to waking with eyes closed. Darker color corresponds to higher 40 Hz 
activity. For a full color picture, see Voss et al., 2009. Source: Voss et al. (2009).
2010, 2011). A different interpretation that we now 
favor is that lucidity involves a change in ordinary 
REM sleep, but without thereby causing awakening 
(Czisch et al., 2014; Voss & Hobson, 2015; Voss 
& Voss, 2014). Here, we want to propose that this 
change is best characterized by describing lucidity 
as arising during a distinct substage of REM sleep.
Introducing the distinction between lucid and 
non-lucid REM sleep makes room for describing 
lucid dreaming as a genuine sleep phenomenon, 
but may also help refine sleep-stage scoring. The 
terminology for describing different sleep stages 
is conventional, and scoring rules are occasionally 
adjusted to optimally reflect new scientific findings 
(for a discussion from a philosophical perspective,
see Thompson, 2014, 2015a, 2015b; Windt, 
2015a, b; Windt et al., 2016). The current rules for 
scoring non-REM (NREM) sleep were proposed by 
the American Academy of Sleep Medicine in 2004; 
they revised the rules proposed by Rechtschaffen 
and Kales in 1968 (see Silber et al., 2007, for discus­
sion and further references). Different taxonomies 
for describing and scoring sleep stages can also coex­
ist. For instance, within the period stretching from 
wakefulness via NREM 1 into early NREM 2, 9 
EEG substages can be distinguished, and they bear 
a complex relationship to different types of mental 
activity and subjective judgments of sleep or wake­
fulness (Stenstrom et al., 2012; for a discussion of 
so-called microdreams, or dream-like experiences
3 9 4
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

Figure 29.2. (See Color Insert) EEG Power (POT = scalp 
potential) in the analyzed frequencies from 1 to 48 Hz, averaged 
over three lucid dreams and for all electrode recording sites, 
corrected for eye movements (Gratton et al. 1983). Dotted 
line: Waking, eyes closed (WEC), lying down. Black line: lucid 
dream sleep. Broken line: non-lucid REM sleep. Source: Voss 
et al. (2009).
occurring during sleep onset, see also Nielsen,
2017). In order to determine the neural correlates 
of mental activity during sleep, more fine-grained 
sleep-stage scoring of this type may be required. 
What we are proposing here is a similar refinement 
of the taxonomy for describing REM sleep. In the 
future, the distinction between lucid and non-lucid 
REM sleep might lead to distinct scoring criteria. 
And perhaps, with time, even more fine-grained 
categories and scoring criteria can be introduced, 
describing differences between REM sleep involv­
ing dreams and occasionally dreamless REM sleep, 
or even different types of dreams arising in REM 
sleep. In this process, the distinction between lucid 
and non-lucid REM sleep is a first, but important, 
step. The characterization of lucid dreams as arising 
during an altered stage of REM sleep rather than 
a hybrid state between sleep and wakefulness also 
reflects the fact that subjectively, dream lucidity is 
clearly not a wake-state phenomenon. The follow­
ing reports following stimulation during REM sleep 
(for details, see next section) show this clearly:
Example 1: “I saw myself lying there. I was some­
how . . .  I looked wounded. I was telling someone 
about this while I was lying there, and then I saw 
myself crying, but not in the dream, and now there 
were only the other people there and I told them 
how this happened. And that’s when I seem to have 
noticed that I was dreaming, in the dream.”8
Example 2\ “I was sitting at my computer with my 
grandfather and I was explaining something to him 
and then I suddenly thought, ‘whoops, am I dream­
ing? If so, I could just get up and walk around,’ and 
so that’s what I did. I walked around for about 20 
seconds. I didn’t do anything else. The floor was 
colored, like a mosaic. I walked through the house, 
went outside, and then I noticed that all of the floors 
were somehow paved with mosaic stones.”
The bizarreness and incoherence of these reports 
illustrate, we think, the degree to which lucidity 
(and its precursors) involves a change in ordinary 
REM sleep, but without thereby causing awaken­
ing. The investigation of the transition between 
non-lucid and lucid dreaming can thus help deter­
mine the extent to which levels of awareness that 
have traditionally been assumed to be restricted to 
wakefulness are in fact compatible with sleep, but 
also highlights the inherently dreamlike character 
of lucid dreams, which is so prominent in both of 
these reports. The compatibility of insight and oth­
erwise dreamlike conscious thought, in particular, is 
important from an empirical perspective, but also 
challenges the commonly accepted taxonomy of 
mental states by blurring the conceptual distinction 
between sleep and wakefulness.
Induction of Lucid Dreams Through 
Frontotemporal Low Current Electrical 
Stimulation at 40 Hz
An important question that is associated with 
investigating the neural correlates of lucidity is how 
to increase the frequency of lucid dreams, especially 
under the systematic and controlled conditions of 
the sleep laboratory. A related question concerns 
the causally enabling conditions for lucidity to arise. 
After numerous failed attempts to induce lucidity 
with the help of light or acoustic signals (which had 
low success rates at best; see Stumbrys et al., 2012), 
we were able to use electrical stimulation at 40 Hz 
during REM sleep to induce changes in experience 
of the type normally associated with spontaneous 
lucid dreaming— almost as if stimulation were 
pushing initially non-lucid dreams in the direction 
of lucidity (Voss et al., 2014). We used the method 
of transcranial alternating current stimulation 
(tACS). In line with evidence from spontaneous 
lucid dreams, we stimulated bilaterally over fronto­
temporal brain areas at several low frequencies (see 
gray rectangles in Figure 29.3 A and B). The electric 
current had been determined based on pilot studies 
so as to minimize the likelihood of awakening dur­
ing stimulation (250 pA). We also applied a local
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
3 9 5

analgesic to the stimulated patches of skin. As noted 
earlier, all of our participants reported having no 
prior experience with lucid dreams.
In this comprehensive double-blind study, we 
tested six different conditions, including repeated 
measurement (stimulation at 2 Hz, 6 Hz, 12 Hz, 
70 Hz, 100 Hz, contrasted with pseudostimula- 
tion/sham). Our participants spent up to four non- 
consecutive nights in the laboratory; stimulation 
was conducted during REM sleep, with the first 
stimulation beginning after 3 a.m. The duration of 
stimulation was 30 seconds and participants were
Effect of tACSon EEG gamma power
awakened immediately afterward. With the help of 
specific algorithms (Voss et al., 2014), we filtered the 
stimulation signal out of the EEG data in order to 
ensure that stimulation had not led to an interrup­
tion of REM sleep. During each experimental night 
we alternated between two conditions (e.g., between 
2 Hz and 40 Hz or between 12 Hz and 70 Hz, with 
a balanced design for participants and nights).
The only stimulation frequencies to induce 
changes in the lower gamma band were 25 Hz and 
40 Hz. Figure 29.3 illustrates the effect of stimula­
tion at 6 Hz (no change in the theta frequency band
Figure 29.3. (See Color Insert) Effect of transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) on EEG gamma power (37-43 Hz). 
tACS electrodes were placed bilaterally at frontal and temporal positions (black rectangles) and current was flowing back and forth 
between these electrodes. EEG electrode placements are indicated as dark dots. (A) Stimulation with 6 Hz resulted in no change in 
lower gamma activity around 40 Hz (37-43 Hz). (B) Stimulation with 40 Hz led to a strong increase in lower gamma activity around 
40 Hz. (C) Grand average Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) power ratios of activity during versus activity prior to stimulation for the 
6-Hz stimulation condition. Gray shading represents mean values ± 2 standard errors (s.e.). Any excursions outside of this range 
would be considered significant at least at the p < .05 level. However, with 6 Hz, we see no significant stimulation-induced increase 
in 6 Hz activity. (D) Grand average FFT power ratios of activity during versus activity prior to stimulation for the 40-Hz stimulation 
condition. Gray shading represents mean values ± 2 standard errors (s.e.). Note that lucid dreams (gray line) are accompanied by a 
significantly larger increase in the 40 Hz frequency band than non-lucid dreams (black line) (independent two-sided t tests between 
lucid and non-lucid dreams during stimulation with 40 Hz: t40H;£ = 5.01, df = 35,p < 0.001). Source: Voss & Hobson (2015).
396
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

or any other frequency) and 40 Hz (strong increase 
in the lower gamma frequency band). Importantly, 
even 40 Hz stimulation did not always lead to sub­
jective reports of lucidity. When participants did 
report a lucid dream after awakening, however, 
activity in the lower gamma frequency band was 
clearly elevated. This leads us to assume that, on the 
one hand, activity in the lower gamma band is nec­
essary (but not sufficient) to induce lucidity, and on 
the other hand, that dream lucidity further increases 
activity in this frequency band.
Difficulties and Limitations
As mentioned earlier, the frequency of spontane­
ous REM-initiated lucid dreams is very low in adults 
(Voss et al., 2009; Voss et al., 2013), and somewhat 
paradoxically, being asked to produce a lucid dream 
in a sleep laboratory may further reduce the like­
lihood of success. The following examples from 
trained lucid dreamers illustrate this point:
Example 3: “It is not easy to become lucid in a 
dream or to stay lucid. Lucidity is fragile and basi­
cally, it is always about keeping the right balance 
between control and looseness.” (27-year-old female)
Example 4: “For me, a lucid dream is always an 
exceptionally exciting experience. . . . This condi­
tion feels like a brain battle between maintaining 
the dream scenery and waking up. In these short 
periods of clarity the acting dream body and the 
real body that lies in bed exist simultaneously and it 
costs great effort and concentration to keep up the 
balance between the two.” (22-year-old female)
The possibility of inducing lucid dreams through 
electrical stimulation of the brain constitutes a new 
and promising method to increase the frequency of 
lucidity under laboratory conditions. However, this 
method is quite demanding, and at this point, we 
must consider it possible that electrically induced 
lucid dreams differ from spontaneous ones. Dodet 
et al. (2014) have observed that narcolepsy patients 
often report lucid dreams and propose to use these 
patients as subjects and thereby bypass the recruit­
ment problem that hampers many lucid dream 
studies. Here, too, the question is how similar the 
lucid dreams of narcolepsy patients are to those 
occurring independently of sleep disturbances.
Another important question refers to causality. 
We found that lucidity can be triggered through 
the external application of a 40 Hz current, but also 
that stimulation with 40 Hz does not always lead 
to a measurable lucid dream. Our induction study 
was very elaborate, and we tested a large number
of subjects across several nights. Yet while the effect 
was statistically significant, the average question­
naire scores suggest that we achieved only small 
changes in absolute terms. Also, while stimulation 
with 40 Hz led to an increase in lower gamma band 
activity, this increase was much greater when it 
was accompanied by a lucid dream. It is thus pos­
sible that the 40 Hz activity we managed to induce 
experimentally was insufficient to initiate lucidity. 
This once more raises the question of the predict­
ability and scoring of lucid dreams. Under what 
conditions is it justified to score a period of REM 
sleep as lucid when the frontal lobe is activated in 
the 40 Hz frequency band? How long and how 
intense must frontal 40 Hz activity be to lead to 
a remembered lucid dream? In light of our earlier 
suggestion of introducing lucid REM sleep as a sub­
stage of REM sleep, it will be imperative to eventu­
ally answer these questions, and we hope that future 
studies will help make progress toward doing so.
Insight, Control, and Spontaneous 
Cognitive Processing in Lucid Dreams
Based on our review of some of the main scien­
tific findings on dream lucidity, we can now return 
to our original question: What role does spontane­
ous cognitive processing play in lucid dreams? Are 
lucid dreams, like non-lucid ones, still paradigmatic 
cases of mind-wandering? Or does realizing that 
one is dreaming, coupled with the ability to control 
the dream, effect such a radical change in overall 
processing that the analogy with wake-state mind­
wandering is broken? We can begin to tackle these 
questions by asking about the extent and limits of 
lucid dream control. As noted earlier, this also will 
help identify those aspects of dreaming that are most 
interesting for the investigation of spontaneous cog­
nitive processes.
While the extent to which skilled lucid dreamers 
can control not just their own actions but also effect 
changes in the dream environment is impressive, it 
seems that even in systematically performed lucid 
dream experiments involving signal-verified lucid 
dreams in the laboratory, there is still much room 
for spontaneity and surprise. To begin with, the 
success rate for actually carrying out one’s waking 
intentions in a lucid dream is comparatively small. 
According to one study, lucid dreamers remem­
bered their waking intentions, for instance to per­
form a particular dream experiment, only about 
half the time, and less than half of these remem­
bered intentions were successfully carried out in 
dreams (Stumbrys, Erlacher, Johnson, & Schredl,
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
397

2014). This suggests that while the contents of lucid 
dreams can in principle be brought under deliberate 
control, they mostly unfold spontaneously, rather 
than according to waking intentions.
This appears to be reflected in the subjective 
experience of dream lucidity. Dresler and col­
leagues (2013) asked experienced lucid dream­
ers to assess the level of volition in lucid dreams, 
non-lucid dreams, and wakefulness. They found 
that self-determination, or the ability to act freely 
according to ones will, obtained higher ratings for 
lucid dreams and wakefulness than for non-lucid 
dreams. Planning ability received high ratings for 
wakefulness but low ones for lucid and non-lucid 
dreams, and intention enactment, or assessing how 
promptly intentions are executed, was highest in 
lucid dreams and lower but comparable in wakeful­
ness and non-lucid dreaming. This seems to sug­
gest that lucid dreamers are aware of their ability to 
control their dreams independently of real-world 
constraints, but mostly enact spontaneous inten­
tions rather than ones formed in wakefulness. In 
fact, they may even have the experience that their 
ability to act upon long-standing, waking inten­
tions is diminished in lucid dreams as compared 
to wakefulness.
A slightly stronger point would be that the associ­
ation between lucid dream control and spontaneous 
cognitive processes is not just statistically frequent, 
but systematic. Experienced lucid dreamers often 
say that lucid dreaming involves a kind of balanc­
ing act between active participation and critical, 
reflective distance (LaBerge, 1985, pp. 104-108; 
see also Examples 3 and 4, earlier in this chapter). 
The deliberate suspension of disbelief may even be 
used to facilitate dream control; for instance, treat­
ing dream characters as if they were real may help 
“fill in” the overall situation and stabilize the dream 
by making it feel more real (Schatzman et al., 1988, 
pp. 171-172). Even when lucid dreamers success­
fully act upon their waking intentions, the result 
is often not exactly what they were expecting. The 
following example shows that even high levels of 
insight and control are compatible with spontane­
ous, subjectively unexpected, and surprising dream 
contents:
Example 5: “I am on a large, cobbled square in a 
fantastically beautiful port city that reminds me of 
some of the locations from Hayo Mizayaki’s Howl's 
M oving Castle. Sky and water are shining in a bright 
azure, so that the horizon is barely visible; there is 
not a single cloud in sight. ‘Too bad that this isn’t 
a lucid dream,’ I think, but then in the very next
moment I hear myself say, internally: ‘Well, then 
just turn it into one!’
At that same moment, I become lucid and my 
visual field expands rapidly. Everything looks much 
clearer and more sharply defined. I am immediately 
aware that I am now able to do anything imagin­
able, no matter how absurd or surreal, and I feel 
immense euphoria. I pull a silver hand mirror out 
of a pants pocket that is comparatively much too 
small and check my eye movements. Left, right, left, 
right. My reflection in the dream mirror does not 
quite correspond to my waking one, but I recognize 
myself nonetheless.
I place the mirror back in my pocket and use 
both feet to push away from the ground. Flying has 
always been my first intention when I became lucid. 
I circle above the peer for a few rounds, together 
with the seagulls, my hair blowing in the soft ocean 
breeze. An indescribable sense of freedom. If I now 
really have the opportunity to do anything I like, 
I should seize it, I think. I decide to look for Albert 
Einstein. I continue to fly, hoping to see him from 
above, but then realize that this is an inefficient 
method and decide to land. I have another idea.
Resolutely, I walk towards the next-best hot- 
dog cart, traditionally painted with red and white 
stripes. The friendly vendor is about to start prais­
ing his hotdogs, but I am faster and wipe over his 
face with my right hand. Again, left, right, left, 
right. And as his red-cheeked, moon-shaped face 
pales with every wipe, the famous features of Albert 
Einstein slowly take its place; in black and white.9 
My plan has worked.
I introduce myself and ask if he can explain the 
world formula to me. Out of nowhere, a piece of 
paper appears in his right hand and a pen in his left. 
It’s really simple, he explains, and begins to write red 
numbers on the piece of paper. He starts with 532 and 
subtracts another number, then divides by another 
one. I don’t completely follow the point of this cal­
culation; to the contrary, it seems to be completely 
arbitrary. But against my expectations, he continues 
to perform simple calculations with relatively small 
numbers. Not a single Greek letter appears.
When the whole page has been filled with writ­
ing, I wake up. I can’t remember the result of the 
calculation but it wasn’t 42.” (23-year-old-female, 
mathematics student)
As this report was taken from a home diary, we 
have no way of knowing which sleep stage the dream 
occurred in, whether this was a WILD or a REM- 
initiated lucid dream, and whether it was reported 
immediately upon awakening. Judging from the
398
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

wording, it does seem heavily edited. But if we take 
the report at face value, then it nicely illustrates 
that even successful dream control is the result of 
interacting with the dream environment: control 
is a matter of modulating the dream as it unfolds, 
rather than forcing it in another direction entirely. 
Control and insight are also compatible with the 
subjective sense of spontaneity. For the same reason, 
some level of dream control is important to coun­
teract the loss of lucidity itself; if one engages too 
fully with the dream, one too easily forgets that it is 
just, after all, a dream (Brooks & Vogelsong, 1999).
The sense of effort involved in the maintenance 
of dream lucidity is nicely complemented by the 
importance of dissociative phenomena and dere­
alization, which, as mentioned earlier, are hall­
marks of lucidity. Control may also precede lucid 
insight, with dreamers carrying out their waking 
intentions, for instance to conduct a specific dream 
experiment, w ithout having explicitly realized that 
they are now dreaming. Sometimes, this type of 
lucid dream behavior then leads to the cognitive 
realization that this is actually a dream (Brooks 
& Vogelsong, 2000). This complex relationship 
between the different factors characterizing fully 
lucid dreams means that lucid dreams are a rich 
opportunity for investigating the interplay between 
deliberate control and lower-level, automatic cog­
nitive processes of the type underlying the process 
of dream formation. This is true not only theo­
retically and scientifically, but also subjectively. As 
illustrated by the following report by Frederik van 
Eeden, lucid control dreams are an opportunity for 
introspectively observing the interplay of these fac­
tors as the dream unfolds— and we suspect that the 
element of surprise accounts for a large part of the 
fascination with lucid dreaming:10
Example 6: “On Sept. 9, 1904, I dreamt that 
I stood at a table before a window. On the table 
were different objects. I was perfectly well aware 
that I was dreaming and I considered what sorts 
of experiments I could make. I began by trying 
to break glass, by beating it with a stone. I put a 
small tablet of glass on two stones and struck it with 
another stone. Yet it would not break. Then I took a 
fine claret-glass from the table and struck it with my 
fist, with all my might, at the same time reflecting 
how dangerous it would be to do this in waking life; 
yet the glass remained whole. But lo! when I looked 
at it again after some time, it was broken.
It broke all right, but a little too late, like an 
actor who misses his cue. This gave me a very curi­
ous impression of being in a fake-world, cleverly
imitated, but with small failures. I took the broken 
glass and threw it out of the window, in order to 
observe whether I could hear the tinkling. I heard 
the noise all right and I even saw two dogs run away 
from it quite naturally. I thought what a good imita­
tion this comedy-world was. Then I saw a decanter 
with claret and tasted it, and noted with perfect 
clearness of mind: ‘Well, we can also have voluntary 
impressions of taste in this dream-world; this has 
quite the taste of wine.’ ” (van Eeden, 1913)
The spontaneous and often surprising aspects 
of lucid dreaming also facilitate the types of naive- 
realistic beliefs in the reality of dream events that 
are normally thought to characterize only non-lucid 
dreams. So-called lucidity lapses, or instances in 
which lucid dreamers fail to realize the full conse­
quences of the fact that they are now dreaming, can 
be fairly localized and often seem to reflect some 
of our most deeply ingrained beliefs and expecta­
tions. Often, they arise with respect to events that 
would be dangerous in waking life (such as cutting 
oneself with a knife or jumping off a cliff), and 
they also often have a social component, such as 
feeling embarrassed, being convinced that another 
dream character is a real person, or even thinking 
that one is sharing the dream with someone else 
(Green & McCreery, 1994, pp. 28-29; Levitan,
1994). Some lucidity lapses appear to involve 
spontaneous thought in the narrow, phenomeno­
logical sense of experiencing oneself as a thinker of 
thoughts introduced in the first section of this chap­
ter. To the extent that these spontaneous thoughts 
are prompted by the experiential character of the 
dream (e.g., the seemingly realistic behavior of 
other dream characters), these are examples of how 
spontaneous, conscious thought can be shaped by 
lower-level imagistic cognition.
Do lucidity lapses mean that thinking even in 
lucid dreams is marked by the same cognitive defi­
ciencies as in non-lucid dreams and should be set 
apart from waking thought? Not necessarily. It 
is noteworthy that in virtual reality experiments, 
social interactions and potentially threatening situa­
tions, such as walking to the edge of a cliff, enhance 
the subjective feeling of presence (Sanchez-Vives & 
Slater, 2005; Slater, 2009). Social interactions, in 
particular, seem to be even more important for gen­
erating the illusion of presence in virtual environ­
ments than perceptual realism (Slater, 2009)— and 
again, note that this is true for healthy participants 
who are awake and fully aware that what they are 
experiencing is just a high-tech simulation, not real­
ity. For instance, participants with a fear of speaking
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
399

in public feel similarly nervous when asked to speak 
in front of a group of virtual characters (Sanchez- 
Vives & Slater, 2005). This suggests that in both 
sleep and wakefulness, insight is compatible with 
the subjective feeling of presence, and often with 
behavioral and emotional reactions that would be 
appropriate if the events in question were occur­
ring in the real world, and not just in a virtual or 
dreamed one. So-called lucidity lapses therefore 
do not appear to be unique to lucid dreams or to 
be confined to sleep. This leads to an interesting 
conceptual point: Whereas the occurrence of lucid 
insight in sleep puts pressure on attempts to cast 
metacognitive awareness, insight, and critical self­
reflection as strictly “wake-like” forms of thinking, 
the similarity between lucidity lapses and reactions 
prompted by virtual environments in healthy, wak­
ing participants raises doubts about the alleged defi­
ciency underlying “dreamlike” conscious thought. 
To be clear, we are not denying that such differences 
between thinking in dreams and in wakefulness 
exist— we are just suggesting that they are less clear- 
cut than is often assumed.
Lucidity lapses are also interesting because they 
may indicate which types of dream content fit our 
phenomenological notion of spontaneous cogni­
tive processing. Again, social interactions between 
the dream self and other dream characters in lucid 
dreams are a nice example. The status of dream 
characters that are experienced as distinct from the 
self has long been a source of fascination. Social 
imagery plays an important role in dreams, with 
social interactions being even more frequent in 
dreams than in waking life (McNamara, McLaren, 
Smith, Brown, & Stickgold 2005). Non-self dream 
characters are rarely bizarre and are typically experi­
enced as highly realistic. They are also often experi­
enced as having a mind of their own, and dreamers 
frequently ascribe thoughts, feelings, and inten­
tions to other dream characters (Kahn & Hobson, 
2005b). Recently, the wealth of social imagery in 
dreams has even been suggested to shed light on 
the evolutionary function of dreaming (Revonsuo 
et al., 2015a). Social interactions in lucid dreams 
might thus be particularly interesting for investigat­
ing the interplay between spontaneous contents and 
deliberate control. A prediction would be that the 
ability to control the actions of a non-self dream 
character should be inversely related to the degree 
of experienced spontaneity and perhaps realism. If 
another dream character’s actions can be controlled, 
we would expect this character to be experienced as 
not quite distinct from the self, whereas experienced
difficulties in controlling a non-self dream character 
might prompt lucidity lapses, such as believing that 
the dream character is actually a real person.
This prediction appears to be supported by exist­
ing studies of social interaction in lucid dreams. 
Stumbrys et al. (2011) investigated the abilities 
of dream characters to solve simple mathemati­
cal problems in lucid dreams. Overall, the dream 
characters performed quite poorly and their answers 
were comparable to those of primary school stu­
dents. For present purposes, however, how the 
dream characters reacted to these questions is more 
interesting. One dream report described that when 
asked to calculate 18 minus 6, the dream character 
refused, complaining that the question was much 
too private— a response that the dreamer found 
both baffling and inspiring. Two other reports 
described that dream characters, when confronted 
with mathematical problems, ran away or even 
started to cry. Other times, the dream characters 
came up with the correct answers, even though the 
dreamer had anticipated a false one. In these cases, 
the answers given by non-self dream characters were 
not directly accessible to the dreamers— they were 
experienced as surprising and as distinct from their 
own thought processes.
In another online experiment, Schmidt et al. 
(2014) instructed lucid dreamers to ask another 
dream character to guess how many fingers they 
were holding up behind their backs, or, in reverse, 
to themselves attempt to guess how many fingers 
other dream characters were holding up behind 
their backs. Generally, the success rate was higher 
than one would expect in waking participants 
engaging in real social interactions, indicating, not 
very surprisingly, that non-self dream characters are 
incompletely differentiated from the dream self. But 
the most important factor predicting the outcome 
of the dream experiment were the dreamers’ own 
expectations before the experiment. If dreamers 
thought they would be able to “guess” the number 
of fingers other dream characters were holding up 
behind their backs, they were much more likely to 
be able to do so than if they expected this to be dif­
ficult. Even subjectively surprising dream contents 
may thus be biased by the dreamer’s own uncon­
scious expectations.
Windt et al. (2014) attempted to investigate the 
relationship between control and non-self dream 
characters in lucid dreams in a slightly different 
manner. Our question was whether it would be 
possible, in a lucid control dream, to tickle oneself 
or to be tickled by another dream character. This
400
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

is interesting because in wakefulness, it is impos­
sible to tickle oneself. Put simply, the sensory 
outcome of self-initiated actions is expected, and 
so it is attenuated, preventing self-induced tickles 
from feeling ticklish. There are, however, excep­
tions: schizophrenic subjects are able to tickle them­
selves (Blakemore, Wolpert, & Frith, 2000), as are 
healthy participants who have just been awakened 
from REM sleep and say they have been dreaming 
(Blagrove, Blakemore, & Thayer, 2006). In both 
cases, the lack of attenuation for the sensory con­
sequences of self-initiated actions is likely due to 
disturbances in agency and self-other distinctions. 
In our study, we found that at least in the context of 
lucid control dreams, the distinction between tick­
ling oneself and being tickled by another dream char­
acter was obliterated. This makes sense: Directing 
the actions of another dream character involves a 
sophisticated form of dream control, and often, 
the participants in this online study reported that 
they did not succeed. Yet when they did, the tickles 
administered by other dream characters tended to 
not feel very ticklish— they felt more like tickling 
oneself, both in lucid dreams and in wakefulness. 
Control, expectation, and experienced self-other 
distinctions are closely linked, and this relationship 
appears to be reflected on the level of phenomenal 
experience in lucid control dreams as well.
Expectation can also blur the distinction between 
lucid dream control and standard, non-lucid dream­
ing in another way. This is connected to the narrative 
structure of dreams. Many authors have remarked 
on the tendency of dreams to fluidly respond to 
dreamers’ thoughts and concerns— sometimes even 
in a way that appears to preempt explicit insight 
into the fact that they are now dreaming. Some have 
thought that this means dreams are the product of 
unconscious authorship (McGinn, 2009); others 
have emphasized the similarity between dreaming 
and confabulation (Hobson, 1999). We want to 
suggest a more neutral reading, in which there is no 
sharp distinction or strict cutoff line between the 
lower-level imagistic processes underlying dream 
formation and higher-level, conceptually mediated 
insight and control, as in lucid dreams. These are 
simply different expressions of the same underlying 
process, though at different levels. As Pace-Schott 
puts it, “dream hallucinosis itself may generate low- 
level narrative coherence by associative processes in 
which images evoke related images . . . that are suc­
cessfully woven together by this putative tendency 
to organize experience as a story” (2013, p. 2). 
This does not happen deliberately, but seemingly
automatically— and while the factors determin­
ing the success of attempts to induce lucid con­
trol dreams are unknown, this might be why, as 
remarked earlier, suspending disbelief and “going 
with the flow” is often an effective way of indirectly 
exercising lucid dream control. Put differently, con­
trol in the context of lucid dreams may just be the 
special case in which expectations are deliberately 
used to nudge the largely spontaneous process of 
dream formation in the desired direction. Successful 
dream control may thus result when conscious and 
explicit intentions are temporarily aligned with 
the non-conscious processes and implicit expecta­
tions that drive the largely spontaneous process of 
dream formation. This comparatively tighter cou­
pling between conscious thought and the ongoing 
flow of dream events would explain why the balance 
between critical distance and active participation in 
lucid dreams is so hard to maintain, but also why 
dream thinking is easily captured or even corrupted 
(Windt, 2015a) by dream imagery, resulting in 
lucidity lapses. For the same reason, this close con­
nection between expectation and dream imagery 
production can also prevent explicit lucid insight. 
Take the following example:
Example 7: “I noticed that immediately in front 
of me, a house appeared to be standing on its head, 
and concluded that I must be dreaming. But then 
I noticed that I was wearing glasses, and immedi­
ately thought that the reversed visual effect must be 
caused by the glasses. In order to ascertain whether 
this was the case, I removed the glasses, whereupon 
I saw the house in its correct position. This led me to 
falsely conclude that I was awake after all.” (Tholey 
& Utecht, 1987, p. 88; translation by J. W.)
What about the occurrence of lucidity itself? 
To what extent should we regard lucid insight into 
the fact that one is now dreaming as a spontaneous 
thought process, and to what extent is this insight 
itself controllable? To begin with, while lucid 
dreaming is a learnable skill, it is difficult to master, 
and perhaps increasingly so in adulthood. As men­
tioned earlier, the comparatively high frequency 
of lucidity in childhood and adolescence may be 
related to brain maturation, especially as the peak 
frequency in lucid dreaming coincides with the final 
stages of frontal lobe myelination and at a time of 
synapse expansion and dendritic growth. As Voss 
and Hobson (2014) point out, these natural pro­
cesses might facilitate the activation of frontal areas 
in REM sleep in adolescence and thus lead to dream 
lucidity. In addition, adolescence is associated
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
401

with changes in the timing of sleep and a matura­
tion of circadian processes. Adolescents require as 
much sleep as pre-adolescents, but their sleep pat­
terns undergo a phase-delay, leading adolescents to 
stay up later and, in association with early school 
times, to experience an increase in daytime sleepi­
ness (Wolfson & Carskadon, 2003). This might 
be another factor that facilitates the occurrence of 
lucidity in adolescent sleep— especially as lucidity 
tends to occur in the second half of the night and 
especially toward morning or during morning naps 
(LaBerge, Phillips, & Levitan, 1994) and in our 
experience is more easily initiated from wakefulness 
than from within the dream state (but see Stumbrys 
et al., 2012). The association between spontaneous 
lucidity and shifts in circadian rhythms also fits 
well with our earlier observation of lucidity being 
a transitional state between sleep and wakefulness, 
as well as with anecdotal reports describing lucid­
ity as a balancing act between non-lucid dreaming 
and awakening. In this reading, lucidity, at least 
when occurring in adolescence, can be described as 
a spontaneous glitch, a byproduct of brain matu­
ration and associated shifts in circadian processes 
underlying the timing of sleep.
A related point is that the timing and duration 
of lucid dreams are largely dependent on the occur­
rence and duration of REM phases. Lucid dreams 
can be voluntarily terminated: Because of the cor­
respondence between real-eye and dream-eye move­
ments, lucid dreamers can wake themselves up by 
fixing their gaze on something and thus interrupt­
ing the rapid eye movements (LaBerge, 1985). But 
lucid dreams cannot be prolonged indefinitely, and 
while lucid dreams occurring at home may be longer 
and more easily maintained, the majority of lucid 
dreams occurring in the laboratory are very short, 
lasting around two minutes (Voss et al., 2013).
Tellingly, even experienced lucid dreamers seem 
unable to suppress visual imagery for prolonged 
periods, or at least not without waking themselves 
up. At the same time, other types of imagery that 
are normally rare in dreams (for instance, smell 
or taste) can, apparently, be induced successfully 
(Worsley, 1988; see also Example 6). Visual imagery, 
however, may be so central to the process of dream 
generation that its suppression leads to a disruption 
of REM sleep. All of this suggests that lucidity is, 
for the most part, a spontaneously occurring cogni­
tive process: The contents of lucid dreams can, to 
an extent, be deliberately controlled, lucid dreams 
can often be terminated at will (though it would 
seem that more often, they end spontaneously),
and induction techniques can facilitate the onset of 
lucidity. But voluntary control involved in initiat­
ing and maintaining lucidity often fails and might 
exert a mostly modulatory influence.
An important question in this context is whether 
the core feature of lucidity, namely the cognitive 
realization that one is now dreaming, is itself the 
outcome of a process of deliberate reasoning or 
occurs spontaneously, as a form of intuitive insight, 
rather than as an intellectual achievement. Here, it 
would seem that both variants exist— sometimes, 
lucid dreamers engage in a complex line of reason­
ing to conclude that they are now dreaming, whereas 
other times, the insight that they are dreaming seem­
ingly comes out of nowhere; dreamers ju st know that 
this is a dream (see, for instance, Examples 1 and 2). 
We might say that in these cases, lucid insight results 
from a spontaneously occurring metacognitive feel­
ing (Dokic, 2012), rather than from an explicit and 
deliberate attempt at cognitive evaluation. This feel­
ing— , for instance an impression that everything 
has taken on a dreamlike character,— then acts as a 
precursor to the explicit and conceptually mediated 
thought that this is a dream. According to one study, 
the onset of lucidity was associated with a “dreamlike 
sense” in 48%-67% of cases (Gackenbach, 1988, 
p. 193), whereas the recognition of an incongru- 
ent element triggered lucidity in only 11%—19%. 
The situation is further complicated by the fact that 
experienced lucid dreamers may recognize the dream 
state by sheer familiarity; they may  ju st know they are 
dreaming without ever conceptualizing or explicitly 
thinking about this fact at all. Such cases of “tacit” 
lucidity may be extremely hard to detect in dream 
reports, and subjects themselves may even be uncer­
tain as to whether or not a given dream of their own 
was lucid (Brooks & Vogelsong, 1999, pp. 26-31; 
LaBerge & DeGracia, 2000; Worsley, 1988, p. 341). 
Perhaps, tacit lucidity can be seen as the outcome of 
unconscious goal representations (Bargh, Gollwitzer, 
Lee-Chai, Barndollar, & Trotschel, 2001), for 
instance of the intention to become lucid. The 
Einstein dream cited earlier (Example 5) seems to 
be a good example of tacit lucidity of this type pre­
ceding explicit insight. The report s wording suggests 
that in this case, the onset of lucidity itself can be 
experienced as something spontaneous, as an auto­
matic process: the dreamer hears herself say, “this is 
a dream,” rather than experiencing this insight as 
the outcome of a conscious and deliberate reasoning 
process.
If insight into the fact that one is now dreaming 
can arise spontaneously, seemingly independently of
402
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

rational thought, this brings with it an interesting 
problem: Spontaneous metacognitive insight of this 
type does not seem categorically different from cases 
in which dreamers subjectively ju st know that they 
are now awake. The explicit belief that one is awake, 
even though one is in fact dreaming, is the hallmark 
of false awakenings and pre-lucid dreams. Again, 
two variants exist, which complement the ways in 
which lucidity can be attained (see Windt, 2015a, 
Chapter 10, for details). First, dreamers can conclude 
that they are awake as a result of faulty reasoning. 
For instance, they might try to engage in reality test­
ing by attempting to fly and then conclude that they 
are awake because they have floated off the ground.11 
Second, dreamers might ju st know they are awake, 
and this conviction may be driven by the seemingly 
realistic quality of dream imagery that subjectively 
leaves little room for conscious doubts. These cases 
of ju st knowing that one is awake seem analogous to 
cases of ju st knowing that one is now dreaming: Both 
involve explicit beliefs about ones current conscious 
state and both are driven by lower-level cognitive 
processing, rather than by conscious self-reflection 
and reasoning. From an epistemological perspec­
tive, this is quite worrisome: Despite having opposite 
truth values and different content (I am dreaming 
versus I am awake, where in reality one is dreaming), 
both result from the same type of metacognitive pro­
cessing, and on the level of phenomenal experience, 
they carry with them the same subjective conviction. 
The experience of certainty and of knowing, far from 
being a sure guide to truth, can be deeply deceptive 
(cf. Metzinger & Windt, 2014, 2015). For now, 
another point is more important: Whether or not the 
dreamer hits on the correct conclusion and becomes 
lucid might largely be a matter of chance.
In this context, recall that Voss et al. (2014) found 
that tACS over prefrontal areas led not just to lucidity, 
as defined by knowing that one is dreaming, but also 
to dissociation. Participants reported seeing them­
selves from above, having the feeling of being in a 
computer game, being watched, or even being asked 
to describe their sensory experiences in dreams. As the 
participants in this study were not experienced lucid 
dreamers, this finding makes sense: It is almost as if 
electrical stimulation pushed them in the direction of 
lucidity by activating the kinds of metacognitive pro­
cessing and imagery that are typically associated with 
insight, but without thereby generating the explicit, 
conscious thought that this is a dream. In some cases, 
participants even explicitly thought that they were 
awake. The information that one is now dreaming can 
be reflected on different levels. It can be reflected on
the level of dream content— for instance, in a dream­
like sense, in the feeling that this is not quite real, or 
that one has separated from ones body— but also on 
the level of conscious thought, in the realization that 
one is now dreaming or, conversely, in the now firmly 
held belief that one is awake. Only in the case of cor­
rectly and explicitly realizing that this is a dream can 
the report be scored as describing a lucid dream; but 
there is a deep continuity with these other examples 
nonetheless.
Finally, just as dreamers can ju st know they are 
dreaming because the dream has taken on a strange, 
dreamlike quality, lucidity can also be lost because the 
dream just seems too realistic to be a dream. In this 
example, the dreamer’s attempts to ascertain whether 
she really is dreaming seem to prompt exactly the 
types of imagery that finally lead to a loss of lucidity.
Example 8: “I am on my way to the bathroom, 
open the door and find myself in the wrong bath­
room. Rather than standing in my own bathroom, 
I am in the bathroom in my parents’ house. This 
is not at all where I wanted to be and it makes me 
mad. I walk through the bathroom and keep telling 
myself, this can’t be true.’
I can’t believe that this is true, so I look for indi­
cations that this could be a dream. I am very excited 
and a little bit angry because I don’t want to be here. 
My mirror image looks normal; in fact everything 
looks authentic, just like in reality. This makes me 
even angrier, because I know that this is a dream— I 
shouldn’t be here.
My cellphone rings, but I ignore it (who would 
be calling me now— my brain is letting it ring, this 
isn’t real). I say out loud what I am thinking: ‘This 
is a dream!’ I open a window because I figure that 
my brain won’t also create the entire garden behind 
the house. But it does: it’s foggy, gray and wet— just 
as it should be. I notice an ugly ceramic frog and a 
race car in the garden— but immediately concoct an 
explanation (my brother has a new car, my father 
doesn’t know the first thing about garden decora­
tion). I accept what is happening and give up on try­
ing to unmask what I am seeing as a dream. Continue 
to dream normally. . . .” (unpublished dream report 
from a student group headed by Ursula Voss)
Both the onset and the termination of lucidity 
can be the outcome of spontaneous metacognitive 
processing.
Conclusions and Future Challenges
Throughout this chapter, we have argued that 
lucid dreams involve an intricate interplay between
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
403

spontaneous, largely imagistic cognitive processing 
and metacognitive insight, deliberate control, and 
dissociative phenomena. The next step is to place 
the investigation of dreaming in general and lucid 
dreaming in particular in the context of research on 
mind-wandering and spontaneous waking thought. 
In this concluding section, we suggest what we take 
to be some of the most exciting research questions 
for investigating spontaneous cognitive processing 
across the sleep-wake cycle.
A first and basic aim is to gather mentation 
reports across the sleep-wake cycle, ideally under 
the same conditions. As timed awakenings, followed 
by immediate reporting, are the gold standard for 
gathering dream reports, a similar method of imme­
diate retrospection seems well suited to gather­
ing reports of spontaneous waking activity as well 
(Windt, 2013, 2015). Existing studies (Stickgold, 
Malia, Fosse, & Hobson, 2001; Siclari, LaRocque, 
Postle, & Tononi, 2013) comparing reports from 
active and quiet wakefulness to those from different 
sleep stages suggest that participants give the longest 
reports following REM sleep awakenings, followed 
by active wakefulness, quiet wakefulness, NREM 
sleep, and sleep onset. This somewhat intriguingly 
suggests that dreams are more easily reported than, 
for instance, daydreams. Future studies should aim 
to carefully compare dream and mind-wandering 
reports in terms of length, content, imagery, and 
emotions. Such studies would, we expect, substan­
tively enrich our understanding of subtle fluctua­
tions in experience, meta-awareness, control, and 
thought contents across the sleep-wake cycle.
A set of more specific questions follows from our 
sharpened reading, proposed in the first section of this 
chapter, of what it means to say that dreams are spon­
taneous cognitive processes. There, we introduced 
the distinction between thinking in dreams (or con­
scious thoughts occurring within an ongoing dream) 
and dreaming as a spontaneous cognitive process. 
The motivation for distinguishing these two readings 
was primarily phenomenological: Dreaming as such 
does not feel like thinking; subjectively, dreaming 
involves the experience of moving through a dream 
world and interacting with other persons and objects 
in it. Dreams are more vivid and immersive, in this 
respect, than even vivid daydreams, which are still 
experienced as ones own thought processes. Given 
this distinction, one can then investigate the rela­
tionship between spontaneous thoughts experienced 
within a dream and the lower-level, imagistic, and 
largely automatic cognitive processes that underlie 
the experience of dreaming.
A next step would be to investigate how lucid 
insight into the fact that one is now dreaming 
affects the occurrence and character of conscious 
thought within dreams. Based on the occurrence of 
lucidity lapses, we suggest that even in lucid dreams, 
thought is only weakly differentiated from the 
lower-level processes underlying the production of 
dream imagery. But a similar question can now be 
asked for waking mind-wandering episodes as well. 
What exactly is the relationship between imagistic 
daydreams and accompanying consciously expe­
rienced thoughts (i.e., thoughts occurring within 
or about a daydream)? And how does the presence 
and absence of insight into the fact that one is now 
dreaming or that one is now daydreaming, respec­
tively, alter this relationship?
We also proposed that the timing and duration, 
but also the formal features of dreaming (i.e., the 
modality-specific types of imagery experienced in a 
dream) do not count as spontaneous cognitive pro­
cesses in an interesting sense. Spontaneous cognitive 
processes are idiosyncratic and hard to predict; they 
are also amenable, at least in principle, to deliber­
ate control. By contrast, the timing and duration 
of dreams, as well as its formal features, are highly 
predictable, generic, and governed by internal circa­
dian rhythms. What is presently unclear is whether 
the same is true for dream lucidity. Lucid dreams 
cannot be prolonged at will, but they can, to an 
extent, be initiated voluntarily via autosuggestion. 
Quite frequently, however, lucidity occurs sponta­
neously, as a developmental glitch, a side effect of 
brain maturation in adolescence. It is also likely 
influenced, at least in part, by subcortical processes. 
This is further supported by the observation that 
in many dreams, the realization that this is just a 
dream is the result of ju st knowing, it is a spontane­
ous insight, rather than the outcome of a conscious 
reasoning process, and hence cannot be regarded as 
an intellectual achievement. Future research should 
aim to determine more precisely the factors that 
underlie the onset and maintenance of lucidity.
Again, similar questions can also be applied to the 
study of spontaneous thought in wakefulness. A first 
step would be to investigate the timing and duration 
of mind-wandering episodes themselves: Can they 
be ascribed to a breakdown in attention and con­
trol over ones conscious thought processes? Or are 
they governed by a similar internal rhythm as is the 
case for non-lucid dreams? If fluctuations in wak­
ing conscious thought were found to be regulated 
by an internal clock, this would profoundly impact 
a host of educational and therapeutic measures.
404
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

Attempting to deliberately prevent or reduce the 
occurrence of mind-wandering might then appear 
as similarly futile as attempts to reduce, over long 
periods of time, the amount and timing of sleep. 
The investigation of disturbed sleep and its relation 
to mind-wandering would also seem to be central 
in this context.
But the contrast between lucid and non-lucid 
dreaming might also elucidate the role of metacogni- 
tive insight and control for spontaneous thought in 
wakefulness. For example, what exactly are the cog­
nitive mechanisms underlying insight into the fact 
that ones mind has wandered, and to what extent 
can this be trained deliberately, as for instance in 
mindfulness meditation? There is, of course, a long 
tradition in Indian philosophy and contemplative 
traditions linking mindfulness to lucid insight in 
dreams (Thompson, 2014). Recently, it has also been 
suggested that lucidity is not restricted to dream­
ing, but that meditation might also enhance lucid 
awareness of dreamless sleep (Thompson, 2015a, 
2015b; Windt, 2015b; Windt et al., 2016). A next 
step would be to investigate this relationship in more 
detail. How exactly do different styles of meditation 
enhance the frequency of lucidity in dreams and in 
dreamless sleep, but also in waking mind-wandering? 
Do experienced lucid dreamers report fewer episodes 
of waking mind-wandering, perhaps because they 
more easily notice when their thoughts are about to 
drift away from an ongoing task? Or do they experi­
ence more frequent and more vivid daydreams, but 
are simultaneously more aware of mind wandering 
throughout the episodes? To what extent, in other 
words, are metacognitive insight and control com­
patible with spontaneous thought in wakefulness, 
much as we have been arguing is the case for dream­
ing (see also Fox & Christoff, 2014; for a discussion 
of intentional versus unintentional mind-wandering 
and their relation to mind-wandering with and 
without awareness, see Seli et al., 2016a, b)?
Finally, the experimental induction of lucid 
dreams via tACS raises a number of questions about 
the nature of lucidity itself. Is the transition between 
lucid and non-lucid dreaming really as sharp as sug­
gested by enthusiastic descriptions in the literature, 
where lucidity is often said to involve an all-pervasive 
change in the clarity of imagery and reasoning? Or 
do lucid dreams rather lie on a continuum with 
non-lucid ones, with pre-lucid dreams, false awak­
enings, tacit lucidity, dissociative phenomena, and 
control occupying intermediate positions on the 
spectrum? If lucid insight, as suggested here, often 
exists alongside the types of spontaneous cognitive
processing, including erratic reasoning, that charac­
terize many non-lucid dreams, this would suggest 
that the difference between lucid and non-lucid 
dreams is gradual rather than absolute.
But we can also ask about the necessary and suf­
ficient conditions for the induction of dream lucid­
ity at the level of brain activation. We have already 
pointed out that 40 Hz activity in prefrontal areas 
appears to be necessary but not sufficient for dream 
lucidity. This is closely linked to the question of 
whether, as we tentatively proposed in the second 
section of this chapter, lucid REM sleep can be 
identified as a separate substage of REM sleep. If so, 
this could lead to a refinement of sleep-stage scor­
ing criteria as well. To achieve this, the experimental 
induction of lucidity will have to be optimized in 
order to turn lucidity into a predictable and eas­
ily replicable phenomenon. Future research should 
aim to determine the precise duration and strength 
of stimulation that is sufficient to induce lucid­
ity, even in inexperienced participants. A next step 
would be to investigate the effect of 40 Hz stimula­
tion outside of REM sleep. Would stimulation not 
only in waking participants, but also in NREM 
sleep increase the probability of insight and control 
over ongoing thought content, as well as dissocia­
tive phenomena? For instance, might stimulation 
lead to perspective changes in ongoing daydreams? 
Interestingly, Axelrod, Rees, Lavidor, Bar (2015) 
have recently reported that the application of tran- 
scranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to lateral 
prefrontal areas increases the number of episodes of 
mind-wandering. However, as Fox and Christoff
(2015) point out, the actual effect may have been 
an enhancement of meta-awareness of mind­
wandering, prompting a higher number of reports, 
instead of an actual increase in the frequency of 
mind-wandering episodes. If so, this would again 
suggest that insight and spontaneous thought are 
not just consistent, but perhaps intimately and sys­
tematically related.
Clearly, researchers are only beginning to address 
these questions, and many of the points we make 
throughout this chapter are preliminary and specu­
lative. But we hope that they are nonetheless useful 
in identifying points of contact between emerg­
ing lines of research that so far remain largely 
separate: the scientific investigation of dreaming, 
including lucid dreaming, and research on mind­
wandering and spontaneous thought in wakeful­
ness. Bringing these lines of research together is, 
we think, a promising and exciting project for the 
future, and we hope to have shown how the analysis
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
405

of dream lucidity can contribute to this, both theo­
retically and experimentally.
Notes
1. Note that on a purely semantic level, task- and stimulus- 
independence do not appear to be necessary for spontaneous 
thought. One might well have spontaneous thoughts about 
a task to which all of one’s attentional resources are cur­
rently directed and in which one is fully absorbed; and these 
thoughts might well be triggered by environmental stimuli. 
In our definition, these cases still count as spontaneous to 
the extent that they are only weakly constrained, rather than 
directly determined, by the tasks and/or external stimuli 
they are arising in response to. This is a subtle difference, 
but it opens the door to saying that spontaneous thoughts 
can be task-relevant, for instance by being guided by uncon­
scious goal representations. Empirical evidence suggests 
that goals can indeed be activated and pursued automati­
cally; explicit awareness of one’s intentions is apparently not 
necessary for the guidance of goal-directed behavior (Bargh 
et al. 2001). We return to this point later, in section 3. For 
now, we merely want to emphasize that there is no con­
ceptual contradiction involved in saying that spontaneous 
thought can be goal-directed and can contribute to the solu­
tion of ongoing tasks.
2. Simulation views also give a clear sense to types of experience 
occurring in sleep that do not count as dreamful because they 
are not immersive and lack the experience of a self in a world 
(Windt et al., 2016). Asking how these types of dreamless 
sleep experience relate to spontaneous thought in wakeful­
ness is an important question for future research.
3. A related question, which is mostly confined to the philo­
sophical literature and tends to run parallel to the discussion 
of dreaming in the context of psychological and neuroscien­
tific theories of mind-wandering and spontaneous thought, 
is whether dreaming involves the same kind of mental state 
as perceiving and hallucinating or whether dreams are imag­
inative experiences. The imagination view of dreaming is 
sometimes tied to the phenomenological claim that dream­
ing actually feels like daydreaming and imagining (McGinn 
2009; Ichikawa 2009); the experience of presence in a dream 
is, in this view, similar to being deeply absorbed in a novel or 
movie. This view has interesting consequences for thinking 
about the relationship between dreaming, imagination, and 
control. While spontaneous thought and mind-wandering 
are typically described as involving a loss of control, imagina­
tion, at least in the philosophical literature, is often held to 
be active and controllable and is contrasted with the passive 
character of perception. The challenge then becomes how to 
account for the seemingly passive and uncontrolled nature of 
dreaming. Here, a common move is to say that dreams, like 
imaginings but unlike percepts, are not actively controlled, 
but are nonetheless subject to the will (Ichikawa, 2009) or 
even the product of unconscious authorship involving a psy­
chic split between the dream self, or the audience of the 
dream, and the dream producer (McGinn, 2009). There are 
numerous issues in the background, and this is not the place 
to enter into this debate in any detail (but see Windt, 2015a, 
Chapter 6); but it is noteworthy that the imagination view 
construes the relationship between dreaming and control in 
a way that is diametrically opposed to the claim that dream­
ing is a spontaneous, uncontrolled process.
4. A particularly interesting question is whether thoughts expe­
rienced within a dream are experienced as spontaneous or 
as deliberately caused. Do we experience ourselves, in other 
words, as cognitive agents in our dreams? A related question 
that is only beginning to be explored is whether phenomena 
such as thought insertion and auditory verbal hallucinations, 
which are frequent in schizophrenia and are likely related to a 
disturbance in agency, exist in dreams. See Rosen (2015) for 
discussion.
5. It is also possible, however, that similar temporal patterns 
exist for spontaneous waking thoughts as well. Older research 
indicates the existence of a circadian rhythm in spontaneous, 
task-unrelated thoughts (Giambra & Rosenberg, 1989), and 
there may also be a general association between mind-wan­
dering, sleep quality, and chronotype (Carciofo et al., 2014).
6. Interestingly, Fox et al. (2014) found a mild positive bias in all 
studies on mind-wandering, regardless of whether recordings 
were collected in the laboratory or at home. Further investi­
gating this question in relation to dreaming might shed light 
on the complex relationship between mind-wandering and 
well-being (Franklin et al., 2013; Ruby et al., 2013).
7. One way of understanding this study, consequently, is that 
it sets out from the folk-psychological distinction between 
lucid and non-lucid dreams—as measured by what partici­
pants score as a lucid dream—and seeks to render it more 
precise by identifying those factors that most strongly dis­
tinguish lucid and non-lucid dreams. The reasoning behind 
this approach is that this will lead to a theoretical account 
of lucidity that is both theory-driven and empirically plau­
sible—and that, because of its grounding in folk psychology, 
is also likely to match participants’ understanding. This last 
point is important because lucid dream research, as is the case 
for all dream research, is constrained, for methodological rea­
sons, by dream reports (Windt 2013, 2015a).
8. Unless indicated otherwise, all of these examples are unpub­
lished reports from the experiments described in Voss and 
colleagues 2009, 2013.
9. This is strikingly reminiscent of a finding that when par­
ticipants are asked to imagine famous persons, visual images 
of individuals from the black-and-white media era, such as 
Albert Einstein, are also experienced as less colored (Pearson 
& Hollings 2013).
10. The observation that lucid dream control often brings about 
unintended effects also fits in well with findings on thought 
suppression in wakefulness. In the white-bear effect (Wegner 
et al., 1987; Wegner & Zanakos 1994), attempting to con­
trol one’s thoughts by suppressing certain types of thought 
contents ironically enhances exactly those kinds of thoughts 
one wanted to avoid—for instance, white-bear thoughts. 
The effect has also been investigated for sleep-onset imag­
ery. In one study, participants often dreamed about persons 
they had been asked to not think about before sleep—and 
they were more likely do so than participants who had been 
asked to think about the target person (Wegner et al., 2004). 
In another study, suppressed thoughts seemed to occur 
in exactly those contexts that the participants had used as 
distractors. For instance, one participant had talked about 
her parents’ garden to suppress white-bear thoughts during 
wakefulness. As she drifted off to sleep, she saw
a picture of cherries with a text column alongside, 
which resembled a recipe in a magazine she had read 
in the afternoon as she explained in the morning
406
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

interview. Then, a vision of a myriad of small leaves 
pervaded her mind, abruptly followed by an image of 
a fern in a pot on the white, round table in her par­
ents’ garden. At this point, the picture of the face of a 
white bear intruded upon her. (Schmidt & Gendolla
2008, p. 721)
The resurfacing of suppressed thoughts—including feelings 
of regret, shame, and guilt—at sleep onset and in the pre­
sleep period may even be associated with disturbed sleep and 
insomnia (Schmidt & van der Linden 2009, 2013; see also 
Schmidt et al., 2011). The general picture seems to be that 
when control is relaxed, both before sleep, but also at sleep 
onset, unwanted thoughts return. It would be interesting to 
explore how this is related to cases in which lucid dream con­
trol leads to unexpected or even unwanted results. A predic­
tion would be that because the maintenance of lucidity and 
the exercise of dream control involve a sense of effort, result­
ing cognitive depletion may actually foster spontaneous and 
perhaps even unwanted cognitive processes—including, 
perhaps, the total or partial loss of lucidity itself, as well as 
lucidity lapses (see later discussion).
11. In other scenarios, the conclusion that one is awake might 
even be rational by waking standards: presumably, dream­
ers could diligently engage in reality testing, and the results 
could consistently but falsely indicate that they are indeed 
awake. This would correspond to the classical Cartesian sce­
nario of dream deception.
References
Aristoteles & Gallop, D. (1996). Aristotle on Sleep and Dreams: 
A Text and Translation'. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Arnold-Forster, M. L. S.-M. (1921). Studies in dreams. 
New York: Macmillan.
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring peri­
ods of eye motility, and concomitant phenomena, during 
sleep. Science, 118(3062), 273-274.
Augustine, C. (1991). Confessions. (Henry Chadwick, Trans.). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Axelrod, V., Rees, G., Lavidor, M., & Bar, M. (2015). Increasing 
propensity to mind-wander with transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
112( 11), 3314-3319.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255(5044), 
556-559.
Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & 
Trotschel, R. (2001). The automated will: Nonconscious acti­
vation and pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 81(6), 1014.
Blagrove, M., Blakemore, S.-J., & Thayer, B. R. (2006). The abil­
ity to self-tickle following rapid eye movement sleep dream­
ing. Consciousness and Cognition, 75(2), 285—294.
Blakemore, S.-J., Wolpert, D., & Frith, C. (2000). Why can’t 
you tickle yourself? Neuroreport, 77(11), R11—R16.
Blanke, O., Landis, T., Spinelli, L., & Seeck, M. (2004). Out-of- 
body experience and autoscopy of neurological origin. Brain, 
127(2), 243-258.
Blanke, O., & Mohr, C. (2005). Out-of-body experience, 
heautoscopy, and autoscopic hallucination of neurologi­
cal origin: Implications for neurocognitive mechanisms of 
corporeal awareness and self-consciousness. Brain Research 
Reviews, 50(1), 184-199.
Brooks, J. E., & Vogelsong, J. (2000). The conscious exploration of 
dreaming: Discovering how we create and control our dreams. 
New York: 1st Books Library.
Brugger, P, Regard, M., & Landis, T. (1997). Illusory redupli­
cation of one's own body: phenomenology and classifica­
tion of autoscopic phenomena. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 
2(1), 19-38.
Carruthers, P. (2015). The centered mind, New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Carciofo, R., Du, F., Song, N., & Zhang, K. (2014). Mind wan­
dering, sleep quality, affect and chronotype: an exploratory 
study. PloS one, 9(3), e91285.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A., Smith, R., Vartanian, O., & Mandel, 
D. (2011). The role of spontaneous thought in human cog­
nition. Neuroscience of Decision Making, 1, 259—284.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: a dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17( 11), 718-731.
Czisch, M. (2014). The boundaries of consciousness: Lucid 
dreaming. Journal of Sleep Research, 23, 63.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957). Cyclic variations in EEG 
during sleep and their relation to eye movements, body 
motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalography and clinical 
neurophysiology, 9(4), 673-690.
Dennett, D. C. (1976). Are dreams experiences? The Philosophical 
Review, 85(2), 151-171.
Descartes, R., & Cottingham, J. (2013). Rene Descartes: 
Meditations on first philosophy: With selections from the objec­
tions and replies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Diekelmann, S., & Born, J. (2010). The memory function of 
sleep. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 77(2), 114.
Dodet, P, Chavez, M., Leu-Semenescu, S., Golmard, J.-L., & 
Arnulf, I. (2014). Lucid dreaming in narcolepsy. Sleep, 38(3), 
487-497.
Dokic, J. (2012). Seeds of self-knowledge: Noetic feelings and 
metacognition. Foundations of Metacognition, 1, 302—321.
Domhoff, G. William. (2011). The neural substrate for dreaming: Is it 
a subsystem of the default network? Consciousness and Cognition, 
20(4), 1163-1174. doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2011.03.001
Domhoff, G. W. (2013). Finding meaning in dreams: A quantita­
tive approach. New York: Springer Science & Business Media.
Dorsch, F. (2015). Focused daydreaming and mind-wandering. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 6(4), 1—23.
Dresler, M., Eibl, L., Fischer, C. F., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V.
I., Steiger, A., . . . Pawlowski, M. (2013). Volitional com­
ponents of consciousness vary across wakefulness, dreaming 
and lucid dreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 987.
Dresler, M., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Koch, S. P., Holsboer, 
F., Steiger, A., . . . Czisch, M. (2012). Neural correlates of 
dream lucidity obtained from contrasting lucid versus non- 
lucid REM sleep: A combined EEG/fMRI case study. Sleep, 
35(7), 1017.
Erlacher, D., Schadlich, M., Stumbrys,T., & Schredl, M. (2013). 
Time for actions in lucid dreams: Effects of task modality, 
length, and complexity. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1013.
Espie, C. A., Broomfield, N. M., MacMahon, K. M., Macphee, L. 
M., & Taylor, L. M. (2006). The attention-intention-effort 
pathway in the development of psychophysiologic insomnia: A 
theoretical review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 70(4), 215—245.
Filevich, E., Dresler, M., Brick, T. R., & Kuhn, S. (2015). 
Metacognitive mechanisms underlying lucid dreaming. The 
Journal of Neuroscience, 35(3), 1082-1088.
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
407

Fosse, R., Stickgold, R., & Hobson, J. A. (2001). Brain-mind 
states: Reciprocal variation in thoughts and hallucinations. 
Psychological Science, 12(1), 30-36.
Fosse, R., Stickgold, R., & Hobson, J. A. (2004). Thinking and 
hallucinating: Reciprocal changes in sleep. Psychophysiology, 
41(2), 298-305.
Fox, K. C., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilitation of 
spontaneous thought processes: When metacognition helps 
the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. Fleming & C. D. 
Frith (Eds.), The cognitive neuroscience of metacognition (pp. 
293-319). Berlin: Springer.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Anderson, C. L., Smallwood, J., 
Kingstone, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The silver lining of 
a mind in the clouds: Interesting musings are associated with 
positive mood while mind-wandering. Frontiers in psychol­
ogy, 4, 583.
Gackenbach, J. (1988). The psychological content of lucid ver­
sus nonlucid dreams. In J. Gackenbach & S. LaBerge (Eds.), 
Conscious mind, sleeping brain (pp. 181-220). Boston: 
Springer.
Goleman, D., & Davidson, R. (1979). Consciousness: Brain, 
States of awareness and mysticism. New York: Harper & Row.
Green, C. E. (1968). Lucid dreams (Vol. 1). Oxford: Institute of 
Psychophysical Research.
Green, C. E., & McCreery, C. (1994). Lucid dream­
ing: 
The 
paradox 
of 
consciousness 
during 
sleep.
New York: Psychology Press.
Hanna, R., & Thompson, E. (2003). Neurophenomenology 
and the spontaneity of consciousness. Canadian Journal of 
Philosophy, 33(Suppl 1), 133-162.
Hartmann, E. (1975). Dreams and other hallucinations: An 
approach to the underlying mechanism. In R. K. Siegel & L. 
J. West (Eds.), Hallucinations: Behavior, experience and theory 
(pp. 71-79). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Hearne, K. M. (1978). Lucid dreams: An elecro-physiological and 
psychological study. Liverpool: Liverpool University.
Hobson, A., & Voss, U. (2011). A mind to go out of: Reflections 
on primary and secondary consciousness. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20(4), 993-997.
Hobson, J., & Voss, U. (2010). Lucid dreaming and the bimo­
dality of consciousness. In E. Perry, D. Collerton, & F. 
LeBeau (Eds.), New horizons in the neuroscience of conscious­
ness (Vol. 79, pp. 155-165).
Hobson, J. A. (1988). The dreaming brain. New York: Basic Books.
Hobson, J. A. (1999). Dreaming as delirium: How the brain goes 
out of its mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000). 
Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience 
of conscious states. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(06), 
793-842.
Ichikawa, J. (2009). Dreaming and imagination. Mind & 
Language, 24(\), 103-121.
Irving, Z. C. (2016). Mind-wandering is unguided atten­
tion: Accounting for the “purposeful” wanderer. Philosophical 
Studies, 173, 547-571.
Kahan, T. L. (2001). Consciousness in dreaming: A metacogni­
tive approach. In K. Bulkeley (Ed.), Dreams (pp. 333-360). 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kahn, D., & Hobson, J. A. (2005). State-dependent thinking: A 
comparison of waking and dreaming thought. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 14(3), 429-438.
Kaliuzhna, M., Vibert, D., Grivaz, P., & Blanke, O. (2015). 
Out-of-body experiences and other complex dissociation 
experiences in a patient with unilateral peripheral vestibular 
damage and deficient multisensory integration. Multisensory 
Research, 28(5-6), 613-635.
Kam, J. W., & Handy, T. C. (2013). The neurocognitive con­
sequences of the wandering mind: A mechanistic account 
of sensory-motor decoupling. Frontiers in Psychology, 
4, 725.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wander­
ing mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932. 
doi: 10.1126/science.l 192439
Kramer, M. (2013). The dream experience: A systematic explora­
tion. New York: Routledge.
LaBerge, S. (1985). Lucid dreaming: The power of being awake 
and aware in your dreams. Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarcher.
LaBerge, S., & DeGracia, D. J. (2000). Varieties of lucid dream­
ing experience. In R. G. Kunzendorf & B. Wallace (Eds.), 
Individual differences in conscious experience (pp. 269-307). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
LaBerge, S., Phillips, L., & Levitan, L. (1994). An hour of wake­
fulness before morning naps makes lucidity more likely. 
NightLight: Lucidity Institute Newsletter, 6(3), 1—4.
LaBerge, S. (1990). Lucid dreaming: Psychophysiological stud­
ies of consciousness during REM sleep. In R. R. Bootzin, J. 
F. Kihlstrom & D. L. Schacter (Eds.), Sleep and Cognition 
(pp. 109-126). Washington D.C.: Amercan Psychological 
Associatioan.
Leibniz, G. W. (1956). Philosophical papers and letters: A selection 
(L. E. Loemker, Trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levitan, L. (1994). A fool’s guide to lucid dreaming. Nightlight,
6(2) ,  1- 5.
Malcolm, N. (1962). Dreaming, 2nd. ed. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Maury, A. (1861). Le sommeil etles reves. Paris: Didier.
McGinn, C., & McGinn, C. (2009). Mindsight: Image, dream, 
meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode to 
positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 
626. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00626
McNamara, P., McLaren, D., Smith, D., Brown, A., & 
Stickgold, R. (2005). A “Jekyll and Hyde” within aggressive 
versus friendly interactions in REM and non-REM dreams. 
Psychological Science, 16(2), 130-136.
Metzinger, T. (2004). Being no one: The self-model theory of subjec­
tivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental auton­
omy. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 931. doi: 10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2013.00931
Metzinger, T. (2015). M-Autonomy. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 22(11-12), 270-302.
Metzinger, T., & Windt, J. (2014). Die phanomenale Signatur 
des Wissens: Experimentelle Philosophic des Geistes mit 
oder ohne Intuitionen. In T. Grundmann, J. Horvath & J. 
Kipper (Eds.) Die Experimentelle Philosophie in der Diskussion 
(pp. 279-321). Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Metzinger, T., & Windt, J. M. (2015). What does it mean to 
have an open mind? In T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), 
Open MIND, 0(GI). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
408
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

Naro, A., Bramanti, P., Leo, A., Russo, M., & Calabro, R. S. 
(2016). Transcranial alternating current stimulation in 
patients with chronic disorder of consciousness: A possible 
way to cut the diagnostic Gordian knot? Brain Topography, 
29(4), 623-644. doi: 10.1007/sl0548-016-0489-z
Nielsen, T. (2014). What is the current status of your “covert 
REM Process” theory, especially in the light of the new pro­
toconsciousness hypothesis? In N. Tranquillo (Ed.), Dream 
consciousness (pp. 175-180). Vienna: Springer.
Nielsen, T. A. (1993). Changes in the kinesthetic content of 
dreams following somatosensory stimulation of leg muscles 
during REM sleep. Dreaming, 3(2), 99.
Nielsen, T. A. (2000). A review of mentation in REM and 
NREM sleep: “Covert” REM sleep as a possible reconcilia­
tion of two opposing models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
23(06), 851-866.
Nielsen, 
T. 
(2017). 
Microdream 
neurophenomenology. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 3(1), 1-17.
Noreika, V., Windt, J. M., Lenggenhager, B., & Karim, A. A. (2010). 
New perspectives for the study of lucid dreaming: From brain 
stimulation to philosophical theories of self-consciousness. 
InternationalJournal of Dream Research, 3(1), 36-45.
Pace-Schott, E. F. (2013). Dreaming as a story-telling instinct. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 159.
Pearson, D. G., & Hollings, J. (2013). Einsteins jacket: Evidence 
for long-term perceptual specificity in mental imagery. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 148-154. doi: http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j .concog.2012.11.004
Rahimi, S., Naghibi, S. M., Mokhber, N., Schredl, M., 
Assadpour, H., Farkhani, A. R., . . . Naghibi, S. S. (2015). 
Sophisticated evaluation of possible effect of distinct audi­
tory stimulation during REM sleep on dream content. 
International Journal of Dream Research, 8(2), 146-151.
Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner presence: Consciousness as a biological 
phenomenon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Revonsuo, A., Tuominen, J., & Valli, K. (2015a). The avatars 
in the machine: Dreaming as a simulation of social reality. 
In T. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND, 32(T). 
Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Revonsuo, A., Tuominen, J., & Valli, K. (2015b). The simula­
tion theories of dreaming: How to make theoretical progress 
in dream science. In T. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), Open 
MIND, 32(R). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Rosen, M. G. (2015). I’m thinking your thoughts while I sleep: 
Sense of agency and ownership over dream thought. 
Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 
2(3), 326.
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). 
How self-generated thought shapes mood: The relation 
between and mood depends on the socio-temporal content 
of thoughts. PLoS One, 5(10), e77554. doi: 10.1371/jour- 
nal.pone.0077554
Sagnier, S., Coulon, P, Chaufton, C., Poli, M., Debruxelles,
S., Renou, P, . . . Sibon, I. (2015). Lucid dreams, an atypi­
cal sleep disturbance in anterior and mediodorsal thalamic 
strokes. Revue Neurologique, 171(11), 768-772.
Saint-Denys, H. d. (1982). Dreams and the means of directing 
them. London: Duckworth. Edited by M. Schatzman & 
translated by N. Fry from the French, Les rives et les moyens 
de les diriger (1867). Paris: Amyat.
Sanchez-Vives, M. V., & Slater, M. (2005). From presence 
to consciousness through virtual reality. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 6(4), 332-339.
Schatzman, 
M., Worsley, A., 
& 
Fenwick, 
P. 
(1988).
Correspondence during lucid dreams between dreamed and 
actual events. In J. Gackenbach & S. LaBerge (Eds.), Conscious 
Mind, Sleeping Brain (pp. 155-179). Boston: Springer.
Schmidt, R. E., & Gendolla, G. H. (2008). Dreaming of 
white bears: The return of the suppressed at sleep onset. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 17(3), 714—724.
Schmidt, R. E., Renaud, O., & Van Der Linden, M. (2011). 
Nocturnal regrets and insomnia in elderly people. The 
International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 
73(4), 371-393.
Schmidt, R. E., & Van der Linden, M. (2009). The aftermath 
of rash action: Sleep-interfering counterfactual thoughts and 
emotions. Emotion, 9(4), 549.
Schmidt, R. E., & Van der Linden, M. (2013). Feeling too regret­
ful to fall asleep: Experimental activation of regret delays sleep 
onset. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 37(4), 872-880.
Schmidt, S. C., Stumbrys, T., & Erlacher, D. (2014). Dream 
characters and the dream ego: An exploratory online study in 
lucid dreams. Dreaming, 24(2), 138.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 15(7), 319-326. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.tics.2011.05.006
Schredl, M., Atanasova, D., Hormann, K., Maurer, J. T., Hummel, 
T., & Stuck, B. A. (2009). Information processing during 
sleep: The effect of olfactory stimuli on dream content and 
dream emotion s. Journal of Sleep Research, 18(3), 285-290.
Schredl, M., Henley-Einion, J., & Blagrove, M. (2012). Lucid 
dreaming in children: The UK library study. International 
Journal of Dream Research, 5(1), 94-98.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2011). Perplexities of consciousness. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Scott, J. G., & Schoenberg, M. R. (2011). Frontal lobe/executive 
functioning. In The little black book of neuropsychology (pp. 
219-248). Springer US.
Seli, P, Risko, E. F., & Smilek, D. (2016a). On the necessity of 
distinguishing between unintentional and intentional mind 
wandering. Psychological Science, 27(5), 685-691.
Seli, P, Risko, E. F., Smilek, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016b). 
Mind-wandering with and without intention. Trends Cogn 
Sci, 20(8), 605-617.
Siclari, F., LaRocque, J. J., Postle, B. R., & Tononi, G. (2013). 
Assessing sleep consciousness within subjects using a serial 
awakening paradigm. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 542.
Silber, M. H., Ancoli-Israel, S., Bonnet, M. H., Chokroverty,
S., Grigg-Damberger, M. M., Hirshkowitz, M., Kapen, S., 
Keenan, S., Kryger, M., Penzel, T. Pressman, M., Iber, C. 
(2007). The visual scoring of sleep in adults. /  Clin Sleep Med, 
3(2), 121-131.
Slater, M. (2009). Place illusion and plausibility can lead to 
realistic behaviour in immersive virtual environments. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 364(1535), 3549-3557.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,441. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00441
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of con­
sciousness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487-518. 
doi: 10.1 l46/annurev-psych-0108l4-015331
J E N N I F E R  M.  W I N D T  A N D  U R S U L A  VOS S
409

Stenstrom, P., Fox, K., Solomonova, E., & Nielsen, T. (2012). 
Mentation during sleep onset theta bursts in a trained 
participant: A role for NREM stage 1 sleep in memory 
processing? International Journal of Dream Research, 
5(1), 37-46.
Stickgold, R. (2005). Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. 
Nature, 437(7063), 1272-1278.
Stickgold, R., Malia, A., Fosse, R., & Hobson, J. A. (2001). 
Brain-mind states: I. Longitudinal field study of sleep/wake 
factors influencing mentation report length. Sleep, 24(2), 
171-179.
Stumbrys, T., Erlacher, D., Johnson, M., & Schredl, M. (2014). 
The phenomenology of lucid dreaming: An online survey. 
The American Journal of Psychology, 127(2), 191-204.
Stumbrys, T., Erlacher, D., Schadlich, M., & Schredl, M. (2012). 
Induction of lucid dreams: A systematic review of evidence. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 21(3), 1456-1475.
Stumbrys, T., Erlacher, D., & Schmidt, S. (2011). Lucid dream 
mathematics: An explorative online study of arithmetic 
abilities of dream characters. International Journal of Dream 
Research, 4(1), 35-40.
Stuss, D. T. (2011). Functions of the frontal lobes: relation to 
executive functions. Journal of the international neuropsycho­
logical Society, 17(5), 759-765.
Tart, C. T. (1988). From spontaneous event to lucidity. In J. 
Gackenbach & S. LaBerge (Eds.), Conscious mind, sleeping 
brain (pp. 67-103). Boston: Springer.
Tholey, P., & Utecht, K. (1987). Schopferisch trdumen. Der 
Klartraum als Lebenshilfe. Niedernhausen: Falken-Verlag.
Thompson, E. (2014). Waking, dreaming, being: Self and 
consciousness in neuroscience, meditation, and philosophy. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Thompson, E. (2015a). Dreamless sleep, the embodied mind, 
and consciousness. InT. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), Open 
MIND, 37(T). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Thompson, E. (2015b). Steps toward a neurophenomenol­
ogy of conscious sleep. Open MIND, 37(R). Frankfurt am 
Main: MIND Group.
van Eeden, F. (1913). A study of dreams. Paper presented at the 
Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research.
van Rijn, E., Eichenlaub, J.-B., Lewis, P, Walker, M., Gaskell, 
M., Malinowski, J., & Blagrove, M. (2015). The dream-lag 
effect: Selective processing of personally significant events 
during rapid eye movement sleep, but not during slow wave 
sleep. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 122, 98-109.
Voss, U., Frenzel, C., Koppehele-Gossel, J., & Hobson, A. 
(2012). Lucid dreaming: An age-dependent brain dissocia­
tion. Journal of Sleep Research, 21(6), 634-642.
Voss, U., & Hobson, A. (2015). What is the state-of-the-art on 
lucid dreaming? In T. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), Open 
MIND, 38 (T). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Voss, U., Holzmann, R., Hobson, A., Paulus, W., Koppehele- 
Gossel, J., Klimke, A., & Nitsche, M. A. (2014). Induction of 
self awareness in dreams through frontal low current stimula­
tion of gamma activity. Nature Neuroscience, 17(6), 810-812.
Voss, U., Holzmann, R., Tuin, I., & Hobson, J. A. (2009). Lucid 
dreaming: A state of consciousness with features of both wak­
ing and non-lucid dreaming. Sleep, 32(9), 1191.
Voss, U., Schermelleh-Engel, K., Windt, J., Frenzel, C., & 
Hobson, A. (2013). Measuring consciousness in dreams: The 
lucidity and consciousness in dreams scale. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 22( 1), 8-21.
Voss, U., Tuin, I., Schermelleh-Engel, K., & Hobson, A. 
(2011). Waking and dreaming: Related but structurally 
independent. Dream reports of congenitally paraplegic and 
deaf-mute persons. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(3), 
673-687.
Voss, U., & Voss, G. (2014). A neurobiological model of lucid 
dreaming. In R. Hurd & K. Bulkeley (Eds.), Lucid dream­
ing: New perspectives on consciousness in sleep (pp. 23-36). 
Santa Barbara, CA, Praeger.
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. 
(1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 5.
Wegner, D. M., Wenzlaff, R. M., & Kozak, M. (2004). Dream 
rebound: The return of suppressed thoughts in dreams. 
Psychological Science, 15(4), 232-236.
Wegner, D. M., & Zanakos, S. (1994). Chronic thought sup­
pression. Journal of Personality, 62(4), 615-640.
Windt, J. M. (2013). Reporting dream experience: Why (not) 
to be skeptical about dream reports. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7,70%.
Windt, J. M. (2015a). Dreaming: A conceptual framework for 
philosophy of mind and empirical research. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Windt, J. M. (2015b). Just in time: Dreamless sleep expe­
rience as pure subjective temporality. In T. Metzinger 
& J. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND, 37(C). Frankfurt am 
Main: MIND Group.
Windt, J. M. (2017). Predictive brains, dreaming selves, sleeping 
bodies: How the analysis of dream movement can inform 
a theory of self- and world-simulation in dreams. Synthese. 
doi: 10.1007/s 11229-017-1525-6
Windt, J. M., Harkness, D. L., & Lenggenhager, B. (2014). 
Tickle me, I think I might be dreaming! Sensory attenu­
ation, self-other distinction, and predictive processing in 
lucid dreams. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 717.
Windt, J. M., & Metzinger, T. (2007). The philosophy of dream­
ing and self-consciousness: What happens to the experiential 
subject during the dream state? In D. Barett & P. McNamara 
(Eds.), The New Science of Dreaming. Vol. 3: Cultural and 
Theoretical Perspectives (pp. 193-248). Westport; London: 
Praeger Perspectives.
Windt, J. M., & Noreika, V. (2011). How to integrate dream­
ing into a general theory of consciousness: A critical review 
of existing positions and suggestions for future research. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 20(4), 1091-1107.
Windt, J. M., Nielsen, T., & Thompson, E. (2016). Does con­
sciousness disappear in dreamless sleep? Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 20(12), 871-882.
Wolfson, A. R., & Carskadon, M. A. (2003). Understanding 
adolescent s sleep patterns and school performance: A critical 
appraisal. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 7(6), 491-506.
Worsley, A. (1988). Personal experiences in lucid dreaming. In 
J. Gackenbach & S. LaBerge (Eds.), Conscious mind, sleeping 
brain (pp. 321-341). Boston: Springer.
4 IO
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T ,  I N S I G H T ,  A N D  C O N T R O L  I N  L U C I D  D R E A M S

C H A P T E R
30
Microdream Neurophenomenology: 
A Paradigm for Dream Neuroscience
Tore Nielsen
Abstract
The fleeting dream images of sleep onset afford a rare glimpse at how experience is transformed from 
the perceptually grounded consciousness of wakefulness to the hallucinatory simulations of dreaming. 
These images, or m icrodream s, are briefer, simpler, and more accessible to phenomenological scrutiny 
than are the long REM dreams traditionally recorded in the sleep lab. This chapter shows that a focus 
on microdream phenomenology has thus far contributed to (1) developing a classification system for 
dreaming’s core phenomenology (W in d t's oneiragogic spectrum ), (2 ) establishing a structure for assessing 
dreaming’s multiple memory inputs (m ulti-tem poral m em ory sources), (3) furthering Silberer’s project for 
sleep onset imagery by uncovering two new types of imagery (autosensory im agery, exosensory im agery), 
and (4) providing a larger framework for explaining some microdreaming processes (m ultisensory 
integration approach). A continued focus on microdream neurophenomenology may help resolve 
outstanding questions about dreaming’s core features, neurophysiological correlates, and memory 
sources.
Key Words: sleep onset, dreaming, neurophenomenology, microdream, neurophysiology, memory
Introduction
Nightly transitions into sleep are, typically, brief 
and uneventful. But in the sleep laboratory these tran­
sitions afford a unique opportunity to observe how 
consciousness shifts abruptly from veridical waking 
perception to hallucinatory dreaming simulation. The 
present chapter focuses specifically on these brief tran­
sitions. It considers imagery in the sleep-onset transi­
tion as an alternative object of study to dreaming as 
traditionally studied in the sleep lab. Because of their 
simplicity and accessibility, the microdreams of sleep 
onset may help resolve some of the more intractable 
problems of dreaming research— especially questions 
about dreamings neurobiological correlates and its 
representational sources in memory.
Limits of Traditional REM Sleep 
Dream Studies
The discovery that vivid dreaming accompanies 
recurrent bouts of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953; Dement & 
Kleitman, 1957) was heralded as a major meth­
odological breakthrough for the study of dream 
neurophysiology. The advantages were clear: inves­
tigators now possessed a method that gave imme­
diate and predictable access to a vast reservoir of 
oneiric activity— activity that could be recorded 
in near-real time with a minimum of distortion 
and under controlled experimental conditions. 
Researchers were quick to exploit REM sleep 
to address fundamental questions about dream­
ing, such as: Is there a biological need for dream­
ing? and How does dreaming vary with sleep stage? 
And although progress was made on some fronts 
using these laboratory methods, many fundamen­
tal questions about dreaming remain unanswered. 
In particular, questions about the neurophysiological 
correlates of dreaming have not been satisfactorily 
resolved, despite repeated attempts to assess both 
macro- and micro-physiological sleep events in the

laboratory. Rechtschaffen’s (1978) early theoretical 
paper signaled a frustration with research’s inability 
to find such correlates, declaring dreaming to exist 
in isolation from “organismic state” variables. Later, 
Pivik’s (1991) comprehensive review concurred 
in finding no persuasive evidence for a pattern of 
physiological changes accompanying the presence, 
vividness, or specific contents of dreaming in either 
REM or non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. 
This was the case even when very brief or “phasic” 
measures of physiological fluctuation were assessed. 
He suggested that researchers may be “demanding 
an impossible degree of introspective precision 
from subjects” (1991, p. 247). Evidence support­
ing psychophysiological isomorphism was so scant 
that Foulkes (1985, p. 4), one of the principal 
laboratory-based researchers at the time, consid­
ered psychophysiological studies to have failed and 
abandoned them in favor of a more strictly cogni­
tive framework for understanding dreaming.
More recently, the situation has improved only 
slightly. Some insights into the neurophysiology of 
dreaming have been gleaned from neuropsychologi­
cal assessments of brain-lesioned individuals (e.g., 
Doricchi & Violani, 1992; Solms, 1997) and from 
neuroimaging and polysomnographic studies of REM 
sleep (Cipolli, Ferrara, De Gennaro, & Plazzi, 2016; 
Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff, 
2013), but the relationships uncovered remain rela­
tively imprecise and fall short of clarifying either the 
specific brain networks that sustain dreaming or the 
electrophysiological measures that reliably index it 
(see also, in this volume, Domhoff, Chapter 27, and 
Fox & Girn, Chapter 28). One approach that has 
provided some clarity treats REM sleep as a neuro­
marker for the presence of dreaming and relates neu­
ral changes in REM sleep (relative to wake) to general 
phenomenological characteristics of dreaming (Fox, 
Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013). 
To illustrate, using meta-analytic methods, Fox et al.
(2013) found relative activation, during REM sleep, 
in neural circuits that normally subserve high-level 
visual processing (hippocampal place area, fusiform 
gyrus, lingual gyrus) and episodic memory processing 
(parahippocampal cortex, entorhinal cortex)— both 
common features of dreaming— but relative deacti­
vation in circuits subserving higher-level cognition 
(prefrontal cortical regions). These findings have been 
interpreted (Domhoff & Fox, 2015) to provide con­
vergent validity for findings from brain lesion patients 
(e.g., Solms, 1997), but nevertheless fall short of pro­
viding hard evidence for the neurophysiological cor­
relates of specific types of dream content.
And even among the many studies that have 
attempted to link dream recall or attributes of dream 
content with specific neurophysiological indicators, 
most commonly electroencephalograph (EEG) mea­
sures, mixed results have been reported, at best. To 
illustrate, researchers have found the recall or the 
vividness of REM sleep dreams to be preceded by 
reduced alpha power (Bertolo, Paiva, Pessoa, Mestre, 
Marques, & Santos, 2003; Esposito, Nielsen, & 
Paquette, 2004), especially reduced frontal alpha 
power (Chellappa & Cajochen, 2013); but oth­
ers report associations with reduced delta power 
(Esposito et al., 2004; Siclari, Baird, Perogamvros, 
Bernardi, LaRocque, Riedner, Boly, Postle, &Tononi,
2017), reduced frontal beta power (Chellappa, Frey, 
Knoblauch, & Cajochen, 2011), reduced 4 to 14 Hz 
power (Lehmann, Dumermuth, Lange, & Meier, 
1981), increased 40 Hz power (Llinas & Ribary, 
1993), increased occipital gamma power (Siclari, 
et al., 2017), 
increased occipital beta power 
(Chellappa et al., 2011), and increased theta power 
(Marzano, 
Ferrara, 
Mauro, 
Moroni, 
Gorgoni, 
Tempesta, Cipolli, & De Gennaro, 2011; Scarpelli, 
D ’Atri, Gorgoni, Ferrara, & Gennaro, 2015). 
Similarly for NREM sleep, while some studies again 
find dreaming to be associated with reduced alpha 
activity (Esposito et al., 2004; Hong, Jin, Potkin, 
Buchsbaum, Wu, Callaghan, Nudleman, & Gillin, 
1996), others report reduced delta (Chellappa et al., 
2011; Esposito et al., 2004; Siclari, et al., 2017), 
reduced 12 to 15 Hz (spindle) activity, increased 
beta power (Williamson, Csima, Galin, & Mamelak, 
1986), increased occipital gamma power (Siclari, et 
al., 2017), or no differences at all (Morel, Hoffmann, 
& Moffitt, 1991). Thus, while some EEG studies 
converge in identifying reduced alpha power as a cor­
relate of dreaming, others suggest a variety of different 
markers. There is even less evidence that specific EEG 
signatures accompany specific qualities of dream con­
tent, such as emotion, color, or complexity (but see 
Siclari, et al., 2017 for a preliminary study).
The discovery shortfall in dream neuroscience 
may be due, paradoxically, to an overabundance of 
information— both phenomenological and neu­
rophysiological. Research has attempted to quan­
tify, in parallel, extended multisensory episodes of 
dreaming on the one hand, and multifactorial arrays 
of neurophysiological information on the other. 
Yet, approaches that attempt to align such complex 
phenomena are largely unstandardized, with little 
agreement on what levels of description and types of 
measurement are appropriate to assess phenomenal 
and physiological events in parallel. This is ultimately
412
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

a problem of isomorphic mapping (Nielsen, 2000) or, 
more recently, of delineating the neural correlates of 
consciousness (Hohwy & Bayne, 2015).
The pitfalls of undertaking such a multicompo­
nent task are too numerous to enumerate here, but 
they include factors such as use of subjects who are 
untrained in the introspective reporting of dreams, 
failure to control for inaccuracies in recalling and 
reporting long dream sequences, assessment of EEG 
signals in the frequency (not the time) domain, and 
use of broad-band EEG definitions (alpha, theta, 
etc.) and a limited number of EEG leads (e.g., C3), 
among others.
Despite the scarcity of discovery and the meth­
odological pitfalls in previous research, there has 
been no shortage of speculation about dreamings 
neurophysiological basis. REM sleep has routinely 
been treated as a proxy for dreaming, and REM 
sleep mechanisms largely equated with dreaming 
mechanisms. This allowed early investigators to 
propose dreaming theories, such as the activation- 
synthesis model (Hobson & McCarley, 1977) or 
the genetic programming model (Jouvet, 1998), 
that were supported principally by animal studies of 
REM sleep. More recent human neuroimaging stud­
ies have also enabled speculative theories (DomhofF 
& Fox, 2015; Maquet, Ruby, Maudoux, Albouy, 
Sterpenich, 
Dang-Vu, 
Desseilles, 
Boly, 
Perrin, 
Peigneux, & Laureys, 2005; Pace-Schott, 2005) but, 
again, most such studies have not assessed whether 
dreams were present during the brain scans, nor 
have they correlated dream content attributes 
with neural activity patterns; studies by Maquets 
group (Maquet, Peters, Aerts, Delfiore, Degueldre, 
Luxen, & Franck, 1996) and Gottschalk s group 
(Gottschalk, Buchsbaum, Gillin, Wu, Reynolds, & 
Deborah, 1991; Gottschalk, Buchsbaum, Gillin, 
Wu, Reynolds, & Herrera, 1991) constitute a few 
important exceptions.
In sum, the laboratory methods of REM-period 
awakenings for sampling dreaming have not resulted 
in a decidedly clearer portrait of dreamings neuro­
physiological underpinnings. While there is conver­
gence from some domains, on the whole findings 
are mixed (e.g., EEG) or based on interpretations 
of REM sleep neurophysiology (e.g., PET). Rather, 
it may be that the overabundance of information 
and an intractable isomorphic mapping problem 
have prevented researchers from demonstrating 
reliable relationships between these two domains 
of 
measurement— neurophysiological 
theories
notwithstanding.
An Alternative Approach: Microdynamic 
Neurophenomenology
Alternative methods that may hasten discovery 
in dream science focus on the microdynamics of 
dreaming. One neurophenomenological approach 
(Petitmengin & Lachaux, 2013) applicable to 
dream science employs a convergence of phenom­
enological and neural descriptions aimed at brief 
cognitive events. The phenomenological compo­
nent of this approach describes the microdynamics 
of brief experiential events. Applied to imagery, the 
approach employs a mode of attending to features 
of “how” an experience appears, rather than “what” 
appears in it (Petitmengin & Lachaux, 2013):
. ..  if a mental image is emerging into our 
consciousness, we have to reorient our attention from 
the content of the image (for example a blooming 
cherry tree), toward the dynamics of appearance, 
the genesis of this content: the rapid phases which 
precede its stabilization, and at each phase, the 
subtle inner micro-gestures that we perform to elicit, 
stabilize, recognize, evaluate, rule out, or enrich 
this image. Becoming aware of this microdynamics 
requires a particular mode of attention, which is both 
unfocused, diffuse, receptive, and very acute, sensitive 
to the most subtle discontinuities. (Petitmengin & 
Lachaux, 2013, p. 2)
Petitmengin explores various methods for 
applying this attentional mode: “first-person” 
accounts, “second-person” elicited descriptions, 
autobiographical reports from trained individuals 
(e.g., poets, meditators), and others (Petitmengin, 
2006; Petitmengin & Bitbol, 2009; Petitmengin 
& Lachaux, 2013). Thus, using an elicitation 
in terview  (Petitmengin, 2006; Petitmengin & 
Lachaux, 2013), Petitmengin successfully elic­
ited descriptions of subtle early signs of epilep­
tic seizures or of how a concept matures from a 
“fuzzy and blurred” feeling to a “clear and dis­
tinct” idea. First-person applications have allowed 
her to describe the pre-reflective, pre-conceptual 
“source” of thoughts (Petitmengin, 2007) and 
the introspective process itself (Petitmengin & 
Bitbol, 2009). Such microdynamic phenomenol­
ogy has not yet been attempted for dream expe­
rience; there may be practical obstacles to doing 
so, as summarized previously. But the approaches 
are particularly well-suited for brief dreaming 
events occurring at sleep onset. I developed a first- 
person self-observational approach to study sleep- 
onset imagery (Nielsen, 1995) and subsequently
T O R E  N I E L S E N
413

adapted it to a second-person approach for use 
with untrained laboratory subjects (Germain & 
Nielsen, 2001). The first-person method is the 
basis for the discovery of two new microdream 
phenomena reported in later sections.
For the neural analysis component of the 
microdynamic 
approach, 
intracranial 
EEG 
(iEEG) has been given particular attention. iEEG 
has been applied successfully to the study of object 
naming (Hamame, Alario, Llorens, Liegeois- 
Chauvel, & Trebuchon-Da Fonseca, 2014), face 
processing (Musch, Hamame, Perrone-Bertolotti, 
Minotti, Kahane, Engel, Lachaux, & Schneider,
2014) , perceptual learning (Hamame, Cosmelli, 
Henriquez, & Aboitiz, 2011), and visual imag­
ery (Hamame, Vidal, Ossandon, Jerbi, Dalai, 
Minotti, Bertrand, Kahane, & Lachaux, 2012). 
iEEG has the advantage of providing fine time 
resolution (in the order of milliseconds), fine spa­
tial resolution (in the order of cubic millimeters), 
single-trial precision (high signal-to-noise ratio) 
and even real-time feedback. While iEEG is not 
practical for use with non-epileptic subjects, the 
feasibility of microdynamic neural approaches is 
supported by advances in brain imaging, such as 
the delineation of EEG microstates (Milz, Faber, 
Lehmann, Koenig, Kochi, & Pascual-Marqui,
2015) and the development of high-density EEG 
procedures (Mouthon & Huber, 2015), together 
with increasingly precise descriptions of sleep- 
onset EEG events.
In sum, rather than grappling with the overly 
large data sets of traditional research, dream science 
could benefit from focusing a microdynamic lens 
on the neurophysiological fluctuations that accom­
panying ultra-brief sleep-onset images.
Historical Antecedents to Microdynamic 
Dream Study
A handful of studies have anticipated, and sup­
port the feasibility of, microdynamic approaches to 
dream neurophenomenology. These have delimited 
the amounts of dreaming and accompanying neuro­
physiology to test specific isomorphism hypotheses. 
In one early study (Gardner, Grossman, Roffwarg, 
& Weiner, 1975), subjects reported only the last 15 
seconds of dream content, starting with the last item 
recalled (and remembering in reverse order), and 
these were assessed against quantified occurrences 
of upper and lower dream limb movements; elec­
tromyogram (EMG) tracings revealed significant 
correspondences between dreamed movements and 
real limb activity that occurred within 5 seconds of
waking up. At an even finer scale of measurement 
(Herman, Erman, Boys, Peiser, Taylor, & Roffwarg, 
1984), subjects were trained to report only the last 
“few seconds” of dreamed content, paying partic­
ular attention to virtual reorientations of the eyes 
and head, while real eye movements (EOG) occur­
ring immediately before waking up were recorded. 
Again, correspondences between the directionality 
of dreamed and real eye movements were found. 
Two studies (Foulkes & Pope, 1973; Molinari & 
Foulkes, 1969) applied a similar approach to test a 
tonic-phasic model, which predicts that dream con­
tents will differ for sleep periods whose physiology 
is relatively constant in nature (tonic), that is, con­
taining no phasic activations such as eye movements 
or sawtooth waves, versus those that do contain such 
brief activations (phasic). Subjects reported their 
“very last experience” before awakening with poly­
somnography (PSG) signals being assessed for rapid 
eye movements and sawtooth waves within 10-30 
seconds of awakening. REM-phasic awakenings 
were associated with discrete sensory dream events 
like seeing (88%) more often than were REM-tonic 
awakenings (20%); the latter were associated more 
with conceptual content like thinking or wondering 
(80%) than were the former (12%).
A final example relevant specifically to sleep- 
onset 
microdreaming 
(Germain 
& 
Nielsen,
2001) had subjects signal precisely when brief 
dream images appeared in awareness. EEG activity 
was sampled from 9 seconds preceding the signal, 
subjected to spectral analysis and compared with 
wake EEG taken 35 seconds earlier. Specific rela­
tionships between subject-reported image modality 
and EEG frequency and topography were found; 
kinesthetic images had higher delta power in fron­
tal regions (Fpl, Fp2, F3, Fz, F8) than did visual 
images, and visual images had higher delta power 
in a dispersion of mainly left central and temporal 
leads (F7, C3, Cz, T3, T5).
These studies demonstrate the feasibility of 
applying microdynamic methods to the laboratory 
study of brief dream imagery and its neural corre­
lates, but especially to imagery occurring at sleep 
onset. While the question of isomorphism remains 
unresolved, these studies converge in suggesting 
that neural correlates may be found when very brief 
imagery samples are targeted. They also raise the 
important issue of widening the scope of physiolog­
ical measurement beyond the EEG, as other mea­
sures such as the EMG and EOG appear sensitive to 
the multifactorial correlates of dreaming including, 
especially, its kinetic or movement features.
414
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

The Spectrum of Sleep-Onset Imagery
Multiple studies (see reviews in Mavromatis 
& Richardson, 1984; Oswald, 1962; Schacter, 
1976; Vogel, 1991) attest to the presence of vivid 
dreams during the sleep-onset transition (Ogilvie,
2001), dreams that vary considerably in structure, 
specificity, length, clarity and presence or absence 
of different sensory modalities (Figure 30.1). 
Both anecdotal and empirical studies identify a 
resplendent variety of imagery, ranging from very 
elaborate and dream-like to extremely simple and 
almost subliminal. This spectrum includes images 
that appear to arise out of the waking state. At 
one extreme are the complex elaborate dreams 
that accompany sleep-onset REM (SOREM) and 
partial SOREM episodes. Their commonness is 
revealed by the fact that 13%-23% of normal sub­
jects exhibit at least one SOREM episode on the 
standardized Multiple Sleep Latency Test (Bishop, 
Rosenthal, Helmus, Roehrs, & Roth, 1996; Singh, 
Drake, & Roth, 2006); in fact, as little as one hour 
of nighttime sleep disruption can induce SOREM 
episodes when subjects return to sleep (Fukuda, 
Miyasita, & Inugami, 1987; Miyasita, Fukuda, & 
Inugami, 1989).
Partial SOREM episodes, during which some 
(but not all) signs of REM sleep are visible, are also 
common; episodes of muscle atonia— a defining 
feature of REM sleep— are particularly likely to 
occur at sleep onset, a phenomenon referred to as 
muscle atonia in N R E M  sleep, or MAN (Tinguely, 
Huber, Borbely, & Achermann, 2006; Werth, 
Achermann, & Borbely, 2002).
Less complex and elaborate dream imagery 
occurs in NREM Stage 1 (N l) and Stage 2 (N2) 
sleep. However, recall of any item of dream imagery 
is high at these times, 90%-98%, for sleep-onset 
stages N 1 and N2 (Figure 30.2; Foulkes & Vogel, 
1965; Vogel, 1991); even higher than the average 
level (80%) for nocturnal REM sleep (Nielsen, 
2000). More complex dreaming, defined as involv­
ing hallucinated dramatic episodes, is more scarce 
from N l and N2 (31 %—76%; Vogel, 1991) than 
from REM sleep. At the other extreme of this spec­
trum are the microdream images most suitable to 
a microdynamic analytic approach. These tend to 
occur during drowsiness and waking reverie and, 
although they appear to be less elaborate or complex 
than images from other sleep stages, nonetheless 
share the pseudohallucinatory qualities of the latter.
Specturm of oneiragogic experience in the sleep onset 
transition: imagery types and associated sleep/wake stages
Hallucinatory images, 
Regressive images 
f 
N
O 
a  
□
Waking reverie
Sleepiness sensations 
Fleeting images
r~
CD
Mildly drowsy
Sleepiness sensations 
Fleeting images
f------------------
□
o a
Very drowsy
Brief coherent images
d c d  
0
a  ° d
F 
D
E 
CD 
CD
a  
□ (
Stage 1 sleep
Stage 2 sleep
Brief coherent images, Longer images
r f
D  
CD 
_
 
□
□
□
I
□Bl
Partial SOREM sleep
G 
Full-blown dream imagery
s b d b d d b d '
m s n n n n n n
SOREM sleep
-------------------------- ►
-1 sec
Sleep Onset Transition
Figure 30.1. (See Color Insert) Some varieties of experience falling on the oneiragogic spectrum (i.e., the phenomenological events 
characterizing the sleep-onset transition). Experiences of increasing complexity are proposed to occur during passage through 
different sleep-onset states, as described in the text. The briefest and least complex events are presumed to occur during microsleeps 
that may take place during (A) waking reverie (blue bars) or (B) mildly or (C) very drowsy wakefulness (red bars) and more complex 
events during (D) Stage 1 and (E) Stage 2 NREM sleep (purple bars). Longer images and full-fledged dreaming occurs during either 
(F) Partial SOREM sleep, when only some signs of REM sleep (e.g., muscle atonia, alpha EEG reduction) are visible (green bars), 
or (G) SOREM sleep, when all basic signs of REM sleep are visible. SOREM events are very prevalent, occurring under various 
situations of sleep disruption, including especially combinations of low NREM and high REM propensity.
T O R E  N I E L S E N
415

R & K
stage
Hori
stage
EEG composition
EEG appearance
W
1
Alpha wave train
W
2
Alpha wave intermittent (>50%)
SI
3
Alpha wave intermittent (<50%)
SI
4
EEG flattening
--------—
SI
5
Ripples of low-voltage theta waves
51 
6 
Vertex sharp wave solitary
51 
y 
Vertex sharp wave train/brust
51 
g Vertex sharp wave and incomplete spindle
52 
9 
At least one complete spindle
Imagery attributes
100 -r---------------------
------------ ■
Vis
-♦-A ud
-*-Body
—*-Misc
— ------ X
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
7 
8
9
EEG sleep onset stage
Figure 30.2. (See Color Insert) Left panel: definitions of Hori sleep-onset substages (Hori stage) in relation to standard Rechtschaffen 
and Kales sleep/wake stages (R&K stage). Right panel: Percentages of subjects reporting dreams and claiming to be asleep (upper 
panel) and sensory attributes of reported imagery for 9 EEG-defined sleep-onset substages. Note that visual imagery can occur in the 
earliest substages. W = wake; SI = stage 1; S2 = stage 2. Source: Hori, Hayashi, & Morikawa, (1994).
More detailed analysis 
of the physiologi­
cal changes accompanying sleep-onset imagery 
(Hayashi, Katoh, & Hori, 1999; Tanaka, Hayashi, 
& Hori, 1998a, 1998b) led to a subdivision of stan­
dard W, N l, and N2 stages into a progression of 
nine, more precise, EEG-based substages (Figure
30.2, left panel). Subjective sleepiness ratings vali­
date the claim that these Hori sleep-onset (HSO) 
stages reflect a gradual progression into sleep. 
However, the likelihood of recalling dream menta­
tion is present to some degree even at HSO stage 
1, and increases progressively up to stage 5 (Figure
30.2, upper right, bars). Assessment of imagery 
attributes (Figure 30.2, lower right) reveals that 
visual quality is high for all substages, but reaches 
a plateau at stage 5, at which point the incidence 
of all other sensory attributes diminishes. Together, 
the results suggest that dreamlike imagery is partic­
ularly apt to arise early in sleep onset, when alpha 
drops out and theta appears (HSO stages 4-5). Our 
own study (Germain & Nielsen, 2001), which used 
a phenomeno- rather than a neuro-centric1 method 
for sampling spontaneously arising images, con­
firmed this: the vast majority of images signaled 
(93.4% or 112/120) were from HSO stages 4-5.
Finally, dreamlike imagery is sometimes reported 
when objective and subjective measures indicate 
wakefulness; almost 25% of reports in two studies of 
quiet wakefulness were dreamlike and distinct from 
waking mentation such as mind-wandering or being 
lost in thought (Foulkes & Fleisher, 1975; Foulkes
& Scott, 1973). As these studies remain unrepli­
cated, it is unknown whether the observed images 
are distinct attributes of waking-state imagery or, 
in fact, microdreams for which the sleep signs were 
too subtle to quantify with methods available at the 
time. They may have occurred during microsleeps, 
which are sleep intrusions as brief as a fraction of 
a second (Tirunahari, Zaidi, Sharma, Skurnick, & 
Ashtyani, 2003). Microsleeps are associated with 
localized deactivations of the brain in some regions 
(thalamus, posterior cingulate, occipital cortex) and 
localized activations in others (frontal, posterior 
parietal, parahippocampal) and display the small­
est brain changes when they are the briefest (0.5-5 
s) (Poudel, Innes, Bones, Watts, & Jones, 2014). 
Subjects commonly— sometimes adamantly— deny 
having slept during microsleep episodes, despite clear 
electrophysiological (e.g., EEG) and behavioral (e.g., 
response failure) evidence to the contrary (Oswald, 
1962, pp. 63-65). Oswald (1962) attributes this 
denial to the failure of introspective capacities while 
subjects are momentarily unconscious.
An Oneiragogic Spectrum
Windt (2010, 2015), better than any previ­
ous author, offers a comprehensive framework for 
describing the variety of sleep-onset imagery, which 
she dubs the spectrum of oneiragogic experience. This 
new term refers to the progression of phenomeno­
logical events leading from drowsy wakeful percep­
tion to full-fledged dreaming (Table 30.1, items
4 1 6
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

Table 30.1 Summary of the Oneiragogic Experiential Spectrum Including Five Constitutive Dimensions and a 
Proposed Amendment
ISTH Dimension
Description
Simple Extreme 
(Closer to Waking)
Complex Extreme 
(Closer to Dreaming)
1. Visuospatial scene
The sense of being located 
at a specific point in a larger 
spatial expanse (“here”)
Isolated, static
Dynamic, prolonged, 
immersive
2. Phenomenal embodiment
Progression from passive 
observation to active 
participation
Partial body awareness 
(e.g., sleepiness feelings)
Full-body awareness
3. Temporal reference frame
The sense of being located 
in a specific moment within 
a succession of moments 
(“now”)
Brief, isolated instant
Prolonged, organized 
narrative
4. Waking memory sources
Integration of recent with 
increasingly remote memory 
sources
Recent, episodic 
memories
Remote, abstract, but
semantically-related
memories
5. Autobiographical 
historicity
The sense that an image is 
part of ones autobiographical 
experience/memory 
(“recallability”)
Barely graspable as own 
experience, difficult to 
recall
Integration in 
autobiographic memory, 
easily recalled
6. Kinesis (proposed)
The sense of dynamism, 
movement
Ultra-brief movements
Complex movements
ISTH = immersive spatiotemporal hallucination. 
Source: Windt (2015).
1-5) or “the trajectory underlying the shift in self­
location from a perceptual to a hallucinatory (or 
dreamlike) reference frame” (Windt, 2015, p. 536). 
In other words, ones sense of immersion in space 
and time {here and now) shifts progressively from 
a veridical framework (the real world) to an hal­
lucinatory framework (the dream world). She con­
siders the oneiragogic spectrum analogous to, but 
distinct from, the hypnagogic state, which describes 
a progression of physiological changes from wake 
to sleep. The oneiragogic spectrum forms part of a 
broader conceptual framework for dream phenom­
enology, the immersive spatiotemporal hallucination 
(ISTH) model (see Windt, 2015, Chapter 11). Five 
dimensions are proposed to constitute the oneira­
gogic spectrum; I suggest adding a sixth, kinesis, to 
describe movement quality (Table 30.1, item 6).
Whereas the concept of microdreams has been 
used by several authors to describe all sleep-onset 
imagery (see review in Oswald, 1962), the onei­
ragogic spectrum advances the phenomenological 
triage of imagery types and facilitates the identifica­
tion of particularly brief images of interest to the
microdynamic approach. I suggest using the term 
microdream in the present context in a more limited 
sense to refer to those images falling on the simpler 
extreme of the oneiragogic spectrum.
Microdreaming
Because existing studies have typically treated 
sleep-onset imagery as of a single type, only rarely 
are simpler images systematically contrasted with 
more complex ones, despite the fact that differ­
ence in the lengths of dream reports has remained a 
central methodological concern of researchers who 
compare REM and NREM dream reports (Hunt, 
Ruzycki-Hunt, Pariak, & Belicki, 1993). The only 
systematic studies I am aware of that have attempted 
to identify the simplest forms of images are my own 
self-observational studies. From a set of over 250 
sleep-onset images recorded under either laboratory 
or naturalistic conditions, and for which I have pre­
sented preliminary phenomenological descriptions 
(Nielsen, 1991, 1995), I identified a subgroup of 
images referred to as “fleeting images” but that I now 
consider a type of microdream. I distinguished these
T O R E  N I E L S E N
417

brief images from “fully formed” images in respect 
to their timing, duration, simplicity, ineffability, 
and association with sleepiness feelings. In short, 
fleeting images were found to
• occur in the very earliest stages of a self­
observation trial (i.e., during mild drowsiness);
• be so brief that they often require an 
established intent (if not introspective training) to 
observe;
• possess primarily unimodal sensory content;
• frequently fall outside of the normal range of 
experience, thus defying easy description;
• be accompanied by subtle feelings of falling 
asleep.
Fully formed images, in contrast, were found to
• occur later in the sleep-onset transition;
• be longer and easier to recall;
• possess a more complex, multimodal structure;
• be easier to describe;
• often mask accompanying sleepiness feelings.
Using the oneiragogic spectrum terminology, 
fleeting images may now be described to
• implicate an isolated spatiotemporal location 
(“here”);
• include a sense of body awareness, however 
ephemeral (e.g., sleepiness feelings);
• occur in a discrete instant (“now”);
• draw upon a few recent, episodic memories 
(e.g., ongoing sensory stimuli);
• be often barely graspable and difficult to 
recall;
• possess a subtle kinetic quality (i.e., sensed 
movement of self or setting).
Fully formed images, in contrast, more closely 
resemble common dreams. That is, they are spatio- 
temporally elaborate (multimodal), possess a greater 
measure of embodiment, are temporally extended, 
draw upon a wider swath of remote memory ele­
ments, are more fully integrated into ones histori­
cal context (easily recalled), and are more obviously 
dynamic in character.
There is still no validated method for distinguish­
ing fleeting microdreams from fully formed images, 
but the oneiragogic spectrum— possibly with the 
addition of the kinesis dimension— provides a 
thorough framework for drawing such distinctions 
clearly and reliably. With further development, it 
could serve as a standardized tool for classifying the 
phenomenological attributes of sleep-onset imagery.
Example of a Microdream
An example of a microdream recorded in our 
sleep laboratory is shown in Figure 30.3. The pre­
cise timing of this primarily kinesthetic image was 
signaled with a handheld switch, which allowed its 
accompanying neurophysiological changes to be 
examined in some detail. EEG, EOG, and EMG 
changes accompanied an episode of microsleep 
of about one second in duration, and included a 
decrease in occipital alpha activity, neck and chin 
muscle atonia (MAN), and the appearance of slow 
eye movements.
The image was very brief and unusual in that it 
consisted of apparent sensations of touch (“knock­
ing”) and motion (“moving”) that occurred inside 
the head. On the oneiragogic spectrum, this image 
displays 
(1) 
rudimentary spatiality 
(“inside”), 
including vague visuospatiality (“someone elses 
head”); (2) minimal embodiment (“head”); and
(3) minimal temporal extension (“[the knocking] 
is moving”). There was no report of (4) memory 
sources, but (5) minimal historicity is suggested 
by the difficulty in recall (“vague visual impres­
sion”). Finally, these attributes possess (6) a clear 
spatially kinetic character in that the sensations 
changed dynamically over time (“knocking,” “mov­
ing”). Note that although the memory sources of 
this image were not reported or probed, many other 
images of this type were recorded in the previous 
study (Nielsen, 1995) and were found to relate 
directly to sensations that either just preceded the 
image (e.g., ongoing sensations of cutaneous pres­
sure) or were present as the image emerged (e.g., 
the head abruptly nodding). This feature is dealt 
with in more detail in discussion of multi-temporal 
memory associations in a following section.
Simple oneiragogic experiences such as the one 
in Figure 30.3 can be mined for evidence of the 
elusive defining features of dreaming s phenomenal 
core. These defining features are likely to be more 
easily discernible in simple imagery than in com­
plex REM sleep imagery because simple images lack 
the common, albeit non-essential, features so typi­
cal of complex imagery (e.g., emotion, visual/audi- 
tory details, or narrative structure). Windt (2015, 
pp. 517-520) makes the case that dreaming, includ­
ing especially sleep-onset dreaming, may be purely 
spatial in nature, an argument bolstered by the 
observation that congenitally blind subjects report 
vivid dreaming despite their total absence of visual 
imagery (Kerr & Domhoff, 2004; Kerr, Foulkes, & 
Schmidt, 1982).
418
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

01/A2
02/A1
LOC/A1
4-H  
I 
\lA I 
4 .....1
a
Hand Switch
1 sec
Figure 30.3. Sample microdream recorded using a phenomeno-centric signaling procedure. The signaled image was primarily 
kinesthetic in nature (“I feel a knocking inside my head and a sense that it is moving; also a vague visual impression of seeing 
someone else’s head”). Recorded correlates of the experience define a microsleep of slightly more than one second in duration, 
including (a) an abrupt decrease in cervical and chin EMG, (b) a sudden bilateral decrease in occipital alpha waves and the 
appearance of a low amplitude, slow eye movement on the LOC/A1 channel. This pattern changes abruptly to wakefulness 
(alpha with movement) at (d) when the end of the image is signaled. The appearance of (c) two brief rapid eye movements just 
prior to the signal may reflect an oculomotor component to the image or part of an awakening reaction. Cardiac activity is 
visible on the cervical EMG channel at a steady 60 bpm through the sequence. Source: Nielsen (1995).
Because the available evidence concerning micro­
dreams still stems largely from self-observational 
studies and because replication studies are still 
lacking, I continue to consider examples such as 
the ones presented here to constitute provisional 
findings— proofs in principle of microdreaming 
and a basis for the generation of hypotheses to be 
tested, rather than evidence of established facts. 
Further, although I claim that microdreams are the 
simplest form of oneiragogic experience, research 
with subjects of different personalities and under 
different conditions and who are highly trained 
in self-observation may well uncover even simpler 
images than have been reported thus far. The limits 
of imagery simplicity remain uncharted. Exploring 
these limits may well challenge existing findings 
and methodologies, but such revelations would 
constitute a welcome outcome of the micrody­
namic dreaming project.
Spatiotemporal Kinesis
The kinetic attributes of an organism are its 
capacity to move or react in its environment, usually 
in response to sources of stimulation. Analogously, 
an images kinetic qualities refer to its inher­
ent dynamism, vitality, or moment-to-moment 
changeability within its hallucinatory context—  
and possibly also in response to its various memory 
sources. Full-blown dreaming is clearly kinetic in 
this respect, rich with immersive self-movement, 
character actions, and environmental flux that can 
be linked to memory source elements. However, 
microdreams, too, express this feature— even in 
their simplest, most ephemeral forms— and in this 
respect their phenomenal core is the same as that 
of dreaming. Kinesis manifests most often as a 
realistic apparent movement of the self (or part of 
the self) or of another character, or of an apparent 
movement felt to take place inside the body. It also
T O R E  N I E L S E N
419

manifests as apparent movement of the environ­
ment in proximity to the self. But it may even occur 
in ways that are less obviously related to visuospa- 
tial modulation. For example, images containing 
vivid isometric tension or sensations of an immi­
nent action or impending contact with something 
else may reflect a variant of spatial kinesis. In this 
respect, then, my description of microdreams differs 
somewhat from that of Windt in that I do not view 
the simple extreme of microdreams to be static> as 
is suggested by her description of the visuospatial 
scene dimension in Table 30.1. Rather, I hypothe­
size that microdreams are by nature kinetic and that 
this feature is as integral to the immersive nature 
of microdreams as it is to completely hallucinatory 
dream experiences.
Microdream Memory Sources
The study of microdreams offers unique pos­
sibilities for developing experimental methods to 
clarify how and why images are formed. These pos­
sibilities hinge on identifying an images memory 
associations— associations that are widely assumed 
to index the memory sources from which the image 
derives (Freud, 1900; Nielsen & Stenstrom, 2005). 
The following sections deal with three advantages 
of memory source analysis that microdreams con­
fer, including how such work may contribute to the 
development of experimental methods for investi­
gating imagery formation. These advantages include 
the following: access to memory sources that arise 
from multiple time periods (m ulti-tem poral memory 
sources); access to memory sources rooted in waking 
cognitions and somatic sensations occurring prior 
to image formation (autosymbolic imagery); and 
access to observations that suggest causal relation­
ships between memory sources and image elements 
(autosensory imagery\ exosensory imagery).
ACCESS TO MULTI-TEMPORAL MEMORY 
ASSOCIATIONS
The memory sources of microdreams are read­
ily accessible even while being restricted in num­
ber. Clearly, an image less than a second in duration 
would be expected to derive from fewer source mem­
ories than would a lengthier, REM sleep, dream. 
Also, because the observation of images occurs 
so close to a waking state, access to their memory 
sources may be optimal. Using a self-observational 
approach, we previously demonstrated both the fea­
sibility of identifying memory sources of sleep-onset 
images and that these sources are relatively few in 
number (Stenstrom, Fox, Solomonova, & Nielsen,
2012). Figure 30.4 shows all memories associated 
with a total of 31 sleep-onset images collected over 
two nights from a single subject, classified by the 
memories’ times since occurrence. The number of 
memories for each image is clearly restrained: an 
average of 2.6±1.1 (range: 1-5) per image.2 For a 
majority of these images, memories were drawn 
simultaneously from both recent and remote time 
periods, a finding consistent with other research for 
dream imagery (Verdone, 1965). Further, variations 
in the temporal distance of these memories from 
the image suggest that their access may have been 
modulated by time of night and, possibly, day of 
week factors. For example, on both Nights 1 and 
2 memories for elements that were encountered 
just prior to sleep (e.g., lab technician, EEG equip­
ment) were clearly reported for the first four images 
of the night; yet, for Night 2 these very recent 
memories persisted even for later night images, 
while for Night 1 they tended to diminish. Such 
variation may mean that circadian factors modulate 
access to memory sources (for a review, see Nielsen, 
2011) or that habituation to the laboratory and the 
self-observational method takes place before access 
to memory sources is completely stable. In either 
case, this study illustrates the ease of both collecting 
memory sources at sleep onset and evaluating their 
temporal distances from a target image.
Sample M em ory Source Analysis
The following example describes the memory 
sources of a single, brief microdream arising from 
multiple prior time periods. The description further 
illustrates a hypothetical model that could explain 
formation of the image (for a detailed presenta­
tion of this analysis, see Nielsen, 1995). I suggest 
a multi-temporal classification of memory sources 
that consists of four general categories differentiated 
by their temporal distance from the target image:
1. Im m ediate memory: thoughts, perceptions, 
and sensations that are ongoing or that occurred 
only moments before image onset. These might 
include sensations of pressure in the arms, legs, or 
neck that manifest as images in which arm, leg, or 
head movement figures centrally.
2. Short-term memory', experiences that occurred 
minutes to hours prior to image onset. These are 
relatively easy to identify, occurring only a short 
time before the observation session.
3. M edium -term  memory', experiences that 
occurred one or more days prior to the image.
They include previous-day memories (day-residue
420
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

Night 1 
11:32:00 PM 
11:48:00 PM 
12:22:00 AM 
12:58:00 AM 
01:39:00 AM 
02:04:00 AM 
02:52:00 AM 
02:57:00 AM 
03:09:00 AM 
03:45:00 AM 
04:03:00 AM 
04:36:00 AM 
04:55:00 AM 
05:22:00 AM 
05:41:00 AM 
Night 2 
11:56:00 PM 
12:20:00 PM 
12:34:00 PM 
12:58:00 PM 
01:20:00 AM 
01:45:00 AM 
02:20:00 PM 
02:44:00 AM 
03:01:00 AM 
03:22:00 AM 
03:43:00 AM 
04:00:00 AM 
04:30:00 AM 
04:47:00 AM 
05:00:00 AM 
05:15:00 AM
#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16 
17
Days 
Weeks 
Months 
Years
1 2 3 4 5 6  
1 2 3 4  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  1011 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  101112131415
:
it
• •
8
— •  
• ---------
• ----- • -----• -
m ----------•
- • —
•
. « 
r  .
•  
•
- • —
• -------•
• •
1 2 3 4 5 6  
1 2 3 4  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  1011 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  101112131415
Days 
Weeks 
M onths 
Years
Figure 30.4. Temporal distances between sleep-onset images and their memory sources collected over two nights from a single 
subject. Circles denote sources situated in time (x axis) for images collected over two nights (y axis); black lines denote sources from 
the same image. Source: Stenstrom, Fox, Solomonova & Nielsen (2012).
effect; (Freud, 1900; Nielsen & Powell, 1992) and 
memories from six to eight days earlier (dream- 
lag effect; (Nielsen, Kuiken, Alain, Stenstrom, & 
Powell, 2004; van Rijn, Eichenlaub, Lewis, Walker, 
Gaskell, Malinowski, & Blagrove, 2015). These 
may be difficult to retrieve, but access may be 
facilitated by systematically reviewing events from 
the previous week.
4. 
Long-term memory: experiences that occurred 
weeks, months or years prior to the image. These 
may be difficult to identify reliably and have been 
investigated only minimally. They are often rooted 
in declarative memory and thus resemble the 
“semantic knowledge” memory-source category 
(Cicogna, Cavallero & Bosinelli, 1991).
Figure 30.5 illustrates a single, one-second 
microdream (right panel) arranged chronologically 
(left panel, bottom row). Its associated memory 
elements are classified according to the four-part 
scheme (left panel, Y-axis). The memory sources 
are also arranged in a hypothetical chronological 
sequence, and hypothetical causal influences among 
them and the image elements are indicated by black 
arrows.
A comparison of the image and memory elements 
suggests that the image is a close, but not exact, 
reproduction of a medium-term episodic memory 
fragment (i.e., of performing a quasi-reflexive arm 
movement during a volleyball game from six days 
earlier). This portion of the episodic memory3 pos­
sesses a sequential structure that is mirrored in the 
microdream: the visually perceived approach of 
the ball, the rapid motor response of the arm, and 
the cutaneous feedback from contact with the 
ball that were all experienced during a real volleyball 
game are represented in slightly altered form, but in 
the same chronological sequence, in the brief image. 
This “primary” memory fragment is modified by 
several “secondary” memory fragments such that the 
image does not directly depict the episodic memory. 
For example, the original quasi-reflexive arm move­
ment became completely reflexive in the image; the 
balls trajectory was altered; the balls size and weight 
sensations became sensations appropriate to a larger, 
lighter beach ball; and so forth. Such transforma­
tions of episodic elements may reflect the piecemeal 
nature of episodic memory storage (e.g., Brady, 
Konkle, Alvarez, & Oliva, 2013) or the influence of
T O R E  N I E L S E N
4 2 1

>ng-term
Vfemory
Im age
elements
A. Round object with 
blue and white swirls
B. Blue-and-white ball 
approaches; left forearm 
flexes to intercept it
C. Forearm contacts ball; 
senses its light weight
Image: I see a small blue-and-white object fa 
off to my left. Its colors are very bright andfo 
a swirled pattern. It suddenly and unexpectet 
flies toward me, horizontally but with a sligk 
arc. It was as if  someone had thrown it at mt
Close to me it is about the size of a basketbal
make a quick, reflexive movement with my l
arm as if  to strike or intercept it. For an insti
feel a sensation on the upper part of the elboi
andforearm as the ball makes contact with r
From this I perceive that the ball is much lig
and thinner in consistency than I had expecU
like a beach ball. Though I expect it to bourn
stays in my arm as if  I had caught it there. 
However, I wake up abruptly at the momen 
contact, before anything else can happen. I w
surprised by the image.
Color Insert) Multi-temporal description of memory sources associated to a single, one-second microdream (right panel) and hypothetical model of their combinati 
tegories of memory elements (jy-axis) combine to produce elements of the microdream as they unfold chronologically (X-axis). Arrows indicate possible causal influe 
:ess referred to as transformative priming. The image is proposed to unfold in three steps: (1) a combination of several short-term and one long-term memory elemen
hite object seen at a distance; (2) combination of the prior result with immediate memory impressions (kinesthetic) and one medium-term memory (flight of ball, r
ned image of an approaching ball and reflex motor response; (3) combination of the prior result with further immediate memory impressions (cutaneous), and a loi
1) to produce a transformed image of object contact with cutaneous feedback. Elements are thought to transform subsequent elements as they trigger (“prime”) then 
econscious level. The result is a continuous, de novo integration of memory elements that reflects features from all of the contributing memories but which expunge
e primary memory element—a reflex arm movement—is modified by several secondary elements: features such as color, trajectory, weight, and texture are changed,
ming may sustain the spatiotemporal coherence of the imagery sequence, may account for its persistently novel character, and may explain why larger episodic mem 
Nielsen (2017; 1995).

consolidation mechanisms that transform episodic 
into semantic memories (e.g., Stickgold, 2002).
The memory sources identified by this simple 
descriptive analysis lend themselves to hypothetical 
causal models of image formation. One type, a real­
tim e model, might stipulate that the image memory 
sources are combined successively in the chrono­
logical order shown. The notion of transformative 
prim in g is suggested as a basic mechanism of such 
combination: Each memory source both triggers 
(“primes”) and merges with (“transforms”) a subse­
quent memory or imagery element. Alternatively, an 
off-line model might suggest that the image sequence 
emerges fully formed into awareness, without the 
need for real-time integration. Integration might 
have occurred in the days, hours, minutes, or even 
seconds prior to the image, and only a brief trig­
ger may be needed to activate it in its entirety. 
Immediate memory sources (cutaneous, kinesthetic 
sensations) may thus serve to activate the preformed 
imagery associatively. Other models might be pro­
posed that stipulate combinations of real-time and 
off-line influences. Figure 30.5 is but a starting 
point, meant to demonstrate that much of the evi­
dence needed to explore such hypotheses is accessi­
ble from a thorough description of memory sources. 
And, unlike previous efforts that have attempted 
analyses of the memory sources of lengthy dream 
reports (Foulkes, 1978; Freud, 1900), microdreams 
offer a much simpler set of observations and a 
more limited number of hypothetical constructs to 
explain their phenomenology.
ACCESSING COGNITIVE AND SOMATIC IMAGERY 
SOURCES: AUTOSYMBOLIC IMAGERY
Microdreams are particularly useful for explor­
ing the potential influence of immediate and short­
term memory sources on image formation. This 
is amply demonstrated by Silberers (1909/1951) 
study of autosymbolic images, or images that auto­
matically and symbolically reflect ongoing wak­
ing states, thoughts or feelings. The three types 
he observed differed in the nature of the memory 
source represented:
1. M aterial images', reflect the contents of pre­
imagery thoughts, such as an abstract idea (e.g., 
thinking about the nature of trans-subjectivity) 
being represented by a perceptual image (e.g., 
dreaming of a transparent sphere with peoples’ 
heads in it).
2. Functional (effort) images', reflect attributes 
of the thinking process itself, such as a quality
of cognitive activity (e.g., losing one’s train of 
thought) being reflected symbolically (e.g., image 
of a line of text with no ending).
3. 
Somatic images', reflect the influence of 
sensations of any kind, such as somatic sensations 
(e.g., taking a deep breath) being reflected 
metaphorically (e.g., dream of lifting a table high 
in the air).
Silberer believed that autosymbolic images offered 
opportunities to experimentally examine dream pro­
duction mechanisms. For example, by holding in 
mind a particular thought content or by administer­
ing a particular type of somatic stimulus, one could 
observe how image formation processes incorporate 
these memory sources. Such experimental methods 
have, in fact, been used to influence the dreams of 
REM sleep (see review in Arkin & Antrobus, 1991). 
While I share this view of the potential usefulness 
of microdreams, it is critical to recognize that post 
hoc observations of juxtapositions between waking 
and sleeping cognitions do not guarantee that they 
are causally linked. It is possible that some underly­
ing factor spanning sleep/wake states produces both 
the waking cognition and its closely related dream 
image. For causality to be demonstrated, stimuli 
would need to be administered experimentally (i.e., 
with suitable control conditions). Notwithstanding 
this caveat, however, a limited set of self-observations 
does strongly support Silberers causality assump­
tion. While anecdotal, these observations bolster the 
feasibility of developing more thorough experimen­
tal approaches to investigate microdreams and to 
model their formation mechanisms. Some of these 
observations are described in the following sections.
ACCESSING CAUSAL FACTORS IN IMAGE FORMATION
I suggest broadening Silberers three-part classifi­
cation to include instances in which memory stim­
uli are more obviously linked in a causal fashion to 
images. Specifically, I suggest adding a fourth type 
of autosymbolic imagery— autosensory imagery—  
as well as expanding upon Silberers third type of 
imagery (somatic) to include exosensory imagery.
Autosensory Imagery
Autosensory imagery is shaped by self-generated 
stimuli that occur immediately prior to an image’s 
appearance. The self-generated stimuli usually stem 
from neuromuscular events like a muscle twitch, 
body jerk, or nodding of the head, but may also 
include sounds such as snoring, wheezing, or even 
speaking. These stimuli may arise from one image
T O R E  N I E L S E N
423

but are integrated identifiably with a subsequent 
image. Thus, a stimulus may originate in an image 
that produces an overt behavioral response, or 
dream-enacting behavior, such as poking an object 
with a dream finger, which induces a real finger 
twitch, and this may evoke a sensation of touch 
in another body region— a sensation that modi­
fies a subsequent (autosensory) image. An autosen- 
sory image such as this one, which involves touch, 
could be described as “autosomatic.” My observa­
tion is that autosomatic images are the most com­
mon type of self-induced image, although other 
types are possible, such as “auto-acoustic” images 
for auditory stimuli (e.g., hearing ones own voice 
or sounds of movement), or even “auto-vestibular” 
and “auto-optical” images for vestibular and visual 
stimuli, respectively, although these are rare. Note 
that the dream-enacting behavior eliciting an auto­
sensory image may provoke an awakening, even as 
the new image takes hold in awareness. An example 
of an autosomatic image is presented to highlight its
clear causal implication in imagery formation (see 
Table 30.2).
The example, in fact, begins with a Silberer Type 
1 (material) autosymbolic image for which ongo­
ing reflection on placing fingers in a specific gui­
tar chord shape is followed by an image in which 
the same fingers unscrew a plastic bottle cap. This 
dream action leads to very slight movements of the 
real fingers, which trigger touch sensations where 
they are resting on the forehead. The latter, in turn, 
evoke the autosensory image of someone abruptly 
appearing and touching the same spot on the fore­
head. The behavioral enactment and subsequent 
cutaneous stimulation trigger an awakening just 
after the autosensory image enters awareness. The 
precise chronological order of events could be dis­
cerned and, thus, a causal connection inferred.
In light of this clear phenomenological sequence, 
the question arises as to how a self-induced cuta­
neous sensation produces a contextualized visual 
image of another person who appears to produce
Table 30.2 Chronology of Events Constituting an Autosensory Image
Stage
Event
Comments
Context
Lying down on L side, hand near forehead. 
L thumb, index and middle fingers next to 
forehead while falling asleep.
The fingers were not placed in this position 
intentionally, nor was I specifically aware of 
them there until the image occurred.
Ongoing cognitive 
activity
I had been imagining using my L hand to 
execute a difficult guitar chord (Em add 
G#), unsure of its order in a song.
This chord requires use of the L thumb, 
index and middle fingers in a pinching 
action similar to the squeezing necessary 
for removing a bottle cap. A difficult chord 
for me.
1. Original image
I  was using my L thumb, index and middle 
fingers to twist off' the dark blue top o f a blue 
plastic water bottle. I  saw the cap between my 
fingers.
I typically perform this movement with my 
R hand. I cannot recall having done it with 
my L hand.
2. Reflex/stimulus
While twisting the cap, I felt my actual L 
hand fingers twitch briefly and with the 
same direction of movement. I also felt a 
touch on my forehead.
The image —» movement —» touch 
sequence occurred very quickly. I realized 
almost immediately that the touch was 
self-produced.
3. Autosensory image 
(somatic)
D Z  was reaching her R arm in from  my R 
side. It was grey and had very little form . I  saw 
and felt her hand touch me at the same place 
my fingers were resting.
The visual details were relatively indistinct 
but the arms presence was very distinct. 
The image occurred as I woke up.
4. Wake up
The entire image —» movement —» touch —» 
image 
wake up sequence took less than a 
second.
The sequence was recalled rapidly in reverse 
order.
Source: Nielsen (2017). Sleep-onset imagery description is in italic.
424
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

the sensation. In other words, how does a cutaneous 
stimulus so immediately produce its own context- 
appropriate visual precursor? This puzzle may be 
viewed as a special case of conflict in multisensory 
temporal ordering and will be addressed more fully 
once we have considered other instances in which 
external sensory stimuli causally influence images 
(i.e., exosensory images).
Exosensory Imagery
I suggest the term exosensory imagery as a more 
inclusive category of Silberer s third type of auto- 
symbolic imagery (somatic imagery), that is, an 
image influenced by external stimuli (sounds, 
lights, cutaneous contacts, imposed movements of 
the body, etc.). At present, examples of exosensory 
sleep-onset images are anecdotal and are based on 
fortuitous observations made under the different 
conditions itemized in Table 30.3. Here, external 
stimulations occurred unpredictably in locations 
as varied as an airplane during turbulence, a noisy 
park, and a quiet office. Discussion of these observa­
tions will include some phenomenological clarifica­
tions, followed by consideration of implications for 
image formation processes.
Brevity. 
The 18 images in Table 30.3 are 
all 
short-duration 
episodes— microdreams—
despite 
their 
sometimes 
lengthy 
descriptions 
(Mwords = 28.8±14.4; range: 12-75). Most (N =  14) 
consist of only a single part, usually a single dreamed 
movement of a limb, character or object, accompa­
nied by some visual details. The other four images 
(#1, #3, #9, #10) consist of at most two parts: two 
consecutive actions or movements with visual 
details. In all but one of these (#3), some degree 
of coherence between the two parts is apparent. In 
image #3, the second part (cats head emerges) seems 
tangential to the first part (hand puts file in box).
Eruptive quality. Most of the images possess an 
eruptive character in two separate but interrelated 
ways. First, they seem to erupt into awareness with­
out warning, eliciting surprise and a quick return to 
consciousness. Second, the images content hinges 
on an abrupt emphatic movement that seems to 
have been caught in mid-expression. Thus, for 
image #2, the multicolored clown is seen spinning 
with an energy and trajectory consistent with hav­
ing just tripped violently or jumped off a trampo­
line. Similarly, in image #5, a young man vaults with 
such velocity that he seems to have just stumbled 
while running, and gives the image a “caricature­
like” aspect. This eruptive quality is especially true 
for images affected by phasic stimuli, while for some
images affected by tonic stimulation (e.g., #11-#13) 
an eruptive action is less apparent than its sudden 
appearance in awareness. For other tonic images 
(#15-# 18) an eruptive action is, in fact, present.
Instability. Many of the images depict an insta­
bility theme: their primary constituent is a vigorous, 
even violent, movement in a downward or circular 
direction. These include an arm slapping down (#1); 
a clown somersaulting (#2); a door slamming (#4); 
a man tripping (#5); a girl falling (#7); a woman 
spilling a drink (#8); a bicycle collapsing and man 
falling on it (#9), a spinning ball sliding and falling 
(#10); and a page falling (#15). Image instability 
appears closely linked to the eruptive quality.4
S elf versus non-self focus. The focus of images is 
sometimes the movements and sensations of the self 
(N  = 7) and sometimes those of other characters or 
objects (N  = 11). Accordingly, the effects of exter­
nal stimuli are detected in modifications to either 
self (somatic) or non-self (visual, auditory) imagery 
attributes. In rare cases (#17), an apparent overlap 
between self and non-self attributes occurs such 
that the actions of another character are felt to be 
executed by the self.
Influence o f External Stim uli
Several important relationships between image ele­
ments and their immediately preceding external 
stimuli are illustrated in this collection.
M ultiple sensory modalities. Images are affected by 
stimuli from many sensory modalities, including ves­
tibular, auditory, visual, and various somatic stimuli 
(cutaneous, thermal, pain). Visual stimuli are perhaps 
least reliably identified, with very few observations of 
this type having been made.5 There is a fairly specific 
correspondence between stimulus modality and its 
influence on the image; in general, auditory stimuli 
affect sounds, vestibular stimuli affect balance, cuta­
neous stimuli affect touch, thermal stimuli affect per­
ceived temperature, and so forth. Some exceptions to 
this general rule (e.g., #3, #18) point to a non-specific 
influence. For example, in image #18, pain and cuta­
neous sensations in a limb were associated with a 
visual image of an arm abruptly flailing. Additionally, 
cross-modality influences, especially an auditory stim­
ulus effecting a visual change, are common.
Phasic versus tonic stimuli. Abrupt, short-lasting 
(phasic) stimuli and ongoing, longer-lasting (tonic) 
stimuli affect images in different ways. For images 
# l-# 9 , phasic influences, such as sudden sounds 
or airplane movements, result in equally abrupt 
changes in image content, most notably, in people
T O R E  N I E L S E N
425

Table 30.3 Exosensory Images and the Sensory Stimuli Affecting Them, Categorized by Stimulus Modality and Type
Image (#parts, #words) 
External Stimulus 
Stimulus 
Stimulus
Modality 
Type
Image Clarifications 
Focus
1. 
A  woman is holding her 
A “whop” sound coming 
Auditory 
Phasic 
nose with her L hand, her R 
from the tennis court near 
hand/'arm sweeps down in 
where I was lying in the 
front o f her face. Suddenly, a 
grass woke me. 
hand (and arm) comes out o f 
nowhere and slaps down on the 
bare forearm o f another arm 
with a loud “whop. ” (2, 43)
Other The sound from the 
tennis shot matched 
precisely the timbre, 
timing and apparent 
direction of the sound 
in the image.
2. 
A  bright, multicolored clown! 
Dozing while sitting on a 
Auditory 
Phasic 
jester suddenly somersaults 
couch near an IKEA cash 
with a snapping, elastic 
register, which abruptly 
motion. His black suit had 
sounds with a loud clatter 
patches o f red, yellow, green, 
and wakes me. 
blue, and other colors. (1, 24)
Other The somersault
coincided with the 
noise. I was surrounded 
by brightly colored 
sofas, pillows and other 
furniture.3
3. 
A  hand puts a file into a 
A stapler suddenly sounds 
Auditory 
Phasic 
white box; a black cat’s head 
in the next office. 
suddenly emerges from  behind 
the edge o f a table. (2, 22)
Other The cats head emerges 
at the same time as 
the stapler sounds.
The sound and the 
cat image seem 
strangely overlaid and 
incongruous.
4. 
A  heavy door made o f wood 
The conference speaker had Auditory 
Phasic 
suddenly swings open to the R 
made a thudding sound by 
and slams against the corner o f hitting the microphone 
a countertop. (1, 21)
Other The thud sound
corresponded exactly 
with the door slam 
in the image. A slide 
on the screen just 
pre-image depicted a 
closed, large, brown 
wooden door.3
5. 
I  see a young mans legs and 
A loud tearing sound, like 
Auditory/ 
Phasic 
feet as he trips over something 
Velcro ripping, from the 
Somatic 
and falls to the right in 
seat behind me, woke me 
my visualfield. Almost a 
up. Airplane had been 
caricature o f a fall. (1, 28) 
going through occasional
turbulence.
Other The fall coincided
exactly with the ripping 
sound. Falling imagery 
is similar to other 
images observed during 
turbulence.
6. 
M y upper body was in a 
Airplane dipped and rose 
Vestibular/ Phasic 
seated, doubled over position, 
quickly giving a feeling 
Somatic 
twisted toward the L and 
of “stomach rising” (like 
downward. I  was in the act o f going over a hill in a car 
pulling myself into an upright 
quickly). 
posture. (1, 28)
Self 
The pulling up
sensation coincided 
with the sudden dip/ 
rise of the airplane.
7. 
A  5 - 6  year-old girl in an 
The airplane made an 
Vestibular/ Phasic 
aisle— an airplane aisle 
unexpected “dip” during 
Somatic 
perhaps—falls forw ard onto 
final descent that woke 
her hands and knees. She has 
me up. 
brown, shoulder-length hair 
and a hair band. The aisle is 
reddish. (1, 33)
Other The girls fall occurred 
at the instant the plane 
dipped.
426
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

Table 30.3 Continued
Image (#parts, #words) 
External Stimulus 
Stimulus 
Stimulus 
Image Clarifications
Modality 
Type 
Focus
8. A  woman (face indistinct) 
seated across from  me suddenly 
spills red liquid from  a glass 
onto her lap. I  saw dark stains 
on her beige dress. (1, 26)
The airplane made an 
unexpected “dip” during 
final descent that woke 
me up.
Vestibular/ Phasic 
Somatic
Other The spill coincided 
with the sudden dip. 
The woman seated 
to my R had a glass 
of wine served to her 
earlier in the flight.1
9. Ife lt some people pass very 
close by on my L, from  back 
to front, as i f  on a sidewalk. 
Then a clear image o f a bicycle 
collapsing in a pile on the 
ground, the driver falling to 
the L, face first on top o f the 
bike. (2, 47)
The airplane slowed 
abruptly, albeit very 
slightly, to begin final 
descent.
Vestibular/ Phasic 
Other The bicycle collapse 
Somatic 
coincided with the
sudden slowing of 
the airplane. Flight 
attendants passed close 
by on the L of my aisle 
seat (back to front) 
several times.1
10. Iflip  a volleyball onto my R 
finger and spin it clockwise fo r 
a bit. It flattens, bulges a t the 
center, then deviates forward, 
then downward. I  progressively 
lose control o f it. It is twice 
as wide now and very fla t as 
I  grab fo r it with both hands.
I  feel it on my R fingers, which 
seems incongruous because it 
cannot be spinning on that 
p a rt o f my hand—as i f  on the 
backside. (2, 75)
Hands holding open 
a glossy reprint article 
songbook style on stomach 
(lodged against R thumb 
mainly). In waking I felt 
it slowly slipping forward 
along the crook of the 
thumb and coming to rest 
on the fingers underneath 
it.
Cutaneous Phasic/ 
Tonic
Self 
The gradual slipping 
forward of the reprint 
coincided with the 
gradual slipping 
forward of the spinning 
ball; the ball and 
reprint were both felt 
to slide at the same 
locations on the hand.
11. I  am climbing a stairwell 
that has freshly fallen snow 
scattered over the stairs. M y L 
hand is holding a thick metal 
railing. (1, 23)
Sitting in office, left hand 
Thermal 
holding right in lap, 
window to my L is open 
and cold air is blowing in.
Tonic
12. In the same stairwell, about 
halfway up a flight o f 
stairs. I  have a cold feeling. 
I  feel snow blowing up and 
enveloping me. The scene is 
largely dark. (1, 30)
Sitting in office, left hand 
Thermal 
Tonic 
holding right in lap, 
window to my L is open 
and cold air is blowing in.
Self 
There were no abrupt 
movements or phasic 
stimulus.
Self 
There were no abrupt 
movements or phasic 
stimulus.
13. A  man and boy are riding in a
Bright sunlight is coming 
Visual
Tonic
Other Sunlight may have
small motorcycle with a sidecar in the windows of the
shone red through my
with bright red shiny fenders.
office.
eyelids.
(U 18)
14. Seated in my chair I  bend
Holding a heavy book 
Cutaneous Tonic
Self 
Correspondence is in
forw ard and place a medium­
open in my lap with R
the localized sensations
sized book on my desk, pressing fingers bookmarking
in fingertips.
against the books bottom edge
several pages; pressure on
with my fingertips. (1, 24)
middle and ring fingertips.
{continued)
T O R E  N I E L S E N
427

Table 30.3 Continued
Image (#parts, #words) 
External Stimulus 
Stimulus 
Stimulus 
Image Clarifications
Modality 
Type 
Focus
15. A  grey cardboard page resting My right thumb is pressing Cutaneous Tonic 
Self
on my L thumb and index 
down on my left thumb
finger suddenly falls forward. 
and index.
f t  15)
16. I  suddenly and vigorously slap 
a door with my open Rpalm .
(T 12)
Seated in chair, my left 
Cutaneous Tonic
elbow is pressing on my R
palm.
Self 
Only correspondence 
is a general increase 
in sensation in the R 
palm.
17. Someone is spinning an
Sitting upright with both 
Cutaneous Tonic
Other Only correspondence
anim al quickly around in
hands between my thighs
is a general increase
circles with his R hand. It
palms facing out. A bit of
in sensation in the R
ju st seems stuck to his hand
paresthesia in both, more
hand.
and turning around it. I  feel
in R.
as though I  were making the
movements myself. (1, 34)
18. An obese person or creature 
Sitting with book in lap, 
Pain/ 
Tonic 
Other Only correspondence
on my L suddenly flails his R 
arms on armrests. R arm 
Cutaneous 
is between the flailing
arm forw ard toward me and 
is pained and slightly 
arm and the arm
growls. (1, 18) 
paralyzed. 
in pain and slightly
paralyzed.
Source-. Nielsen (2017).
Correspondence is in 
the localized sensations 
in fingers.
or objects falling, appearing quickly, or being hit 
brusquely. Some changes suggest a direction integra­
tion of the stimulus into the core of the image; (e.g., 
in image #1, the sound of an arm being slapped 
directly reflects the sound of a tennis ball being hit; 
in image #4, the sound of a door slamming directly 
reflects the sound of a microphone being struck; and 
in image #6, the airplane s sudden rise during turbu­
lence reflects a sense of pulling the bent-over self into 
an upright posture.
However, in several other images, a phasic 
stimulus appears to have only indirectly modi­
fied an image. In image #2, a vestibular stimulus 
is not incorporated directly as a self-feeling of fall­
ing or moving, but as a clown abruptly somer­
saulting. Similarly, in images #7 and #9, vestibular 
stimuli lead not to self-feelings of falling, but to 
other characters falling; in images #8 and #9, such 
stimuli lead to objects falling. Such indirect, “pro­
jected” incorporations have also been observed after 
somatosensory stimulation delivered during REM 
sleep (Dement & Wolpert, 1958; Koulack, 1969; 
Nielsen, 1993).
Curiously, tonic stimuli also sometimes lead 
to abrupt changes. Images #14, #15, and #17, in
particular, demonstrate the eruptive quality familiar 
from phasic stimuli, even though in all three cases 
there was no sudden stimulus. Thus, although there 
is a fairly general correspondence between both the 
modality and the phasic or tonic nature of source 
stimulations, exceptions behoove us to seek expla­
nations beyond a simple mechanism of “direct 
incorporation” or even “projected incorporation” 
(see later discussion).
The orderliness o f imagery disruption. When pha­
sic disruptions of image formation take place, the 
end-product of this disruption maintains a certain 
degree of orderliness. The integrity of objects and 
characters depicted is preserved to varying degrees, 
and the image contents almost inevitably adhere 
to the physical laws of classical mechanics for the 
real world. For example, images for which stimu­
lation triggered a “falling” theme (#5, #7, #8, #9, 
#10, #15) all depict objects or characters that fall 
in a relatively orderly manner (i.e., downward in 
accordance with the influence of gravity, not up or 
sideways as might be expected if no sense of grav­
ity was adhered to). Further, although some objects 
in these images do appear to lose their stability 
within the scene, they do not completely lose their
428
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

internal structural integrity. For example, for the 
spinning ball in image #10 there is a progressive 
loss of stability both in balance control and in the 
ball’s round shape, yet the ball changes shape in a 
plausible manner (“flattening”) rather than falling 
apart entirely. Even so, there are again exceptions; 
in image #9, a bicycle collapses into a pile, losing 
its structure altogether. Overall, however, the main­
tenance of an images stability, even in the face of 
disruption, points to degrees of interference with 
a basic reality simulation process and, more pre­
cisely, to disruption of multisensory integration of 
multimodal and self/non-self elements. Even as an 
image is disrupted, it improvises a solution within 
a context that obeys rules of classical mechanics 
for the real world. Further, the integration of real 
perceptual events in this manner implicates sen­
sory systems in imagery formation, a notion that 
has been proposed both for waking imagery (Finke, 
1980; Kosslyn, Behrmann, & Jeannerod, 1995; 
McNorgan, 2012) and dreaming (Windt, 2015).
Interpretation of Causal 
Factors: Multisensory Integration
In the preceding observations, I pointed out 
that sometimes an external stimulus is not only 
incorporated directly into an image, but it elic­
its details in other modalities that contextualize 
this incorporation. This takes place very quickly, 
from a few hundred milliseconds to, at most, a 
second or two, and before a full return to con­
sciousness sets in. This rapid elicitation of both 
direct incorporation and apparent context poses a 
logical conundrum for a theory of image forma­
tion, but a conundrum whose resolution might 
help resolve how more complex dream imagery is 
produced. The conundrum hinges on the observa­
tion that an external stimulus so quickly elicits a 
set of image features, some of which seem to p re­
cede in time the incorporated stimulus. It is par­
ticularly clear in two images from Table 30.3 that 
appear after exposure to phasic sounds. For image 
#1, the sound of a tennis shot is not only incor­
porated directly as a hand slap sound, but visual 
details preceding the slap are also represented 
(i.e., the hand doing the slapping). For image 
#4, the sound of a microphone being struck is 
incorporated directly into the image as the sound 
of a door slamming, yet it also elicits the visual 
image of a swinging door that seems to precede 
the incorporated sound. The stimuli in both these 
cases presumably elicit— through some associative 
mechanism— visual details that are appropriate
to, and thus help contextualize, the sound stim­
uli. The conundrum is in the perceived temporal 
ordering of events; an auditory event clearly leads 
to a visual event (A->V). Yet, the phenomenologi­
cal chronology of the experience is that the visual 
event precedes the auditory event (a hand moves 
to cause a slap; a door moves to cause a slam) or 
V->A. What mechanism is responsible for rear­
ranging the temporal order of events? Identifying 
this mechanism for simple exosensory images 
could illuminate basic mechanisms of production 
of more complex dream imagery.
One approach to solving this conundrum is to 
consider exosensory imagery as analogous to, or 
even as a special case of, multisensory integration 
(MSI; for reviews, see De Gelder & Bertelson, 2003; 
Talsma, 2015). Specifically, exosensory imagery 
could be studied as an MSI situation in which the 
sensory modalities of an external stimulus and an 
endogenous image feature are in conflict (e.g., audi­
tory stimulus, visual image feature). A similar per­
spective has recently been validated for interactions 
between MSI and intentionally generated auditory 
and visual imagery (Berger & Ehrsson, 2013, 2014; 
Vetter, Smith, & Muckli, 2014) and allows us to 
consider how a number of findings from MSI stud­
ies parallel observations from the present inquiry in 
potentially clarifying ways. These include findings 
about (1) the tim ing o f percepts in different sensory 
modalities, (2) the perceived localization of these 
percepts, (3) the perceived intensity of percepts, and 
(4) the qualitative alteration of visual percepts by 
auditory and somatic stimuli.
PERCEPT TIMING
During waking, information in different modali­
ties reaches sense receptors at different speeds (e.g., 
light travels faster than sound) and is processed in 
sensory systems at different rates (e.g., hearing is 
processed more quickly than seeing). Thus, vari­
ous mechanisms compensate for discrepancies in 
the timing, localization, and other stimulus fea­
tures of multisensory stimuli. These mechanisms 
are thought to overcome intersensory conflicts to 
preserve the perception of unified objects and, ulti­
mately, a unified stream of consciousness.
In the case of percept timing, much evidence 
indicates that the perceived onset of visual events 
can be temporally shifted by stimuli in other 
modalities— but especially in the auditory modal­
ity. Thus, when brief visual and auditory stimuli are 
presented consecutively, regardless of order, the per­
ceived onset of the visual stimulus shifts toward that
T O R E  N I E L S E N
429

of the sound (Bertelson & Aschersleben, 2003; De 
Gelder & Bertelson, 2003; Fendrich & Corballis, 
2001; Jaekl & Harris, 2007; Morein-Zamir, Soto- 
Faraco, & Kingstone, 2003). Tactile stimulation 
can force a time shift of visual events that is of equal 
magnitude to that induced by auditory stimulation 
(Keetels & Vroomen, 2008).
If the visual content of microdream imagery 
behaves like that of visual perception, then visual 
imagery, too, may be shifted temporally to appear 
closer in time to an external auditory stimulus. 
This one mechanism alone may account for how an 
actual A->V sequence of events is transformed into a 
virtual V->A sequence.
PERCEPT LOCALIZATION
Unlike percept timing, percept localization 
is more strongly influenced by visual stimuli. 
A sound s apparent location is likely to shift toward 
that of a visual event if the two occur close enough 
in time. The visual event is said to “capture” the 
sounds location as in the well-known spatial ven­
triloquist effect (Howard & Templeton, 1966): a 
visual stimulus (the dummy) captures the verbal 
stimulus (the ventriloquists voice), forcing a multi- 
sensory illusion of spatial integration. Such an effect 
might underlie the production of exosensory imag­
ery once a visual component has been elicited; the 
eliciting sound may be captured by the visual image 
and seem to arise from it, rather than from the real 
world. This is supported by experiments in which 
the classic ventriloquism effect occurred when sub­
jects imagined the visual component of the illusion; 
an auditory stimulus was drawn toward the visual 
images location, just as for an actual visual stimulus 
(Berger & Ehrsson, 2013). The authors conclude 
that “mental imagery is capable of integrating with 
perceptual stimuli of a different sensory modality” 
(p. 1369). A similar integrative mechanism could 
explain why incorporations of a sound stimulus into 
visual imagery usually do not preserve the original 
location of the stimulus. However, it is notewor­
thy that such a mechanism may also fail entirely, as 
suggested by image #1 in which the incorporated 
sound was perceived to originate exactly from its 
location in the real world.
PERCEPT INTENSITY
Sound stimuli may modify the apparent inten­
sity of visual events (Stein, London, Wilkinson, & 
Price, 1996). For example, if an LED light is pre­
sented together with a brief, broad-band auditory 
stimulus, regardless of where the stimulus source is,
the light will be rated as more intense than if it is 
presented alone— especially when the light is at a 
low visual intensity. Such auditory stimuli appear 
to facilitate early stage sensory processing of visual 
stimuli as suggested by, for example, reduced reac­
tion times in a visual identification task (Doyle & 
Snowden, 2001) or improved detection of changes 
in visual motion (Staufenbiel, van der Lubbe, & 
Talsma, 2011). A similar facilitative mechanism 
may be implicated in the rapid production of visual 
imagery at sleep onset when a phasic noise elicits an 
abrupt facilitation of visual imagery, leading possi­
bly to the “eruptive” quality of elicited images.
QUALITATIVE CHANGES IN VISUAL EVENTS
Auditory stimuli can alter visual perceptions in 
several qualitative respects that have implications 
for image-formation processes, including apparent 
motion and image segmentation. In the “bounce 
illusion,” two small target discs moving in a straight 
line toward each other, coinciding, then continuing 
on can be made to seem to “bounce off” each other 
if a phasic sound burst is presented at or near the 
point of coincidence. Even a subliminal sound can 
induce this effect (Dufour, Touzalin, Moessinger, 
Brochard, & Despres, 2008). The pertinence for 
sleep-onset imagery is demonstrated by the fact that 
subjects merely imagining the phasic sound also 
experience the bounce illusion (Berger & Ehrsson,
2013). Additionally, brief sound stimuli can frag­
ment a visual percept into two or more parts. With 
the sound-induced flash illusion, one phasic light 
flash accompanied by two rapid beeps will be per­
ceived as two flashes of light; multiple beeps will 
elicit multiple apparent flashes of light (Shams, 
Kamitani, & Shimojo, 2002). Multiple tactile stim­
uli can also elicit this illusion (Violentyev, Shimojo, 
& Shams, 2005). For sleep-onset images, phasic 
stimuli might affect the apparent intensity and 
motion of visual images, possibly leading to their 
eruptive and kinetic qualities.
Conclusion
Traditional laboratory methods of assessing 
REM sleep dreaming have still not resolved key 
questions about the essential phenomenal ingredi­
ents of dreaming and the nature of its neurophysi­
ological correlates. The typical sleep laboratory 
approach to studying such questions involves sam­
pling long, multifaceted dream experiences and 
concurrent voluminous, polysomnographic signal 
arrays and has struggled to demonstrate clear rela­
tionships between such large sets of measures. This
430
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

in turn has slowed the pace of discovery in dream 
science. I propose an alternative, simpler course that 
is consistent with developments in the micrody­
namic neurophenomenology of consciousness and 
that takes as its principal object of study the brief­
est episodes of imagery occurring at sleep onset—  
microdreams. Such images provide a fertile ground 
for assessing the details of oneiragogic phenomenol­
ogy and the multiple memory sources contribut­
ing to them. The assessment of microdreaming 
also lends itself well to the development of theo­
ries of microdream formation and to experimen­
tal approaches for assessing how real and dreamed 
imagery constituents may be integrated. Two new 
types of microdream imagery— autosensory imag­
ery and exosensory imagery— illustrate this poten­
tial. A concerted focus on, and alignment of, brief 
cognitive and neurophysiological events at sleep 
onset may reveal mechanisms of imagery structure 
and formation that are not possible with the com­
plex measurements derived from traditional sleep 
laboratory approaches.
Notes
1. The neuro-centric method refers to the waking up of sleep­
ing subjects when a particular configuration of polysomno- 
graphic events transpires (e.g., following 15 s of EEG-defined 
Stage 1 sleep or following 3 min of stage REM sleep). It dif­
fers from the phenomeno-centric method by which subjects 
themselves determine the moment of (self-) awakening after 
having just experienced an imagery event. Self-awakening 
methods have been described for sleep-onset (Nielsen, 1992, 
1995) and NREM sleep (Brown & Cartwright, 1978).
2. Contrast this with Freud’s analysis of the memory sources 
of his “Irma’s Injection” dream; the dream was 332 words in 
length and required 4,130 words of terse prose to describe all 
its identified memory sources.
3. Episodic memory is defined in different ways (Cavallero, 
Foulkes, Hollifield, & Terry, 1990; Fosse, Fosse, Hobson, 
& Stickgold, 2003; Malinowski & Horton, 2014; Tulving,
2002) . When defined as confidently remembered percepts of 
locations combined with objects, actions, or characters, they 
occur in <2% of home dreams (Fosse et al., 2003). However, 
elements of episodic memories are much more frequent, 
e.g., 28%-38% (Cavallero et al., 1990) or 65% (Fosse et al.,
2003) . Sometimes, such elements alone may constitute well- 
remembered episodic memories due to their substantial per­
sonal significance.
4. A sleep-onset image that commonly occurs after a day of vig­
orous sport such as skiing is of abruptly falling (cf. Wamsley, 
Perry, Djonlagic, Reaven, & Stickgold, 2010). Such images 
may be accompanied by an intense bodily jerk and an erup­
tive awakening.
5. One hypothesis is that image formation in a brightly lit 
room favors the influence of colors from the red end of 
the spectrum that are filtered by the closed eyelids. In one 
study conducted in bright light conditions (Nielsen, 1995), 
in 91 images there were 37 (41%) that contained a total of 
69 color references. The most prevalent color—apart from
black (31.9%)—was red, pink, or orange (24.6%), followed 
by white (15.9%), silver/grey (10.1%), green/blue (5.8%), 
brown/beige/gold (7.2%), and unspecified (4.4%).
References
Arkin, A. M., & Antrobus, J. S. (1991). The effects of external 
stimuli applied prior to and during sleep on sleep experience. 
In S. J. Ellman & J. S. Antrobus (Eds.), The mind in sleep 
(2nd ed., pp. 265-307). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring peri­
ods of eye motility, and concomitant phenomena during 
sleep. Science, 118, 273-274.
Berger, C. C., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2013). Mental imagery 
changes multisensory perception. Current Biology, 23(14), 
1367-1372. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.012
Berger, C. C., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2014). The fusion of mental 
imagery and sensation in the temporal association cortex. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 34(4\), 13684-13692. doi: 10.1523/ 
JNEUROSCI.0943-14.2014
Bertelson, P., & Aschersleben, G. (2003). Temporal ventrilo­
quism: crossmodal interaction on the time dimension. 
1. Evidence from auditory-visual temporal order judgment. 
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 50(1-2), 147-155.
Bertolo, H., Paiva, T., Pessoa, L., Mestre, T., Marques, R., & 
Santos, R. (2003). Visual dream content, graphical represen­
tation and EEG alpha activity in congenitally blind subjects. 
Brain Research. Cognitive Brain Research, 15, 277-284.
Bishop, C., Rosenthal, L., Helmus, T., Roehrs, T., & Roth, T. 
(1996). The frequency of multiple sleep onset REM periods 
among subjects with no excessive daytime sleepiness. Sleep, 
19, 727-730.
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A. (2013). 
Real-world 
objects 
are 
not 
represented 
as 
bound 
units: Independent forgetting of different object details from 
visual memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
142(3), 791-808. doi: 10.1037/a0029649
Brown, J. N., & Cartwright, R. D. (1978). Locating NREM 
dreaming through instrumental responses. Psychophysiology, 
15, 35-39.
Cavallero, C., Foulkes, D., Hollifield, M., & Terry, R. (1990). 
Memory sources of REM and NREM dreams. Sleep, 13, 
449_455.
Chellappa, S. L., & Cajochen, C. (2013). Ultradian and circa­
dian modulation of dream recall: EEG correlates and age 
effects. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 89, 165— 
170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.03.006
Chellappa, S. L., Frey, S., Knoblauch, V., & Cajochen, C. 
(2011). Cortical activation patterns herald successful dream 
recall after NREM and REM sleep. Biological Psychology, 87, 
251-256.
Cicogna, P, Cavallero, C., & Bosinelli, M. (1991). Cognitive 
aspects of mental activity during sleep. American Journal of 
Psychology, 104, 413-425.
Cipolli, C., Ferrara, M., De Gennaro, L., & Plazzi, G. (2016). 
Beyond the neuropsychology of dreaming: Insights into 
the neural basis of dreaming with new techniques of sleep 
recording and analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 35, 8-20. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.smrv.20l6.07.005
De Gelder, B., & Bertelson, P (2003). Multisensory integra­
tion, perception and ecological validity. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 7(10), 460-467.
Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957). Cyclic variations in EEG 
during sleep and their relation to eye movements, body
T O R E  N I E L S E N
43i

motility, and dreaming. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 9, 673-690.
Dement, W., & Wolpert, E. (1958). The relationship of eye 
movements, body motility, and external stimuli to dream 
content. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 543-553.
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 342-353. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2015.01.019
Doricchi, F., & Violani, C. (1992). Dream recall in brain­
damaged patients: A contribution to the neuropsychol­
ogy of dreaming through a review of the literature. In J. 
S. Antrobus & M. Bertini (Eds.), The neuropsychology of 
sleep and dreaming (pp. 99-129). Hillsdale, NJ: Eawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Doyle, M. C., & Snowden, R. J. (2001). Identification of visual 
stimuli is improved by accompanying auditory stimuli: The 
role of eye movements and sound location. Perception, 30(7), 
795-810.
Dufour, A., Touzalin, P., Moessinger, M., Brochard, R., & 
Despres, O. (2008). Visual motion disambiguation by a sub­
liminal sound. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(3), 790-797. 
doi: 10.1016/j .concog.2007.09.001
Esposito, M. J., Nielsen, T. A., & Paquette, T. (2004). Reduced 
alpha power associated with the recall of mentation from 
Stage 2 and Stage REM sleep. Psychophysiology, 41, 288-297.
Fendrich, R., & Corballis, P. M. (2001). The temporal cross­
capture of audition and vision. Perception and Psychophysics, 
63(4), 719-725.
Finke, R. A. (1980). Levels of equivalence in imagery and per­
ception. Psychological Review, 87, 113-132.
Fosse, M. J., Fosse, R., Hobson, J. A., & Stickgold, R. J. (2003). 
Dreaming and episodic memory: A functional dissociation? 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 1—9.
Foulkes, D. (1978). A grammar of dreams. New York: Basic 
Books.
Foulkes, D. (1985). Dreaming: A cognitive-psychological analysis. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Foulkes, D., & Fleisher, S. (1975). Mental activity in relaxed 
wakefulness. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 84, 66-75.
Foulkes, D., & Pope, R. (1973). Primary visual experience and 
secondary cognitive elaboration in Stage REM: A modest 
confirmation and an extension. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 
37, 107-118.
Foulkes, D., & Scott, E. (1973). An above-zero baseline for 
the incidence of momentary hallucinatory mentation. Sleep 
Research, 2, 108-108.
Foulkes, D., & Vogel, G. (1965). Mental activity at sleep onset. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 70, 231-243.
Fox, K. C., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., 
& Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412.
Freud, S. (1900). The interpretation of dreams. New York: 
Basic Books.
Fukuda, K., Miyasita, A., & Inugami, M. (1987). Sleep onset 
REM periods observed after sleep interruption in normal short 
and normal long sleeping subjects. Electroencephalography 
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 67(6), 508-513.
Gardner, R., Jr., Grossman, W. I., Roffwarg, H. P, & Weiner, H. 
(1975). The relationship of small limb movements during 
REM sleep to dreamed limb action. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
37, 147-159.
Germain, A., & Nielsen, T. A. (2001). EEG power associated 
with early sleep onset images differing in sensory content. 
Sleep Research Online, 4, 83-90.
Gottschalk, L. A., Buchsbaum, M. S., Gillin, J., Wu, J. C., 
Reynolds, C. A., & Deborah, B. H. (1991). Anxiety levels in 
dreams: Relation to localized cerebral glucose metabolic rate. 
Brain Research, 538, 107-110.
Gottschalk, L. A., Buchsbaum, M. S., Gillin, J. C., Wu, J., 
Reynolds, C. A., & Herrera, D. B. (1991). Positron- 
emission tomographic studies of the relationship of cerebral 
glucose metabolism and the magnitude of anxiety and hos­
tility experienced during dreaming and waking. Journal of 
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 3, 131-142.
Hamame, C. M., Alario, F. X., Llorens, A., Liegeois-Chauvel, 
C., & Trebuchon-Da Fonseca, A. (2014). High frequency 
gamma activity in the left hippocampus predicts visual object 
naming performance. Brain and Language, 135, 104-114. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.bandl.20l4.05.007
Hamame, C. M., Cosmelli, D., Henriquez, R., & Aboitiz, F. 
(2011). Neural mechanisms of human perceptual learn­
ing: Electrophysiological evidence for a two-stage process. 
PloS One, 6(4), el9221. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.OO 19221
Hamame, C. M., Vidal, J. R., Ossandon, T., Jerbi, K., Dalai, S. 
S., Minotti, L .,... Lachaux, J. P (2012). Reading the mind’s 
eye: Online detection of visuo-spatial working memory and 
visual imagery in the inferior temporal lobe. Neuroimage, 
59(1), 872-879. doi: 10.10l6/j.neuroimage.2011.07.087
Hayashi, M., Katoh, K., & Hori,T. (1999). Hypnagogic imagery 
and EEG activity. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 88, 676—678.
Herman, J. H., Erman, M., Boys, R., Peiser, L., Taylor, M. E., & 
Roffwarg, H. P (1984). Evidence for a directional correspon­
dence between eye movements and dream imagery in REM 
sleep. Sleep, 7, 52-63.
Hobson, J. A., & McCarley, R. W. (1977). The brain as a 
dream state generator: An activation-synthesis hypothesis 
of the dream process. American Journal of Psychiatry, 134, 
1335-1348.
Hohwy, J., & Bayne, T. (2015). The neural correlates of conscious­
ness. In S. M. Miller (Ed.), The Constitution of Phenomenal 
Consciousness. Toward a Science and Theory. Amsterdam, John 
Benjamins. 92, 155-176. doi: 10.1075/aicr.92.06hoh
Hong, C. C., Jin, Y., Potkin, S. G., Buchsbaum, M. S., Wu, 
J., Callaghan, G. M., . . . Gillin, J. C. (1996). Language in 
dreaming and regional EEG alpha power. Sleep, 19,232-235.
Hori, T., Hayashi, M., & Morikawa, T. (1994). Topographical 
EEG changes and the hypnagogic experience. In R. Ogilvie 
& J. R. Harsh (Eds.), Sleep onset: Normal and abnor­
mal processes (pp. 237-253). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Howard, I. P, & Templeton, W. B. (Eds.) (1966). Human spatial 
orientation. London: John Wiley & Sons.
Hunt, H., Ruzycki-Hunt, K., Pariak, D., & Belicki, K. (1993). 
The relationship between dream bizarreness and imagina­
tion: Artifact or essence? Dreaming, 3, 179-199.
Jaekl, P M., & Harris, L. R. (2007). Auditory-visual temporal 
integration measured by shifts in perceived temporal loca­
tion. Neuroscience Letters, 417(3), 219—224. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neulet.2007.02.029
Jouvet, M. (1998). Paradoxical sleep as a programming system. 
Journal of Sleep Research, 7(Suppl 1), 1-5.
Keetels, M., & Vroomen, J. (2008). Tactile-visual temporal 
ventriloquism: No effect of spatial disparity. Perception and 
Psychophysics, 70(5), 765-771. doi: 10.3758/pp.70.5.765
432
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

Kerr, N. H., & Domhoff, G. W. (2004). Do the blind literally 
“see” in their dreams? A critique of a recent claim that they 
do. Dreaming, 14, 230—233.
Kerr, N. H., Foulkes, D., & Schmidt, M. (1982). The structure 
of laboratory dream reports in blind and sighted subjects. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 170, 286-294.
Kosslyn, S. M., Behrmann, M., & Jeannerod, M. (1995). 
The cognitive neuroscience of mental imagery. [Review]. 
Neuropsychologia, 33, 1335-1344.
Koulack, D. (1969). Effects of somatosensory stimulation 
on dream content. Archives of General Psychiatry, 20, 
718-725.
Lehmann, D., Dumermuth, G., Lange, B., & Meier, C. A. 
(1981). Dream recall related to EEG spectral power during 
REM periods. Sleep Research, 10, 151—151.
Llinas, R., & Ribary, U. (1993). Coherent 40-Hz oscillation 
characterizes dream state in humans. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences U SA, 90, 2078-2081.
Malinowski, J. E., & Horton, C. L. (2014). Memory sources of 
dreams: The incorporation of autobiographical rather than 
episodic experiences. Journal of Sleep Research, 23(4), 441— 
447. doi: 10.1111/jsr. 12134
Maquet, P., Peters, J.-M., Aerts, J., Delfiore, G., Degueldre, C., 
Luxen, A., & Franck, G. (1996). Functional neuroanatomy 
of human rapid-eye-movement sleep and dreaming. Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 383, 163-166.
Maquet, P., Ruby, R, Maudoux, A., Albouy, G., Sterpenich, V., 
Dang-Vu, T., . . . Laureys, S. (2005). Human cognition dur­
ing REM sleep and the activity profile within frontal and 
parietal cortices: A reappraisal of functional neuroimaging 
data. Progress in Brain Research, 150, 219—227.
Marzano, C., Ferrara, M., Mauro, F., Moroni, F., Gorgoni, M., 
Tempesta, D., . . . De Gennaro, L. (2011). Recalling and 
forgetting dreams: Theta and alpha oscillations during sleep 
predict subsequent dream recall. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 
6674-6683.
Mavromatis, A., & Richardson, J. T. E. (1984). Hypnagogic 
imagery. In A. A. Sheikh (Ed.), International review of 
mental imagery (vol. 1, pp. 159—189). New York: Human 
Sciences Press.
McNorgan, C. (2012). A meta-analytic review of multisen- 
sory imagery identifies the neural correlates of modality- 
specific and modality-general imagery. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6, 285. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00285
Milz, R, Faber, P. L., Lehmann, D., Koenig, T., Kochi, K., & 
Pascual-Marqui, R. D. (2015). The functional significance of 
EEG microstates-Associations with modalities of thinking. 
Neuroimage, doi: 10.10l6/j.neuroimage.2015.08.023
Miyasita, A., Fukuda, K., & Inugami, M. (1989). Effects of sleep 
interruption on REM-NREM cycle in nocturnal human 
sleep. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 73, 
107-116.
Molinari, S., & Foulkes, D. (1969). Tonic and phasic events 
during sleep: Psychological correlates and implications. 
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29, 343-368.
Morein-Zamir, S., Soto-Faraco, S., & Kingstone, A. (2003). 
Auditory capture of vision: Examining temporal ventrilo­
quism. Brain Research: Cognitive Brain Research, 17( 1), 
154-163.
Morel, C. R., Hoffmann, R. F., & Moffitt, A. R. (1991). The 
electrophysiological correlates of dream recall and nonrecall 
from stage 2 sleep. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45(2), 
140-147.
Mouthon, A. L., & Huber, R. (2015). Methods in pediatric sleep 
research and sleep medicine. Neuropediatrics, 46(3), 159— 
170. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-l550232
Musch, K., Hamame, C. M., Perrone-Bertolotti, M., Minotti,
L. , Kahane, P., Engel, A. K., . . . Schneider, T. R. (2014). 
Selective attention modulates high-frequency activity in the 
face-processing network. Cortex, 60, 34-51. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.cortex.2014.06.006
Nielsen, 
T. 
(2017). 
Microdream 
neurophenomenology. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 3(1), 1-17. doi: 10.1093/nc/ 
nixOO 1
Nielsen, T. (2011). Ultradian, circadian, and sleep-dependent 
features of dreaming. In M. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. 
Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (5th 
ed., pp. 576-584). New York: Elsevier.
Nielsen, T. A. (1991). Upright napping: Pilot trials of a self- 
observational method for the study of brief hypnagogic 
images and their neuromuscular correlates. Sleep Research, 
20A, 255-255.
Nielsen, T. A. (1992). A self-observational study of spontaneous 
hypnagogic imagery using the upright napping procedure. 
Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 11, 353-366.
Nielsen, T. A. (1993). Changes in the kinesthetic content of 
dreams following somatosensory stimulation of leg muscles 
during REM sleep. Dreaming, 3, 99-113.
Nielsen, T. A. (1995). Describing and modeling hypnagogic 
imagery using a systematic self-observation procedure. 
Dreaming, 5, 75-94.
Nielsen, T. A. (2000). A review of mentation in REM and 
NREM sleep: “Covert” REM sleep as a possible reconcilia­
tion of two opposing models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
23, 851-866.
Nielsen, T. A., Kuiken, D., Alain, G., Stenstrom, P., & Powell, 
R. (2004). Immediate and delayed incorporations of events 
into dreams: Further replication and implications for dream 
function. Journal of Sleep Research, 13, 327-336.
Nielsen, T. A., & Powell, R. A. (1992). The day-residue and dream- 
lag effects: A literature review and limited replication of two 
temporal effects in dream formation. Dreaming, 2(2), 67—11.
Nielsen, T. A., & Stenstrom, P. (2005). What are the memory 
sources of dreaming? Nature, 437, 34—38.
Ogilvie, R. D. (2001). The process of falling asleep. Sleep 
Medicine Reviews, 5, 247-270.
Oswald, I. (1962). Sleeping and waking: Physiology and psychol­
ogy. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Pace-Schott, E. F. (2005). The neurobiology of dreaming. In
M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles 
and practice of sleep medicine (4th ed., pp. 551-565). 
Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders.
Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one’s subjective experience 
in the second person: An interview method for the science of 
consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 5, 
229-269.
Petitmengin, C. (2007). Towards the source of thoughts: The 
gestural and transmodal dimension of lived experience. 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14, 54—82.
Petitmengin, C., & Bitbol, M. (2009). The validity of first- 
person descriptions as authenticity and coherence. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies, 16, 363—404.
Petitmengin, C., & Lachaux, J. P. (2013). Microcognitive sci­
ence: Bridging experiential and neuronal microdynamics. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 617. doi: 10.3389/ 
fnhum.2013.00617
T O R E  N I E L S E N
433

Pivik, T. (1991). Tonic states and phasic events in relation to 
sleep mentation. In S. Ellman & J. Antrobus (Eds.), The 
mind in sleep: Psychology and psychophysiology (2nd ed., pp. 
214-248). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Poudel, G. R., Innes, C. R., Bones, P. J., Watts, R., & Jones, R. 
D. (2014). Losing the struggle to stay awake: Divergent tha­
lamic and cortical activity during microsleeps. Human Brain 
Mapping 35(1), 257-269. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22178
Rechtschaffen, A. (1978). The single-mindedness and isolation 
of dreams. Sleep, 1, 97-109.
Scarpelli, S., D’Atri, A., Gorgoni, M., Ferrara, M., & Gennaro, 
L. D. (2015). EEG oscillations during sleep and dream 
recall: State- or trait-like individual differences? Frontiers in 
Psychology, 6, 605. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00605
Schacter, D. L. (1976). The hypnagogic state: A critical review of 
the literature. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 452-481.
Shams, L., Kamitani, Y., & Shimojo, S. (2002). Visual illusion 
induced by sound. Brain Research: Cognitive Brain Research, 
M l), 147-152.
Siclari, F., B. Baird, L. Perogamvros, G. Bernardi, J. J. LaRocque, 
B. Riedner, M. Boly, B. R. Postle and G. Tononi (2017). 
“The neural correlates of dreaming.” Nature Neuroscience 
20(6): 872-878. doi: 10.1038/nn.4545
Singh, M., Drake, C. L., & Roth, T. (2006). The prevalence of 
multiple sleep-onset REM periods in a population-based 
sample. Sleep, 29(7), 890-895.
Solms, M. (1997). The neuropsychology of dreams. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Staufenbiel, S. M., van der Lubbe, R. H., & Talsma, D. (2011). 
Spatially uninformative sounds increase sensitivity for visual 
motion change. Experimental Brain Research, 213(4), 457— 
464. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2797-6
Stein, B. E., London, N., Wilkinson, L. K., & Price, D. D. 
(1996). Enhancement of perceived visual intensity by audi­
tory stimuli: A psychophysical analysis. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 8(6), 497-506. doi: 10.1162/jocn. 1996.8.6.497
Stenstrom, P, Fox, K., Solomonova, E., & Nielsen, T. (2012). 
Mentation during sleep onset theta bursts in a trained partic­
ipant: A role for NREM stage 1 sleep in memory processing? 
International Journal of Dream Research, 5, 37-46.
Stickgold, R. (2002). EMDR: A putative neurobiological mech­
anism of action. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 61-75.
Talsma, D. (2015). Predictive coding and multisensory inte­
gration: An attentional account of the multisensory mind. 
Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 9, 19. doi: 10.3389/ 
fnint.2015.00019
Tanaka, H., Hayashi, M., & Hori, T. (1998a). Coherence analy­
sis of topographical characteristics of the hypnagogic EEG. 
In Y. Koga, K. Nagata, & K. Kirata (Eds.), Brain topography 
today (pp. 309-312): Elsevier.
Tanaka, H., Hayashi, M., & Hori, T. (1998b). Topographic 
mapping of electroencephalography coherence in hyp­
nagogic state. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 52, 
147_148.
Tinguely, G., Huber, R., Borbely, A. A., & Achermann, P. 
(2006). Non-rapid eye movement sleep with low muscle 
tone as a marker of rapid eye movement sleep regulation. 
BMC Neuroscience, 7, 2.
Tirunahari, V. L., Zaidi, S. A., Sharma, R., Skurnick, J., & 
Ashtyani, H. (2003). Microsleep and sleepiness: A compari­
son of multiple sleep latency test and scoring of microsleep 
as a diagnostic test for excessive daytime sleepiness. Sleep 
Medicine, 4(1), 63-67.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 1-25.
van Rijn, E., Eichenlaub, J. B., Lewis, P. A., Walker, M. P., 
Gaskell, M. G., Malinowski, J. E., & Blagrove, M. (2015). 
The dream-lag effect: Selective processing of personally 
significant events during Rapid Eye Movement sleep, but 
not during Slow Wave Sleep. Neurobiology of Learning and 
Memory, 122, 98-109. doi: 10.10l6/j.nlm.2015.01.009
Verdone, P. (1965). Temporal reference of manifest dream con­
tent. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 20, 1253-1268.
Vetter, P., Smith, F. W., & Muckli, L. (2014). Decoding sound 
and imagery content in early visual cortex. Current Biology, 
24(11), 1256-1262. doi: 10.10l6/j.cub.20l4.04.020
Violentyev, A., Shimojo, S., & Shams, L. (2005). Touch-induced 
visual illusion. Neuroreport, 76(10), 1107—1110.
Vogel, G. W. (1991). Sleep-onset mentation. In S. J. Ellman & J. 
S. Antrobus (Eds.), The mind in sleep: Psychology and psycho­
physiology (2nd ed., pp. 125-142). New York: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Wamsley, E. J., Perry, K., Djonlagic, I., Reaven, L. B., & 
Stickgold, R. (2010). Cognitive replay of visuomotor learn­
ing at sleep onset: Temporal dynamics and relationship to 
task performance. Sleep, 33, 59-68.
Werth, E., Achermann, P, & Borbely, A. A. (2002). 
Selective REM sleep deprivation during daytime. II. 
Muscle atonia in non-REM sleep. American Journal 
of Physiology: Regulative, Integrative, and Comparative 
Physiology, 283(2), R527-R532.
Williamson, P. C., Csima, A., Galin, H., & Mamelak, M. 
(1986). Spectral EEG correlates of dream recall. Biological 
Psychiatry, 21, 717—723.
Windt, J. M. (2010). The immersive spatiotemporal hallucina­
tion model of dreaming. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 9(2), 295-316.
Windt, J. M. (2015). Dreaming: A conceptual framework for 
philosophy of mind and empirical research. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
434
M I C R O D R E A M  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y

C H A P T E R
31
Sleep Paralysis: Phenomenology, 
Neurophysiology, and Treatment
Elizaveta Solomonova
Abstract
Sleep paralysis is an experience of being temporarily unable to move or talk during the transitional 
periods between sleep and wakefulness: at sleep onset or upon awakening. The feeling of paralysis 
may be accompanied by a variety of vivid and intense sensory experiences, including mentation in 
visual, auditory, and tactile modalities, as well as a distinct feeling of presence. This chapter discusses 
a variety of sleep paralysis experiences from the perspective of enactive cognition and cultural 
neurophenomenology. Current knowledge of neurophysiology and associated conditions is presented, 
and some techniques for coping with sleep paralysis are proposed. As an experience characterized by 
a hybrid state of dreaming and waking, sleep paralysis offers a unique window into phenomenology of 
spontaneous thought in sleep.
Key W ords: sleep paralysis, sleep, neurophenomenology, dreaming, neurophysiology, spontaneous 
thought
I had a few terrifying experiences a few years 
ago. I awoke in the middle of the night. I was 
sleeping on my back, and couldn’t move, but 
I had the sensation I could see around my 
room. There was a terrifying figure looming 
over me. Almost pressing on me. The best 
way I could describe it was that it was made of 
shadows. A deep rumbling or buzzing sound 
was present. It felt like I was in the presence 
of evil. . . . Which sounds so strange to say!
(31-year-old man, United States)
Sleep paralysis (SP) is a transient and gener­
ally benign phenomenon occurring at sleep onset 
or upon awakening. Classified as a rapid-eye- 
movement (REM) sleep-related parasomnia, SP 
represents a psychophysiological state characterized 
simultaneously by qualities of both sleep and wake­
fulness, wherein the experiencer can open her eyes 
(Hishikawa & Kaneko, 1965) and can be aware of 
her physical environment, but is unable to move
and may start seeing, hearing, feeling, or sensing 
something.
While documented instances of SP seem to be 
very consistent across cultures, SP s lived qualities, 
phenomenology, and interpretation as a meaningful 
experience vary depending on the cultural and reli­
gious background. Rooting SP in a particular belief 
system may either help the experiencer recognize 
that SP is common and transient, or amplify nega­
tive qualities of SP by giving more concrete shape 
to an already terrifying experience of a supernatural 
assault.
The emotional experience of SP is often one of 
fear, terror, and panic. Threatening presences, the 
vulnerability of being in a paralyzed state, uncon­
trollable visions— all these elements contribute to 
intense, predominantly dysphoric, negative affect. 
Some qualities of spontaneous thought associated 
with felt presence during SP can be seen as para­
noid (Cheyne & Girard, 2007), spatial, or interper- 
sonal/social (Nielsen, 2007; Solomonova, 2008).
4 3 5

The vast majority of SP experiences are associated 
with intense feelings of realism, and are most often 
characterized by fear and distress, which may carry 
over into wakefulness and create a vicious cycle of 
negative emotional association with sleep, includ­
ing aversion to going to bed, and even, in extreme 
cases, can result in symptoms reminiscent of post- 
traumatic stress disorder (McNally & Clancy,
2005). Yet, some SP experiences are described in 
positive terms, especially vestibulo-motor phe­
nomena that include out-of-body experiences 
(OBE), or sensations of flying or floating. While 
the intuitive and immediate reaction to SP is typi­
cally negative, as will be discussed in the section 
on practical considerations, there are numerous 
reports of neutral/positive SP. Furthermore, there 
is a possibility of harnessing the power and poten­
tial of the dissociative/overlapping state in order to 
take active charge of one’s experience and to use 
the opportunity presented by the simultaneity of 
waking and sleeping cognition— a potential for 
entering into a lucid dream state or for contempla­
tive self-observation.
Neurophysiologically, SP is currently under­
stood as a state dissociation or a state overlap 
between REM sleep and wakefulness (American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014). During SP one 
can open her eyes, look around the room, become 
aware of her environment, and simultaneously 
experience REM sleep-related paralysis (muscle ato- 
nia) as well as intense and realistic imagery1 of all 
sensory modalities— a nightmare spilling into the 
real world. Normally, during REM sleep, skeletal 
muscle atonia blocks most motor output, effec­
tively preventing the sleeper from acting out her 
dreams (Peever, Luppi, & Montplaisir, 2014). Sleep 
paralysis can also occur in the context of narcolepsy 
(Sharpless & Barber, 2011; Terzaghi, Ratti, Manni, 
& Manni, 2012), but the majority of those who 
experience SP report it in its isolated form (often 
referred to as isolated sleep paralysis), without known 
medical or neurological association.
In current medical and neuroscientific litera­
ture, SP is discussed in terms of its presentation and 
negative factors: SP-associated mentation is gen­
erally seen as a non-desirable effect of REM sleep 
intrusion into waking. In this chapter I propose 
that situating SP experiences as a dream phenom­
enon within the framework of embodied mind and 
enactive cognitive science, including contemplative 
approaches to consciousness, is an alternative that 
accounts for the phenomenology of SP as a lived 
experience, allows for rich and detailed cultural
framing of the experience, and offers avenues for a 
cross-cultural social neurophenomenology of SP.
First, I will discuss the phenomenology and neu­
rophysiology of SP experiences. I will present SP in 
general, without distinguishing between its isolated 
and narcolepsy-related form, unless such a separa­
tion is warranted. I will start by presenting the cur­
rent state of knowledge of SP prevalence, as well as 
the varieties of imagery accompanying SP and their 
cultural significance. I will then discuss SP in terms 
of a REM sleep parasomnia and outline its pre­
cipitating and enabling factors, as well as sleep and 
dream characteristics of those who experience SP. 
Finally, I will examine SP in light of various cultural 
and shared practices, including preventive measures 
and practices aimed at interrupting and transform­
ing SP experiences.
The experiential examples of SP used in the 
present chapter are all derived from an Internet- 
based study of SP (Solomonova et al., 2008). Our 
research group collected 193 responses from people 
with recurrent SP experiences, using a modified 
version of the Waterloo Unusual Sleep Experiences 
Questionnaire (Cheyne, Newby-Clark, & Rueffer,
1999). Our participants were recruited online, 
using word of mouth, and via advertising on SP- 
related forums, information, and support.
Definitions and Prevalence
Idiopathic SP (SP not associated with narco­
lepsy, and without known cause) is a benign and 
transient parasomnia (Howell, 2012), occurring 
during transitions between wake and sleep: at 
sleep onset or upon awakening. The D iagnostic 
a n d  Statistical M an u al o f  M en ta l D isorders (5th 
edition; DSM-5) classifies isolated SP accom­
panied by fearful mentation as an instance of 
a 
nightmare 
disorder 
(American 
Psychiatric 
Association, 2013). During an episode of SP, 
characteristics of REM sleep intrude upon seem­
ingly awake consciousness: thus the person expe­
riencing SP, while having an impression of being 
awake and aware of her environment, is unable 
to initiate voluntary movements (i.e., experiences 
REM sleep muscle atonia/paralysis), and may also 
experience intense and realistic sensations in any 
sensory modality— REM sleep-related mentation 
(American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014). 
SP should be distinguished from night terrors—  
early night awakenings with feelings of panic/ 
terror, typically associated with somnambulism- 
spectrum arousal from slow wave (Stages 3 and 
4) non-REM (NREM) sleep. Night terrors are
436
SL EE P PA R AL YS I S

characterized by sudden awakening in an agitated 
state, anxiety, body motility, and general amne­
sia with regard to underlying cognitive experience 
(Szelenberger, Niemcewicz, & Dabrowska, 2005).
Prevalence estimates of SP range widely, and 
may depend on geographic and cultural factors. 
A systematic review of SP prevalence has revealed 
that studies report SP lifetime prevalence from as 
low as 1.5% to possibly 100% in the general pop­
ulation (Sharpless & Barber, 2011). The authors 
indicated that about one in five individuals may 
have experienced SP at least once in their lifetime 
(of 36,533 persons in their review). Prevalence 
estimation of SP is difficult due to numerous fac­
tors such as ethnicity and cultural background, 
including variable familiarity with the phenom­
enon and in the wording of questions (Fukuda, 
1993). For example, in a cross-cultural study, 
Fukuda and colleagues (2000) reported that while 
it is unclear whether SP is equally prevalent in 
Canada and Japan, the lack of familiarity and of 
a normative cultural framework for SP in Canada 
may contribute to the fact that many Canadian, 
but not Japanese, respondents qualified SP as a 
kind of a dream, and would not have, therefore, 
readily recognized SP in a prevalence study. An 
additional reason for under-diagnosis of SP in the 
West may be the fact that those who experience 
SP may be misdiagnosed as having psychiatric 
disturbances (Hufford, 2005). The developmental 
trajectory of SP is traditionally associated with an 
onset during adolescence, which may indicate a 
process associated with sleep architecture matu­
ration (Wing, Lee, & Chen, 1994). However, in 
one study of older adults, a bimodal onset pattern 
was reported, with a second pattern of onset of SP 
episodes after the age of 60 years (Wing, Chiu, 
Leung, & Ng, 1999), suggesting a possibility that 
SP may have a variety of onset conditions.
Neurologically and phenomenologically, SP is 
situated on the REM-sleep based dream/nightmare 
continuum. In this chapter, I will approach SP 
experiences as a variant of intensified or disturbed 
dreaming, and will situate them within a framework 
of embodiment and enactivism.
The 4EA Cognition and Oneiric 
Mentation
Recent years have seen the development of a par­
adigm shift from a strictly neurocentric view of the 
mind, a position that can be stated as “embrained” 
(Morris, 2010), to a diverse family of approaches that 
consider the mind embodied (Varela, Thompson
& Rosch, 1991; Gallagher, 2005), enactive (Noe, 
2004; Thompson, 2005; Stewart, Gapenne & Di 
Paolo, 2010), extended into and embedded in the 
physical and social world (Clark & Chalmers, 1998; 
Menary, 2010), and affective (Colombetti, 2013; 
Pessoa, 2013). While these approaches are in many 
respects quite different, they have sometimes been 
labeled as 4EA (embodied, embedded, extended, 
enactive, affective) cognition, with a common 
theme of offering a robust alternative to computa­
tional, connectionist, and neuro-reductionist views 
of the mind (Protevi, 2012; Wheeler, 2005). These 
theories attempt to situate cognition, brain activ­
ity, and psychophysiology within the larger contexts 
of lived subjective experience, by emphasizing the 
roles of developmental sensorimotor attunement to 
the world, as well as of the active and motivated 
processes of perception and sense-making, the 
importance of the social and cultural milieu, and 
the role of emotion and affect.
Sleep and dreaming phenomena have been only 
rarely addressed by 4EA theorists (with the excep­
tion of Thompson 2014, 2015a, 2015b), and the 
prevailing view of the sleeping mind today situates 
sleep mentation as being firmly constrained within 
the brain (Hobson, Pace-Schott & Stickgold, 
2000; Rechtschaffen, 1978; Revonsuo, 2006). As 
Revonsuo states, “The conscious experiences we 
have during dreaming are isolated from behav­
ioral and perceptual interactions with the envi­
ronment, which refutes any theory that states that 
organism-environment interaction or other exter­
nal relationships are constitutive of the existence 
of consciousness” (Revonsuo et al., 2015, p. 3). 
Alternatively, situating dream mentation within 
a framework of 4EA approaches implies that the 
dreaming subject is not entirely isolated or dis­
connected from environmental and somatic stim­
uli, and that her experiential self retains affective, 
social, sensorimotor, and sense-making qualities. 
Dreaming then is not passively lived as a purely men­
tal simulation (Revonsuo et al., 2015), but can be 
seen as a process of active imagination (Thompson,
2014) rooted in the dreamers physical, social, and 
affective world (Solomonova & Sha, 2016). I pro­
pose that SP experiences, by virtue of their special 
kind of overlap between and simultaneous presence 
of both waking and dreaming cognition, are perfect 
candidates for neurophenomenological research on 
spontaneous thought in sleep, which would help 
illuminate particular qualities of dreaming cogni­
tion that may otherwise be inaccessible to reflective 
consciousness upon awakening from a dream.
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
437

Phenomenology of Sleep Paralysis 
Experiences
In addition to transient experience of muscle 
paralysis (Figure 31.1),2 the most dramatic quality 
of SP is its sensory content, characterized by vivid, 
intrusive audiovisual and somatosensory imagery. 
The experience of SP can be extremely realistic, may 
have a quasi-perceptual and wake-like quality, and 
may be accompanied by tactile and kinesthetic sen­
sations. Reflective thought processes, self-awareness, 
and metacognitive abilities seem to be relatively pre­
served during SP experiences, and people who have 
had multiple SP experiences may develop a “feel” 
for recognizing SP imagery.
SP-associated experiences are typically referred 
to as hallucinations (hypnagogic, when occurring 
at sleep onset, or hypnopompic, when happening 
upon awakening), since these occur during oth­
erwise seemingly awake consciousness (American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014; Liddon, 1967). 
This entails that a person who experiences SP sees 
something that is not there, something that is dis­
torted or false. Such a view presupposes that during 
SP one is effectively awake and is misinterpreting 
her experience. Another way of looking at SP is to 
situate it within the spectrum of dream mentation 
and dreaming imagination. While dreaming also
has been seen as a delusional/hallucinatory activ­
ity, an alternative view, in line with embodied mind 
theories and enactive approach, has also been pro­
posed: “When you hallucinate, you seem to perceive 
what is not there. [ . . . ] When you imagine, you 
evoke something absent and make it mentally pres­
ent to your attention” (Thompson, 2014, p. 179). 
In this chapter I adopt this latter view and will 
refer to SP experiences as a variant of spontaneous 
thought/mentation or mental imagery, rather than 
hallucinations or delusions.
Kinds of Sleep Paralysis Experience
A factor analysis by Cheyne and colleagues 
(1999) showed that SP mentation typically falls 
into three general categories. The first category is 
Intruder, and it is characterized by a felt presence 
and fear, as well as auditory and visual imagery. The 
person who experiences SP feels that someone is 
in the house or in their room. This experience is 
sometimes accompanied by seeing or hearing some­
one or something sentient move around the house. 
The second category of SP experiences is known as 
incubus, in which the felt presence is interpreted as 
a supernatural assault and is often accompanied by 
a sensation of shallow breathing, a feeling of being 
smothered, pressure on the chest, or pain. In this
Figure 31.1. (See Color Insert) A representation of sleep paralysis experience. The sleeper is awakened suddenly and sees a menacing 
shadowy creature on top of him. He experiences the sensation of being pushed into the bed, while the bed itself is swirling in a sort 
of a tornado. The two faces of the dreamer represent the “double” consciousness during sleep paralysis: he is simultaneously terrified 
of the supernatural attacker and also knows that if he does not resist the experience and allows himself to drift back into sleep he may 
have a lucid dream (this lucid consciousness is represented as a sleeping face with a detailed brain, denoting vibrant possibilities of 
lucidity). Artist: Benjamen Samaha, Montreal, Canada, 2016. Reproduced with the artist’s permission.
438
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

case, the sleeper often sees and feels the maleficent 
being on top of her. The third category, unusual 
bodily experiences, appears to be a separate, less 
well-known, and a qualitatively different kind of 
SP experience: these are often described as positive 
events, such as sensations of floating, out-of-body 
experiences (OBEs), and feelings of bliss. Both 
intruder and incubus categories typically include 
the experience of felt presence— a distinct sensation 
that someone sentient is in the immediate vicinity 
of the sleeper (Cheyne, 2005).
Most literature on SP focuses almost exclusively 
on the first two kinds, intruder and incubus, possi­
bly due to their particularly intensified felt presence 
imagery, which contributes to distressing SP expe­
riences (Cheyne & Pennycook, 2013; Solomonova 
et al., 2008). However, neutral and positive instances 
of SP have also been described, and the third cat­
egory, unusual body experiences, or vestibulo-motor 
experiences, is often characterized by pleasant sen­
sations and a spirit of exploration, accompanying 
sensations of flying, out-of-body experiences, or 
autoscopy (observation of ones own body from an 
unusual/novel point of view) (Brugger, Regard & 
Landis, 1997).
Felt Presence
Just before going to sleep or if awoken sud­
denly I feel as though a presence, usually a 
dark shadow figure is standing over the bed 
staring down at me, or pacing back and forth. 
(22-year-old, gender not reported, United 
States)
Among all SP experiences, felt presence, the dis­
tinct sensation that another sentient being, human 
or not, is present in the extracorporeal space of the 
experiencer, is arguably the most salient, terrifying, 
and rich. Felt presence is consistently reported as 
the most common SP-associated experience— about 
80% of episodes (Cheyne et al., 1999)— which pro­
duces the most fear and SP-related state of distress 
(Solomonova et al., 2008). One salient feature of 
felt presence experiences during SP is the fact that it 
is a distinct sensation, and may occur in the absence 
of visual, auditory, or tactile imagery. Felt presence 
experiences during SP have been classified as a para­
noid delusion (Cheyne & Girard, 2007), an expres­
sion of spatial social imagery (Nielsen, 2007), and 
as a variant of basic intersubjective experience of the 
world (Solomonova, Frantova, & Nielsen, 2010).
Felt presence experiences are often interpreted 
within the cultural framework available to the
experiencer (see the following section on the cultural 
neurophenomenology of SP), but some basic char­
acteristics seem to be common across cultures and 
ages (Cheyne, 2001): (1) felt presence often mani­
fests from ambiguous stimuli: it is often described as 
“shadowy,” and its physical characteristics are often 
unclear; (2) the experiencer may report a distinct 
sensation of being watched, and that the presence 
has some intentions toward the dreamer; these range 
from some vague interest to full-blown assault; (3) felt 
presence is usually accompanied by intense emotions 
(often fear when the presence is interpreted as threat­
ening), sometimes to the point of a distinct feeling 
of dread, imminent death, or being in the presence 
of evil. Positive emotions, however, are also possible, 
especially when the experience is understood as visita­
tions by deceased relatives or visions of the divine.
Intruder
Consider the following examples of felt presence 
experiences of the intruder type: A 26-year-old man 
from the United States reports: “It felt as if someone 
was watching me but silently standing behind me.” 
In this example the presence is felt in a distinct and 
clear way, but is not seen or heard, yet the experi­
encer knows where in space the presence is located. 
Similarly, a 29-year-old woman from the United 
States regularly experiences the malevolent pres­
ence without ever seeing it: “. . . feeling of evil that 
is watching or monitoring; never able to actually see 
this evil entity.’ ” Even in the absence of direct visual, 
auditory, or tactile imagery, she feels that she is 
observed and that the presence is “evil.” The ambigu­
ous qualities of the physical attributes of SP visitors 
can be illustrated by the following two examples. 
A 39-year-old man from the United States writes, 
“The ‘presence’ is a tall black/darkest grey shadow of 
a human form without any features. It stands in the 
doorway to my bedroom waiting to be ‘noticed.’ ” 
Likewise, a 30-year-old woman experienced various 
ways in which the presence was manifesting during 
her SP attacks: “Once it seemed a shadow was leav­
ing the room. One other time the shadow seemed 
to have ‘wild’ hair or if it doesn’t have hair at all, it 
looked as some sort of black something.”
Incubus
The 
incubus experience happens when the 
intruder physically oppresses the sleeper, sometimes 
in a rather dramatic way. In words of a 52-year-old 
man from the United States: “My worst experience 
was being choked by a man who burst into my bed­
room. The experience was so real and frightening
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
439

that I was very afraid of my SP for many months 
after” The incubus takes many forms, including 
human, supernatural, and, more rarely, animal: “I 
often hallucinate creatures like large cats— lions or 
tigers, . . . wrapping themselves firmly around me 
and crushing my body” writes a 20-year-old woman 
from England.
Some of the most dramatic and potentially trau­
matic SP incubus experiences are instances that are 
lived as sexual assault or alien abduction (McNally 
& Clancy, 2005b; McNally, 2011). Consider the fol­
lowing example, reported by a 40-year-old man from 
the United States: “When it is a ‘Dark Man episode, 
he most likely touches me. Either by laying across my 
body, in a sexual way or in the beginning, he would 
grab me and drag me. I always felt that if I let go, 
he would pull me out of my body.” Similarly, a 29- 
year-old woman from Spain describes her distressing 
SP experience: “. . . extreme terror, the feeling that 
air is dense and darker, that shadows boil and take 
shape. . . .  I hear some low tone noises, voices, tac­
tile feeling of grabbing, of naked cold skin, and, very 
rarely, a presence. Very dark with round eyes, spider­
like fingers, that laughs, messes up the bed, and makes 
me feel terror, with some sexual approaches. . . .” 
In a study linking reports of space alien abduction 
to SP episodes, McNally and Clancy present this 
case: “. . . female abductee . . . was completely para­
lyzed, and felt electrical vibrations throughout her 
body. She was sweating, struggling to breathe, and 
felt her heart pounding in terror. When she opened 
her eyes, she saw an insect-like alien being on top of 
her bed” (McNally & Clancy, 2005, p. 116).
Positive Felt Presence Experiences and 
Doubling
While most easily recognizable and most com­
monly documented cases of felt presence during SP 
have to do with a threatening and ominous “visitor,” 
some evidence suggests, however, that the presence 
is not always understood as hostile. Such experi­
ences include perception of friends and family; visi­
tation from deceased relatives or benevolent spirits; 
and erotic encounters where the sense of presence 
is comforting. A 20-year-old SP sufferer from the 
United States writes, “Once or twice I have thought 
that my friend or roommate was standing over me. 
I was confused but not afraid.” Similarly, encounter­
ing deceased family members in visions or in dreams 
can be experienced as a positive spiritual event, and 
possibly play a healing role in processes of bereave­
ment (Belicki, Gulko, Ruzycki, & Aristotle, 2003; 
Garfield, 1996).
Finally, another rare kind of SP-related felt pres­
ence episode involves first an experience of “some­
one there,” and then a doubling of the dreamers 
own body, a self-projection into the extracorporeal 
space. Some individuals report that the felt pres­
ence entities are becoming an externalized view of 
themselves: “Sometimes I feel that the presence is 
myself, that I can watch myself,” reports a 21-year- 
old man from Jamaica; “I switch to another world 
and I myself become a presence,” writes a 19-year- 
old man from Russia.
Body Experiences in Sleep Paralysis
Most (if not all) SP episodes are defined by an 
altered experience of the body. These include simple 
experiences of muscle paralysis; sensations associ­
ated with supernatural assault, including touch, 
pressure on the chest, or even choking; feelings of 
unusual vibrations or falling into a vortex; and out- 
of-body experiences, including flying, falling, or 
moving around one’s house.
One of the most salient features of SP is the 
REM sleep-related muscle atonia. The inability 
to move is a striking and unusual experience for 
most individuals, and the mismatch between sens­
ing the body and the loss of voluntary control over 
the body’s movements may contribute to a range 
of somatosensory experiences. As discussed earlier, 
some of the most intense SP episodes may involve 
a feeling of being assaulted or touched by a super­
natural entity. For instance, a 34-year-old man from 
the United States describes the following experi­
ence: “Felt my arms pinned across my chest in a 
strait jacket hold, felt hands on my chest pinning 
me against a wall.” Perception of not being able to 
fully breathe, often accompanied by feeling of pres­
sure on the chest, may be prevalent in as much as 
57% of SP episodes (Sharpless et al., 2010).
Although most accounts of and research on SP 
experience have centered on paralysis accompa­
nied by terrifying mentation and by felt presence, 
not all SP experiences are characterized by imag­
ery and many are simply experiences of transient 
body paralysis during the transition between sleep 
and wakefulness, without any other accompany­
ing mental activity (American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine, 2014). Additionally, SP episodes may be 
predominantly somatosensory in nature: Cheyne 
(1999) characterizes these experiences as vestibulo- 
motor mentation.
Autoscopy, 
out-of-body 
experiences, 
vibra­
tions, floating, falling, and body-doubling experi­
ences (Cheyne, 2002) are all possible within the SP
440
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

framework due to its reliance on dream-supporting 
REM sleep mechanisms. During a dream, especially 
a lucid dream (wherein one is aware of the fact that 
she is dreaming), it is possible to have a simultane­
ous experience of one’s dream body and real body 
at the same time. Thompson (2014) distinguishes 
between the dreaming self (“I” the dreamer) and 
the dream ego (“I” as dreamed) as two coinciding 
modes of self-experience, which may sometimes 
be experienced in parallel. The dreaming self is the 
sleeping self; it is the “I” of the waking life, now 
engaging in the practice of sleep and dreaming. The 
dream ego, on the other hand, is the experiential 
self, immersed in the dream scenario. The “I” as 
dreamed is the temporary “I” that takes on the first- 
person perspective as a subject (and sometimes an 
object) of the dream world. Seen from this point 
of view, SP episodes may represent an intense expe­
rience of the dreaming ego, lacking a dream body 
and temporarily “stuck” within her immobilized 
sleeping body of the dreaming self/“I” the dreamer 
while experiencing dream-like mentation. This feel­
ing of being stuck, coupled with awareness of the 
overlap between states of vigilance, may then trans­
form itself into a situation of perceptual doubling 
of body imagery.
Contrary to most SP episodes with a felt presence 
component, some bodily experiences are described 
in quite positive terms. For instance, a 20-year-old 
woman from England describes this characteristic 
of her typical SP episode: “Generally, the experi­
ences start with a low, pleasant vibration that moves 
through my body in defined waves, from the feet 
up. I feel them most strongly in the throat and in 
my eardrums.”
Out-of-body experiences are also relatively com­
mon in SP— as much as 39% of SP experiencers 
have had one at some point (Cheyne, 2002). A 39- 
year-old woman from the United States writes, 
“I floated out of my bed into the kitchen. But, as 
I floated over my bed, I saw like this beast figure 
crouched over on the front of my bed. I floated 
over it down to the kitchen. That is where I saw this 
[sic] beautiful kaleidoscope-like leaves. They were so 
vibrant . . .  I then floated back to my room into 
my body.” In this example there is a combination 
of various SP characteristics: dream-like mentation 
superimposed onto the environment, a nocturnal 
visitor, and an altered sense of the body.
SP experiences are also sometimes accompa­
nied by false awakenings— dreams where one has 
a vivid and realistic feeling of waking up in one’s 
own bed and engaging in usual activities, only to
realize that one is still asleep (Buzzi, 2011). While 
false awakenings are typically characterized as 
dream experiences, their phenomenology in terms 
of realism and possible state overlap is to a degree 
similar to SP. In Cheyne’s report (2002), 58% of 
people who experience SP also experienced false 
awakenings at least occasionally. Additionally, false 
awakenings are often associated with feelings of 
dread, anxiety, and oppression (Green & McCreery, 
1994; Nielsen & Zadra, 2011), similarly to SP. The 
following two examples from our Internet-based 
sample illustrate such cases: a 24-year old man from 
the United States reports: “. . . sometimes I think 
I have moved . . . sometimes even gotten up and 
walked around only to find that I never got up 
at all.” In a similar vein, a 21-year old man from 
Jamaica describes his experience: “I will wake up 
into another dream inside my bedroom and think 
I am awake and realize I am still sleeping minutes 
later and the same procedure repeats several times.”
Emotions
. . . Extreme anxiety and fear, mind is awake,
but body is asleep. I feel as though I am trapped
and cannot communicate with those around
me. (23-year-old woman, United States)
The most prevalent emotion associated with SP 
experiences is fear. Indeed, the most natural reaction 
to waking up unable to move is panic, and the sensa­
tion of constricted breathing (consistent with REM 
sleep physiology) may increase the state of distress. 
Sharpless and colleagues (2010) introduced the term 
fearful isolated sleep paralysis to denote SP experiences 
characterized by an intense state of distress.
As much as 90% of reported SP episodes are 
described as fearful (Cheyne, Rueffer, & Newby- 
Clark, 1999). Similarly, in an sample of Irish uni­
versity students, fear was found to be the most 
prevalent emotion, with 82% of respondents stat­
ing that they have experienced fear at some point 
during an SP episode (O’Hanlon, Murphy, & Di 
Blasi, 2011). Moreover, nightmare frequency was 
previously reported as a predictor of SP occurrence 
(Liskova, Janeckova, Kluzova Kracmarova, Mlada, 
& Buskova, 2016). This data suggests that SP, or 
at least the fearful form of SP, can be seen as an 
intensified form of a nightmare: A recent study by 
Robert and Zadra (2014) reported that about 65% 
of nightmares and 45% of bad dreams are charac­
terized by fear.
One approach to classify the affective and per­
sonal impact of SP experiences is to assess not
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
441

only the frequency or intensity of SP episodes, 
but also distress associated with SP experiences 
(Solomonova et ah, 2008; Cheyne & Pennycook,
2013) . To what extent is the individual affected by 
SP? To what extent do negative emotions carry over 
from an SP episode into waking life? Do SP experi­
ences promote a negative relationship with sleep? 
These questions have been successfully examined 
in previous research on nightmares (Belicki, 1992; 
Blagrove, Farmer, & Williams, 2004), showing 
that the individual impact of negative and intense 
dream experiences depends more on a trait-like 
reactivity, sometimes referred to as affect distress 
(Nielsen & Levine, 2007). This trait is thought 
to represent a general dysfunction of affect regu­
lation network, and it has been shown to be a 
better measure of how much nightmares influ­
ence waking life emotional well-being than the 
frequency or intensity of self-reported nightmare 
occurrence. Furthermore, affect distress mediates 
reactivity, negative interpretation, and degree of 
negative reaction to nightmares (Belicki, 1992; 
Levin & Fireman, 2002). According to Nielsen 
and Levin (2007; Levin & Nielsen, 2009), dream­
ing helps regulate emotional memory consolida­
tion and emotional reactivity via fear extinction. 
Nightmares, therefore, represent a case of prob- 
lematic/dysfunctional processes of fear extinction. 
In combination with other factors, affect distress is 
likely to play a role in the formation, experience, 
and interpretation of SP.
Positive emotions associated with SP are much 
less studied, and it is not possible to accurately esti­
mate their prevalence. One possible reason for this 
is lack of appropriate screening (SP is often diag­
nosed as an unpleasant phenomenon) and lack of 
medical/psychiatric concern: Patients are not very 
likely to describe such experiences to their health 
practitioner, since they are not bothered by them. 
In addition, the current diagnostic criteria for a 
recurrent isolated SP as listed in the latest edition 
of the International Classification o f Sleep Disorders 
(3rd edition; American Academy of Sleep Medicine,
2014) , include that the episodes must cause “clini­
cally significant distress including bedtime anxiety 
or fear of sleep.” Such a provision would effectively 
exclude all possible positive and non-distressing 
SP phenomena from investigation and/or diagno­
sis. Nonetheless, in a web-based SP study Cheyne 
(2002) reports that in addition to anger (30% 
of respondents) and sadness (23%), bliss (17%) 
and erotic sensations (17%) are also sometimes 
present in SP.
Visual and Auditory Experiences
Felt presence is the most prevalent, the most emo­
tionally disturbing, and the most salient SP-related 
experience. Therefore, it is unsurprising that most 
visual and auditory mentation during SP usually 
has something to do with these unwelcome visitors. 
The entities, however, while fe lt in a very distinc­
tive and concrete way, are often described visually 
as rather general and vague shadowy beings. Visual 
experiences are reported to occur in 54%-56% and 
auditory experiences in 55%-60% (Cheyne, 2002; 
Solomonova et al., 2008) of SP sufferers.
SP may be accompanied by auditory expe­
riences, ranging from abstract and mechanical 
sounds, such as electric sounds and sounds of buzz­
ing, to vivid auditory imagery, consistent with SP 
experience of an intruder or an incubus. Sounds of 
footsteps and of voices are often reported (Cheyne, 
2002; Cheyne, Rueffer, & Newby-Clark, 1999; 
Solomonova et al., 2008).
Cultural Grounding of Sleep Paralysis
While SP is a lesser-known sleep phenomenon in 
the West, it is quite prevalent and is well described 
in many other cultures. Due to the lack of general 
awareness of SP in the West, it is rarely discussed 
in the context of family medicine or psychology. 
Cross-cultural work on SP revealed that it is rooted 
in a variety of religious beliefs and cultural schemas, 
including interpretations of the experience and 
techniques to engage with the nocturnal visitors. 
Some of the common qualities of SP across cultures 
(Adler, 2011) include the following: (1) sensation 
of being awake; (2) perception of the environment; 
(3) paralysis; (4) feeling of fear and dread; (5) felt 
presence; (6) chest pressure/breathing difficulties; 
(7) supine position; and (8) various unusual body 
sensations. These apparently culturally invariant 
qualities of SP-related occurrences of the experience 
of a supernatural attack have been at the center of 
the phenomenological and cross-cultural cognitive 
research on SP.
Figure 31.2 is a reproduction of an eighteenth- 
century work by Henri Fuseli entitled 
The 
N ightm are. It represents a sleeping woman in a 
supine position being oppressed by a maleficent 
creature sitting on her chest and with an omi­
nous presence of the nightmare. It is likely that 
the early use of the English term nightmare was 
to describe intense SP (Orly & Haines, 2014). 
Culture-specific presentations of SP-related felt 
presence experiences typically involve a malefi­
cent supernatural being, such as a witch or an
442
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

Figure 31.2. (See Color Insert) Henry Fuseli, The Nightmare (1781). Detroit Institute of Art. Public Domain image: https://commons. 
wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid= 15453518.
evil spirit. Some examples found across cultures 
include the kanashibari demon in Japan (Arikawa, 
Templer, & Brown, 1999; Fukuda et al., 1987); 
kokma in the West Indies (Ness, 1983); “old hag” 
in Newfoundland (Hufford, 1989); pandafeche in 
Italy (Jalal, Romanelli, & Hinton, 2015); uqum an- 
girn iq among the Inuit of Baffin Island (Bloom 
& Gelardin, 1983; Law & Kirmayer, 2005); and 
many others (for a comprehensive list of terms 
for SP experiences, see Adler, 2011). Figure 31.3 
illustrates a possible SP representation (Olry & 
Haines, 2014): a Japanese demon Yamachichi 
oppresses and inhales the breath of the sleeper.
The first systematic cultural exploration of SP 
was done by Hufford (1989): He described a phe­
nomenon specific to Newfoundland— the “old 
hag” witch attack. In his book Hufford discusses 
the tension in situating SP experiences somewhere 
between the “cultural source hypothesis,” wherein 
cultural interpretations and framing influence how 
an experience unfolds, and the “experiential source 
hypothesis,” in which some invariant lived experi­
ences, such as SP, may influence the development 
of a spiritual interpretation and formation of cul­
tural beliefs (Hufford 1989, 2005). Similar to this 
notion, McNamara and Bulkeley (2015) proposed 
an experiential hypothesis to describe how dreams
and other dream-associated experiences, includ­
ing visions and transcendental experiences, can be 
seen as a cornerstone and a source of religious belief 
(McNamara & Bulkeley, 2015). According to this 
view, a number of cultural, religious, and paranor­
mal beliefs are shaped primarily by direct experi­
ence and then framed within a particular tradition, 
which imbues them with existential and metaphysi­
cal meaning, a notion that is reminiscent of William 
James’s grounding of mystical experience in the 
phenomenology of lived experience (James, 1985).
The effect of framing such intense subjective 
experiences within a cultural tradition can have 
at least two kinds of potentially opposing effects. 
On the one hand, many cultures provide not only 
supernatural explanations of SP, but also remedies 
and protective rituals against it (some of which are 
described later in this chapter), thus rooting the 
SP in a framework that allows for shared narrative 
and for practical interventions. On the other hand, 
intense and fearful SP, when interpreted as super­
natural assault, has a potential for traumatizing 
the sleeper, thus creating a vicious circle of anxiety, 
aversion to sleep, facilitation of future SP episodes 
(Hinton et al., 2005b; Sharpless et al., 2010), 
and increasing the level of distress via “cultural 
fear priming” (Jalal, Romanelli, & Hinton, 2015;
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
4 4 3

Figure 31.3. (See Color Insert) Takehara Shunsen, Yamachichi (1841). Public domain image: https://c0mm0ns.wilcimedia.0rg/w/index. 
php?curid=2074508.
Ohayon, Zulley, Guilleminault, & Smirne, 1999). 
For instance, the incubus experience, when seen 
as part of the Christian tradition starting with the 
late Antique period, according to Gordon (2015), 
gained additional stigmatizing power, with a con­
notation of an illicit supernatural sexual experience. 
Not only were SP victims living through a waking 
nightmare of an encounter with a demonic assail­
ant, they were also seen as responsible for having 
summoned it due to their own sinful predisposi­
tion/ thoughts/impurities.
It is important to note that while SP can include 
a range of experiences, such as positive experiences, 
neutral emotions, vestibulo-motor phenomena, 
out-of-body experiences, and others, most cultural 
interpretations of SP deal specifically with overlap­
ping aspects of intruder and incubus.
Neural Basis, Associated Conditions, and 
Precipitating Factors
Human sleep is typically divided into two 
kinds: REM sleep and NREM sleep. Healthy adults 
alternate between NREM and REM in cycles last­
ing about 90 minutes, for a total of 5-6 cycles 
over a night of sleep. While it is possible to experi­
ence dreaming in all stages of sleep, REM sleep is
typically characterized by the most vivid, realistic, 
bizarre, and emotionally intense sleep mentation 
(Nielsen, 2000). Other vivid dream experiences, 
such as nightmares (Nielsen & Levin, 2007) and 
lucid dreams (LaBerge, Levitan & Dement, 1986), 
are also typically associated with REM sleep.
Within the context of narcolepsy, sleep paralysis 
is a part of the diagnostic tetrad, alongside daytime 
sleepiness, cataplexy, and hypnagogic hallucinations 
(Thorpy, 2016). There is not sufficient data to assess 
whether there are significant differences in phenom­
enology between narcolepsy-associated SP and the 
isolated form.
SP episodes are characterized by the simultane­
ous presence of waking thought and of REM sleep 
psychophysiology (Mahowald & Schenck, 1991, 
2005; Terzaghi et al., 2012), and the sleeper can 
often open her eyes and become relatively aware of 
her environment, while REM sleep-related sponta­
neous mentation— vivid dreaming— superimposes 
onto otherwise awake consciousness. This imagery 
may occur at sleep onset (hypnagogic) or upon 
awakening (hypnopompic). Other characteristics of 
REM sleep, such as airway occlusion and rapid shal­
low respiration (Gould et al., 1988), may contribute 
to the feeling of being suffocated or the perception
444
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

of shortness of breath often reported by SP sufferers. 
Additionally, in one study, obstructive sleep apnea 
was found to be a possible precipitating factor for 
SP (Hsieh, Lai, Liu, Lan, & Hsu, 2010).
Little research has been done on the sleep char­
acteristics of SP sufferers. Some preliminary data 
suggest that the SP sleep profile may be similar to 
that of frequent nightmare sufferers (Nielsen et al.,
2010), in that SP participants appear, paradoxi­
cally, to exhibit less REM sleep pressure, have more 
“skipped” REM sleep periods, and show no increase 
in eye movement density (as opposed to healthy 
controls) 
throughout the night (Solomonova, 
Nielsen, Takeuchi, Bezinger, & Carr, 2012). SP par­
ticipants also show higher delta power during sleep 
than non-SP controls (Marquis et al., 2015), which 
suggests alteration of the processes of wake-NREM- 
REM regulation.
Some of the vestibulo-motor characteristics, 
such as autoscopy, out-of-body experiences, and 
feelings of physical transformation, may stem 
from disturbances in right parietal regions (Jalal 
& Ramachandran, 2014): The mismatch between 
intended motor movement and inability to move 
may contribute to unusual physical sensations.
SP may be experimentally elicited in labora­
tory settings, but only using an arduous protocol 
of repeated sleep interruption. For example, SP epi­
sodes were experimentally induced by letting par­
ticipants sleep uninterrupted for the first NREM 
period, thus eliminating most of the slow-wave sleep 
pressure (a tendency of slow-wave NREM sleep to 
take precedence and occupy a large proportion of 
early night sleep), and then repeatedly awakening 
participants after 5 minutes of REM sleep have 
elapsed, thus augmenting REM sleep pressure and 
facilitating sleep-onset REM periods (SOREMPs). 
SOREMPs may be seen as a facilitating factor in a 
REM-wake state dissociation thought to character­
ize SP experiences. It should be noted, however, that 
even within such controlled settings and demand­
ing protocols, rates of SP were relatively low: 6 
episodes total in 16 participants who already had 
a tendency toward recurrent isolated SP (Takeuchi, 
Miyasita, Sasaki, & Inugami, 1992), and 8 episodes 
from 184 sleep interruptions in 13 SP sufferers 
(Takeuchi, Fukuda, Sasaki, Inugami, & Murphy,
2002). These results suggest that the incidence of SP 
at sleep onset may signify an individual’s propensity 
to enter into REM sleep directly upon falling asleep. 
This further supports the idea that SP may result 
from alterations in wake-REM-NREM regulation 
patterns, resulting in state overlap.
Associated Conditions
Little is known about the epidemiology of SP, 
but growing evidence points to a combination of 
genetic and experiential factors. The only study 
to date to examine genetic factors associated with 
SP has reported moderate heritability, and that 
this effect was associated with factors known to 
contribute to disrupted sleep cycles (Denis et al.,
2015). Sleep fragmentation and disruption in 
wake-NREM-REM regulation are an important 
factor facilitating SP occurrence, but it is uncertain 
whether all types of SP can be explained by a pro­
pensity for sleep fragmentation. Some ethnic groups 
seem to be more likely to experience SP than others. 
The Hmong population in Wisconsin, for instance, 
had a significantly higher incidence of SP than a 
non-Hmong cohort (Young et al., 2013), with as 
much as 31% of interviewed Hmong participant 
reporting at least weekly occurrence of SP episodes. 
Individuals of African descent also seem to have 
elevated rates of SP (Bell et al., 1984; Friedman & 
Paradis, 2002).
Links between affective disorders, especially 
depression and anxiety, and SP have also been 
reported. A relationships have been found between 
SP and depression magnitude and anxiety (Szklo- 
Coxe, Young, Finn, & Mignot, 2007), social pho­
bia and panic disorder (Otto et al., 2006; Paradis 
& Friedman, 2005; Sharpless et al., 2010) and 
social anxiety (Simard & Nielsen, 2005), especially 
with the sensation of being observed (Solomonova 
et al., 2008). Changes in REM sleep regulation are 
often found in mood disorders, especially in depres­
sion (Arargun & Cartwright, 2003; Nofzinger 
et al., 1994).
The relationship between trauma, especially 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and SP has 
been noted by a number of researchers. McNally 
and Clancy found that there was a higher propor­
tion of SP reports in participants with a history 
of childhood sexual abuse (McNally & Clancy, 
2005a), and Abrams and colleagues (2008) reported 
that sexual abuse survivors report more distress­
ing and more frequent SP incidence. In addition, 
higher rates of SP were found in Hmong popula­
tion in relation to traumatic Vietnam War expe­
riences (Young et al., 2013), as well as in Khmer 
(Hinton, Pich, Chhean, & Pollack, 2005a) and 
Cambodian 
refugees 
(Hinton, 
Pich, 
Chhean, 
Pollack, & McNally, 2005b). Similarly, Sharpless 
and Grom (2013) report that some cases of SP onset 
in adolescents begin after the loss of a family mem­
ber. Considering that SP may be conceptualized
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
445

as a nightmare spectrum experience, this relation­
ship may represent the same dysfunction in the 
affect regulation network (Levin & Nielsen, 2007; 
Nielsen & Levin, 2007) as the one that has been 
proposed to be involved in nightmare production. 
PTSD-related sleep disturbances have been exten­
sively documented (Germain, Buysse, & Nofcinger, 
2008; Spoormaker & Montgomery, 2008), includ­
ing REM sleep dysregulation and increased night­
mares (Germain, 2013; Mellman et al., 2002), 
which in itself may contribute to altered REM sleep 
pressure, in turn facilitating the occurrence of SP 
episodes.
Since SP is often associated with intense, 
detailed, and troubling visions, a link between SP 
and psychiatric disorders has been hypothesized. 
Research, however, shows no consistent relation­
ship between psychiatric conditions and SP, with 
the exceptions of PTSD, panic disorder, and social 
anxiety. In one study, a number of links between 
SP and psychiatric conditions were found (Ohayon 
et al., 1999); these findings were challenged, how­
ever, by an Internet-based study (Solomonova 
et al., 2008) with a larger sample size, in which no 
strong links between psychopathology and SP were 
described. However, while isolated SP often pres­
ents itself in the absence of psychopathology, higher 
rates of hypnagogic and hypnopompic experiences 
(dream experiences occurring during the transition 
between sleep and wake, at sleep onset or upon 
awakenings, respectively), some of which may be 
associated with SP, are often found in psychosis 
(Plante & Winkelman, 2008).
Precipitating Factors
In their recent book, Sharpless and Doghramji 
(2015) list a number of plausible precipitating 
factors for SP occurrence in susceptible individu­
als. Sleep fragmentation and insufficient sleep 
are among the most obvious factors. REM sleep 
deprivation has been shown to increase REM sleep 
pressure, contributing to REM rebound effect and 
intensified dreams at sleep onset (Nielsen et al., 
2005). Poor sleep quality with frequent awaken­
ings and disruptions may also facilitate REM- 
wake overlap, creating fruitful conditions for the 
occurrence of SOREMPs (Takeuchi et al., 1992; 
Takeuchi et al., 2002; Spanos, McNulty, DuBreuil, 
Pires, & Burgess, 1995). Shift work, jet-lag, use of 
sleep-disrupting medication, stress, anxiety— all 
these factors affect sleep and may facilitate an SP 
episode. Alcohol consumption was also reported to 
promote SP (Golzari & Ghabili, 2013; Munezawa
et al., 2011), probably due to its effect on altering 
sleep architecture (Roehrs & Roth, 2001). Sleeping 
in a supine position also appears to enhance the risk 
of an SP episode (Sharpless et al., 2010).
Neurocognitive Considerations 
A Return to Felt Presence
While undoubtedly felt presences are a hallmark 
of SP, especially of the intense and frightening epi­
sodes, presence experiences are not restricted to this 
parasomnia and are reported in a variety of condi­
tions, thus possibly representing a more general 
and basic social imagery process (Nielsen, 2007; 
Solomonova, Frantova, & Nielsen, 2011). Arguably, 
the most salient and compelling felt presence occurs 
in the context of mystical and spiritual experiences. 
Otto (1958) introduced the idea of the numinous 
as a cornerstone of religious mystical experiences. 
Some of the recent work comes from anthropol­
ogy: The ecstatic presence of God is manifested 
in the community of Evangelical Christians in the 
United States (Luhrmann, 2012). Other examples 
of felt presence have been documented in situations 
that are physically and emotionally straining or 
novel. Some examples of these experiences include 
high-altitude climbing (Brugger, Regard, Landis, 
& Oelz, 1999); feeling the presence of a baby in 
postpartum mothers (Nielsen & Paquette, 2007); 
the presence of deceased relatives in the context 
of bereavement (Keen, Murray, & Payne, 2013; 
Simon-Buller, Christopherson, & Jones, 1989; 
Taylor, 2005); in extreme environments, such as 
solitary sailing (see also Suedfeld, Rank, & Malus, 
Chapter 40 in this volume) and surviving in remote 
and hostile environments (Suedfeld & Mocellin, 
1987); and others. While in most cases felt pres­
ence is experienced spontaneously, in some cases 
it may be a product of sustained mental practices 
(as in prayer and some forms of meditation). One 
contemporary non-religious phenomenon is tul- 
pam ancy (Veissiere, 2016)— a long-term practice 
of conjuring up imaginary companions, that, over 
time, may be experienced as almost as real as other 
people.
Additionally, being able to have a felt sense of 
others may be seen as a prerequisite for the develop­
ment of subjectivity. Recent work in phenomenol­
ogy and enactivism suggests that the development 
of sense of self depends crucially on sensing oth­
ers, as early as in utero (Ammaniti & Gallese, 2014; 
Gallagher, 2005), that the sense of ones own body 
depends on the sense of others (Maclaren, 2008), and 
that the self-other dynamic is a necessary condition
446
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

for the sense of self (Zahavi, 2014). Evidence from 
dream research also suggests that dream processes 
are relational and intersubjective. The fact that 
dreams are most often about other people has been 
conceptualized as simulations of social interaction 
(Revonsuo, 2015) and as representations of individ­
ual attachment styles (McNamara, Andresen, Clark, 
Zborowski, & Duffy, 2001). Additionally, dreams, 
similarly to waking, can be seen as a dynamic inter­
action between the “self’’-related and “non-self” ele­
ments of dream content (everything extraneous to 
the dreamer). These non-self elements (non-human 
characters, dream environment, even dream objects) 
can be seen as a “dream other” due to their inher­
ent relational property (Solomonova et al., 2015), 
as the dream environment in its entirety affectively 
motivates the dreamer to engage with it.
Toward a Cultural Neurophenomenology 
of Sleep Paralysis
SP has often been characterized as dissociative 
(Terzaghi et al., 2012) state, since it effectively 
combines characteristics of “waking” consciousness 
(self-awareness, access to autobiographical memory, 
ability to open eyes and perceive the environment) 
with REM-sleep phenomena, specifically muscle 
atonia/paralysis and mentation/dreams. This notion 
of SP as dissociative has been at the heart of the 
previous neurobiological work on the link between 
dreaming and REM sleep. The relative deactivation 
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex characteristic 
of REM sleep (Hobson, Stickgold, & Pace-Schott, 
1988; Maquet, 2000) has been long hypothesized 
to be at the root of the loss of autobiographic mem­
ory and of the inability to appreciate the contents of 
the dream as “bizarre” or implausible in relation to 
reality. This has led to the hypothesis that in REM 
sleep dreaming one is effectively delusional and in a 
state of a transient psychosis (Hobson, 2004). In SP, 
similarly, there is often incomplete autobiographi­
cal access. This association between SP and REM 
sleep has also displaced the experience of SP from 
the psycho-spiritual domain of meaningful encoun­
ters with menacing/unreal/supernatural others, into 
a more reductionist account of uncontrollable and 
inescapable REM-initiated hallucinations.
In contrast, an account of SP in the context of 
an oneiric phenomenology and in a 4EA perspec­
tive may allow for a more nuanced reading of these 
experiences. An emerging neurophenomenological 
framework of sleep challenges the strict distinctions 
between wake, NREM, and REM sleep. Indeed,
while SP is one of the examples of simultaneous 
presence of REM sleep and wake processes, it is 
not the only phenomenon that attests to the fluid­
ity and interpermeability of states of consciousness. 
Lucid dreaming is another example of REM-wake 
co-occurrence (LaBerge, 1986); REM sleep behav­
ior disorder is characterized by preserved motor 
output during REM dreaming (Peever, Luppi, 
& Montplaisir, 2014); somnambulism episodes 
combine NREM and wake physiology and phe­
nomenology (Zadra, Pilon, Joncas, Rompre, & 
Montplaisir, 2004); and a variety of dream-enacting 
behaviors, such as laughing, simple movement, cry­
ing, and looking for a baby in bed, are prevalent 
in normal populations (Nielsen & Paquette, 2007; 
Nielsen, Svob, & Kuiken, 2010).
A more continuous view of mentation in sleep 
includes viewing SP as a form of oneiric experi­
ence: as a process of intensified mind-wandering 
(Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, & Christoff, 
2013), as a process of creativity (Hartmann & 
Kunzendorf, 2013), or as enactive imagination 
(Thompson, 2014), a process of sense-making 
in a rich, embodied, and intersubjective world 
(Solomonova & Sha, 2016). In his discussion of 
lucid dreaming, Thompson (2014) proposes that in 
addition to seeing this state as a dissociative super­
imposition of two distinct states of consciousness, it 
may be simultaneously approached as an integrative 
state, thus allowing for an integration of two different 
yet related ways of self-experience.
While SP sufferers feel awake and in their own 
bed, the realism of the experience and the quality 
of total immersion are completely overpowering to 
the dreamer, so that she is unable to appreciate the 
dreamlike quality or the unreality of the SP episode. 
The high prevalence of tactile and physical sensa­
tions probably contributes to this effect. There are, 
however, numerous accounts of long-time SP expe- 
riencers that are characterized by a certain “feel” 
for the experience as somewhere between real and 
unreal. SP-related experiences may have a very 
compelling and realistic quality, but they are usually 
lived differently from waking experiences, as a kind 
of a liminal state.
Consider the following example: While the par­
ticipant is experiencing intense emotion and is quite 
absorbed in the unfolding on the SP, he seems to 
have a kind of a dual awareness regarding the nature 
of his SP:
. . . Cant. Move. Not a muscle. Not an eyelash. It’s
often accompanied by hallucinations. So this bizarre
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
447

or terrifying event is happening all around me, and 
I am completely unable to respond or defend myself. 
Sometimes I know it s not real, somewhere in my 
mind, but it looks real, and it sounds real, and I’m 
terrified or revolted (or maybe just bemused), but 
I cannot wake myself up to stop it. (30-year-old man, 
United States)
Similarly, in another example, the experiencer is 
also hesitant to ascribe any particular state to her 
experience:
. ..  I might be answering wrong, because I see the 
beings in my dream-state immediately before waking. 
But their presence seems so real, I would compare the 
experience to having them accompanying me in the 
room. (48-year-old woman, United States)
Grounding SP in its cultural context allows 
us to appreciate the variety of factors contribut­
ing to qualities of the lived experience, and it may 
not be possible to dissect the relative contribution 
of the multitude of neural, phenomenological, 
and cultural narrative factors (Kirmayer, 2009). 
Importantly, in the current medical context, reduc­
ing SP to a dysfunction of REM psychophysiology 
may also have an important effect on reducing the 
potential for a deeper exploration of SP as a spiritual 
experience (Hufford, 2005).
The cultural neurophenomenology of SP is a 
powerful tool for investigating SP from the 4EA 
cognition perspective. As neurophysiological, expe­
riential accounts of SP show, the dreamer is in fact 
embodied— the oneiric scenario is dependent on 
the dreamers state of consciousness (REM intru­
sion) and on the dreamers physiological state (ato- 
nia, shallow rapid breathing). She is embedded in 
a physical (interprets ambiguous stimuli around 
her) and in a cultural world (these ambiguous stim­
uli take on a familiar shape and are infused with 
a deeper cultural and interpersonal signification). 
The sleeper is also extended into the world— the 
whole environment, both dreamed and real, is part 
of her ongoing experience; and her experience is 
enactive— there is a relational quality: She is not 
a passive observer of the oneiric drama unfolding 
before her eyes, but rather, she is deeply engaged 
(Solomonova & Sha, 2016).
In order to elucidate neurophenomenological 
qualities of SP in greater detail, future work may 
use 
microdynamic 
phenomenology/elicitation 
interviews, aimed at uncovering the fine-grained 
temporal and structural qualities of lived experience 
(Nielsen, Chapter 30 in this volume; Petitmengin,
2006; Petitmengin & Lachaux, 2013), in addition 
to neurophysiological data and deep awareness of 
the cultural, religious, and spiritual context of the 
experiencer.
Sleep Paralysis Practices: Prevention, 
Disruption, Treatment, and Exploration
While SP remains a relatively unknown phe­
nomenon in much of Europe and America, a num­
ber of practical culture-specific practices have been 
developed to protect the sleeper from the negative 
influence of presumed supernatural forces. While 
some of these methods have deep roots in their 
respective metaphysical contexts, and therefore 
need to be grounded in existing religious and mysti­
cal practices, a number of practical and conceptu­
ally neutral recommendations have emerged, and 
seem beneficial for most SP sufferers, regardless of 
background.
No established treatment for SP currently exists; 
its clinical management is instead often focused on 
treating comorbid problems. According to a review 
by Sharpless and Doghramji (2015), psychoanaly­
sis, cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), hypnosis, 
and education in sleep hygiene have been investi­
gated in relation to SP, but no empirical consensus 
on the efficacy of such interventions is currently 
available. Based on the available evidence on SP 
and cognitive-behavioral approaches to treatment 
of sleep disorders, especially insomnia, the authors 
propose a manual for CBT-ISP. This is a promis­
ing first step toward finding a systematic method 
of dealing with SP. Sparse evidence for pharmaco­
logical interventions for SP also exists: in one study 
it was suggested that REM sleep-suppressing anti­
depressants may provide temporary relief (Plante 
& Winkelman, 2008), and treatment of narco­
lepsy may reduce SP frequency (Mamelak, Black, 
Montplaisir, & Ristanovic, 2004). Antidepressants 
and anxiolytics were also used in severe cases (Hsieh 
et al.,2010). Terrillon and Marques-Bonham (2001) 
proposed that management of SP might benefit 
from the administration of melatonin, which would 
help normalize the circadian rhythm. The cost of 
side effects associated with these treatments, how­
ever, may outweigh the benefit, and Shapless and 
Doghramji (2015) argue for a cautious approach, 
tailored to each individual situation.
While methods for dealing with sleep paralysis 
have not been systematically explored by empirical 
psychology or cognitive science, the contemporary 
context of Internet-facilitated support groups and 
information-sharing practices are changing the
448
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

solitary and culture-bound nature of SP attacks. 
Furthermore, a number of methods, which have 
been anecdotally reported and documented online 
and in print, see SP experiences as an opportu­
nity rather than a nuisance, and promote explora­
tion of one’s own consciousness via SP-supported 
lucid dreaming or even contemplative approaches 
to SP (Hurd, 2010). One popular support group­
mailing list is known as “Awareness during sleep 
paralysis” (ASP), and a reddit group on SP counts 
over 4,000 users, sharing information on the phe­
nomenology of their experiences and methods of 
overcoming them.
Cultural and clinical practices associated with SP 
can be roughly separated into three kinds: (1) pre­
ventive practices, focused on avoiding SP-enabling 
circumstances; (2) disruptive practices, designed 
to stop SP in the middle of the experience; and 
(3) observational/explorative practices, aiming at 
observing SP and possibly transforming it into a 
positive event, such as a lucid dream or an out-of- 
body experience.
Raising awareness of SP-associated phenomena 
itself may be one of the most important factors in 
reducing fear and distress before, during, and after 
SP occurrence (Otto et al., 2006; Sharpless et al.,
2010). Indeed, knowing that the experience is tran­
sient (will not last), benign (does not contain any 
real danger), and common (is shared with many 
individuals across the world) are powerful tools 
for psychological distancing and for facilitating an 
eventual observational, as opposed to fully immer­
sive and fatalistic, attitude toward SP. Knowing 
about SP phenomenology and neurophysiology
and having access to cultural grounding with avail­
able symbolic gestures helps prevent, disrupt, and 
transform a negative experience into a tool for self­
exploration. Figure 31.4 summarizes the intricate 
links between precipitating factors and effects of SP 
experiences in light of disruptive and observational/ 
transformational practices.
Methods for Preventing Sleep Paralysis
While undoubtedly helpful, simply knowing the 
basis of SP may not be enough to alleviate terror and 
distress associated with the experiences, and disrup­
tion techniques are clearly warranted. A 25-year-old 
man from the United States reports, “This happens 
sometimes every night, sometimes only once every 
few weeks. Even though I ‘know’ what is happening, 
and that I am in no danger, it is always terrifying.” 
The first study to systematically assess prevention 
strategies for SP by Sharpless and Grom (2014) has 
suggested that while no foolproof method for pre­
venting SP is yet known, some strategies, such as 
avoiding sleeping on one’s back (supine position), 
maintaining optimal sleep hygiene (avoiding stimu­
lants, noise, irregular sleep patterns, and anything 
that contributes to sleep fragmentation), and pre­
sleep relaxation practices may help in preventing SP.
A number of culture-specific preventive ritual­
istic measures to prevent SP exist. These include 
placing a variety of defensive objects in the room 
or in the bed before going to sleep, such as a vari­
ety of knives (Hufford, 1982, Law & Kirmayer, 
2005); sprinkling salt (a common anti-witch rem­
edy) (Roberts, 1998); putting a broom bottom-up 
(Paradis & Friedman, 2005) or a pile of sand at the
Figure 31.4. (See Color Insert) Predisposing, precipitating factors and experience and outcome of sleep paralysis 
episodes. Note: OBE = out-of-body experience; SP = sleep paralysis.
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
4 4 9

bedroom door (Jalal, Romanelli, & Hinton, 2015); 
and many others. Putting a Bible in the room 
(Hufford, 1982) and saying a protective prayer 
before bedtime are also thought of as effective deter­
rents. Other ritualistic actions, designed to deter, 
divert, and chase away unwelcome supernatural vis­
itors, were also documented in a variety of contexts 
(Sharpless & Doghramji, 2015).
Techniques for Disrupting Sleep Paralysis
While preventive measures, whether culturally 
embedded or aimed at increased awareness and 
promotion of sleep hygiene, may be effective in 
reducing the frequency of SP episodes, many meth­
ods for dealing with an ongoing SP experience also 
exist. Considering that most SP experiences are 
characterized by fear and other unpleasant sen­
sations, it is not surprising that in one study the 
majority of participants reported having attempted 
to disrupt the ongoing SP experience. Moving the 
extremities and self-monitoring (raising aware­
ness, promoting calm) may be helpful during the 
SP episode (Sharpless & Grom, 2014). Not all 
attempts or all strategies are equally successful, but 
it seems that attempting micro movements, instead 
of trying to get up or to scream, are most effec­
tive. Culture-bound rituals include saying a prayer 
(Hufford, 1989), making a sign of a cross with 
ones tongue (Davies, 2010), and asking someone 
to physically shake the oppressed sleeper (Law & 
Kirmayer, 2005).
Observational/Transformational Practices
One may argue that ISP and lucid dreaming are 
polar opposites. However, they share the same under­
lying psychophysiology and seem to involve similar 
mechanisms: Both are dependent upon REM sleep 
mechanisms; both are characterized by the simulta­
neous presence of the dream state and by the feeling 
of being awake, including activation of higher order 
metacognitive functions indicative of some degree 
of waking thought processes (Dresler et al., 2012; 
Filevich, Dresler, Brick, and Kuhn, 2015; LaBerge, 
Levitan, & Dement, 1986; Voss, Holzmann, Tuin, 
& Hobson, 2009); and in both cases, muscle atonia 
is present. The crucial difference between the two 
states is the quality and the focus of awareness and 
metacognition: In lucid dreaming, one is aware of 
the illusory nature of the dream scenario, whereas 
in SP the dreamer is often absorbed by the vision, 
not always fully realizing that it is dreamlike, and, 
in case of fearful SP, is too absorbed in the panicky 
state of perceived imminent danger.
The link between SP and lucid dreaming has 
not been systematically investigated in empirical 
research, but two studies report a positive correla­
tion between frequency of lucid dreaming and SP 
(Denis & Poerio, 2016; Solomonova, Nielsen, & 
Stenstrom, 2009), suggesting that the REM-wake 
intertwined state, characterizing SP, may be a trait­
like phenomenon predisposing individuals to SP, on 
the one hand, and facilitating lucidity in REM sleep 
dreams, on the other.
Transforming SP into a positive experience, such 
as an OBE or a lucid dream, or utilizing SP experi­
ences as a means of contemplative insight into ones 
own mind, may become a practice in itself, since 
not only techniques for disrupting and preventing 
SP exist in the contemporary digital culture, but 
also techniques for inducing SP, with the hope that 
the experience will function as a portal to a desirable 
altered state of consciousness (Hurd, 2010). The 
following two reports illustrate the transformative 
potential of SP:
I have woken up from dreaming and found I cant 
move or open my eyes. I get the feeling of lemonade 
bubbling in my body, especially my head. It is very 
frightening. But since I have been having OBEs3 
I now relax and go with the flow of sleep paralysis 
and sometimes I actually achieve an OBE. (40-year- 
old man, Australia)
At first I was very frightened until I found the 
ASP email group and found that I was not the 
only one being “visited” by this being during sleep 
paralysis. . . . When it first started happening it 
was more of an assault and I had to fight terribly to 
escape. But after years, I learned to ignore and now 
Ive been trying to communicate with the presence. 
(40-year-old man, United States)
Further Considerations and Future 
Directions
In terms of possible avenues for treatment, 
since SP can be conceptualized as a form of night­
mare occurring in a mixed state of consciousness, 
nightmare treatment techniques could be use­
ful in approaching SP. Currently, the most used 
and recommended technique for treating chronic 
nightmares is imagery rehearsal therapy (Krakow, 
Kellner, Pathak, & Lambert, 1995; Krakow & 
Zadra, 2006), which consists of “rehearsing” and 
transforming dysphoric oneiric imagery in a safe 
context. This method has been effective in treat­
ing PTSD-related nightmares (Cook et al., 2010; 
Casement & Swanson, 2012; Germain et al., 2004;
450
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

Krakow et al., 2001), which seems particularly 
appropriate for intense and trauma-related SP expe­
riences. Similarly, treatment of nightmares by lucid 
dreaming is a promising avenue (LaBerge, 2009; 
Spoormaker & Van Den Bout, 2006; Zadra & Pihl, 
1997). Considering that neurophysiologically both 
states are characterized by an overlap between REM 
sleep and wakefulness, and that a number of folk 
approaches treating SP as a portal to lucid dreams 
already exist, mastering lucid dreaming could be an 
effective approach to the transformation of an ongo­
ing SP episode. Such a strategy may also be highly 
effective in de-stigmatizing and desensitizing the 
experiencer, especially in increasing her mastery and 
agency over her spontaneous oneiric experiences.
Contemplative practices, such as meditation or 
pranayam a (yogic breathing), may also be useful in 
dealing with recurring SP episodes. There is cur­
rently no empirical evidence for contemplative tech­
niques and SP management, with the exception of 
a case study by Jalal (2016), but anecdotal evidence 
from practitioners, as well as growing empirical lit­
erature linking contemplative practices with stress 
management, emotion regulation, and increased 
self-awareness, provides grounds for future research.
Recent years have seen an important increase 
in empirical studies on the effects of meditation 
and meditation-based mindfulness interventions. 
There are documented benefits of contemplative 
practice in clinical populations, including posi­
tive effects in mood disorders such as anxiety and 
depression (Goyal et al., 2014; Hofmann et al.,
2010), social anxiety (Goldin & Gross, 2010), and 
PTSD (Kearney et al., 2013). At least four kinds 
of meditation are currently investigated in relation 
to mental health: focused attention, open moni­
toring (Lutz, Slagter, Dunne, & Davidson, 2008), 
self-transcendence (Travis & Shear, 2010), and 
loving-kindness meditation (Hofmann, Grossman, 
& Hinton, 2011). Different kinds of meditation 
practices may recruit different neural networks (Fox 
et al., 2016), and particular psychological and neuro­
plastic changes, associated with meditation practice, 
likely depend on the kind and duration of medita­
tion experience (Lutz, Jha, Dunne, & Saron, 2015). 
These different kinds of contemplative practice may 
be helpful in targeting different kinds of recur­
rent SP experiences, promoting de-automatization 
(Kang, Gruber, & Gray, 2013) and deconstructing 
patterns of behavior/reactivity. Meditation may be 
effective in SP management as a way of cultivating a 
non-judgmental or “non-sticky” observational atti­
tude to arising imagery, sensations, and emotions,
and in letting the experience unfold. In addition, 
one important feature of most mindfulness-related 
practices is the focus on the experience of the body 
(Kerr, Sacchet, Lazar, Moore, & Jones, 2013), and 
some evidence suggests that meditation practice 
may improve awareness of ones own body states 
(Solomonova et al., 2016) and increase introspec­
tive accuracy for somatic experience (Fox et al.,
2012). Breathing practices, such as pranayam a, may 
be particularly effective in transforming SP as it is 
happening due to the fact that many SP episodes 
are characterized by a feeling of disordered/insuf- 
ficient breathing. A recent study (Seppala et al., 
2014) reported that breathing exercises were effec­
tive in decreasing PTSD symptoms in war veter­
ans. This implies that practicing techniques that 
improve awareness of body sensations may lower 
the reactivity to SP episodes, thus lowering the dis­
tressing quality of the experience, and increasing the 
potential for disrupting or transforming SP.
Acknowledgments
The author was supported by Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada 
and by a J.-A. DeSeves Sacre-Coeur Hospital 
Foundation doctoral scholarship. Thanks are due 
to Tore Nielsen, Philippe Stenstrom, and Michelle 
Carr for numerous conversations on sleep paralysis 
and its interpretation, and to the members of the 
Dream and Nightmare Laboratory at the Center for 
Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine. Additional 
thanks are due to Don Donderi and Elena Frantova, 
as well as to all participants who have consented to 
share their experiences with us. Special thanks to 
Benjamen Samaha (artist) and to the anonymous 
SP sufferer for generously offering the narrative and 
the drawing of a sleep paralysis episode.
Notes
1. In this chapter I will use the terms “imagery” and “mentation” 
interchangeably to refer to visual, auditory, somatosensory, 
and even social experiences during SP. The term “imagery” 
here is therefore not restricted to the visual domain. I pre­
fer “imagery” and “mentation” to “hallucination; in order 
to emphasize the dream-like process of spontaneous imagi­
nation that takes place during SP, and to de-emphasize the 
association with delusional thought and pathologies, associ­
ated with the term “hallucination.”
2. Excerpt from the dreamer’s account: “The transition between 
wake and sleep is a crucial moment to enter into the world 
of dreams. During this transition on countless occasions 
I would awaken suddenly not being able to move. During 
this experience it seems that the very essence of fear perme­
ates my consciousness. Eeriness goes through my soul, freezes 
my blood and interrupts all substantial notion of my being.
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
45i

No words can describe that visceral sensation, and in paral­
lel, no words can come out of my mouth. Aware of the lack 
of muscle tonus, I try to escape this inevitable Machiavellian 
black beast, that materializes in my head before my eyes and 
on my chest, slowing down my breathing. Moreover, my 
senses are grabbed by an impression of fighting a hurricane 
that may drag me out of my body. This cyclone, that has a 
black hole in lieu of an eye, forces me to fight it, and this 
fight seems crucial to my survival [ . . . ] .  In addition, there 
are auditory experiences, an amalgam of petrifying words 
and vibrations that feel like sudden gusts of wind in the ear­
drums. All this happens when by body feels like a statue, 
without a possibility of screaming.
[ . . . ] On occasion, with determination and lucidity, 
I can have power over this swirl of stillness. [.. . ] I take back 
some control of my imaginary hands, and then I hold them 
out to M orpheus for a dazzling and colorful dance in a deep 
and enlightened night.” (Male SP sufferer, also diagnosed 
with narcolepsy. Montreal, Canada. Account translated from 
French).
3. OBE = out-of-body experience
References
Abrams, M. P., Mulligan, A. D., Carleton, R. N., & Asmundson, 
G. J. G. (2008). Prevalence and correlates of sleep paraly­
sis in adults reporting childhood sexual abuse. Journal 
o f Anxiety Disorders, 22(8), 1535—1541. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.janxdis.2008.03.007
Adler, S. R. (2011). Sleep paralysis: Night-mares, nocebos, an d 
the m ind-body connection. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press.
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. (2014). International 
classification o f sleep disorders (3rd ed., ICSD-3). Darien, 
IL: AASP
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic an d statisti­
cal m anual o f m ental disorders (5 th ed., DSM-5). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Ammaniti, M., & Gallese, V. (2014). The birth o f intersubjectiv­
ity: Psychodynamics, neurobiology, an d the self New York: W. 
W. Norton.
Agargun, M. Y., & Cartwright, R. (2003). REM sleep, dream 
variables and suicidality in depressed patients. Psychiatry 
Research, 119( 1), 33-39.
Arikawa, H., Templer, D. I., & Brown, R. (1999). The struc­
ture and correlates of kanashibari. The Journal o f Psychology, 
133(A), 
369-375. 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/
10.1080/00223989909599749
Belicki, K. (1992). Nightmare frequency versus nightmare dis­
tress: Relations to psychopathology and cognitive style. 
Journal o f A bnorm al Psychology, 101(3), 592.
Belicki, K., Gulko, N., Ruzycki, K., & Aristotle, J. (2003). 
Sixteen years of dreams following spousal bereavement. 
OM EGA-Journal o f D eath a n d  Dying, 47(2), 93—106.
Bell, C. C., Shakoor, B., Thompson, B., Dew, D., Hughley, E., 
Mays, R., & Shorter-Gooden, K. (1984). Prevalence of iso­
lated sleep paralysis in black subjects. Journal o f the N ational 
M edical Association, 76(5), 501.
Blagrove, M., Farmer, L., & Williams, E. (2004). The relation­
ship of nightmare frequency and nightmare distress to well­
being. Journal o f  Sleep Research, 13(2), 129—136.
Bloom, J. D., & Gelardin, R. D. (1983). Uqamairineq and 
uqumanigianiq: Eskimo sleep paralysis. The Culture-Bound 
Syndromes, 7 , 117-122. doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-5251-5_10
Brugger, P, Regard, M., & Landis, T. (1997). Illusory reduplication 
of one’s own body: Phenomenology and classification of auto- 
scopic phenomena. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 2 (\), 19—38.
Brugger, P, Regard, M., Landis, T., & Oelz, O. (1999). 
Hallucinatory experiences 
in 
extreme-altitude 
climb­
ers. Cognitive an d Behavioral Neurology, 12( 1), 67. http:// 
journals.lww.com/cogbehavneurol/Fulltext/1999/01000/ 
Hallucinatory_Experiences_in_Extreme_Altitude.8.aspx
Buzzi, G. (2011). False awakenings in light of the dream proto­
consciousness theory: A study in lucid dreamers. International 
Journal o f Dream  Research, 4(2), 110—116.
Casement, M. D., & Swanson, L. M. (2012). A meta-analysis 
of imagery rehearsal for post-trauma nightmares: Effects on 
nightmare frequency, sleep quality, and posttraumatic stress. 
C linical Psychology Review, 32(6), 566-574.
Cheyne, J. A. (2001). The ominous numinous: Sensed presence 
and “other” hallucinations. Journal o f Consciousness Studies, 
8 (5 -6 ), 133-150.
Cheyne, J. A. (2002). Waterloo Unusual Sleep Experiences 
Questionnaire—Villa: Technical report, http://watarts.uwa- 
terloo.ca/ *acheyne/spdoc/Techreport.pdf
Cheyne, J. A. (2005). Sleep paralysis episode frequency and 
number, types, and structure of associated hallucinations. 
Journal o f Sleep Research, 14(3), 319-324. doi: 10.1111/ 
j. 1365-2869.2005.00477.x
Cheyne, J. A., & Girard, T. A. (2007). Paranoid delusions 
and threatening hallucinations: A prospective study of 
sleep paralysis experiences, 16(A), 959-974. doi: 10.1016/ 
j .concog.2007.01.002
Cheyne, J. A., & Pennycook, G. (2013). Sleep paralysis post­
episode distress modeling potential effects of episode charac­
teristics, general psychological distress, beliefs, and cognitive 
style. C linical Psychological Science, 1(2), 135-148.
Cheyne, J. A., Rueffer, S. D., & Newby-Clark, I. R. (1999). 
Hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations during sleep 
paralysis: Neurological and cultural construction of the 
night-mare. Consciousness an d Cognition, 8(3), 319—337. 
doi: 10.1006/ccog. 1999.0404
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 
58(1), 7-19.
Colombetti, G. (2013). The feeling body: Affective science meets the 
enactive mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davies, O. (2010). The nightmare experience, sleep paraly­
sis, and witchcraft accusations. Folklore, 114(2), 181-203. 
doi: 10.1080/0015587032000104211
Cook, J. M., Harb, G. C., Gehrman, P R., Cary, M. S., Gamble, 
G. M., Forbes, D., & Ross, R. J. (2010). Imagery rehearsal 
for posttraumatic nightmares: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal o f Traumatic Stress, 23(5), 553—563.
Denis, D., French, C. C., Rowe, R., Zavos, H. M. S., Nolan, 
P M., Parsons, M. J., & Gregory, A. M. (2015). A twin 
and molecular genetics study of sleep paralysis and associ­
ated factors. Journal o f Sleep Research, 24(A), 438-446. . 
doi: 10.1111/jsr. 12282
Denis, D., & Poerio, G. L. (2016). Terror and bliss? 
Commonalities and distinctions between sleep paralysis, 
lucid dreaming, and their associations with waking life expe­
riences. Journal o f Sleep Research, 26(1), 38—47.
Dresler, M., Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Koch, S. P, Holsboer, 
F., Steiger, A., . . . Czisch, M. (2012). Neural correlates of 
dream lucidity obtained from contrasting lucid versus non- 
lucid REM sleep: A combined EEG/fMRI case study. Sleep, 
35(7), 1017-1020.
452
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

Filevich, Elisa, Dresler, M., Brick, T. R., & Kuhn, S. (2015). 
Metacognitive mechanisms underlying lucid dreaming. The 
Journal o f Neuroscience, 3 5(3), 1082-1088.
Fox, K. C., Dixon, M. L., Nijeboer, S., Girn, M., Floman, J. 
L., Lifshitz, M., . . . Christoff, K. (2016). Functional neu­
roanatomy of meditation: A review and meta-analysis of 
78 functional neuroimaging investigations. Neuroscience &  
Biobehavioral Reviews, 65, 208-228.
Fox, K. C., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. W., 
& Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in H um an Neuroscience, 7, 412.
Fox, K. C., Zakarauskas, R, Dixon, M., Ellamil, M., Thompson, 
E., & Christoff, K. (2012). Meditation experience predicts 
introspective accuracy. PloS One, 7(9), e45370.
Friedman, S., & Paradis, C. (2002). Panic disorder in African- 
Americans: Symptomatology and isolated sleep paralysis. 
Culture, M edicine a n d  Psychiatry, 26(2), 179-198.
Fukuda, K. (1993). One explanatory basis for the discrepancy of 
reported prevalences of sleep paralysis among healthy respon­
dents. Perceptual a n d  M otor Skills, 77(3), 803-807. http:// 
www.amsciepub.com/doi/pdf/10.2466/pms.l993.77.3.803
Fukuda, K., Miyasita, A., Inugami, M., & Ishihara, K. (1987). 
High prevalence of isolated sleep paralysis: Kanashibari phe­
nomenon in Japan. Sleep, 10(3), 279-286.
Fukuda, K., Ogilvie, R. D., & Takeuchi, T. (2000). Recognition 
of sleep paralysis among normal adults in Canada and in 
Japan. Psychiatry a n d  C linical Neurosciences, 54(3), 292—293.
Gallagher, S. (2005). H ow  the body shapes the m in d (pp. 173— 
178). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Garfield, P. (1996). Dreams and bereavement. In D. Barrett (Eds.), 
Trauma and dreamy (pp. 186-211).Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Germain, A. (2013). Sleep disturbances as the hallmark of 
PTSD: Where are we now? American Journal o f Psychiatry, 
170(A), 372-382.
Germain, A., Buysse, D. J., & Nofzinger, E. (2008). Sleep- 
specific mechanisms underlying posttraumatic stress disor­
der: Integrative review and neurobiological hypotheses. Sleep 
M edicine Reviews, 12(3), 185-195.
Germain, A., Krakow, B., Faucher, B., Zadra, A., Nielsen, T., 
Hollifield, M., . . . Koss, M. (2004). Increased mastery ele­
ments associated with imagery rehearsal treatment for night­
mares in sexual assault survivors with PTSD. Dreaming, 
14(A), 195.
Goldin, P. R., & Gross, J. J. (2010). Effects of mindfulness-based 
stress reduction (MBSR) on emotion regulation in social 
anxiety disorder. Emotion, 10(1), 83.
Golzari, S. E., & Ghabili, K. (2013). Alcohol-mediated sleep 
paralysis: The earliest known description. Sleep M edicine, 
14(3), 298.
Gordon, S. (2015). Medical condition, demon or undead corpse? 
Sleep paralysis and the nightmare in medieval Europe. Social 
History o f M edicine, 2 8(3), 425-444 . doi: 10.1093/shm/ 
hkv005
Gould, G. A., Gugger, M., Molloy, J., Tsara, V. M. S. C., Shapiro, 
C. M., & Douglas, N. J. (1988). Breathing pattern and eye 
movement density during REM sleep in humans. American 
Review o f Respiratory Disease, 138(A), 874-877.
Green, C. E., & McCreery, C. (1994). Lucid dreaming: The para­
dox o f  consciousness during sleep. New York: Routledge.
Hartmann, E., & Kunzendorf, R. (2013). Thymophor in dreams, 
poetry, art and memory: Emotion translated into imagery as
a basic element of human creativity. Imagination, Cognition 
a n d  Personality, 33(1), 165-191.
Hinton, D. E., Pich, V., Chhean, D., & Pollack, M. H. (2005a). 
“The ghost pushes you down”: Sleep paralysis-type panic 
attacks in a Khmer refugee population. 
Transcultural 
Psychiatry, 42(1), A 6-77.
Hinton, D. E., Pich, V., Chhean, D., Pollack, M. H., & 
McNally, R. J. (2005b). Sleep paralysis among Cambodian 
refugees: Association with PTSD diagnosis and severity. 
Depression an d Anxiety, 22(2), 47—51.
Hishikawa, Y., & Kaneko, Z. (1965). Electroencephalographic 
study on narcolepsy. Electroencephalography a n d  Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 18(3), 249-259.
Hobson, 
A. 
(2004). 
A 
model 
for 
madness? 
Nature, 
430(6995), 21-21.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000) 
Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience 
of conscious states. Behavioral an d Brain Science, 23(6), 7 9 3 - 
842; discussion 904-1121.
Hobson, J. A., Stickgold, R., & Pace-Schott, E. F. (1998). The 
neuropsychology of REM sleep dreaming. Neuroreport, 9(3), 
R1-R14.
Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D. (2010). 
The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on anxiety and 
depression: A meta-analytic review. Journal o f Consulting an d 
C linical Psychology, 78(2), 169.
Hofmann, S. G., Grossman, P., & Hinton, D. E. (2011). 
Loving-kindness and compassion meditation: Potential 
for psychological interventions. C linical Psychology Review, 
31(7), 1126-1132.
Howell, M. J. (2012). Parasomnias: An updated review. 
Neurotherapeutics: 
The Journal o f the American Society 
fo r 
Experim ental 
NeuroTherapeutics, 
9(A), 
753—775.
doi: 10.1007/s 13311-012-0143-8
Hsieh, S.-W., Lai, C.-L., Liu, C.-K., Lan, S.-H., & Hsu, C.-Y. 
(2010). Isolated sleep paralysis linked to impaired nocturnal 
sleep quality and health-related quality of life in Chinese- 
Taiwanese patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Q uality 
o f Life Research: A n International Journal o f  Q uality o f  Life 
Aspects o f Treatment, Care an d Rehabilitation, 19(9), 1265— 
1272. doi: 10.1007/s 111 36-010-9695-4
Hufford, D. (1989). The terror that comes in the night: A n experi­
ence-centered study o f supernatural assault traditions (Vol. 7). 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hufford, D. J. (2005). Sleep paralysis as spiritual experience. 
Transcultural Psychiatry, 42( 1), 11—45.
Hurd, R. (2010). Sleep paralysis: A  guide to hypnagogic visions an d 
visitors o f the night. Los Altos, CA: Hyena Press.
Goyal, M., Singh, S., Sibinga, E. M., Gould, N. F., Rowland- 
Seymour, A., Sharma, R., . . . & Ranasinghe, P. D. (2014). 
Meditation programs for psychological stress and well­
being: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JA M A  Internal 
M edicine, 174(3), 357-368.
Jalal, B., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2014). Sleep paralysis and “the 
bedroom intruder”: The role of the right superior parietal, 
phantom pain and body image projection. M edical Hypotheses, 
83(6), 755-757. doi: 10.10l6/j.mehy.20l4.10.002
Jalal, B. (2016). How to make the ghosts in my bedroom disap­
pear? Focused-attention meditation combined with muscle 
relaxation (MR therapy): A direct treatment intervention for 
sleep paralysis. Frontiers in Psychology, 7.
Jalal, B., Romanelli, A., & Hinton, D. E. (2015). Cultural 
explanations of sleep paralysis in Italy: The Pandafeche
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
453

attack 
and 
associated 
supernatural 
beliefs. 
Culture,
M edicine, a n d  Psychiatry, 39(4), 651-664. doi:10.1007/ 
si 1013-015-9442-y
James, W. (1985). The varieties o f religious experience (Vol. 15). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kang, Y., Gruber, J., & Gray, J. R. (2013). Mindfulness and de­
automatization. Emotion Review, 5(2), 192—201.
Kearney, D. J., Malte, C. A., McManus, C., Martinez, M. E., 
Felleman, B., & Simpson, T. L. (2013). Loving-kindness 
meditation for posttraumatic stress disorder: A pilot study. 
Journal o f Traumatic Stress, 26(4), 426-434.
Keen, C., Murray, C. D., & Payne, S. (2013). A qualitative 
exploration of sensing the presence of the deceased following 
bereavement. M ortality, 18(4), 339-357.
Kerr, C. E., Sacchet, M. D., Lazar, S. W., Moore, C. I., & Jones, S. 
R. (2013). Mindfulness starts with the body: Somatosensory 
attention and top-down modulation of cortical alpha 
rhythms in mindfulness meditation. Frontiers in Hum an 
Neuroscience, 7, 12.
Kirmayer, L. J. (2009). Nightmares, neurophenomenology and 
the cultural logic of trauma. Culture, M edicine an d Psychiatry, 
33(2 ), 323-331.
Krakow, B., Kellner, R., Pathak, D., & Lambert, L. (1995). 
Imagery rehearsal treatment for chronic nightmares. 
Behaviour Research a n d  Therapy, 33(7), 837-843.
Krakow, B., & Zadra, A. (2006). Clinical management of 
chronic nightmares: Imagery rehearsal therapy. Behavioral 
Sleep M edicine, 4(1), 45-70.
Krakow, B., Johnston, L., Melendrez, D., Hollifield, M., Warner, 
T. D., Chavez-Kennedy, D., & Herlan, M. J. (2001). An 
open-label trial of evidence-based cognitive behavior therapy 
for nightmares and insomnia in crime victims with PTSD. 
American Journal o f  Psychiatry, 158(12), 2043-2047.
LaBerge, S. (2009). 
Lucid dreaming: A  
concise guide to 
awakening in your dreams an d in your life. http://www. 
ReadHowYouWant.com.
LaBerge, S., Levitan, L., & Dement, W. C. (1986). Lucid dream­
ing: Physiological correlates of consciousness during REM 
sleep. Journal o f M in d  an d Behavior, 7(2-3), 251-258.
Law, S., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2005). Inuit interpretations of sleep 
paralysis. Transcultural Psychiatry, 42(1), 93—112.
Levin, R., & Fireman, G. (2002). Nightmare prevalence, night­
mare distress, and self-reported psychological disturbance. 
Sleep-New York, 2 5 (2 ), 205-212.
Levin, R., & Nielsen, T. A. (2007). Disturbed dreaming, post- 
traumatic stress disorder, and affect distress: A review and 
neurocognitive model. Psychological Bulletin, 133(3), 482.
Liddon, S. C. (1967). Sleep paralysis and hypnagogic hallucina­
tions: Their relationship to the nightmare. Archives o f General 
Psychiatry, 17(1), 88.
Liskova, M., Janeckova, D., Kluzova Kracmarova, L., Mlada, K., 
& Buskova, J. (2016). The occurrence and predictive factors of 
sleep paralysis in university students. Neuropsychiatric Disease 
andTreatm ent, 12, 2957-2962. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S115629
Luhrmann, T. M. (2012). When G od talks back: Understanding 
the American evangelical relationship w ith God. New York: 
Vintage.
Lutz, A., Jha, A. P., Dunne, J. D., & Saron, C. D. (2015). 
Investigating the phenomenological matrix of mindfulness- 
related practices from a neurocognitive perspective. American 
Psychologist, 70(7), 632.
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. (2008). 
Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 12(4), 163—169.
Maclaren, K. (2008). Embodied perceptions of others as a 
condition of selfhood? Journal o f Consciousness Studies, 
15(8), 63-93.
Mahowald, M. W., & Schenck, C. H. (1991). Status dissocia- 
tus: A perspective on states of being. SLEEP. http://psycnet. 
apa.org/psycinfo/1991 -30903-001
Mahowald, M. W., & Schenck, C. H. (2005). Insights from 
studying human sleep disorders. 
Nature, 
4 3 7 (7063), 
1279-1285.
Mamelak, M., Black, J., Montplaisir, J., & Ristanovic, R. (2004). 
A pilot study on the effects of sodium oxybate on sleep 
architecture and daytime alertness in narcolepsy. Sleep, 27, 
1327-1336.
Maquet, P. (2000). Functional neuroimaging of normal human 
sleep by positron emission tomography. Journal o f Sleep 
Research, 9(3), 207-232.
Marquis, L.-P., Solomonova, E., Carr, M., & Nielsen, T. (2015). 
Activite electroencephanographique en sommeil de sujets avec 
paralysie du sommeil isolee. Societe Quebecoisepour la Recherche 
en Psychologie. March 2015. Gatineau, Quebec, Canada.
McNally, R. (2011). Explaining “memories” of space alien 
abduction and past lives: An experimental psychopathol- 
ogy approach. Journal o f Experim ental Psychopathology, 3, 
2-16. doi: 10.5127/jep.017811
McNally, R. J., & Clancy, S. A. (2005a). Sleep paralysis in adults 
reporting repressed, recovered, or continuous memories of 
childhood sexual abuse. Journal o f Anxiety Disorders, 19(5), 
595-602. doi: 10.10l6/j.janxdis.2004.05.003
McNally, R. J., & Clancy, S. A. (2005b). Sleep paralysis, sexual 
abuse, and space alien abduction. Transcultural Psychiatry, 
42(1), 113-122.
McNamara, P., Andresen, J., Clark, J., Zborowski, M., & Duffy, 
C. A. (2001). Impact of attachment styles on dream recall 
and dream content: A test of the attachment hypothesis of 
REM sleep .Journal o f Sleep Research, 10(2), 117-127.
McNamara, P, & Bulkeley, K. (2015). Dreams as a source of 
supernatural agent concepts. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 283. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00283
Mellman, T. A., Bustamante, V., Fins, A. I., Pigeon, W. R., & 
Nolan, B. (2002). REM sleep and the early development of 
posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal o f Psychiatry, 
159(10), 1696-1701.
Menary, 
R. 
(2010). 
The 
extended 
m ind. 
Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Morris, D. (2010). Empirical and phenomenological studies 
of embodied cognition. In S. Gallagher & D. Schmicking 
(Eds.), H andbook o f phenomenology a n d  cognitive science (pp. 
235-252). New York: Springer.
Munezawa, T., Kaneita, Y., Osaki, Y., Kanda, H., Ohtsu, T., 
Suzuki, H., . . . Ohida, T. (2011). Nightmare and sleep 
paralysis among Japanese adolescents: A nationwide repre­
sentative survey. Sleep M edicine, 12( 1), 56-64. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.sleep.2010.04.015
Ness, R. C. (1983). The old hag phenomenon as sleep paralysis: A 
biocultural interpretation. The Culture-Bound Syndromes, 
123-145. doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-5251-5_11
Nielsen, T. (2007). Felt presence: Paranoid delusion or hallucina­
tory social imagery? Consciousness an d Cognition, 16(4), 975. 
doi: 10.1016/j .concog.2007.02.002
Nielsen, T., & Levin, R. (2007). Nightmares: A new neurocogni­
tive model. Sleep M edicine Reviews, 11(4), 295—310.
Nielsen, T., & Paquette, T. (2007). Dream-associated behav­
iors affecting pregnant and postpartum women. Sleep, 
30(9), 1162.
454
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

Nielsen, T., Stenstrom, P., Takeuchi, T., Saucier, S., Lara- 
Carrasco, J., Solomonova, E., & Martel, E. (2005). Partial 
REM-sleep deprivation increases the dream-like qual­
ity of mentation from REM sleep and sleep onset. Sleep, 
28(9), 1083.
Nielsen, T. A. (2000). A review of mentation in REM and 
NREM sleep: “Covert” REM sleep as a possible reconcilia­
tion of two opposing models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
23(06), 851-866.
Nielsen, T. A., Paquette, T., Solomonova, E., Lara-Carrasco, J., 
Popova, A., & Levrier, K. (2010). REM sleep characteristics 
of nightmare sufferers before and after REM sleep depriva­
tion. Sleep Medicine, 11(2), 172-179.
Noe, A. (2004). Action in perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nofzinger, E. A., Schwartz, R. M., Reynolds, C. F., Thase, M. E., 
Jennings, J. R., Frank, E .,. .. & Kupfer, D. J. (1994). Affect 
intensity and phasic REM sleep in depressed men before and 
after treatment with cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62(1), 83.
O’Hanlon, J., Murphy, M., & Di Blasi, Z. (2011). Experiences 
of sleep paralysis in a sample of Irish university students. Irish 
Journal of Medical Science, 180(A), 917-919. doi: 10.1007/ 
si 1845-011-0732-2
Ohayon, M. M., Zulley, J., Guilleminault, C., & Smirne, S. 
(1999). Prevalence and pathologic associations of sleep paral­
ysis in the general population. Neurology, 52(6), 1194-1200. 
doi: 10.1212/WNL.52.6.1194
Olry, R., & Haines, D. E. (2014). Kanashibari: A ghost’s busi­
ness. Journal of the History of the Neurosciences, 23(2), 192— 
197. doi: 10.1080/0964704X.2013.862132
Otto, M. W., Simon, N. M., Powers, M., Hinton, D., Zalta, 
A. K., & Pollack, M. H. (2006). Rates of isolated sleep 
paralysis in outpatients with anxiety disorders. Journal 
of Anxiety Disorders, 20(5), 687-693. doi: 
10.1016/ 
j.janxdis.2005.07.002
Otto, R. (1958). The idea of the holy (Vol. 14). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Paradis, C. M., & Friedman, S. (2005). Sleep paralysis in African 
Americans with panic disorder. Transcultural Psychiatry, 
42(1), 123-134.
Peever, J., Luppi, P. H., & Montplaisir, J. (2014). Breakdown in 
REM sleep circuitry underlies REM sleep behavior disorder. 
Trends in Neurosciences, 37(5), 279-288.
Pessoa, L. (2013). The cognitive-emotional brain: From interac­
tions to integration. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one’s subjective experience 
in the second person: An interview method for the science 
of consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 
5(3-4), 229-269.
Petitmengin, C., & Lachaux, J. P. (2013). Microcognitive sci­
ence: Bridging experiential and neuronal microdynamics. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 617.
Plante, D. T., & Winkelman, J. W. (2008). Parasomnias: 
Psychiatric considerations. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 3(2), 217— 
229. doi: 10.10l6/j.jsmc.2008.01.005
Protevi, J. (2012). One more ‘next step’: Deleuze and brain, body 
and affect in contemporary cognitive science. In R. Braidotti 
& P. Pisters (Eds.), Revisiting Normativity with Deleuze (pp. 
25-36).
Rechtschaffen, A. (1978) The single-mindedness and isolation of 
dreams. Sleep, 1, 97-109.
Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner presence: Consciousness as a biological 
phenomenon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Revonsuo, A., Tuominen, J., Valli, K., Dresler, M., Metzinger, 
T. & Windt, J. M. (2015). The avatars in the machine. In T. 
Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND. Frankfurt am 
Main: MIND Group.doi: 10.15502/9783958570375
Robert, G., & Zadra, A. (2014). Thematic and content analy­
sis of idiopathic nightmares and bad dreams. Sleep, 37(2), 
409-417.
Roberts, K. (1998). Contemporary cauchemar: Experience, 
belief, prevention. Louisiana Folklore Miscellany, 13, 15—26.
Roehrs, T., & Roth, T. (2001). Sleep, sleepiness, sleep disorders 
and alcohol use and abuse. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 5(4), 
287-297.
Seppala, E. M., Nitschke, J. B., Tudorascu, D. L., Hayes, A., 
Goldstein, M. R., Nguyen, D. T., . . . & Davidson, R. J. 
(2014). Breathing-based meditation decreases posttraumatic 
stress disorder symptoms in US Military veterans: A random­
ized controlled longitudinal study. Journal ofTraumatic Stress, 
27(A), 397-405.
Sharpless, B. A., McCarthy, K. S., Chambless, D. L., Milrod, 
B. L., Khalsa, S.-R., & Barber, J. P. (2010). Isolated sleep 
paralysis and fearful isolated sleep paralysis in outpatients 
with panic attacks. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66(12), 
1292-1306. doi: 10.1002/jclp.20724
Sharpless, B. A., & Barber, J. P. (2011). Lifetime prevalence 
rates of sleep paralysis: A systematic review. Sleep Medicine 
Reviews, 15(5), 311-315. doi: 10.10l6/j.smrv.2011.01.007
Sharpless, B., & Doghramji, K. (2015). Sleep paralysis: Historical, 
psychological, and medical perspectives. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Sharpless, B. A., & Grom, J. L. (2014). Isolated sleep paraly­
sis: Fear, prevention, and disruption. BehavioralSleepMedicine, 
14(2) 134-139. doi: 10.1080/15402002.2014.963583
Simard, V., & Nielsen, T. A. (2005). Sleep paralysis-associated 
sensed presence as a possible manifestation of social anxiety. 
Dreaming, 15(A), 245.
Simon-Buller, S., Christopherson, V. A., & Jones, R. A. (1989). 
Correlates of sensing the presence of a deceased spouse. 
OMEGA-Journal of Death and Dying, 19(1), 21-30.
Solomonova, E., Dube, S., Blanchette-Carriere, C., Samson, A., 
Picard-Deland, C., & Nielsen, T. (2016). Effect ofVipassana 
meditation on sleep-dependent procedural memory consoli­
dation and postural balance following a daytime nap: Making 
implicit memories explicit. Mind and Life Summer Research 
Institute, June 2016, Garrison, NY.
Solomonova, E., Frantova, E., & Nielsen, T. (2011). Felt 
presence: The uncanny encounters with the numinous 
Other. A I & Society, 26(2), 171-178. doi: 10.1007/ 
sOO 146-010-0299-x
Solomonova, E., Nielsen, T., & Stenstrom, P. (2009). Lucid 
dreaming is associated with sleep paralysis but not night­
mares. Third Annual Conference of the Canadian Sleep Society. 
April 26-28, Toronto, Canada.
Solomonova, E., Nielsen, T., Stenstrom, P., Simard, V., Frantova, 
E., & Donderi, D. (2008). Sensed presence as a correlate 
of sleep paralysis distress, social anxiety and waking state 
social imagery. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 49-63. 
doi: 10.1016/j .concog.2007.04.007
Solomonova, E., Nielsen, T., Takeuchi, T., Bezinger, E., & 
Carr, M. (2012). The relationship between REM sleep eye 
movement density and dream content: Differences between 
idiopathic sleep paralysis sufferers and healthy controls. 
International Association for the Study of Dreams annual meet­
ing. June 24, 2012. Berkeley, CA.
E L I Z A V E T A  S O L O M O N O V A
455

Solomonova, E. & Sha, X.W. (2016). Exploring the depth of 
dream experience: The enactive framework and methods for 
neurophenomenological research. Constructivist Foundations. 
Special Issue: Exploring the Diversity within Enactivism and 
Neurophenomenology, Tom Froese, Alexander Riegler and 
Sebastian Voros, editors, 11(2), 407-416.
Solomonova, E., Stenstrom, P., Paquette, T., & Nielsen, T. 
(2015). Different temporal patterns of memory incorpora­
tions into dreams for laboratory and virtual reality experi­
ences: Relation to dreamed locus of control. International 
Journal of Dream Research, 5(1), 10—26.
Spanos, N. P., McNulty, S. A., DuBreuil, S. C., Pires, M., & 
Burgess, M. F. (1995). The frequency and correlates of 
sleep paralysis in a university sample. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 29(3), 285-305.
Spoormaker, V. I., & Montgomery, P. (2008). Disturbed sleep in 
post-traumatic stress disorder: Secondary symptom or core 
feature? Sleep Medicine Reviews, 12(3), 169-184.
Spoormaker, V. I., & Van Den Bout, J. (2006). Lucid dreaming 
treatment for nightmares: A pilot study. Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, 75(6), 389-394.
Stewart, J. R., Gapenne, O., & Di Paolo, E. A. (2010). 
Enaction: Toward a new paradigm for cognitive science. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Suedfeld, P, & Mocellin, J. S. (1987). The” sensed presence” 
in unusual environments. Environment and Behavior, 
19(1), 33-52.
Szelenberger, W., Niemcewicz, S., & Dabrowska, A. J. (2005). 
Sleepwalking and night terrors: Psychopathological and 
psychophysiological correlates. International Review of 
Psychiatry, 17(4), 263-270.
Szklo-Coxe, M., Young, T., Finn, L., & Mignot, E. (2007). 
Depression: Relationships to sleep paralysis and other 
sleep disturbances in a community sample. Journal of Sleep 
Research, 16(3), 297-312.
Takeuchi, T., Fukuda, K., Sasaki, Y., Inugami, M., & Murphy, T. 
I. (2002). Factors related to the occurrence of isolated sleep 
paralysis elicited during a multi-phasic sleep-wake schedule. 
Sleep, 25(1), 89-96.
Takeuchi, T., Miyasita, A., Sasaki, Y., & Inugami, M. (1992). 
Isolated sleep paralysis elicited by sleep interruption. Sleep, 
15(3), 217-225.
Taylor, S. F. (2005). Between the idea and the reality: A study 
of the counselling experiences of bereaved people who sense 
the presence of the deceased. Counselling and Psychotherapy 
Research, 5(1), 5 3-61.
Terrillon, J. C., & Marques-Bonham, S. (2001). Does recurrent 
isolated sleep paralysis involve more than cognitive neurosci­
ences? Journal of Scientific Exploration, 75(1), 97—123.
Terzaghi, M., Ratti, P. L., Manni, F., & Manni, R. (2012). Sleep 
paralysis in narcolepsy: more than just a motor dissocia­
tive phenomenon? Neurological Sciences: Official Journal of 
the Italian Neurological Society and of the Italian Society of 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 35(1), 169-172. doi: 10.1007/ 
s 10072-011-0644-y
Thompson, E. (2005). Sensorimotor subjectivity and the enac­
tive approach to experience. Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences, 4(A), 407-427.
Thompson, E. (2014). Waking, dreaming, being: Self and 
consciousness in neuroscience, meditation, and philosophy. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Thompson, E. (2015a). Steps toward a neurophenomenol­
ogy of conscious sleep: A reply to Jennifer M. Windt. In 
T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open MIND. MIND 
Group, Frankfurt am Main: 37(R). http://open-mind.net/ 
papers/steps-toward-a-neurophenomenology-of-conscious- 
ness-in-sleep-a-reply-to-jennifer-m-windt
Thompson, E. (2015b) Dreamless sleep, the embodied mind, 
and consciousness: The relevance of a classical Indian debate 
to cognitive science. In T. Metzinger & Windt J. M. (Eds.), 
Open MIND. MIND Group, Frankfurt am Main: 37(T). 
http://open-mind.net/papers/dreamless-sleep-the-embod- 
ied-mind-and-consciousness-the-relevance-of-a-classical- 
indian-debate-to-cognitive-science
Thorpy, M. J. (2016). Diagnostic criteria and delay in diagnosis 
of narcolepsy. In M. Goswami, M. J. Thorpy, & S. R. Pandi- 
Perumal (Eds.), Narcolepsy (pp. 45—49). Berlin: Springer 
International.
Travis, F., & Shear, J. (2010). Focused attention, open monitor­
ing and automatic self-transcending: categories to organize 
meditations from Vedic, Buddhist and Chinese traditions. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 19(4), 1110—1118.
Varela, F. J., Thompson E., & Rosch E. (1991) The embodied 
mind: Cognitive science and human experience. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Veissiere, S. (2016). Varieties of Tulpa experiences: The hyp­
notic nature of human sociality, personhood, and inter- 
phenomenality. In Raz and Lifshitz (Eds.), Hypnosis and 
meditation towards an integrative science of conscious planes. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wheeler, M. (2005). Reconstructing the cognitive world: The next 
step. Camberidge, MA: MIT press.
Wing, Y.-K., Chiu, H., Leung, T., & Ng, J. (1999). Sleep paraly­
sis in the elderly. Journal of Sleep Research, 8(2), 151-155. 
doi: 10.1046/j. 1365-2869.1999.00143.x
Wing, Y.-K., Lee, S. T., & Chen, C.-N. (1994). Sleep paralysis 
in Chinese: Ghost oppression phenomenon in Hong Kong. 
Sleep, 17(7), 609-613.
Young, E., Xiong, S., Finn, L., & Young, T. (2013). Unique sleep 
disorders profile of a population-based sample of 747 Hmong 
immigrants in Wisconsin. Social Science & Medicine, 79, 57-65.
Zadra, A. L., & Pihl, R. O. (1997). Lucid dreaming as a treatment 
for recurrent nightmares. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 
66(1), 50-55.
Zadra, A., Pilon, M., Joncas, S., Rompre, S., & Montplaisir, 
J. (2004). Analysis of postarousal EEG activity during 
somnambulistic episodes. Journal of Sleep Research, 13(3), 
279-284.
Zahavi, D. (2014). Self and other: Exploring subjectivity, empathy, 
and shame. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
456
S LEE P PA RA LY S IS

C H A P T E R
32
Dreaming and Waking Thought as a 
Reflection of Memory Consolidation
Erin J. Wamsley
Abstract
Dreaming has often been viewed as a “mysterious” experience entirely distinct from waking cognition. 
An alternative view proposes that dreams are generated by the same fundamental processes that give 
rise to spontaneous thought during wakefulness. New evidence suggests that these processes include 
activity of the brain’s memory systems, supporting consolidation of newly encoded experience. During 
both sleep and wakefulness, fragments of recently encoded memory are recombined with related 
remote memory and semantic information to create novel scenarios. This is an adaptive process that 
contributes to the “consolidation” of memory and is reflected in the phenomenology of both our nightly 
dreams and waking daydreams.
Key Words: dreaming, sleep, spontaneous thought, memory, semantic, daydream
Introduction and Historical Notes
What are dreams made of? For millennia, 
humans have sought to answer this question. Today, 
converging lines of evidence point to a surpris­
ingly simple possibility: Dreams, like spontaneous 
thought in wakefulness, are made of memory.
The general notion that dreams arise from 
memory stretches back more than a century, with 
the most influential models describing dream con­
struction as a process categorically distinct from 
that which gives rise to waking cognition. Freud, 
for example, saw sleep as a time when the “uncon­
scious” mind was uniquely enabled to influence 
mental imagery, in a manner unlike any wak­
ing experience (Freud, 1913). The appearance of 
memory in dreams was recognized, but consid­
ered of secondary importance to discovering latent 
“meaning” hidden in dreams. Over 70 years later, 
Hobson and McCarley proposed the first neurosci­
entific theory of dreaming (Hobson & McCarley, 
1977). Ostensibly a stark departure from Freud, 
the “Activation-Synthesis” hypothesis proposed that 
dreams are constructed via a bottom-up process
initiated by essentially random brainstem impulses 
during REM (rapid eye movement) sleep (Hobson 
& McCarley, 1977), devoid of the sort of intention­
ally disguised meaning championed by psychoana­
lysts. Yet like psychoanalysis, Activation-Synthesis1 
still described dreaming as a category of cognition 
entirely distinct from waking thought— dreams 
were a unique form of visual hallucination character­
ized by heightened emotion, uncritical acceptance 
of bizarre events, and a breakdown of higher-order 
cognitive functions (Hobson & McCarley, 1977; 
Hobson, Pace-Schott, & Stickgold, 2000). Memory 
networks might have been among those randomly 
activated during dreaming, but the chaotic process 
by which this occurred bore little resemblance to 
waking cognition. In short, for the last hundred 
years, dreaming has most often been considered a 
process entirely distinct from that which gives rise 
to waking thought.
An alternative view proposes that dreams are 
generated by the same fundamental processes that 
give rise to spontaneous thought during wakefulness 
(Christoff, Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna,
4 5 7

2016; Domhoff, 2011; Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, 
Domhoff, & Christoff, 2013; Wamsley & Stickgold, 
2010). Grounded in the work of cognitive theorists 
including Calvin Hall (1953) and John Antrobus 
(1983, 1991), new observations of offline memory 
processing during both sleep and rest lend increas­
ing support to this conceptualization. Certainly, the 
cessation of sensory input and altered neurochemi­
cal milieu during sleep render dream cognition 
partially dissimilar from waking thought. Yet the 
fundamental brain processes that give rise to spon­
taneous thought may remain constant across states 
of consciousness. Here, we argue that these funda­
mental processes are rooted in the brains memory 
systems, which initiate the reactivation and con­
solidation of recently formed memory across both 
sleep and resting wake states. In the following, we 
describe evidence that during both sleep and wake­
fulness, fragments of recently encoded memory 
are recombined with related remote memory and 
semantic information to create novel scenarios. This 
is an adaptive process that contributes to the “con­
solidation” of memory and is reflected in the phe­
nomenology of our dreams and daydreams.
Dreaming and Memory
The Incorporation of Memory into Dreams
There is a long history of evidence that dream 
content is composed, at least in part, of both recent 
and remote memories. Even prior to Freud s concept 
of “day residue” (Freud, 1913), early experimental­
ists were testing the effect of pre-sleep experience on 
subsequent dream content. Norwegian psychologist 
J. Mourly Void, for example, conducted extensive 
experimentation on the relationship between visual 
experiences introduced during the evening and the 
content of dreams the following night (Warren, 
1897). Following the discovery of REM sleep in the 
early 1950s, this question received renewed atten­
tion as researchers attempted to trace the incorpo­
ration of pre-sleep experiences into dreaming by 
exposing participants to videos, images, or other 
stimuli prior to sleep (Breger, Hunter, & Lane, 
1971; Cartwright, Bernick, & Borowitz, 1969; 
Foulkes & Rechtschaffen, 1964; Witkin & Lewis, 
1967). Yet despite the large amount of research 
effort devoted to this question, laboratory studies 
using appropriate controls (such as independent rat­
ers blinded to experimental condition) largely failed 
to demonstrate significant effects of experimen­
tal stimuli on subsequent dreaming (Wamsley & 
Stickgold, 2009).
A notable exception was the discovery that research 
participants incorporate the experience of visiting 
the sleep laboratory into their dreams at high rates 
(Dement, Kahn, & Roffwarg, 1965). The laboratory 
environment, electroencephalograph (EEG) equip­
ment, and experimenters encountered the previous 
night are consistently among the most common fea­
tures of laboratory-collected dream reports (Dement 
et al., 1965). Thus, despite the difficulty of experi­
mentally influencing dreams using images and videos, 
certain recent episodic memories do clearly influence 
subsequent dream content. The precise features of a 
memory that render it more or less likely to be reacti­
vated during sleep and incorporated into dreaming are 
not well understood. However, the salience of sleep­
ing in a laboratory while attached to EEG recording 
equipment and being observed by strangers might 
cause this novel experience to have an outsize influence 
on dream content. Indeed, recent studies of memory 
consolidation during sleep suggest that salient infor­
mation that is emotional (Payne, Stickgold, Swanberg, 
& Kensinger, 2008), rewarded (Fischer & Born,
2009), or known to be relevant to a future test (van 
Dongen, Thielen, Takashima, Barth, & Fernandez, 
2012; Wilhelm et al., 2011) is preferentially processed 
in the sleeping brain.
Further supporting the notion that more salient 
waking experiences are preferentially incorporated 
into dreams, subsequent research has demonstrated 
that, unlike passive viewing of images and videos, 
emotionally engaging, interactive video-game tasks 
have a consistently strong effect on subsequent 
dream content. In one series of studies using the 
downhill skiing arcade game Alpine Racer //, we 
found that 30% of subsequent sleep-onset dream 
reports were related to the game. Other studies 
have demonstrated clear incorporation of the video 
game Tetris (Kusse, Shaffii-LE Bourdiec, Schrouff, 
Matarazzo, & Maquet, 2011; Stickgold, Malia, 
Maguire, Roddenberry, & O ’Connor, 2000), vir­
tual maze navigation tasks (Solomonova, Stenstrom, 
Paquette, & Nielsen, 2015; Wamsley, Tucker, Payne, 
Benavides, & Stickgold, 2010), and other video- 
game experiences (Gackenbach, Rosie, Bown, & 
Sample, 2011) into dreams. Taken together, these 
observations suggest that while not all experimen­
tal tasks show a definite impact on dream content, 
engaging, interactive pre-sleep learning experiences 
have a high probability of influencing subsequent 
dream experience. Taken together, these observations 
offer an unequivocal demonstration that memory of 
recent learning experiences forms a major compo­
nent of subjective experience during sleep.
458
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

However, episodic memories are rarely “replayed” 
in dreams in their entire, original form (Fosse, 
Fosse, Hobson, & Stickgold, 2003; Malinowski & 
Horton, 2014). For example, a 2003 study by Fosse 
and colleagues analyzed the waking-memory sources 
of 299 home-collected dream reports, finding that 
although recent memories were frequently identi­
fied as the source of the dream (51% of reports), 
less than 2% included all of the key elements of the 
original memory, including the setting, characters, 
objects, and actions of the waking experience (Fosse 
et al., 2003). Instead, dreams identified as “related” 
to a recent memory typically incorporate only frag­
ments of the source episode, perhaps intermingled 
with other recent memories, remote memories, and 
semantic knowledge.
In our studies of the A lpine Racer skiing game, 
for example, the reports that judges (blind to con­
dition) scored as related to the game were never a 
complete and faithful reiteration of the learning 
experience (Wamsley, Perry, Djonlagic, Reaven, & 
Stickgold, 2010). At times, participants reported 
isolated elements that closely mirrored the waking 
experience, such as this participant, who imagined 
a specific point on the skiing course, reporting that 
he dreamed
. . . about that skiing game and how just the first 
really big turn I didn't know it was coming around 
the corner. I just felt that like I continually was doing 
that turn. (Wamsley, Perry, et al., 2010)
Yet in other instances, related experiences 
appeared in the dream, rather than a direct represen­
tation of the learning experience itself. For example, 
one participant reported a dream that clearly refer­
enced a remote memory related to the learning task:
I was picturing stacking wood this time . ..  I felt like 
I was doing it at. .. at a ski resort that I had been to 
before, like five years ago maybe. (Wamsley, Perry, 
et al., 2010)
In other cases, the memory of a recent learning 
experience might be combined with semantically 
related remote memories from the more distant 
past. For example, after training on a virtual maze 
navigation-learning task, a participant in another 
study reported
thinking about the maze and kinda having people 
as check points . . . that led me to think about when 
I went on this trip a few years ago and we went to 
see a bat cave, and they're kind of like, maze-like. 
(Wamsley, Tucker, Payne, Benavides, et al., 2010)
Although dream reports in the preceding stud­
ies were restricted to early NREM (non-rapid eye 
movement) sleep,2 in other recent work we have 
observed that dream reports from all sleep stages at 
times combined elements of waking episodes from 
different points in the past (Wamsley, Hamilton, 
Graveline, Manceor, & Parr, 2016; Figure 32.1). 
This feature of dreaming, in which fragments of 
multiple episodes are simultaneously activated and 
combined into a novel form, echoes recent observa­
tions from the rodent memory reactivation litera­
ture, showing that the “replay” of memory during 
sleep is not really a direct reiteration of a single 
waking experience, but instead combines features 
of multiple waking episodes, at times resulting in 
the “replay” of novel, never-before-experienced spa­
tial trajectories (Gupta, van der Meer, Touretzky, & 
Redish, 2010; Kudrimoti, Barnes, & McNaughton, 
1999). While it may at first seem that the activa­
tion of multiple memory fragments in combina­
tion would lead to memory distortions, such a 
mechanism could actually be ideally suited to the 
gradual integration of newly learned information 
with related memory networks in the neocortex via 
hippocampal replay, for example as described by the 
complementary learning systems model (Kumaran, 
Hassabis, & McClelland, 2016; McClelland & 
O ’Reilly, 1995; see also Mills, Herrerra-Bennett, 
Faber, & Christoff, Chapter 2 in this volume), or 
to the extraction of commonalities across multiple 
waking experiences, a process that is also facilitated 
by sleep (Durrant, Taylor, Cairney, & Lewis, 2011; 
Ellenbogen, Hu, Payne, Titone, & Walker, 2007; 
Lau, Tucker, & Fishbein, 2010).
Future Simulation in Dreams
Dream experience may also serve to simulate 
possible future events. Recent advances in cogni­
tive neuroscience have led to the notion that human 
memory functions not to help us remember the 
past per se, but rather to prepare us for the future 
(Schacter, Addis, & Buckner, 2007). Thus, a grow­
ing field has begun to examine waking thought, 
imagery, and daydreaming as the product of a “pro­
spective brain” (Addis, Pan, Vu, Laiser, & Schacter, 
2009; Addis, Wong, & Schacter, 2007; Schacter 
et al., 2007) that is constantly using past experience 
to predict and prepare for possible future events. 
The notion that our brains use memory to con­
struct episodic simulations of potential futures is 
strongly in line with the long-standing “threat sim­
ulation” hypothesis of dreaming proposed by Antti 
Revonsuo (Valli & Revonsuo, 2009), which focuses
E R I N  J. W A M S L E Y
459

30%
Sleep Onset
Figure 32.1. The incorporation of past and anticipated future episodes into dream content. Participants commonly identify their 
dreams as originating from specific past events, or from specific impending future events. Dream reports most commonly reference 
the recent past or near future, rather than more distant time points. In all sleep stages, single reports may combine multiple past and 
future sources.
on dreaming as a rehearsal for threatening events 
that could occur in the future, triggered by negative 
emotional experiences in the past. Our own obser­
vations also support the notion that future-oriented 
imagery forms a major component of dream experi­
ence (Wamsley et al., 2016). In one recent study, 
participants spent the night in the sleep labora­
tory and were awakened to provide multiple dream 
reports from both NREM and REM sleep stages. 
During a morning interview, participants listened 
to recordings of all of their reports from the previ­
ous night, identifying whether the experience incor­
porated an event from the past, an event that will 
be experienced in the future, or both. Participants 
frequently identified anticipated future events as 
the source of their dream content. Although past 
experience was most frequently identified as the 
source of the dream (49% of reports), a full 30% 
of dream reports were identified as stemming from 
an impending future event (Figure 32.1) (Wamsley 
et al., 2016).
Neurophysiological Evidence of Memory 
Processing During Sleep
Related evidence suggests that not only are 
recent memories incorporated into dreaming, but 
the activation of memory networks during sleep 
is actually functional. In humans, behavioral stud­
ies have established that sleep following learning
leads to improved memory. Across a wide variety 
of domains, including verbal (Ellenbogen, Hulbert, 
Stickgold, Dinges, & Thompson-Schill, 2006; 
Payne et al., 2012; Plihal & Born, 1997; Tucker 
et al., 2006), perceptual (Mednick, Nakayama, 
& Stickgold, 2003; Stickgold, James, & Hobson,
2000), motor (Nishida & Walker, 2007; Walker, 
Brakefield, 
Morgan, 
Hobson, 
& 
Stickgold,
2002), and spatial (Nguyen, Tucker, Stickgold, 
& Wamsley, 2013; Wamsley, Tucker, Payne, & 
Stickgold, 2010) memory, obtaining sleep following 
learning leads to superior memory performance at 
a delayed test, relative to an equivalent duration of 
active wakefulness. This memory benefit is thought 
to derive from a process of systems-level memory 
consolidation unfolding in sleep, during which 
the repeated reactivation of recent memory traces 
facilitates gradual updating of cortical networks 
encoding experience (Diekelmann & Born, 2010; 
Frankland & Bontempi, 2005).
This model is supported by neurophysiological 
evidence that memory networks are activated dur­
ing sleep at both the cellular and systems levels. 
First, studies using single-unit recordings in the 
rodent hippocampus and neocortex have described 
the phenomenon of memory “reactivation,” in 
which patterns of place for cell activity, first estab­
lished when rats are exploring a spatial environment 
during wakefulness, are later repeated during sleep
460
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

(Ji & Wilson, 2006; Lee & Wilson, 2002; Wilson 
& McNaughton, 
1994). This offline “replay” 
of ensemble activity is thought to contribute to 
memory consolidation— as hippocampal networks 
repeatedly trigger the cortical activity patterns 
representing experience, cortical connections are 
strengthened, which eventually allows the memory 
to be retrieved without the aid of the hippocampus 
(Frankland & Bontempi, 2005; O ’Neill, Pleydell- 
Bouverie, Dupret, & Csicsvari, 2010). Indeed, 
hippocampal oscillations during which these reac­
tivation events occur (“sharp-wave ripples”) increase 
following learning (Eschenko, Ramadan, Molle, 
Born, & Sara, 2008), and conversely, their dis­
ruption impairs memory (Ego-Stengel & Wilson, 
2010; Girardeau, Benchenane, Wiener, Buzsaki, & 
Zugaro, 2009). While these cellular-level “replay” 
events are not definitively associated with dreaming, 
their occurrence clearly demonstrates that memory- 
related neural activity is occurring during sleep.
The effect of sleep on human memory has 
similarly been linked to sharp-wave ripple oscil­
lations during NREM sleep (Axmacher, Eiger, & 
Fell, 2008), and to the activity of memory-related 
brain regions as identified in neuroimaging stud­
ies. Beginning in the 1990s, neuroimaging studies 
of human sleep have consistently demonstrated 
that memory-related brain regions, including the 
hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex, are 
among those that remain active in sleep (Braun 
et al., 1997; Maquet et al., 2000; Nofzinger et al., 
2002; Peigneux et al., 2004). Even during NREM 
sleep, some medial temporal and medial prefron­
tal regions remain relatively active, when adjusting 
for the large global reductions in signal that occur 
brain-wide (Nofzinger et al., 2002; Peigneux et al.,
2004). Meanwhile, several imaging studies have 
also demonstrated experience-induced patterns of 
brain activation during human sleep (Maquet et al., 
2000; Peigneux et al., 2003; Peigneux et al., 2004), 
and in one case, learning-related hippocampal acti­
vation during slow-wave sleep was found to predict 
next-morning memory performance on a virtual 
navigation task (Peigneux et al., 2004).
Dreaming Is Associated 
with Improved Memory
Further 
evidence 
that 
memory 
consolida­
tion contributes to dreaming comes from studies 
showing that when recent learning experiences are 
incorporated into dream content, memory for that 
information is enhanced. Fiss and colleagues (1977) 
reported the first observation of this phenomenon,
finding that after reading a short story, participants 
who reported dreams related to the story exhibited 
superior memory for the text the following morn­
ing (Fiss, Kremer, & Litchman, 1977). De Koninck 
et al. followed this work by examining the correla­
tion between dream content and language learning 
in an academic setting. Among students enrolled in 
a French-immersion class, those with the strongest 
language acquisition incorporated French into their 
dreams more frequently than students who were 
less successful in the class (De Koninck, Christ, 
Hebert, & Rinfret, 1990). Most recently, our labo­
ratory has demonstrated that dreaming of a virtual 
maze-navigation task is associated with enhanced 
consolidation of spatial memory both across a 
nap (Wamsley, Tucker, Payne, Benavides, et al.,
2010) and across a full night of sleep (Wamsley, 
Nguyen, Tucker, Olsen, & Stickgold, 2012) (Figure 
32.2). Although the hypothesis that dreaming of a 
learning task is associated with improved memory 
has not been universally supported (Schredl & 
Erlacher, 2010), these studies suggest that the pro­
cesses that cause sleep to benefit human memory 
may be at least reflected in concomitant dream 
experience.
Which Memories Appear in Spontaneous 
Cognition and Why?
But supposing that the preceding account proves 
to be true— what controls which memories are reac­
tivated during sleep, and how they are combined 
together? A memory consolidation account of 
dreaming suggests that there is likely to exist some 
organized set of principles governing which mem­
ory networks become active during sleep, and thus 
appear in the content of dreams (Wamsley, 2014). 
For example, recent work on sleep-dependent mem­
ory consolidation has proposed that the salience of 
a learning experience (variously defined as reward 
value [Fischer & Born, 2009], emotional intensity 
[Payne et al., 2008], or future relevance [Wilhelm 
et al., 2011]) mediates its reactivation and consoli­
dation in the sleeping brain. However, this hypoth­
esis remains largely untested when it comes to 
dreams. In one recent study, informing participants 
that they would be tested on what they were learn­
ing the next morning (a manipulation previously 
reported to enhance memory consolidation in sleep 
[Fischer & Born, 2009]) did not affect the incor­
poration of the learning experience into dreaming 
(Wamsley et al., 2016). Similarly, although there is 
a long-standing hypothesis that highly emotional 
waking experiences are most likely to influence
E R I N  J. W A M S L E Y
461

Dreaming During a Daytime Nap
Dreaming During Overnight Sleep
■ Participants with Maze-Related
200 -|
■ Participants with Maze-
Reports
Related Reports
□ Participants Without Maze-
<u
□ Participants Without Maze-
Related Reports
J 150 -
Related Reports
Sleep
Wake
-1 0 0  -I
Sleep
Wake
Figure 32.2. Dreaming of a learning task is associated with enhanced memory consolidation. During both a daytime nap (left) and 
a night of sleep (right), participants who reported dreaming about the experimental learning task (Virtual Maze Navigation Task) 
showed enhanced memory performance at later test. Reports of spontaneous thoughts about the task during wakefulness were not 
significantly associated with performance.
dream content, there remains little experimental 
work that directly supports this hypothesis.
Still, there are a few robustly established observa­
tions about the rules governing the incorporation 
of memories into dream content. First, we know 
that waking experiences are not incorporated into 
dreaming as a simple function of the amount of 
time that we spend engaged in these activities dur­
ing wakefulness— routine activities such as reading, 
writing, and working on a computer, for example, 
comprise a large portion of participants’ daytime 
activities, but are rarely incorporated into subse­
quent dreams (Hartmann, 2000; Michael Schredl 
& Hofmann, 2003). Second, waking memories are 
especially likely to be incorporated into dreaming 
at specific time points following the experience, 
with memory incorporation showing an initial peak 
during the first one to two nights following encod­
ing, and a secondary peak approximately a week 
later (Blagrove, Fouquet, et al., 2011; Blagrove, 
Henley-Einion, Barnett, Edwards, & Heidi Seage, 
2011; Nielsen, Kuiken, Alain, Stenstrom, & Powell, 
2004; van Rijn et al., 2015). Finally, it appears that 
dreams during NREM sleep are more easily traced 
to specific waking episodes at a particular time and 
place, relative to REM dreams (Baylor & Cavallero,
2001). As described earlier, however, these waking 
episodes typically appear in dreams in an abstracted 
form in which only fragments of recent experience
are interleaved with other content. Although the 
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying these 
phenomenological observations remain unknown, 
the incorporation of select waking experience fea­
tures into NREM dreaming at specific points fol­
lowing encoding could reflect the time course of 
memory consolidation for select experiences during 
NREM sleep.
If the content of dreams even partially reflects 
memory consolidation in the sleeping brain, then 
observing the manner in which memories appear 
in dreaming could help us to better understand the 
process of consolidation in general. Certainly, the 
cognitive-level activation of memory in dreams pro­
vides information about the specific memory net­
works that are active in the sleeping brain at a level 
of detail currently unavailable in humans by other 
means (Wamsley, 2013). It follows that using sub­
jective reports as an indicator of activated memory 
networks during sleep could provide useful infor­
mation about underlying memory processes.
For example, the complementary learning sys­
tems model (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland & 
O ’Reilly, 1995) suggests that in order to optimally 
integrate new memories into cortical networks, rep­
resentations of recent experience must be repeatedly 
reactivated during offline states. But this repeated 
reactivation must be interleaved with the activation 
of other related memories, so that new experiences
4 6 2
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

are gradually integrated into cortical networks in a 
way that avoids catastrophic inference amounting 
to the “overwriting” of older information with the 
newest learning (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland 
& O ’Reilly, 1995). The manner in which new 
memories are interleaved with other memory traces 
remains unknown. There are several possibilities, 
including that (1) recent memories stored in the hip­
pocampus are reactivated interleaved with all other 
recently encoded hippocampal memories; (2) recent 
memories stored in the hippocampus are reactivated 
interleaved only with related recent memories, for 
example via a process of spreading activation that 
biases memory networks with overlapping features 
to become active, or (3) recent memories stored in 
the hippocampus are reactivated interleaved with 
related cortical memory networks (Kumaran et al.,
2016). In any of these scenarios, different memories 
might be reactivated sequentially (either within the 
same sleep stage or across the night in different sleep 
stages), or they might be reactivated simultaneously, 
as suggested by recent observations of hippocampal 
replay events, in which elements of multiple experi­
ences are simultaneously expressed at the ensemble 
level (Gupta et al., 2010; Kudrimoti et al., 1999). 
Subjective reports revealing which recent and 
remote memory traces are active during sleep could 
help us to distinguish between competing models of 
how different memories are reactivated offline in an 
“interleaved” manner. Ongoing work in our labora­
tory seeks to achieve this by describing the manner 
in which multiple episodes from different tempo­
ral sources are combined to create novel imagery in 
both dreaming and waking thought.
Memory and Spontaneous Cognition 
in Waking
In the preceding, we have suggested that dreaming 
is constructed from fragments of memory as recent 
episodes are reactivated and interleaved together 
during sleep. However, this process is very likely not 
unique to sleep. On the contrary, the incorporation 
of waking memory fragments into dream scenarios 
may be only a special case of a more general pro­
cess by which spontaneous cognition is constructed 
across all states of consciousness. Indeed, these 
observations about dreaming closely mirror the con­
cept of “constructive episodic simulation,” proposed 
by Schacter and others as a central feature of wak­
ing cognition (Addis et al., 2009; Schacter & Addis, 
2007; Schacter, Guerin, & St. Jacques, 2011).
Certainly, 
memories 
of the 
past 
are 
a 
major component of waking daydreams and
“mind-wandering,” as are mental simulations of 
possible futures and imagined scenarios (Andrews- 
Hanna, 2011; Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). 
While from one perspective, these latter forms of 
experience may seem to fall outside the realm of 
“memory,” future-oriented cognition and imagina­
tion in fact also draw on memory representations 
and are associated with the activation of many of 
the same brain regions engaged when recalling past 
experiences (Addis et al., 2009; Addis et al., 2007; 
Schacter et al., 2007). Meanwhile, these and other 
brain regions recruited during spontaneous wak­
ing thought (Fox et al., 2013; Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015) overlap signif­
icantly with those that remain active during REM 
sleep (Fox et al., 2013; Fox et al., 2015) and some 
that remain relatively active into NREM sleep, 
when adjusting for the overall reduced level of activ­
ity (Nofzinger et al., 2002; Peigneux et al., 2004). 
A recent meta-analysis directly addressed this point 
by quantitatively demonstrating that brain activa­
tion patterns during REM sleep show a high degree 
of overlap with the “default network” during off- 
task rest, and that simultaneously, the features of 
dream cognition mirror reports of spontaneous 
thought sampled during the resting wakefulness 
of default mode studies (Fox et al., 2013; see also 
Domhoff, 2011). Thus, in both sleep and wake­
fulness, the construction of spontaneous thought 
engages memory systems, as evidenced through 
both reports of phenomenology and neuroimaging 
observations.
At the same time, many of the neurophysiologi­
cal processes thought to promote memory consoli­
dation during sleep are also engaged during resting 
wakefulness. Most obviously, both sleep and rest­
ing wakefulness are characterized by a precipitous 
decrease in external sensory input, relative to active 
waking states. And although the “reactivation” of 
recent memory traces in the rodent hippocampus 
and cortex was first described during slow-wave 
sleep, it is now well documented that this same 
replay of waking experience is also expressed dur­
ing quiet waking rest (Carr, Jadhav, & Frank, 2011; 
Davidson, Kloosterman, & Wilson, 2009; Foster & 
Wilson, 2006; Karlsson & Frank, 2009). The hip­
pocampal “sharp-wave ripples” during which mem­
ory reactivation occurs are also prevalent during 
resting wakefulness, in humans as well as animals 
(Axmacher et al., 2008; Clemens et al., 2011). And 
while low-frequency EEG activity is clearly most 
prominent during sleep, slow EEG oscillations and 
the cortical “up-” and “down-states” associated with
E R I N  J. W A M S L E Y
463

these oscillations are also present during resting 
wakefulness (Crochet, 2006; Kirov, Weiss, Siebner, 
Born, & Marshall, 2009; Vyazovskiy et al., 2011). 
Finally, 
consolidation-promoting 
neurochemi­
cal features of sleep are also partially replicated 
during eyes-closed rest— decreased acetylcholine 
levels during quiet resting wakefulness (Marrosu 
et al., 1995) may facilitate hippocampal-cortical 
communication that favors consolidation, rather 
than encoding (Hasselmo, 1999; Hasselmo & 
McGaughy, 2004). Thus, many mechanisms pro­
posed to account for the effect of sleep on memory 
consolidation are also present during waking rest.
Non-sleep resting states may also behaviorally 
benefit memory consolidation in humans. Recent 
work from our laboratory and others has demon­
strated that obtaining a brief period of eyes-closed 
rest following learning benefits memory for at least 
a week (Dewar, Alber, Butler, Cowan, & Della 
Sala, 2012), and that the memory benefit of rest is 
linked to the same slow-frequency EEG oscillations 
implicated in memory consolidation during sleep 
(Brokaw et al., 2016). In our studies of dreaming 
and memory consolidation described earlier, spon­
taneous thoughts about the learning task during 
waking were not significantly predictive of later 
memory performance, but there were trends in this 
direction (Figure 32.2).
Taken together, these observations suggest that 
during both sleep and resting wakefulness, the con­
struction of spontaneous cognition is supported by 
a similar brain process. At the regional level, the net­
work of brain areas involved overlaps with (but is not 
identical to) the described “default mode” network 
engaged during periods of reduced task demand, 
especially including medial prefrontal and medial 
temporal areas, which also remain relatively active 
during sleep (Domhoff, 2011; Fox et al., 2013; Fox 
et al., 2015). On a cellular level, recent episodic 
memories are reactivated in the hippocampus and 
cortex, perhaps with multiple related experiences 
being reactivated in tandem. On a phenomenologi­
cal level, across all states of consciousness, we expe­
rience a continuous stream of spontaneous thoughts 
and images that are at once novel and built from 
fragments of specific past episodes.
Future Directions
The preceding account remains speculative on 
many fronts, and a number of key questions remain 
unanswered. Chief among these is the question 
of how directly subjective experience maps onto 
the neurophysiology of memory consolidation, in
any state of consciousness. The evidence presented 
here establishes that this is at least a hypothesis 
worth pursuing— there appears to be a relationship 
between the offline reactivation and consolidation of 
memory, on the one hand, and the subjective experi­
ences of dreaming and imagining, on the other. It is 
the nature of this relationship that remains obscure. 
There is a spectrum of possibilities here— at one 
extreme, it could be that although offline memory 
processing has some minor influence on subjective 
experience, the proximal neural processes that gener­
ate conscious experience are far removed from those 
supporting any memory function. In this scenario, 
the study of subjective experience would reveal little 
useful information about the brain basis of memory, 
and conversely, any memory-based model would be 
insufficient to explain the construction of spontane­
ous cognition. At the other extreme, spontaneous 
cognition in sleep and wakefulness could be a direct 
subjective-level instantiation of neurobiological pro­
cesses that function to reactivate, consolidate, and 
integrate memory following encoding. In this latter 
case, the study of spontaneous subjective experi­
ence would emerge as a key method of describing 
the brain processes of memory consolidation, and 
conversely, a memory-based model would provide 
the optimal description of how spontaneous cog­
nition is constructed. Because the resting brain is 
likely engaged in a multiplicity of processes, some of 
which are related to offline memory processing and 
some not, the truth likely lies somewhere between 
these extremes. Moving into the future, these ques­
tions can be answered by new studies that integrate 
high-resolution neural decoding techniques with 
correspondingly detailed analyses of the subjective 
experience (as in Horikawa, Tamaki, Miyawaki, & 
Kamitani, 2013), along with methods of experimen­
tally manipulating these processes.
Acknowledgments
The research described herein was funded in 
part by Bursaries award 83/12 from the BLAL 
Foundation and by R21MH098171 from the 
National Institute of Mental Health.
Notes
1. These comments apply also to more recent iterations of the 
theory, i.e. the “Activation-Input-Modulation” (AIM) model 
(Hobson, Pace-Schott, & Stickgold, 2000).
2. Contrary to some popular notions, complex, visually vivid 
mental experiences are actually common during all stages of 
sleep. Overall, research participants recall a mental experi­
ence from REM sleep about 80% of the time, as compared 
to about 50% of the time from NREM sleep (Nielsen,
464
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

2000; Wamsley, Hirota, Tucker, Smith, & Antrobus, 2007). 
Although REM sleep dreams do tend to be longer, more 
visually vivid, and more bizarre, this is not an absolute cat­
egorical distinction—late-night NREM dreams, for exam­
ple, can be just as vivid and complex as the typical REM 
dream (Antrobus, Kondo, Reinsel, & Fein, 1995; Wamsley 
et ah, 2007).
References
Addis, D. R., Pan, L., Vu, M. A., Laiser, N., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2009). Constructive episodic simulation of the future and 
the past: Distinct subsystems of a core brain network medi­
ate imagining and remembering. Neuropsychologia, 47(11), 
2222-2238.
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common 
and distinct neural substrates during event construction and 
elaboration. Neuropsychologia, 45(7), 1363-1377.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2011). The brain’s default net­
work and its adaptive role in internal mentation. The 
Neuroscientist, 18(3), 251-270. https://doi.org/10T 177/ 
1073858411403316
Antrobus, 
J. 
S. 
(1983). 
REM 
and 
NREM 
sleep 
reports: Comparison of word frequencies by cognitive 
classes. Psychophysiology, 20(5), 562-568.
Antrobus, J. S. (1991). Dreaming: Cognitive processes during 
cortical activation and high afferent thresholds. Psychological 
Review, 
98( 1), 
96-121. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.98.1.96
Antrobus, J. S., Kondo, T., Reinsel, R., & Fein, G. (1995). Dreaming 
in the late morning: Summation of REM and diurnal cortical 
activation. Consciousness and Cognition, 4(3), 275—299.
Axmacher, N., Eiger, C. E., & Fell, J. (2008). Ripples in the 
medial temporal lobe are relevant for human memory con­
solidation. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 131( Pt 7), 1806- 
1817. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awn 103
Baylor, G. W., & Cavallero, C. (2001). Memory sources associ­
ated with REM and NREM dream reports throughout the 
night: A new look at the data. Sleep, 24(2), 165-170.
Blagrove, M., Fouquet, N. C., Henley-Einion, J. A., Pace-Schott, 
E. F., Davies, A. C., Neuschaffer, J. L., & Turnbull, O. H.
(2011). Assessing the dream-lag effect for REM and NREM 
stage 2 dreams. PLoS One, 6(10), e26708. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371 /journal.pone.0026708
Blagrove, M., Henley-Einion, J., Barnett, A., Edwards, D., & 
Heidi Seage, C. (2011). A replication of the 5-7 day dream- 
lag effect with comparison of dreams to future events as con­
trol for baseline matching. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(2), 
384-391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2010.07.006
Braun, A. R., Balkin, T. J., Wesenten, N. J., Carson, R. E., Varga, 
M., Baldwin, P.,... Herscovitch, P. (1997). Regional cerebral 
blood flow throughout the sleep-wake cycle: An H2 (15) O 
PET study. Brain, 120(7), 1173-1197.
Breger, L., Hunter, I., & Lane, R. W. (1971). The effect of stress 
on dreams. Psychological Issues, 7(3), 1-213.
Brokaw, K., Tishler, W., Manceor, S., Hamilton, K., Gaulden, 
A., Parr, E., & Wamsley, E. J. (2016). Resting state EEG 
correlates of memory consolidation. Neurobiology of Learning 
and Memory, 130, 17-25.
Carr, M. F., Jadhav, S. P., & Frank, L. M. (2011). Hippocampal 
replay in the awake state: A potential substrate for memory 
consolidation and retrieval. Nature Neuroscience, 14(2), 147— 
153. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2732
Cartwright, R. D., Bernick, N., & Borowitz, G. (1969). Effect 
of an erotic movie on the sleep and dreams of young men. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 20(3), 262—271. https://doi. 
org /10.1001 /archpsyc. 1969.01740150006002
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 77(11), 718-731. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrn.2016.113
Clemens, Z., Molle, M., Eross, L., Jakus, R., Rasonyi, G., 
Halasz, P., & Born, J. (2011). Fine-tuned coupling between 
human parahippocampal ripples and sleep spindles. The 
European Journal of Neuroscience, 33(3), 511-520. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07505.x
Crochet, S., & Carl C. H. (2006). Correlating whisker behav­
ior with membrane potential in barrel cortex of awake 
mice. Nature Neuroscience, .9(5), 608-610. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nnl690
Davidson, T. J., Kloosterman, F., & Wilson, M. A. (2009). 
Hippocampal replay of extended experience. Neuron, 63(4), 
497-507. https://doi.org/10.1016/j .neuron.2009.07.027
De Koninck, J., Christ, G., Hebert, G., & Rinfret, N. (1990). 
Language learning efficiency, dreams and REM sleep. 
Psychiatric Journal of the University of Ottawa: Revue de 
Psychiatrie de I’Universite d’Ottawa, 15(2), 91-92.
Dement, W. C., Kahn, E., & Roffwarg, H. P. (1965). The influ­
ence of the laboratory situation on the dreams of the experi­
mental subject. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
140, 119-131.
Dewar, M., Alber, J., Butler, C., Cowan, N., & Della Sala, S.
(2012). Brief wakeful resting boosts new memories over the 
long term. Psychological Science, 23(9), 955-960. https://doi. 
org /10.1177/0956797612441220
Diekelmann, S., & Born, J. (2010). The memory function of 
sleep. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 11(2), 114—126. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nrn2762
Domhoff, W. (2011). The neural substrate for dreaming: Is 
it a subsystem of the default network? Consciousness and 
Cognition, 20(4), 
1163-1174. https://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.concog.2011.03.001
Durrant, S. J., Taylor, C., Cairney, S., & Lewis, P. A. (2011). 
Sleep-dependent 
consolidation 
of statistical 
learning. 
Neuropsychologia, 
49(5), 
1322-1331. 
https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.02.015
Ego-Stengel, V., & Wilson, M. A. (2010). Disruption of ripple- 
associated hippocampal activity during rest impairs spatial 
learning in the rat. Hippocampus, 20(1), 1-10. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/hipo.20707
Ellenbogen, J. M., Hu, P. T., Payne, J. D., Titone, D., & Walker, 
M. P. (2007). Human relational memory requires time 
and sleep. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
104(18),7723.
Ellenbogen, J. M., Hulbert, J. C., Stickgold, R., Dinges, D. F., & 
Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2006). Interfering with theories of 
sleep and memory: Sleep, declarative memory, and associa­
tive interference. Current Biology, 16(13), 1290-1294.
Eschenko, O., Ramadan, W., Molle, M., Born, J., & Sara, S. J. 
(2008). Sustained increase in hippocampal sharp-wave rip­
ple activity during slow-wave sleep after learning. Learning 
& Memory, 15(4), 222-228. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
lm.726008
Fischer, S., & Born, J. (2009). Anticipated reward enhances 
offline learning during sleep. Journal of Experimental
E R I N  J. W A M S L E Y
465

Psychology: Learning, Memory.; and Cognition, 35(6), 1586— 
1593. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017256 
Fiss, H., Kremer, E., & Litchman, J. (1977). The mnemonic 
function of dreaming. Sleep Research, 6, 122.
Fosse, M. J., Fosse, R., Hobson, J. A., & Stickgold, R. J. (2003). 
Dreaming and episodic memory: A functional dissociation? 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25(1), 1-9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1162/089892903321107774 
Foster, D. J., & Wilson, M. A. (2006). Reverse replay of behav­
ioural sequences in hippocampal place cells during the 
awake state. Nature, 440(7084), 680-683. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nature04587
Foulkes, D., & Rechtschaffen, A. (1964). Presleep determinants 
of dream content: Effect of two films. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 19, 983-1005.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412 
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. 
R., & Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta­
analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of mind­
wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. 
Neuroimage, 
111, 
611-621. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.neuroimage.2015.02.039
Frankland, P. W., & Bontempi, B. (2005). The organization of 
recent and remote memories. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
6(2), 119-130. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrnl607 
Freud, 
S. 
(1913). 
The 
interpretation 
of 
dreams.
New York: Macmillan.
Gackenbach, J., Rosie, M., Bown, J., & Sample, T. (2011). 
Dream incorporation of video-game play as a function of 
interactivity and fidelity. Dreaming, 21(1), 32—50. https:// 
doi.org/10.1037/a0022868
Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., Buzsaki, G., & 
Zugaro, M. B. (2009). Selective suppression of hippocampal 
ripples impairs spatial memory. Nature Neuroscience, 22(10), 
1222-1223. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2384 
Gupta, A. S., van der Meer, M. A. A., Touretzky, D. S., & 
Redish, A. D. (2010). Hippocampal replay is not a simple 
function of experience. Neuron, 65(5), 695-705. https://doi. 
org /10.1016/j.neuron.2010.01.034 
Hall, C. S. (1953). A cognitive theory of dreams. The Journal 
of General Psychology, 49(2), 273-282. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/00221309.1953.9710091 
Hartmann, E. (2000). We do not dream of the 3 R’s: Implications 
for the nature of dreaming mentation. Dreaming, 10(2), 
103-110.
Hasselmo, M. E. (1999). Neuromodulation: Acetylcholine and 
memory consolidation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(9), 
351-359.
Hasselmo, M. E., & McGaughy, J. (2004). High acetylcholine 
levels set circuit dynamics for attention and encoding and 
low acetylcholine levels set dynamics for consolidation. 
Progress in Brain Research, 145, 207—231. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0079-6123 (03)45015-2 
Hobson, J. A., & McCarley, R. W. (1977). The brain as a dream 
state generator: An activation-synthesis hypothesis of the 
dream process. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 134(12), 
1335-1348.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000). 
Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience
of conscious states. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(6), 
793-842.
Horikawa, T., Tamaki, M., Miyawaki, Y., & Kamitani, Y.
(2013). Neural decoding of visual imagery during sleep. 
Science, 349(6132), 639-642. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science. 1234330
Ji, D., & Wilson, M. A. (2006). Coordinated memory replay 
in the visual cortex and hippocampus during sleep. Nature 
Neuroscience, 
10(1), 
100-107. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nnl825
Karlsson, M. P., & Frank, L. M. (2009). Awake replay of remote 
experiences in the hippocampus. Nature Neuroscience, 12(7), 
913-918. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2344
Kirov, R., Weiss, C., Siebner, H. R., Born, J., & Marshall, L. 
(2009). Slow oscillation electrical brain stimulation dur­
ing waking promotes EEG theta activity and memory 
encoding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
106(36), 15460.
Kudrimoti, H. S., Barnes, C. A., & McNaughton, B. L. (1999). 
Reactivation of hippocampal cell assemblies: Effects of 
behavioral state, experience, and EEG dynamics. The 
Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience, 79(10), 4090—4101.
Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., & McClelland, J. L. (2016). 
What learning systems do intelligent agents need? 
Complementary learning systems theory updated. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 20(7), 512-534. https://doi.org/ 
10.10 l6/j.tics.2016.05.004
Kusse, C., Shaffii-Le Bourdiec, A., Schrouff, J., Matarazzo, L., 
& Maquet, P. (2011). Experience-dependent induction 
of hypnagogic images during daytime naps: A combined 
behavioural and EEG study. Journal of Sleep Research, 27(1), 
10-20. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1365-2869.2011.00939.x
Lau, H., Tucker, M. A., & Fishbein, W. (2010). Daytime nap­
ping: Effects on human direct associative and relational 
memory. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 93(4), 554— 
560. https://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.nlm.2010.02.003
Lee, A. K., & Wilson, M. A. (2002). Memory of sequential expe­
rience in the hippocampus during slow wave sleep. Neuron, 
36(6), 1183-1194.
Malinowski, J. E., & Horton, C. L. (2014). Memory sources of 
dreams: The incorporation of autobiographical rather than 
episodic experiences. Journal of Sleep Research, 23(4), 441— 
447. https://doi.org/10T 111/jsr. 12134
Maquet, P, Laureys, S., Peigneux, P, Fuchs, S., Petiau, C., 
Phillips, C., . . . Maquet, P (2000). Experience-dependent 
changes in cerebral activation during human REM sleep. 
Nature Neuroscience, 3(8), 831-836.
Maquet, P (2000). Functional neuroimaging of normal human 
sleep by positron emission tomography. Journal of Sleep 
Research, 9(3), 207-232.
Marrosu, F., Portas, C., Mascia, M. S., Casu, M. A., Fa, M., 
Giagheddu, M., . .. Gessa, G. L. (1995). Microdialysis mea­
surement of cortical and hippocampal acetylcholine release 
during sleep-wake cycle in freely moving cats. Brain Research, 
671(2), 329-332.
McClelland, J. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are 
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and 
neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connec- 
tionist models of learning and memory. Psychological Review, 
102(3), 419-457.
Mednick, S. C., Nakayama, K., & Stickgold, R. (2003). Sleep- 
dependent learning: A nap is as good as a night. Nature
4  66
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

Neuroscience, 
6(7), 
697-698. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/
nnl078
Nguyen, N. D., Tucker, M. A., Stickgold, R., & Wamsley, E. J. 
(2013). Overnight sleep enhances hippocampus-dependent 
aspects of spatial memory. Sleep, 36(7), 1051-1057. https:// 
doi.org/10.5665/sleep.2808
Nielsen, T. A. (2000). A review of mentation in REM and 
NREM sleep: “Covert” REM sleep as a possible reconcilia­
tion of two opposing models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
23(6), 851-866.
Nielsen, T. A., Kuiken, D., Alain, G., Stenstrom, R, & Powell, R. 
A. (2004). Immediate and delayed incorporations of events 
into dreams: Further replication and implications for dream 
function. Journal of Sleep Research, 13(4), 327-336. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111 /j. 1365-2869.2004.00421 .x
Nishida, M., & Walker, M. P. (2007). Daytime naps, motor 
memory consolidation and regionally specific sleep spindles. 
PLoS One, 2(4), e34l.
Nofzinger, E. A., Buysse, D. J., Miewald, J. M., Meltzer, C. C., 
Price, J. C., Sembrat, R. C .,... Moore, R. Y. (2002). Human 
regional cerebral glucose metabolism during non-rapid eye 
movement sleep in relation to waking. Brain: A Journal of 
Neurology, 125(Pt 5), 1105-1115.
O’Neill, J., Pleydell-Bouverie, B., Dupret, D., & Csicsvari, J. 
(2010). Play it again: Reactivation of waking experience and 
memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 33(5), 220—229. https:// 
doi.org/10.10l6/j.tins.2010.01.006
Payne, J. D., Stickgold, R., Swanberg, K., & Kensinger, E. A. 
(2008). Sleep preferentially enhances memory for emotional 
components of scenes. Psychological Science, 19(8), 781.
Payne, J. D., Tucker, M. A., Ellenbogen, J. M., Wamsley, E. 
J., Walker, M. P, Schacter, D. L., & Stickgold, R. (2012). 
Memory for semantically related and unrelated declara­
tive information: The benefit of sleep, the cost of wake. 
PLoS One, 7(3), e33079. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0033079
Peigneux, P., Laureys, S., Fuchs, S., Collette, F., Perrin, F., 
Reggers, J., . . . Maquet, P. (2004). Are spatial memories 
strengthened in the human hippocampus during slow wave 
sleep? Neuron, 44(5), 535-545. https://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.neuron.2004.10.007
Peigneux, P., Laureys, S., Fuchs, S., Destrebecqz, A., Collette, F., 
Delbeuck, X.,... Maquet, P. (2003). Learned material content 
and acquisition level modulate cerebral reactivation during 
posttraining rapid-eye-movements sleep. Neuroimage, 20( 1), 
125-134. https://doi.org/10.10l6/S1053-8119(03)00278-7
Plihal, W., & Born, J. (1997). Effects of early and late noctur­
nal sleep on declarative and procedural memory. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(4), 534—547.
Schacter, D. L., & Addis, D. R. (2007). The cognitive neuro­
science of constructive memory: Remembering the past and 
imagining the future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1481), 773.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past to imagine the future: The prospec­
tive brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(9), 657—661.
Schacter, D. L., Guerin, S. A., & St. Jacques, P. L. (2011). 
Memory distortion: An adaptive perspective. Trends in 
Cognitive 
Sciences, 
75(10), 
467-474. 
https://doi.org/
10.10l6/j.tics.2011.08.004
Schredl, M., & Erlacher, D. (2010). Is sleep-dependent memory 
consolidation of a visuo-motor task related to dream con­
tent? International Journal of Dream Research, 3(1), 74—79.
Schredl, M., & Hofmann, F. (2003). Continuity between 
waking activities and dream activities. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 
12(2), 
298-308. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/
S1053-8100(02)00072-7
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518. https://doi. 
org /10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331
Solomonova, E., Stenstrom, P., Paquette, T., & Nielsen, T. 
(2015). Different temporal patterns of memory incorpora­
tions into dreams for laboratory and virtual reality experi­
ences: Relation to dreamed locus of control. International 
Journal of Dream Research, 5(1), 10—26.
Stickgold, R., James, L., & Hobson, J. A. (2000). Visual dis­
crimination learning requires sleep after training. Nature 
Neuroscience, 3(12), 1237-1238. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
81756
Stickgold, R., Malia, A., Maguire, D., Roddenberry, D., & 
O’Connor, M. (2000). Replaying the game: Hypnagogic 
images in normals and amnesics. Science (New York, N.Y.), 
290(5490), 350-353.
Tucker, M. A., Hirota, Y., Wamsley, E. J., Lau, H., Chaklader, 
A., & Fishbein, W. (2006). A daytime nap containing solely 
non-REM sleep enhances declarative but not procedural 
memory. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 86(2),
241-247.
Valli, K., & Revonsuo, A. (2009). The threat simulation theory 
in light of recent empirical evidence: A review. The American 
Journal of Psychology, 122(\), 17-38.
van Dongen, E. V., Thielen, J.-W., Takashima, A., Barth, M., & 
Fernandez, G. (2012). Sleep supports selective retention of 
associative memories based on relevance for future utiliza­
tion. PloS One, 7(8), e43426. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour- 
nal.pone.0043426
van Rijn, E., Eichenlaub, J.-B., Lewis, P. A., Walker, M. P., 
Gaskell, M. G., Malinowski, J. E., & Blagrove, M. (2015). 
The dream-lag effect: Selective processing of personally signif­
icant events during rapid eye movement sleep, but not dur­
ing slow wave sleep. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 
122, 98-109. https://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.nlm.2015.01.009
Vyazovskiy, V. V., Olcese, U., Hanlon, E. C., Nir, Y., Cirelli, 
C., & Tononi, G. (2011). Local sleep in awake rats. Nature, 
472(7544), 443-447. https://doi.org/10.1038/naturel0009
Walker, M. P., Brakefield, T., Morgan, A., Hobson, J. A., 
& Stickgold, R. (2002). Practice with sleep makes per­
fect: Sleep-dependent motor skill learning. Neuron, 35(1), 
205-211.
Wamsley, E. J. (2013). Dreaming, waking conscious experi­
ence, and the resting brain: Report of subjective experi­
ence as a tool in the cognitive neurosciences. Frontiers in 
Consciousness Research, 4, 637. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2013.00637
Wamsley, E. J. (2014). Dreaming and offline memory consoli­
dation. Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports, 14(5). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s 11910-013-0433-5
Wamsley, E. J., Hamilton, K., Graveline, Y. M., Manceor, S., & 
Parr, E. (2016). Test expectation enhances memory consoli­
dation across both sleep and wake. SLEEP, 36(Suppl), A78.
Wamsley, E. J., Hirota, Y., Tucker, M. A., Smith, M. R., & 
Antrobus, J. S. (2007). Circadian and ultradian influ­
ences on dreaming: A dual rhythm model. Brain Research 
Bulletin, 
71(4), 
347-354. 
https://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.brainresbull.2006.09.021
E R I N  J. W A M S L E Y
467

Wamsley, E. J., Nguyen, N., Tucker, M. A., Olsen, A., & 
Stickgold, R. (2012). EEG correlates of overnight memory 
consolidation in a virtual navigation task. Abstract Presented 
at the Associated Professional Sleep Societies Meeting.
Wamsley, E. J., Perry, K., Djonlagic, I., Reaven, L. B., & 
Stickgold, R. (2010). Cognitive replay of visuomotor learn­
ing at sleep onset: temporal dynamics and relationship to 
task performance. Sleep, 33( 1), 59-68.
Wamsley, E. J., & Stickgold, R. (2009). Incorporation 
of waking events into dreams. In M. Walker & R. 
Stickgold (Eds.), The Neuroscience of Sleep (pp. 330-336). 
London: Academic Press.
Wamsley, E. J., & Stickgold, R. (2010). Dreaming and offline 
memory processing. Current Biology: CB, 20(23), R1010— 
1013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2010.10.045
Wamsley, E. J., Tucker, M. A., Payne, J. D., Benavides, J. A., & 
Stickgold, R. (2010). Dreaming of a learning task is associ­
ated with enhanced sleep-dependent memory consolidation.
Current Biology: CB, 200), 850-855. https://doi.org/ 
10.10 l6/j.cub.2010.03.027
Wamsley, E. J., Tucker, M. A., Payne, J. D., & Stickgold, 
R. (2010). A brief nap is beneficial for human route­
learning: The role of navigation experience and EEG spectral 
power. Learning & Memory, 17(7), 332.
Warren, H. C. (1897). Dreams. The American Naturalist, 
31(364), 354-357.
Wilhelm, I., Diekelmann, S., Molzow, I., Ayoub, A., Molle, M., & 
Born, J. (2011). Sleep selectively enhances memory expected 
to be of future relevance. The Journal of Neuroscience: The 
Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 31(5), 1563— 
1569. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3575-10.2011
Wilson, M. A., & McNaughton, B. L. (1994). Reactivation 
of hippocampal ensemble memories during sleep. Science 
(New York, N.Y.), 265(5172), 676-679.
Witkin, H. A., & Lewis, H. B. (1967). Presleep experiences and 
dreams. New York: Random House.
468
D R E A M I N G  A N D  W A K I N G  T H O U G H T  AS A R E F L E C T I O N  OF M E M O R Y  C O N S O L I D A T I O N

C H A P T E R
33
Involuntary Autobiographical Memories: 
Spontaneous Recollections of the Past
John H. Mace
Abstract
Spontaneous recollections of the past are a common and salient part of everyday mental life. However, 
memory researchers have only recently (i.e. within the past twenty years) turned their attention to the 
study of this memory phenomenon. While research in this area has answered a number of pressing 
questions about the nature of involuntary memories, answers to some questions remain elusive (e.g. 
determining their functional nature). This chapter reviews the main body of this work. In addition, the 
chapter looks to the future of involuntary memory research, highlighting its promise in a number of 
regards (e.g. its potential role in informing an understanding of autobiographical memory retrieval).
Key W ords: spontaneous memories, spontaneous recollections, involuntary memories, involuntary 
remembering, involuntary autobiographical memories
Ebbinghaus (1885/1964) appears to be the first 
memory researcher to formally define involuntary 
memories:
Often, even after years, mental states once present in 
consciousness return to it with apparent spontaneity 
and without any act of the will; that is, they are 
reproduced involuntarily. Here, also, in the majority 
of cases we at once recognize the returned mental 
state as one that has already been experienced; that is, 
we remember it. (p. 2)
In the modern era, we define involuntary memo­
ries in much the same way. For example, involun­
tary memories have been described in the modern 
literature as instances in which memories of past 
events come to mind spontaneously, unintention­
ally, automatically, without effort, and so forth 
(e.g., Ball & Little, 2006; Berntsen, 1996, 2009; 
Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000; Kvavilashvili 
& Mandler, 2004; Mace, 2004; Mace, 2007b, 
2010; 
Richardson-Klavehn, 
Gardiner & Java, 
1996; Schacter, 1987). As salient today as they 
were in Ebbinghauss generation, this memory
phenomenon is quite common and well-known to 
individuals, as spontaneous memories of the past 
appear to intrude into conversation and thought, 
and to occur while driving, walking, and running; 
in short, we experience them in all aspects of our 
waking mental life. Despite their well-known sta­
tus, it was not until late in the twentieth century 
that the first empirical study of involuntary memo­
ries appeared in the literature (Berntsen, 1996), 
and not until this century that one could describe 
involuntary memory research as a collective effort 
that makes up an important part of autobiographi­
cal memory research (e.g., Ball & Little, 2006; 
Barzykowski & Staugaard, 2015; Berntsen & Hall, 
2004; Kvavilashvili & Mandler, 2004; Mace, 2004; 
Schlagman, Schulz, & Kvavilashvili, 2006).
This chapter reviews the major findings and ques­
tions posed by involuntary memory research. While 
the study of involuntary memories actually began 
with word-list memory tasks (i.e., studies examin­
ing the influence of spontaneous word recollec­
tion on implicit memory measures, e.g., Bowers & 
Schacter, 1990), most of the research to date has
469

focused on spontaneous recollection in everyday life 
(e.g., Berntsen, 1996), that is, spontaneous memo­
ries of ones past. The focus in this chapter is on this 
latter body of work.
Terminology, Classification, and Methods 
of Study
As with most other areas in cognitive psychol­
ogy, there is no shortage of labels for spontaneous 
recollections of the past. Although traditionally, and 
perhaps typically, called involuntary memory, this 
memorial phenomenon is variously called involun­
tary explicit memory (e.g., Bowers & Schacter, 1990; 
Schacter, 1987), involuntary conscious memory (e.g., 
Mace, 2005a; Richardson-Klavehn, Gardiner, & 
Java, 1994), involuntary autobiographical memory 
(e.g., Ball & Little, 2006; Berntsen, 1996, 2009; 
Kvavilashvili & Mandler, 2004; Mace, 2004,2007b, 
2007c, 2010a), and involuntary aware memory (e.g., 
Kinoshita, 2001; Mace, 2003a, 2003b). While the 
terms involuntary explicit memory\ involuntary con­
scious memory, and involuntary aware memory have 
been generally used for the word-list manifestation 
of this phenomenon (i.e., spontaneous word recol­
lection, e.g., Bowers & Schacter, 1990; Kinoshita, 
2001; Mace, 2003a, 2003b; Schacter, 1987), the 
terms involuntary memory and involuntary auto­
biographical memory have been used to denote 
spontaneous recollections of ones past in every­
day life (e.g., Ball & Little, 2006; Berntsen, 1996; 
Kvavilashvili & Mandler, 2004; Mace, 2004).
In further delineation of involuntary memories, 
I have argued that they can be divided into three 
separate phenomenological categories: direct invol­
untary memories, 
chained involuntary memories, 
and traum atic involuntary memories (Mace, 2007a, 
2010a, 2010b).
Direct involuntary memories refer to everyday 
situations in which cues in ones internal or exter­
nal environment (e.g., thoughts or percepts) lead 
to memories of the past (e.g., Ball & little, 2006; 
Berntsen, 1996, 1998; Mace, 2004). This type of 
involuntary remembering is probably the most com­
mon and frequently experienced form of involun­
tary remembering. In contrast, chained involuntary 
memories appear to be less common. Here, invol­
untary memories appear to be activated by other 
involuntary memories, as well as voluntary memo­
ries (e.g., Mace, 2005b, 2006; Mace, Clevinger, & 
Martin, 2010). For example, when one experiences 
an involuntary memory in everyday life, occasion­
ally (some 15% of the time) the involuntary mem­
ory immediately leads to the production of another
involuntary memory, which may in turn produce 
another, and so forth until the process appears to 
terminate, at least consciously (e.g., Mace, 2005b, 
2007a; Mace et al., 2010). These chained involun­
tary memories also occur as a result of voluntary 
remembering (i.e., a deliberately retrieved memory 
causes one or more involuntary memories, e.g., 
Mace, 2006). The third category of involuntary 
remembering involves the production of traumatic 
memories. Here, individuals experience traumatic 
involuntary memories concerning some past trau­
matic experience (e.g., Berntsen, 2001). These 
memories occur repetitively, and this form of spon­
taneous remembering is a defining characteristic of 
post-traumatic stress disorder.
Concerning methodology, the most common 
approach used to study involuntary memories is the 
naturalistic diary method. This approach requires 
subjects to keep a diary of the involuntary memo­
ries that they experience in everyday life. While 
the diary method used by involuntary memory 
researchers has been fairly uniform, it has also varied 
in a number of ways. For example, some researchers 
ask their subjects to record all of their involuntary 
memories for a one- or two-week period (e.g., Mace, 
2004; Mace, 2005b; Mace, et al., 2010; Schlagman, 
Schulz, & Kvavilashvili, 2006), while others ask 
them to record only two per day until they reach a 
total of 50 (e.g., Berntsen, 1996; Berntsen & Hall,
2004). While the diary method has provided quite a 
lot of useful information about involuntary memo­
ries, it also has some serious limitations. Perhaps its 
biggest drawback concerns its inability to control 
and manipulate involuntary memories. However, 
involuntary memory researchers have found a num­
ber of ways around this problem.
For example, Mace (2005b) combined the diary 
method with a laboratory manipulation (i.e., tem­
poral priming), thereby introducing elements of 
laboratory control into a naturalistic diary design. 
Mace (2006) measured involuntary memory chains 
with a standard autobiographical memory task in 
the laboratory, comparing the results from this task 
with the results from a more conventional labora­
tory task, event-cuing (Brown & Schopflocher,
1998). Similarly, Ball (2007) used a free-association 
task to elicit involuntary memories in the laboratory 
while simultaneously manipulating attention on 
the task. In perhaps the most ingenious method to 
date, Schlagman and Kvavilashvili (2008) devised a 
unique laboratory task with the express purpose of 
eliciting and manipulating involuntary memories. 
They had subjects perform a menial vigilance task
470
I N V O L U N T A R Y  A U T O B I O G R A P H I C A L  M E M O R I E S

while they were simultaneously exposed to word 
cues. The task required subjects to view slides of hor­
izontal or vertical lines with individual word phrases 
embedded in them (e.g., “relaxing on the beach”). 
They were to indicate when the slides had vertical 
lines, and also to report any spontaneous thoughts 
(or memories) that might have been triggered by the 
textual content of the slides. The results showed that 
subjects had reported that word cues had triggered 
involuntary memories, and when these memories 
were compared to similarly elicited voluntary mem­
ories, they dissociated from one another on a num­
ber of independent measures, thereby verifying the 
reliability of the task to elicit involuntary memories.
Involuntary Memories in Everyday Life
Prior to the advent of involuntary memory 
research, there remained a number of open ques­
tions and misconceptions about involuntary memo­
ries. For example, are involuntary memories strictly 
random memories in that they have no relationship 
with previous or ongoing thought? Are they primar­
ily elicited by simple sensory experiences, such as 
taste or smell? A lot of the early research was able to 
answer many questions like these, while the answers 
to some other questions remain elusive (e.g., the 
question of functionality). I highlight the main 
points in the following.
Cuing Characteristics
Involuntary memory researchers have found 
that involuntary memories are not random in the 
strictest sense of the word (i.e., occurring without 
any prior input), but are instead cued by a vari­
ety of different experiences (e.g., thoughts; visual 
and auditory percepts, and other sensory experi­
ences; conversation; bodily states, such as pain; 
activities; and other involuntary memories; see 
Berntsen, 1996; Berntsen & Hall, 2004; Mace, 
2004, 2005b, 2007a; Mace, Bernas, & Clevinger, 
2015; Schlagman, Kvavilashvili, & Schulz, 2007). 
Despite the type of cuing experience, most of the 
cues have been shown to relate to the original event 
in a central rather than a peripheral manner (see 
further details in Berntsen, 1996, 1998). Thus, 
these findings have shown that involuntary memo­
ries are not entirely random, and they are not solely 
elicited by basic sensory experiences, as common 
misconceptions had suggested. Indeed, it turned 
out that very few of them are actually triggered 
by tastes or smells (some 3% or less; see Ball & 
Little, 2006; Berntsen, 1996; Mace, 2005b; Mace 
et al., 2015).
While these early studies have answered some 
basic questions concerning the nature of involun­
tary memory cuing, there still remains a number of 
open questions in this area. For example, some 10% 
of all involuntary memories do not have identifiable 
cues (e.g., Berntsen, 1996; Mace, 2004). Whether 
these are actually un-cued involuntary memories 
(an interesting prospect in its own right) or fail­
ures to recognize cues remains a mystery (Mace 
et al., 2015).
Frequency of Occurrence and Mental State
Diary studies of everyday involuntary memories 
have estimated that individuals experience some 3-5 
involuntary memories per day (e.g., Berntsen, 1996; 
Mace, 2004, 2005b; Mace et al., 2015). Informal 
reports from involuntary memory researchers sug­
gest that there is a small subset of individuals who 
experience many more than 3-5 per day, perhaps 
in the range of 50-100. Research attempting to 
explain definitively the cause of this vast individ­
ual difference has yet to be undertaken. However, 
there is one report that suggests that these individu­
als may have disorders of attention (Verwoerd & 
Wessel, 2007), and thus there is the suggestion that 
these individuals may experience a large number of 
involuntary memories because of their inability to 
focus attention or suppress irrelevant information.
Consistent with the possibility that attention 
may play a role in the production of involuntary 
memories, early diary studies have shown that 
involuntary memories were more likely to occur 
in relaxed or non-focused states of attention, 
rather than focused states (e.g., Berntsen, 1998; 
Kvavilashvili & Mandler, 2004). For example, 
Berntsen (1998) reported that some two-thirds of 
all involuntary memories had occurred when sub­
jects reported being in a non-focused or diffuse state 
of attention. Thus, involuntary memories are more 
likely to occur when one is daydreaming, or other­
wise in a non-focused state of attention, as opposed 
to when one is engaged in focused attention. This 
aspect of involuntary memory research is interest­
ing because it suggests that involuntary memories 
might be failures of cognitive control, at least part 
of the time (Kamiya, 2014).
How Random Are Involuntary Memories?
Are involuntary memories simply random men­
tal events, or are they more organized mental events 
in that they are influenced by prior cognitive activi­
ties, such as brooding or reminiscing over the past, 
and so forth? Mace (2005b) tested the idea that
J O H N  H.  M A C E
47i

involuntary memories might by primed by every­
day cognitive activities like thinking or reminisc­
ing about the past. In the first study of this report, 
subjects participated in a two-week diary study that 
concluded with a questionnaire that asked them 
to report on what had been on their minds for 
the previous two weeks coinciding with the diary­
recording period. The results showed a correlation 
between the contents of the questionnaire and the 
contents of the diary, suggesting that the content of 
the involuntary memories had tracked (or had been 
primed by) subjects’ preoccupations. However, as 
one cannot be sure of the direction of causality with 
such data, studies two and three used the same diary 
recording procedure, but in these studies subjects 
additionally came into the laboratory at various 
intervals to engage in an autobiographical memory 
task that had them recalling memories from differ­
ent periods of their lives (e.g., from high school, 
from the past year, etc.). When the involuntary 
memories recorded in their diaries were compared 
to relevant control subjects, a significant proportion 
of them were related to the time period that they 
were asked to recall in the laboratory, suggesting 
that the recall sessions had primed their involuntary 
memories.
Thus, the results of the Mace (2005b) study sug­
gest that involuntary memories are primed by one’s 
daily cognitive activity. One way to interpret these 
results is to see involuntary memories as relevant, at 
least in the sense that they may track and coincide 
with one’s ongoing thoughts and preoccupations. 
Whether or not all involuntary memories can fit 
into this category remains an open question, and 
thus it is still possible that involuntary memories 
can be seen as somewhat random mental events, 
with unknown functionality to the individual. We 
will return to the concept of involuntary memory 
functions in a later section.
Chained Involuntary Memories
As discussed earlier, 
involuntary memories 
sometimes lead to the immediate production of 
one or more additional involuntary memories 
(e.g., Mace, 2005b, 2006; Mace et al., 2010; Mace, 
Clevinger, & Bernas, 2013). Such activations, or 
involuntary memory chains, also follow from vol­
untary memories (Mace, 2006). Apart from being 
a unique instance of involuntary remembering (i.e., 
memories causing other memories), these involun­
tary memories appear to be important for two main 
reasons. First, they occur during the act of voluntary 
remembering, and second, they appear to be telling
us something about the organizational nature of 
autobiographical memory.
Concerning voluntary recall, Mace 
(2006) 
reported that some 40% of voluntary retrievals on 
an autobiographical memory task had led to the 
production of one or more involuntary memories 
(see also Mace, 2009). Given this very high rate of 
involuntary remembering, it seems likely that invol­
untary memory recall is a routine part of the volun­
tary recall process. And, given that the involuntary 
memories emanating from the voluntary memories 
have been shown to be related in content, and fre­
quently from the same time period, it is plausible 
to imagine that this form of involuntary remem­
bering, involuntary memory chaining, is especially 
functional to voluntary recall (for more details, see 
Mace, 2007a).
Whether involuntary memory chains come from 
voluntary memories or involuntary memories, they 
have been consistently observed to be related to 
one another. For example, one might involuntarily 
remember seeing mummies in the British Museum, 
and this memory could in turn trigger a memory 
of seeing the Egyptian collection at the natural his­
tory museum in New York City (for more on the 
nature of the associations, see Mace et al., 2013; 
Mace, 2014). I have argued that these characteris­
tics of involuntary memory chains make it likely 
that they are spreading activations that surface into 
consciousness (Mace, 2007a, 2010b; Mace et al., 
2010; Mace et al., 2013). It is for this reason that 
I have further argued that the associations seen in 
involuntary memory chains are reflective of the 
underlying associative structure of autobiographi­
cal memory (see full details in Mace, 2010b, 2014; 
Mace et al., 2010; Mace et al., 2013). This is at least 
one aspect of involuntary memory research that has 
had implications beyond the study of involuntary 
memories per se.
Involuntary Memories Versus Voluntary 
Memories
In addition to examining involuntary memories 
in everyday life, involuntary memory researchers 
have also directly compared involuntary memories 
to voluntary memories. Most of this work involved 
comparing involuntary memories recorded in diaries 
to voluntary memories collected in the laboratory 
using standard or slightly modified autobiographi­
cal memory tasks (e.g., Berntsen, 1998; Berntsen & 
Hall, 2004; Mace, Atkinson, Moeckel, & Torres,
2011). The goal of most studies was straightfor­
ward: to document similarities and differences.
4 72
I N V O L U N T A R Y  A U T O B I O G R A P H I C A L  M E M O R I E S

Concerning differences between involuntary 
memories and voluntary memories, they have been 
few in number, and perhaps not always notewor­
thy or of significance. For example, involuntary 
memories have been shown to differ from voluntary 
memories in emotional and physiological impact 
(Berntsen & Hall, 2004). Involuntary memories 
are also more likely to be experienced from a first- 
person perspective (as opposed to a third-person 
perspective; Nigro & Neisser, 1983), as well as 
having higher feelings of reliving the original event 
(Mace et al., 2011). However, these differences have 
only pertained to remote memories (i.e., memo­
ries greater than 10 years old), and the emotional 
and physiological findings have not always been 
obtained (e.g., Mace et al., 2011).
The most consistent difference between invol­
untary and voluntary memories concerns the 
specificity of the events recalled (i.e., generating 
memories of specific past events, or episodic memo­
ries, as opposed to more general autobiographical 
memories, e.g., remembering that I took a trip to 
London in 2005 without recalling any specific epi­
sode or details). Involuntary memories are more 
likely to pertain to specific past events than volun­
tary memories, which tend to feature more general 
event memories (e.g., Berntsen, 1998; Mace et al., 
2010; Mace et al., 2011). However, this difference 
may not be of particular theoretical relevance, as it 
may simply be a measurement error of sorts; that 
is, it may not be fair to compare naturally occur­
ring involuntary memories to laboratory-generated 
voluntary memories on this measure, as the latter 
category uses somewhat artificial and arbitrary cues 
to elicit memories. Under these circumstances, one 
may not always be able to retrieve a specific mem­
ory for preselected and often vague retrieval cues 
(e.g., remember a time from your past involving 
the word steam). Indeed, we recently found that 
in cases where subjects had only produced a gen­
eral memory on an autobiographical memory task, 
they frequently were able to come up with a specific 
episode when they were prompted to keep trying 
(Mace, Clevinger, Delaney, Mendez, & Simpson,
2017). Whether specific versus general memory 
production differences are merely a function of task 
differences, or something more theoretically inter­
esting, remains a topic for future research.
Concerning similarities between involuntary 
and voluntary memories, there are many more 
of these than there are differences. For example, 
involuntary and voluntary memories are equally 
vivid, are both judged as veridical, each show the
classic reminiscence bump (Rubin, Wetzler, & 
Nebes, 1986), and so forth (e.g., Berntsen, 1998; 
Berntsen & Hall, 2004; Mace et al., 2011; see 
detailed reviews in Berntsen, 2009; Mace, 2010a). 
Thus, taken together, these findings argue that the 
main difference between involuntary and voluntary 
memories lies on the retrieval intention dimension. 
While the obvious difference between them is that 
one is intentional while the other is unintentional, 
their retrieval differences seem to be far more elabo­
rate and complex than this.
For example, involuntary memory retrieval 
might simply be explained in terms of priming 
and spreading activation (Berntsen, 2009; Mace, 
2010b; Mandler, 2007). In contrast, voluntary 
memory retrieval appears to be more complicated, 
as it may involve many more processes. Studies that 
have examined voluntary recall processes in auto­
biographical memory have found that subjects use 
more than one retrieval strategy to recall the past 
(Haque & Conway, 2001; Mace et al., 2016). 
Indeed, at least one study (Mace et al., 2016) has 
shown that subjects use a multitude of strategies 
(some four or five), each distinctly different from 
one another. In addition to this, one could argue 
that voluntary retrieval also utilizes different invol­
untary retrieval processes (i.e., using both direct 
retrieval and involuntary chaining; Conway & 
Pleydell-Pearce, 2000; Mace, 2007a, 2010a). Thus, 
in sharp contrast to involuntary retrieval, voluntary 
retrieval appears to involve quite a number of dif­
ferent retrieval processes, each potentially having a 
different underlying mechanism.
Involuntary Memories: A Question 
of Function
As spontaneous, seemingly random mental 
events, perhaps one of the more important questions 
concerning involuntary memories is their functional 
relevance. Do they serve the classic three functions 
that have been postulated for autobiographical 
memories (i.e., directive, self, and social functions; 
Baddeley, 1988; Bluck & Alea, 2002)?1 Or, in stark 
contrast, are they entirely non-functional, simply a 
vestige of primordial cognition? A handful of stud­
ies have sought answers to questions concerning the 
utility of involuntary remembering.
Mace and Atkinson (2009) examined this ques­
tion directly in a diary study that asked subjects to 
report how involuntary memories were useful to 
the situation in which they occurred. They report 
that approximately one-third of all involuntary 
memories recorded by diary participants were
J O H N  H.  M A C E
473

judged to be functional to ones immediate situ­
ation, suggesting that involuntary memories may 
typically be of little relevance in ones everyday 
life, as they typically do not provide any useful 
information or utility to one’s situation. Adding 
to these results, Rasmussen and Berntsen (2011) 
report that voluntary memories were more likely 
to be judged as fitting directive, self, or social 
functions than involuntary memories, while the 
latter were more likely to be associated with day­
dreaming, periods of boredom, and to occur dur­
ing non-focused attention (see also Rasmussen, 
Johannessen, & Berntsen, 2014; Rasmussen, 
Ramsgaard, & Berntsen, 2015). Thus, their results 
suggest that involuntary remembering is func­
tionally inferior to voluntary remembering, while 
they highlight the fact that involuntary memories 
most typically occur at times when they can have 
little or no task relevance (i.e., when one is day­
dreaming or otherwise in a non-focused state of 
attention).
While there are probably a number of ways 
in which the results of these studies can be inter­
preted, I put forth two possibilities, one, a negative 
or skeptical account, the other, not so negative and 
non-skeptical.
The skeptical account asserts the non-functional 
nature 
of involuntary 
memories. 
This 
view 
sees involuntary remembering as entirely non­
functional, a vestige of a primordial cognition 
that does little more than provide us with irrever­
ent and unneeded memories. This view would 
argue that reports of involuntary memory function 
(e.g., Mace & Atkinson, 2009) are either spuri­
ous, or coincidental at best, as the data supporting 
some function comes via means of questionnaires, 
rather than through experimental procedures. In 
support of this view, all one need do is look at the 
data, which show that involuntary memories occur 
during non-focused states of attention, and occur 
more frequently in individuals who have disorders 
of attention (i.e., problems focusing and inhibiting 
irrelevant information). Such data suggest that these 
mental events are normally (or should normally be) 
inhibited, and when they are not, they are simply 
another class of cognitive failures.
The more positive account of involuntary mem­
ory functions acknowledges some of this argument; 
that is, it accepts the fact that involuntary remem­
bering is perhaps an archaic mode of cognition, but 
not necessarily a non-functional one. Here, invol­
untary memories are seen as having limited utility, 
in that they are not always functional. Sometimes
they may be functional, and sometimes not, in 
which case they may simply be cognitive failures. 
Thus, in this view, involuntary remembering is seen 
as a somewhat imperfect functional mechanism, 
one that sometimes works haphazardly, and some­
times with purpose. This view would also caution 
against making functional contrasts with voluntary 
remembering, as involuntary remembering may 
often be cast in a negative light, as the former is a 
more recent, more perfect cognitive device. In gen­
eral support of this view, all one need do is examine 
diary entries that subjects mark as functional. While 
it is possible that some of these entries may be spuri­
ous, some also make a compelling case, as there are 
some instances where involuntary memories were 
undoubtedly functional in a classic manner (i.e., 
showed clear directive functions). For example, one 
participant indicated that seeing a set of steps had 
triggered a memory of having tripped on them a 
couple of days ago. Another participant noted that 
when approaching an intersection while bicycling, 
the sight of that intersection had triggered a mem­
ory of narrowly missing a car that pulled out in 
front of him while bicycling in that spot a couple 
of weeks earlier.
Conclusion: The Promise of Involuntary 
Memory Research
Shrouded in mystery for over a century, research 
on involuntary memories has provided answers to 
quite a number of basic questions. In this chapter 
I have highlighted the main areas of this research. 
All of these areas have informed the study of invol­
untary memory, and many of them have the poten­
tial to contribute to our understanding of other 
areas of memory and cognition. I conclude this 
chapter by highlighting three areas of study that 
hold such promise.
The first concerns the question of involuntary 
memory functions. One could argue that this is 
perhaps the most important question to involun­
tary memory research and to the study of cognition. 
Should the answer turn out to be one of the two pos­
sibilities that I laid out in the preceding, each would 
have profound implications. For example, if the 
non-functional argument were to prove true, this 
clearly would answer an important question about 
involuntary remembering per se, and it would also 
potentially give us insight into other forms of spon­
taneous cognition, informing the science of cogni­
tion generally. One could see similar implications 
for the alternative, imperfect functional mechanism 
account.
474
I N V O L U N T A R Y  A U T O B I O G R A P H I C A L  M E M O R I E S

The second area of promise concerns the retrieval 
characteristics of involuntary memories. Here, one 
could argue that the study of involuntary memory 
activations has and should continue to give us 
insights into involuntary memory retrieval, but per­
haps more important, involuntary memory research 
has forced direct comparisons between involuntary 
and voluntary recall. As noted earlier, this research 
has highlighted the complexities of involuntary and 
voluntary retrieval by showing that they have many 
and varied forms. This type of research is just the 
beginning of what should eventually lead to a full, 
or at least better, understanding of autobiographical 
memory retrieval, which should have ramifications 
for the understanding of retrieval processes in gen­
eral, as well as other areas of cognition.
Finally, the third area of promise concerns the 
study of autobiographical memory organization. 
As noted earlier, the study of involuntary memory 
chains has provided some insights into the area of 
autobiographical memory organization, specifi­
cally the organizational relationships found among 
episodic memories. Elsewhere (Mace et al., 2010; 
Mace et al., 2013; Mace, 2014), I have argued 
that as vehicles of spreading activations within the 
autobiographical memory system, the associations 
found in involuntary memory chains are giving 
us rare insights into the basic associative nature of 
episodic memories, insights that pure laboratory 
approaches did not appear to provide. I believe that 
this type of involuntary memory research is a prime 
example of how involuntary memory research can 
have broader relevance.
Note
1. In the directive function, autobiographical memories are 
seen as guides to current and future behavior. In the social 
function, the sharing of autobiographical memories among 
individuals is viewed as important to social bonding. In the 
self-function, autobiographical memories are seen as the 
database on which the notion of the self is formed (for more 
details, see Baddeley, 1988; Bluck & Alea, 2002).
References
Baddeley, A. (1988). But what the hell is it for? In M. M. 
Gruneberg, P. E. Morris, & R. N. Sykes (Eds.), Practical 
aspects of memory: Current research and issues (1st ed., pp. 3— 
18). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Ball, C. T., & Little, J. C. (2006). A comparison of involun­
tary autobiographical memory retrievals. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 20, 1167-1179.
Barzykowski, K., & Staugaard, S. R. (2016). Does retrieval 
intentionality really matter? Similarities and differences 
between involuntary memories and directly and generatively 
retrieved voluntary memories. British Journal of Psychology, 
107, 519-536.
Berntsen, D. (1996). Involuntary autobiographical memory. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 10, 435-454.
Berntsen, D. (1998). Voluntary and involuntary access to auto­
biographical memory. Memory, 6, 113—141.
Berntsen, D. (2001). Involuntary memories of emotional 
events: Do memories of traumas and extremely happy events 
differ? Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15, 135-158.
Berntsen, D. (2009). Involuntary autobiographical memories: An 
introduction to the unbidden past. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Berntsen, D., & Hall, N. M. (2004). The episodic nature 
of involuntary autobiographical memories. Memory & 
Cognition, 32, 789-803.
Bluck, S., & Alea, N. (2002). Exploring the functions of auto­
biographical memory: Why do I remember the autumn? 
In J. D. Webster, & B. K. Haight (Eds.). Critical advances 
in reminiscence: From theory to application (pp. 61—75). 
New York: Springer.
Bowers, J. S., & Schacter, D. L. (1990). Implicit memory and 
test awareness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 404—416.
Brown, N. R., & Schopflocher, D. (1998). Event clusters: An 
organization of personal events in autobiographical memory. 
Psychological Science, 9, 470-489.
Conway, M. A., & Pleydell-Pearce, C. W. (2000). The construc­
tion of autobiographical memories in the self-memory sys­
tem. Psychological Review, 107, 261-288.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885/1964). Memory: A contribution to experi­
mental psychology (H. A. Ruger and C. E. Bussenius, Trans.). 
New York: Dover.
Haque, H., & Conway, M.A. (2001). Sampling the process of 
autobiographical memory construction. European Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 529—547.
Kamiya, S. (2014). Relationship between frequency of invol­
untary autobiographical memories and cognitive failures. 
Memory, 22, 839-851.
Kinoshita, S. (2001). The role of involuntary aware memory in 
the implicit stem and fragment completion tasks: A selective 
review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 58—69.
Kvavilashvili, L., & Mandler, G. (2004). Out of one’s mind: A 
study of involuntary semantic 
memories. 
Cognitive 
Psychology, 48, 47-94.
Mace, J. H. (2003a). Involuntary aware memory enhances prim­
ing on a conceptual implicit memory task. American Journal 
of Psychology, 116, 281-290.
Mace, J. H. (2003b). Study-test awareness can enhance prim­
ing on an implicit memory task: Evidence from a word 
completion task. American Journal of Psychology, 116, 
257-279.
Mace, J. H. (2004). Involuntary autobiographical memories are 
highly dependent on abstract cuing: The Proustian view is 
incorrect. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18, 893-899.
Mace, J. H. (2005a). Experimentally manipulating the effects of 
involuntary conscious memory on a priming task. American 
Journal of Psychology, 118, 159-182.
Mace, J. H. (2005b). Priming involuntary autobiographical 
memories. Memory, 13, 874—884.
Mace, J. H. (2006). Episodic remembering creates access to 
involuntary conscious memory: Demonstrating involuntary 
recall on a voluntary recall task. Memory, 14, 917—924.
Mace, J. H. (2007a). Does involuntary remembering occur dur­
ing voluntary remembering? In J. H. Mace (Ed.), Involuntary 
memory (pp. 50—67). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
J O H N  H.  M A C E
475

Mace, J. H. (Ed.) (2007b). Involuntary memory. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Mace, J. H. (2007c). Involuntary memory: Concept and the­
ory. In J. H. Mace (Ed.), Involuntary memory (pp. 1—19). 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Mace, J. H. (2009). Involuntary conscious memory facilitates 
cued recall performance: Further evidence that chain­
ing occurs during voluntary recall. American Journal of 
Psychology, 122, 371-381.
Mace, J. H. (2010a). Involuntary remembering and voluntary 
remembering: How different are they? In J. H. Mace (Ed.), 
The act of remembering: Toward an understanding of how we 
recall the past (pp. 43-55). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Mace, J. H. (2010b). Understanding autobiographical remem­
bering from a spreading activation perspective. In J. H. Mace 
(Ed.), The act of remembering: Toward an understanding of how 
we recall the past (pp. 183-201). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Mace, J. H. (2014). Involuntary autobiographical memory 
chains: Implications for autobiographical memory organiza­
tion. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 5, article 183.
Mace, J. H., & Atkinson, E. (2009). Can we determine the 
functions of everyday involuntary autobiographical memo­
ries? In M. Kelly (Ed.), Applied memory (pp. 199-212). 
New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Mace, J. H., Atkinson, E., Moeckel, C. H., & Torres, V. (2011). 
Accuracy and perspective in involuntary autobiographical 
memory. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25, 20—28.
Mace, J. H., Bernas, R. S., & Clevinger, A. M. (2015). Individual 
differences in recognizing involuntary autobiographical 
memories: Impact on the reporting of abstract cues. Memory, 
23, 445-452.
Mace, J. H., Clevinger, A. M., & Bernas, R. S. (2013). Involuntary 
memory chains: What do they tell us about autobiographical 
memory organization? Memory, 21, 324—335.
Mace, J. H., Clevinger, A. M., Delaney, D. M., Mendez, A. S., & 
Simpson, S. H. (2017). Voluntary remembering: Elucidating 
the mental strategies used to recall the past. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 31, 156-163.
Mace, J. H., Clevinger, A. M., & Martin, C. (2010). Involuntary 
memory chaining versus event cuing: Which is a better indi­
cator of autobiographical memory organization? Memory, 18, 
845-854.
Mandler, G. (2007). Involuntary memories: Variations on the 
unexpected. In J. H. Mace (Ed.), Involuntary memory (pp. 
208-223). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Nigro, G., & Neisser, U. (1983). Point of view in personal mem­
ories. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 467—482.
Rasmussen, A. S., & Berntsen, D. (2011). The unpredict­
able past: Spontaneous autobiographical memories out­
number autobiographical memories retrieved strategically. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 1842—1846.
Rasmussen, A. S., Johannessen, K. B., & Berntsen, D. (2014). 
Ways of sampling voluntary and involuntary autobiographi­
cal memories in daily life. Consciousness and Cognition, 30, 
156-168.
Rasmussen, A. S., Ramsgaard, S. B., & Berntsen, D. (2015). 
The frequency and functions of involuntary and volun­
tary autobiographical memories across the day. Psychology 
of Consciousness: 
Theory, 
Research, 
and Practice, 2,
185-205.
Richardson-Klavehn, A., Gardiner, J. M., & Java, R. I. (1994). 
Involuntary conscious memory and the method of opposi­
tion. Memory, 2, 1—29.
Richardson-Klavehn, A., Gardiner, J. M., & Java, R. I. (1996). 
Memory: Task dissociations, process dissociations, and 
the dissociation of consciousness. In G. U. Underwood 
(Ed.), Implicit cognition (pp. 85-158). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Rubin, D. C., Wetzler, S. E., & Nebes, R. D. (1986). 
Autobiographical memory across the lifespan. In D. C. 
Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical memory (pp. 202—221). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schacter, D. L. (1987). Implicit memory: History and current 
status. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 13, 501-508.
Schlagman, S., & Kvavilashvili, L. (2008). Involuntary autobio­
graphical memories in and outside the laboratory: How dif­
ferent are they from voluntary autobiographical memories? 
Memory & Cognition, 36, 920-932.
Schlagman, S., Kvavilashvili, L., & Schulz, J. (2007). Effects 
of age on involuntary autobiographical memories. In J. H. 
Mace (Ed.), Involuntary memory (pp. 87—112). Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.
Schlagman, S., Schulz, J., & Kvavilashvili, L. (2006). A con­
tent analysis of involuntary autobiographical memo­
ries: Examining the positivity effect in old age. Memory, 14, 
161-175.
Verwoerd, J., & Wessel, I. (2007). Distractibility and individ­
ual differences in the experience of involuntary memories. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 325—334.
476
I N V O L U N T A R Y  A U T O B I O G R A P H I C A L  M E M O R I E S

ART V 11
Clinical Contexts, 
Contemplative 
Traditions, and Altered 
States of Consciousness


C H A P T E R
34
Potential Clinical Benefits and Risks of 
Spontaneous Thought: Unconstrained 
Attention as a Way into and a Way out 
of Psychological Disharmony
Dylan Stan and Kalina Christoff
Abstract
Spontaneous thought has recently been defined as a state of reduced constraints on the mind, and it 
encompasses a range of experiences such as mind-wandering, day and night dreaming, creative idea 
generation, and others. While its day-to-day benefits have been explored for some time, its clinical 
implications have been understudied, and for the most part have been limited to potential detrimental 
effects on mood. We propose that spontaneous thought has a wider variety of clinical effects, as well as a 
number of potential therapeutic benefits—affording the opportunity to address suppressed or repressed 
material, facilitating therapeutic insights, and promoting general relaxation. Its unconstrained mode may not 
be without clinical risks, however. Within literature discussing meditation, sleep, relaxation, and sensory 
deprivation—activities that promote unconstrained attention—evidence suggests that some individuals may 
become destabilized, or face a worsening of symptoms in some circumstances. More research needs to be 
done to clarify the mediating factors that could result in these divergent outcomes.
Key Words: spontaneous thought, unconstrained attention, clinical risks, therapeutic benefits, meditation, 
sleep, sensory deprivation, relaxation
The open mental mode of spontaneous thought 
has been described as being an avenue leading 
toward creativity, insight, future planning, and 
meaning-making (Christoff, Gordon, & Smith, 
2011; Fox & Christoff, 2014; Klinger, 2014; 
Smallwood & Schooler, 2015). At the same time, 
it has been associated with possible detriments to 
ongoing task performance, and the capacity to 
foster depressive or ruminative symptomatologies 
(Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; Marchetti, Koster, 
Klinger, & Alloy, 2016; Smallwood, O ’Connor, 
Sudbery, & Obonsawin, 2007). While the major­
ity of the clinically oriented discussions have been 
largely limited to its connection with dysphoria and 
depression, there is evidence to suggest that spon­
taneous thought has a much greater scope of clini­
cal influence— both in its potential to propagate
different maladaptive thought patterns in at-risk 
populations, and in its capacity to offer therapeutic 
benefits and healing.
The first part of this chapter describes possible 
sources of therapeutic benefit from a spontaneous 
mode of thought, and suggests that it might already 
be playing a significant role in a number of com­
monly used psychological therapies. We then move 
on to provide some evidence that suggests that 
spontaneous thought is not always without risk for 
some individuals— making a preliminary case for 
how, under certain conditions, it might also have 
the capacity to exacerbate symptoms in a variety 
of clinical conditions. Spontaneous thought, it 
appears, can be both a way into and a way out of 
psychological disharmony, depending on how care­
fully its open-ended terrain is navigated.
4 7 9

This free-flowing mode of mind has often 
been associated with the act of mind-wandering 
(Christoff, 2012; Christoff et al., 2011; Christoff, 
Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016)—  
the effortless shifting between unrelated or loosely 
related thoughts— but spontaneous thought can 
also be implicated in an array of other contexts. 
Daydreaming is perhaps a more absorbed form 
it can take, where one finds oneself immersed in 
fantasy and naturally unfolding mental imagery 
(Singer, 1974). The generative mode of creativity (in 
contrast with evaluative modes), as in brainstorm­
ing, for example, is yet another type of spontaneous 
thought (Beaty, Benedek, Silvia, & Schacter, 2016; 
Ellamil, Dobson, Beeman, & Christoff, 2012; see 
also Dobson, Chapter 23 in this volume); the rela­
tive lack of restrictions seems to open the mind up 
to distantly connected concepts, enabling indirect 
problem-solving and lateral thinking to take place. 
A theoretical perspective on the origins and nature 
of this range in thinking will be briefly outlined 
before delving into the clinical topics.
A recent neuroscientific framework (Christoff 
et al., 2016) aims to account for spontaneous 
thought s dynamic nature by proposing possible pat­
terns of activity between large-scale brain networks. 
The default network (DN) has popularly been asso­
ciated with task-unrelated mind-wandering states 
(Callard, Smallwood, Golchert, & Margulies, 2014; 
Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 
2009; Mason et al., 2007) and is composed of a set 
of regions that are often recruited during memory 
retrieval, prospective thinking, and mentalizing 
(inferring the mental states of others) (Andrews- 
Hanna, 
2012; 
Buckner, 
Andrews-Hanna, 
& 
Schacter, 2008; Spreng, Mar, & Kim, 2009). What 
sets this framework apart are its novel interpreta­
tions of certain subdivisions within the DN, and the 
implications those might hold for how spontaneous 
thought develops. It differentiates between subsys­
tems that appear to contribute in two distinct ways 
to the stream of thought: those that are primarily 
sources of variability in thought content, and those 
that primarily constrain or limit the way thought 
unfolds over time (Christoff et al., 2016).
Spontaneous thought can occur both in brief, 
momentary incidents and over extended timescales. 
In this framework, it is defined as “a mental state, 
or a sequence of mental states, that arises relatively 
freely due to an absence of strong constraints on the 
contents of each state and on the transitions from 
one mental state to another” (Christoff et al., 2016, 
p. 719). Simply put, the fewer restrictions there are
on thought-flow, the more it is able to move about 
naturally. The question becomes: what does it mean 
for thoughts to move about naturally or freely?
One of the D N  subsystems, centered around 
the medial temporal lobes (DN MTL), is suggested 
to be a significant source of variability in thought 
content, and also appears to be recruited just 
before the arising of spontaneous thoughts (Fox, 
Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2016; Selimbeyoglu 
& Parvizi, 2010). A region within it, the hippo­
campus, has been linked to functions of memory 
retrieval and episodic simulation (the generation 
of imagined future events) (Moscovitch, Cabeza, 
Winocur, & Nadel, 2016; Squire, Stark, & Clark, 
2004), and has been proposed to act as an index 
for previous experiences (Teyler & DiScenna, 
1986). Separate features of each experience may 
be encoded together in hippocampal represen­
tations, capable of triggering a constellation of 
neurons to evoke a unified memory (Moscovitch,
2008). Neurons shared by other memory constel­
lations may cue them to become reactivated as well 
(Moscovitch, 2008), leading to a cascade of closely 
or distantly related experiences flowing through the 
mind. Perhaps the free motion of spontaneously 
arising thoughts can be attributed, in part, to these 
associative processes in the D N MTL occurring in a 
relatively uninhibited way.
Constraints on this spontaneous thought activity 
can arise in a number of ways, temporarily narrow­
ing the stream of attention, and creating stability 
for a period of time (Christoff et al., 2016). Most 
notably, externally oriented, sensory-dependent 
attention seems to inhibit D N  activity (Shulman, 
Fiez, Corbetta, & Buckner, 1997; Toro, Fox, & 
Paus, 2008) and keep us rooted in perceptual 
foci (Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008). When 
directed internally, however, another D N  subsystem 
(DN core), with one of its main hubs located in the 
medial prefrontal cortex, appears to play a role in 
constraining attention in a relatively automatic way 
(Christoff et al., 2016). The D N CORE might couple 
with the D N mtl to allow for the automatic pro­
cessing of recent events and the meaning-making 
often observed in mind-wandering 
(Christoff 
et al., 2016). In addition, the frontoparietal control 
network— a wide-reaching network, closely linked 
with cognitive control— might impose further con­
straints on these regions, narrowing their range of 
possible activity to facilitate deliberate thinking 
about our goals, reasoning about the past, and plan­
ning for the future (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
& Spreng, 2014; Christoff et al., 2016).
480
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

What might be most significant to our discus­
sion, moving forward, is the potential for sponta­
neous D N mtl activity to cue responses in affective 
salience networks, triggering automatic or deliberate 
cognitive control (Christoff et al., 2016). Stumbling 
upon emotionally unresolved memories, for exam­
ple, might cause us to either ruminate unintention­
ally, or to consciously seek out possible remedies. 
What is important to note here is that, while the 
origins of a thought might be spontaneous, if it 
becomes constrained this spontaneity would cease 
or be diminished. It therefore seems that spontane­
ous thought flow can frequently give rise to condi­
tions that restrict further spontaneous thought— for 
whatever length of time, short or long. We expect 
this to happen regularly, as our day-to-day lives see 
no shortage of goals or concerns (Klinger, 1971).
Motivational intensity may be a significant 
factor contributing to the strength of constraints 
and reductions in spontaneity (Stan & Christoff, 
Chapter 5 in this volume). As the motivational 
intensity behind some mental act increases, we 
expect constraints to become more extensive and 
restrictive. Constraints, however, will likely always 
be present in our mental activity, even during spon­
taneous thought, in subtle ways. An additional 
factor to consider might be their tendency to per­
sist over time: While enduring constraints, such as 
worry states, for example, might be more restrictive 
on the flow of thought, more transient constraints, 
even strong ones, might still provide sufficient gaps 
for the mind to move about freely. Salient cues in 
the environment that come and go might be an 
everyday example of this— noises, lights, passing 
faces— consuming our attention for moments so 
brief that loose trains of thought can still continue 
around them.
Potential Clinical Benefits of Spontaneous 
Thought
The day-to-day benefits of spontaneous thought 
are commonly discussed in the literature, mostly 
in the context of memory consolidation, prospec- 
tion, creativity, and meaning-making (Baars, 2010; 
Baird, Smallwood, & Schooler, 2011; Christoff 
et al., 2011; Franklin et al., 2013; McMillan, 
Kaufman, 
& 
Singer, 
2013; 
Mooneyham 
& 
Schooler, 2013; Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna,
2013). A state of loosened restrictions has been seen 
to facilitate the arising of current topics of concern, 
enabling the reassessment and restructuring of ones 
goals (Klinger, 1971). Recent experiences can be 
learned from, and new meaning can be made as
old events are revisited. Spontaneous thought also 
seems to provide a wellspring for creative and diver­
gent thinking (Baird et al., 2011; Smallwood & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2013)— a state of mind that may 
be associated with attitudes of openness and flex­
ibility in daily life (Cropley, 2009; McCrae, 1987). 
Spontaneous thought, it appears, is an important 
contributor to our general wellbeing (Smallwood & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2013).
In the clinical realm, we propose, spontane­
ous thought might also be a common source of 
therapeutic benefit— in both indirect and direct 
ways— working off mechanisms similar to those 
described in the preceding. Individuals may be 
guided through an evocation of this open mode of 
mind in a structured setting, facilitating the reor­
dering of troubling material and enabling a process 
of sense-making and healing to take place (Klinger, 
1977). Spontaneous thought, we will also argue, 
may even sometimes be therapeutic by its very 
nature. Some general contexts and examples will be 
explored here; while there will be clear conceptual 
overlaps, a few broad groupings will, nevertheless, 
be teased apart.
The first grouping of benefits has to do with the 
surfacing of suppressed or repressed material. In the 
therapeutic setting, an individual may be provided 
with a safe context in which he or she can set aside 
defense mechanisms (constraints) and explore or 
encounter thoughts, emotions, or memories that 
spontaneously arise. Various thought control strate­
gies have been seen to be commonly used by both 
clinical and non-clinical populations to contain 
unwanted or unpleasant thoughts (Wells & Davies, 
1994). Distraction, reappraisal (changing ones 
interpretation), punishment (of oneself, for having 
the thought), and worry are all significant exam­
ples (Wells & Davies, 1994)— the latter two being 
linked with emotional vulnerability and psychopa­
thology (Abramowitz, Whiteside, Kalsy, & Tolin, 
2003; Amir, Cashman, & Foa, 1997; Morrison 
& Wells, 2000; Warda & Bryant, 1998; Wells & 
Davies, 1994). Such methods of control all seem to 
be different ways of using heightened levels of con­
straints to restrict one’s mental experience. While 
worry might seem counterintuitive as a control 
strategy, it is proposed to involve the engagement 
of more thought-like processes to mask underlying 
emotional discomfort or troubling mental imagery 
(Borkovec & Inz, 1990). Similarly, punishm ent can 
sometimes be a strategy for blocking the arising of 
unwanted thoughts, with some measures on a pun­
ishment rating scale being “I get angry at myself for
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
481

having the thought,” or “I slap or pinch myself to 
stop the thought” (Wells & Davies, 1994, p. 872).
As deliberate constraints on attention (such as 
the active suppression of unwanted thoughts or 
concerns) are relaxed, neglected needs or emotions, 
previously ignored, may be allowed to surface. 
This surfacing itself may be therapeutic, and might 
enable an individual to plan steps that can be taken 
to address his or her situation. Not only has the 
creation of narratives around emotionally valenced 
material been shown to have positive effects on well­
being (Lepore, 1997; Pennebaker, 1993; Pennebaker 
& Seagal, 1999; Smyth, 1998), but some research 
also has found that the suppression of emotional 
reactions can have a range of negative health impli­
cations (Butler et al., 2003; Gross & John, 2003; 
Petrie, Booth, & Pennebaker, 1998). Also, the sup­
pression of thoughts has been seen to result in a 
paradoxical increasing of their frequency (Wegner, 
Schneider, Carter, & White, 1987)— a factor that 
has been found, in chronic cases, to maintain or 
worsen obsessions, anxiety, and depression (Purdon 
& Clark, 1994; Wegner & Zanakos, 1994).
The relaxing of more automatic constraints on 
the mind might enable similar effects— for example, 
in cases where one is not even aware of the sup­
pression. In this case, however, an extra dimension 
of learning (about ones self or situation) could 
also result. In a clinical setting, natural patterns of 
thought and affective responses can be observed by 
both practitioner and client, providing clues about 
hidden concerns or needs (Klinger, 1977). The 
repetitive, spontaneous emergence of ones favorite 
pastimes or leisure activities, for example, might cue 
the recognition that too much time has been spent 
on work lately, and not enough on play. Or, a sud­
den flash of anger might uncover feelings of being 
unheard or ignored in some recent interactions. 
Two mechanisms of action may feature into these 
types of cases: First, relaxing constraints may enable 
the release of affective reactions being actively sup­
pressed in that moment. Second, the heightened 
variability in thought content, associated with more 
spontaneous modes of mind, might increase the 
probability for latent affect-laden memories to be 
cued and triggered.
In more severe cases, such conditions may 
cause the re-experiencing of traumatic memories. 
Individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder 
sometimes engage in what appears to be a more 
drastic form of constraining the mind: dissocia­
tion (van Der Kolk & Fisler, 1995). Dissociation 
from memories of traumatic experiences appears to
be “an attempt to maintain mental control [when] 
physical control [had been] lost,” involving detach­
ment from the experience, and deep absorption 
in other thoughts or sensations (Spiegel, 1997, 
p. 227). The relaxation of such constraints, how­
ever, under safe circumstances, appears to be ben­
eficial for well-being; with the right preparation and 
context, exposure to traumatic memories has been 
demonstrated to be effective in treatment (Paunovic 
& Ost, 2001; Rauch, Eftekhari, & Ruzek, 2012; 
Taylor et al., 2003) and to facilitate a habituation 
effect (Jaycox, Foa, & Morral, 1998)— gradually 
reducing their emotional charge, and disconfirm- 
ing related negative cognitions. Re-evoking trau­
mas in a controlled manner also gives individuals 
the opportunity to have conversations around the 
troubling topics, integrating them into a more com­
plete worldview, and making meaning from them 
(Greenberg, 1995).
The mechanisms behind this group of benefits 
all appear to be working by indirect therapeutic 
means. For example, the emotional liberation 
granted by spontaneous thought occurs by virtue 
of the surfacing and expression of affective reac­
tions. Likewise, the illumination of suppressed or 
repressed material, facilitated by heightened levels 
of thought variability, seems most beneficial because 
of the decision-making and learning opportunities 
it provides. Another group also involving indirect 
mechanisms will be examined next.
The second grouping of benefits are expected to 
come from the broader modes of processing made 
accessible through spontaneous thought (Christoff 
et al., 2011). The more tangential associations in 
undirected fantasy have also been suggested to be 
a possible source of clinically beneficial insights 
(Klinger, 1977). Loosening ones frame of mind 
may enable alternate perspectives on a situation to 
emerge and be considered. Similarly, stepping out­
side ordinary, repetitive thinking may facilitate a 
persons insight into patterns of dysfunction he or 
she has been prolonging over time. For example, 
an individual might be granted access to a series of 
memories in which a certain addictive behavior is 
made suddenly apparent. The acquiring of insight 
or awareness has been one commonly proposed 
mechanism of change in psychotherapy (Gelso 
& Harbin, 2015; Grosse Holtforth et al., 2015; 
Hobbs, 1962; Messer & McWilliams, 2015). It 
has also been suggested that implementing cer­
tain behavioral changes in therapy without such 
awareness may be less efficacious in the long term 
(Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross, 1992).
482
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Spontaneous thought may also enable an expan­
sion in the range of options and possibilities one 
can perceive. A similar proposition has been 
made in relation to depression (Hecker & Meiser,
2005)— aspects of which share similarities with the 
undirected and unfocused qualities of spontaneous 
thought. Despite its negative nature, it has been 
suggested to have adaptive origins: The expanding 
of attentional focus might provide the opportunity 
for an individual to separate from unachievable 
goals, and begin to become aware of other possi­
ble sources of pleasure and fulfillment (Hecker & 
Meiser, 2005).
These broader modes of processing seem to be 
enabled by a couple of factors. First, heightened lev­
els of thought variability could provide a wider range 
of memories and ideas (Klinger, 1977), increasing 
the material available for one to work with. Second, 
it is possible that the relaxing of constraints could 
also free up attentional resources, allowing one to 
sustain more distant connections and thus per­
ceive the wider patterns that are occurring. Again, 
this second group of benefits, just like the first, is 
proposed to work primarily in an indirect way: It 
is what the spontaneous mind brings forth that pro­
vides the therapeutic effect.
Finally, a third grouping can be made around the 
relaxed conditions that enable spontaneous thought 
in the first place. This is perhaps the most direct 
source of therapeutic benefit, as it is the nature of 
spontaneous thought, itself, that is the origin of 
these proposed effects. In order to access this mode 
of thought, perceptual constraints must be mini­
mal, and strong salient activity in the environment 
absent. Individuals must also relinquish control of 
their mind for a period of time; the loosening of 
deliberate cognitive constraints on mental activ­
ity might contribute to a reduction in felt effort, 
and a general sense of allowing one’s experiences to 
unfold.
Mindfulness is a type of meditation that has 
become increasingly popular in the Western world 
(Williams & Kabat-Zinn, 2011). Although it has 
been used, at times, as a contrast to mind-wandering 
and spontaneous thought (Smallwood & Schooler,
2015), they may be more related than might first 
appear. Although some focused meditations clearly 
rely on the implementation of constraints to keep 
one centered on some object or mental image, open 
m onitoring—a general category to which mind­
fulness belongs— uses a much less constrained 
approach (Lutz, Slagter, Dunne, & Davidson, 
2008; see also Eifring, Chapter 38 in this volume).
It involves the non-judgmental observation of all 
aspects of one’s experience, internal or external 
(Lutz et al., 2008). Since it entails the maintenance 
of a monitoring state, it must utilize some degree of 
constraints, but the non-judging attitude that medi­
tators are instructed to take allows their thoughts 
to move in a largely free way. This is evidenced by 
the finding that open monitoring promotes diver­
gent thinking and creative idea generation (Colzato, 
Ozturk, & Hommel, 2012), and also insight prob­
lem solving (Ostafin & Kassman, 2012). It is also 
possible that the deliberate constraints that exist on 
attention are subtler and more transient in nature—  
appearing only for brief moments to gently steer 
the mind away from arising thoughts that draw it 
in. This appears to be the case, as individuals are 
instructed to bring the m in d back with gentleness 
when it has strayed (Holzel et al., 2011), not forc­
ibly hold attention still.
In addition to possible reductions in felt effort, 
the loosening of deliberate constraints on attention 
might also result in a gradual relaxing of more auto­
matic reactivity, as one begins to “unwind.” Some 
research is supportive of this, showing reductions 
in affective reactions after mindfulness training 
(Hoge, Bui, Marques, & Metcalf, 2013), as well as 
the attenuation of bottom-up processing of startle 
cues in experienced mindfulness meditators (van 
den Hurk, Janssen, Giommi, Barendregt, & Gielen, 
2010). It would be understandable, then, how, over 
time, practicing techniques that foster such states 
has been shown to be effective in the treatment of 
anxiety and for stress management in general (Chiesa 
& Serretti, 2009; Grossman, Niemann, Schmidt, 
& Walach, 2004; Hoge et al., 2013; Kabat-Zinn 
et al., 1992). Similar beneficial effects have also 
been reported for the use of other relaxation-based 
interventions in general anxiety disorder (Borkovec 
& Costello, 1993; Manzoni, Pagnini, Castelnuovo, 
& Molinari, 2008). In addition, some have sug­
gested that the practice of mindfulness might also 
result in the development of more adaptive and 
flexible attitudes (Fox, Kang, Lifshitz, & Christoff, 
2016; Shapiro, Carlson, Astin, & Freedman, 2006), 
effects which, if true, may add even more implica­
tions for the influence of spontaneous thought on 
well-being.
While we expect a wide variety of clinical thera­
pies and self-management techniques to employ 
the preceding mechanisms through the encourage­
ment of spontaneous thought, only a few will be 
touched upon here, to illustrate the point. The use 
of free association in psychoanalysis, for example,
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
483

is aimed at revealing the subconscious workings 
of a clients mind, through a non-judgmental and 
open-ended exploration (Klinger, 1977). An indi­
vidual is told to “put himself into a condition of 
calm self-observation” and to report whatever 
memories or thoughts come freely to mind (Freud, 
1920, Nineteenth Lecture, para. 3). He is instructed 
to “skim only across the surface of his conscious­
ness and must drop the last vestige of a critical 
attitude toward that which he finds” (Freud, 1920, 
Nineteenth Lecture, para. 3). Hypnotherapy is 
another therapeutic technique that uses the spon­
taneous mode of thought to deliver positive sug­
gestions and evoke change in an individual. It is 
described as involving the “quieting of the mind” 
and “the induction of a state . . .  in which a per­
sons normal critical or skeptical nature is bypassed, 
allowing for [the] 
acceptance of suggestions” 
(Stewart, 2005, p. 511). Mindfulness-Based Stress 
Reduction, finally, is a particular implementation 
of mindfulness meditation in combination with 
other cognitive therapies that has recently become 
a popular clinical choice, often in structured group 
programs (Kabat-Zinn, 2003). Again, the complete 
acceptance of one’s moment-to-moment experi­
ence in mindfulness (Keng, Smoski, & Robins,
2011) likely results in an overall loosening of con­
straints on the mind.
Potential Clinical Risks of Spontaneous 
Thought
Although the benefits of spontaneous thought 
seem to predominate, there is some evidence that 
suggests that an unconstrained mind may not be 
favorable in all circumstances. It may be the case 
that prolonged periods of unusually low levels of 
constraints on mental activity might be destabiliz­
ing for individuals already struggling with emo­
tional or cognitive disturbances. Likewise, the 
sudden encountering of repressed or suppressed 
material might be overwhelming, potentially lead­
ing to heightened levels of anxiety, or, worse, fur­
ther traumatization, dissociation, or psychosis. Case 
reports related to different activities that greatly 
facilitate spontaneous thought can reveal certain 
recurring types of complications that bear resem­
blance to these. Literature related to m editative 
states, sleep a n d  relaxation-related states, and states o f 
reduced sensory stim ulation— all associated with con­
siderable and sometimes sudden reductions in men­
tal constraints— will initially be explored. A brief 
proposal of possible mechanisms and risk factors 
will follow.
A connection has already been drawn, in the pre­
ceding, between open-monitoring forms of medi­
tation and spontaneous thought. Another general 
category of meditations has been distinguished as 
involving not only the absence of focus, but also 
the absence of control and effort altogether— as 
observed in aspects of Transcendental Meditation 
(Travis & Shear, 2010). These styles are said to 
overlap frequently, in practice and across tradi­
tions (Travis & Shear, 2010), and will be hard to 
fully distinguish, but the meditation literature pre­
sented here does refer often to the use of this less 
constrained type.
Case reports of psychiatric problems being pre­
cipitated by meditation have been cited for decades 
in psychiatric and psychological journals (Epstein 
& Lieff, 1981; Lazarus, 1976; Walsh & Roche, 
1979; West, 
1979). Depersonalization, altered 
capacity to differentiate between one’s internal 
world and the external world, and the emergence 
of highly charged, repressed memories have all been 
reported (Castillo, 1990; Walsh & Roche, 1979). 
Hallucinations, delusions, and other psychotic 
experiences (Sethi & Bhargava, 2003; Sharma, 
Singh, Gnanavel, & Kumar, 2016; Walsh & Roche, 
1979) have been cited as well, with a limited 
amount of evidence suggesting that mania can also 
be precipitated (Yorston, 2001). A meta-analysis of 
case reports on meditation-induced psychosis found 
that only about half of the incidents involved a 
prior psychiatric history (Kuijpers, van der Heijden, 
Tuinier, & Verhoeven, 2007), which may suggest 
that prolonged periods of unconstrained cognition 
might have the capacity to evoke first episodes in 
those at risk. It is important to note, however, that 
the investigation also found that almost all indi­
viduals had a rapid recovery (Kuijpers et al., 2007).
There are obvious major methodological limi­
tations to the preceding findings, as they are lim­
ited to case studies, lack control groups, and are 
not always explicit about the types of meditation 
practiced. It is also hard to know to what extent 
meditation itself was responsible for the reported 
symptoms, and to what degree other factors, such 
as sleep deprivation and fasting— common to many 
of the cases— had a role (Kuijpers et al., 2007). One 
study, in fact, analyzed three case studies and found 
sleep deprivation and drug withdrawal, respectively, 
to be principal influences in two of them (Chan-Ob 
& Boonyanaruthee, 1999). Nevertheless, abnormal 
experiences do seem to be generally associated with 
meditation; a phenomenological study found that 
“unusual experiences, visual or auditory aberrations,
484
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

‘hallucinations,’ unusual somatic experiences and so 
on, are the norm among practiced meditation stu­
dents,” and, in many cases, do not pose problems 
(Kornfield, 1979, p. 51). For individuals on the 
verge of psychosis, however, such experiences would 
likely be further destabilizing.
Sleep-related states, on the other hand, have 
long been compared with other forms of uncon­
strained cognition (Klinger, 1971). The dynamic 
qualities of dreaming have been likened to those of 
mind-wandering and spontaneous thought— both 
tending to unfold in a highly unrestricted and 
associative way (Christoff et al., 2016; Domhoff & 
Fox, 2015; Fox, Nijeboer, Solomonova, Domhoff, 
& Christoff, 2013; see also Domhoff, Chapter 27, 
and Fox & Girn, Chapter 28, both in this vol­
ume). In sleep, the emergence of nightmares, or 
frightening or disturbing dreams, are commonly 
seen in post-traumatic stress disorder (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013; Benca, 1996; Ross, 
Ball, Sullivan, & Caroff, 1989), panic disorder 
(Benca, 1996), and schizophrenia (Benca, 1996; 
Claridge, Clark, & Davis, 1997). In fact, the re­
experiencing of traumatic events in dreams is said 
to be one of post-traumatic stress disorder’s car­
dinal manifestations (Ross et al., 1989). Also, in 
panic disorder, surveys suggest that 44%-71% 
of affected individuals have, at least once, experi­
enced waking from sleep in a state of panic (Craske 
& Tsao, 2005). Another paper found that schizo- 
typy was positively related to, and even predicted, 
the strength of nightmare experiences (Claridge 
et al., 1997). These frightening sleep-related expe­
riences often cause individuals to develop fears 
about going to bed and even to become avoid­
ant of it (Benca, 1996)— probably only making 
matters worse.
In addition to sleep itself, the pre-sleep or sleep- 
onset (“hypnagogic”) phase can also be considered 
spontaneous in nature (for a detailed review, see 
Nielsen, Chapter 30 in this volume). Individuals 
with obsessive-compulsive disorder can have trou­
ble falling asleep, as obsessions— intrusive and dis­
tressing thoughts— can interfere with normal sleep 
onset (Benca, 1996). People with insomnia similarly 
report pre-sleep ideation or imagery that is intru­
sive and upsetting, and focused on worries (Harvey, 
2000; Sanavio, 1988). In a clinician-administered 
interview comparing 30 individuals with insomnia 
to 30 with regular sleep, the insomniacs described 
their pre-sleep mental activity as being less inten­
tional, and including more distressing imagery 
(Harvey, 2000).
In non-sleep relaxation, similar findings have 
been reported. Panic attacks, paradoxically, have 
been found to be frequently induced during easeful 
mental states (Cohen, Barlow, & Blanchard, 1985; 
Heide & Borkovec, 1983; 1984; Wells, 1990). 
While symptoms in panic disorder are often pro­
voked by overt, anxiety-causing situations, “many 
patients [also] report that their attacks occur in the 
absence of anticipatory anxiety or distressing cog­
nitions, or in some cases, when they feel the least 
apprehensive and most relaxed” (Cohen et al., 1985, 
p. 96). Hypnotherapy— the relaxation-based tech­
nique mentioned earlier— has also been accompa­
nied, at times, by a variety of adverse psychological 
reactions (Auerback, 1962; Mott, 1987). Anxiety, 
dissociation, the surfacing of traumatic memories, 
and schizophrenic episodes have all been reported 
in case studies (Gruzelier, 2000); a manic episode 
was also apparently precipitated by the practice of 
self-hypnosis (Suresh & Srinivasan, 1994). While 
the evidence is far from clear, sleep and relaxation- 
related states seem to possess the capacity to uncover 
and sometimes exacerbate fragile psychological 
conditions.
Finally, spontaneous thought has also been seen 
to be evoked readily in conditions of isolation and 
reduced sensory input— often causing memories, 
mental imagery, voices, and other experiences to 
emerge (Suedfeld, Rank, & Malus, Chapter 40 in 
this volume). Abnormal effects, such as depersonali­
zation and hallucinations of various kinds, have been 
reported in both natural and experimental settings 
(Flynn, 1962; Leiderman, Mendelson, Wexler, & 
Solomon, 1958; Solomon, Leiderman, Mendelson, 
& Wexler, 1957). In one study, it was found that 
“after several hours, directed and organized think­
ing became progressively more difficult. . . subjects 
who remained [in sensory deprivation] longer than 
72 hours usually developed overt hallucinations and 
delusions . . . similar to those reported with mes­
caline and LSD” (Solomon et al., 1957, p. 361). 
Sensory deprivation has even been used as a non- 
pharmacological model for psychosis, mimicking 
its effects in the unaffected population for scientific 
purposes (Daniel & Mason, 2015; Daniel, Lovatt, 
& Mason, 2014; Luby, Gottlieb, & Cohen, 1962). 
Enabled, supposedly, by a near-complete removal of 
external constraints, the plummeting into a ground­
less spontaneous mode of mind might worsen mat­
ters for those already experiencing or prone to 
psychosis. Indeed, sensory deprivation has been 
shown to cause significantly stronger psychosis­
like symptoms in hallucination-prone individuals
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
485

(Daniel et al., 2014). These examples suggest that 
caution should sometimes be used in more sensitive 
cases, when a sudden loosening of constraints is to 
be initiated.
Although direct research is lacking on this topic, 
some general patterns do seem to be emerging that 
may indicate the need for further investigating the 
effects of unconstrained cognition in vulnerable 
populations. An interesting point to note is the dif­
fering severity and range of symptoms across the 
various situations described in the preceding: The 
sleep and relaxation literature tended to report 
anxiety-related symptoms more often, while cases 
associated with meditation, hypnosis, and sensory 
deprivation seemed to include more psychosis-like 
symptoms. This may be due to a selection effect, or 
biases in reporting— with more severe cases, such 
as psychosis, taking precedence whenever present. 
Another possibility, however, is that meditation, 
hypnosis, and sensory deprivation do, in fact, lead 
to more extensive reductions in constraints, and 
perhaps in ways that are more foreign to ordinary 
experience, or more forced, at times. We will very 
briefly propose a few factors that may make the dif­
ference between spontaneous thought’s potentially 
beneficial nature, discussed earlier, and the caution­
ary accounts just outlined.
First, some individuals may become unsettled by 
the unconstrained nature of spontaneous thought. 
Some have theorized that the need to remain 
in control, and the discomfort around relaxing 
that control, may play a role in instigating panic 
attacks (Heide & Borkovec, 1984)— or that per­
ceived uncontrollability and unpredictability of 
one’s experiences are factors in the etiology of post- 
traumatic stress disorder (Ehlers & Steil, 1995; Foa, 
Steketee, & Rothbaum, 1989). Similarly, obsessive- 
compulsive disorder is characterized by the strong 
need to control one’s thoughts and outcomes in the 
world through rituals and compulsions (Moulding 
& Kyrios, 2006) and other neutralizing behav­
iors (Rachman, 1997; 1998)— acts hypothesized 
to counteract the high degree of intolerance of 
uncertainty that typically comes with the condi­
tion (Tolin, Abramowitz, Brigidi, & Foa, 2003). 
Uncertainty, incidentally, is a prominent feature of 
the experience of letting go into the unguided terri­
tory of spontaneous thought.
Second, while the release of suppressed or 
repressed material may be liberating in many 
instances, it may also prove harmful in some con­
ditions, especially since significant reductions on 
mental constraints will also mean that one’s defenses
are low. One author speaking about hypnosis, for 
example, cautions that the increased access to the 
unconscious 
(heightened 
thought 
variability) 
and the decreased vigilance (lowered constraints) 
leave one in a vulnerable state (Fromm, 1980). 
Individuals encountering troubling material may 
not be adequately prepared to deal with it in an 
effective way. An extensive study on the experiences 
of Buddhist meditation teachers reported that inex­
perienced individuals, when stripped of their ordi­
nary defenses, may have trouble stabilizing their 
mind, potentially leading to a variety of adverse 
reactions (VanderKooi, 1997).
While such conditions may more immediately 
account for the panic and anxiety-related reactions 
cited earlier, they could potentially also factor in 
to the more severe psychotic cases. A number of 
connections have been noted between psychosis 
and prior trauma, with some evidence suggest­
ing that sexual abuse and other traumatic events 
may increase risk for future episodes of psychosis 
and hallucinatory experiences (Morrison, Frame, 
& Larkin, 2003). Encountering traumatic memo­
ries too suddenly in periods of unusually uncon­
strained cognition may accelerate decompensation 
and other undesirable effects— an understanding 
already heeded in some trauma-processing disci­
plines (Twombly, 2000), calling for an abundance 
of preparatory protocols (Paulsen, 1995).
Third, it may also be the case that reduced lev­
els of constraints can allow troublesome patterns 
of thought to propagate more freely. A recent 
clinical framework accounts for how spontaneous 
thought might lead to both adaptive and maladap­
tive consequences through its possible capacity to 
amplify affective states (Marchetti et al., 2016). 
Spontaneous thought, when paired with nega­
tive affectivity— as in situations with high stress, 
or for individuals prone to mood disorders— may 
result in low self-esteem, hopelessness, cognitive 
reactivity, and rumination, leading to the deepen­
ing of symptoms in depression (Marchetti et al.,
2016). Marchetti et al.’s framework also touches on 
the relationship that spontaneous thought might 
have to mania, suggesting that a funnelling effect 
might occur, intensifying already heightened levels 
of ambitious or unrealistic goal-striving (Marchetti 
et al., 2016). The idea that dysregulation in goal 
pursuit is a contributing factor in mania already has 
substantial evidence in its favor (Johnson, 2005).
Finally, many of the preceding factors might be 
further magnified by additional constraint reduc­
tions associated with perceptual decoupling— a state
486
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

sometimes associated with spontaneous thought 
where attention is disengaged from perceptions and 
sensations (Schooler et al., 2011). Sleep, meditation, 
and sensory deprivation all seem to involve drastic 
reductions in the constraining effects that the external 
environment has on the mind. Prolonged periods of 
reduced perceptual constraints may facilitate a num­
ber of the abnormal experiences mentioned. One 
experiment, which has since been replicated, found 
evidence that it is not necessarily just a lack of sen­
sory stimulation, but a lack of meaningful patterns 
or structures in sensory information that enables hal­
lucinatory experiences to unfold (Gallagher, Dinan, 
& Baker, 1994; Margo, Hemsley, & Slade, 1981). 
This understanding is significant because, while com­
plete sensory deprivation is not a common experi­
ence in everyday life, situations lacking meaningful 
stimulation— monotonous, repetitive, or boring 
conditions— may also be found to facilitate abnormal 
spontaneous thought experiences. Some anecdotal 
evidence supporting this hypothesis exists (Heron, 
1957; Suedfeld, Rank, & Malus, Chapter 40 in this 
volume). If it proves true, prolonged monotonous or 
boring situations may be found to add some amount 
of risk for instigating or intensifying the clinical 
symptoms discussed here (McWelling, 2014).
Conclusion
Spontaneous thought is a mode of mind that 
appears to have considerable benefit for our day- 
to-day functioning and general contentment—  
affording sense-making and the ordering of recent 
events, anticipations of and projections into the 
future, and a starting point for some of our creative 
ideas. Its effects, we have hopefully shown, may go 
far beyond these into the clinical realm, providing a 
number of avenues one can take toward psychologi­
cal well-being. This unconstrained style of think­
ing appears to be evoked in a variety of therapeutic 
interventions, enabling suppressed or repressed 
material to arise and to be addressed, facilitating the 
formation of insights into dysfunctional patterns 
of behavior, and promoting a general state of relax­
ation and ease.
In some circumstances, we have also seen, spon­
taneous thought may also prove to be destabilizing 
for some individuals, potentially allowing hallucina­
tory or psychotic experiences to unfold more easily, 
or worsening symptoms in a variety of anxiety- or 
trauma-related conditions. There is enough evi­
dence to suggest that significant reductions in men­
tal constraints should be approached with care, and
perhaps more gradually, for individuals in vulner­
able states— though more research needs to be done 
to elucidate the direct factors for risk.
It should be mentioned, however, that a wors­
ening of symptoms may not always be a sign that 
something is wrong. The habituation and integra­
tion of traumatic memories, for example, might 
require one to experience immense emotional 
pain in the process, and the confronting of intru­
sive thoughts surely involves discomfort and anxi­
ety. Navigating these sometimes-fine distinctions 
between the troubling experiences that heal and the 
ones that cause further harm might be a process of 
delicate experimentation. While support and guid­
ance can be critical, the directions may best be cho­
sen by the one walking the path.
References
Abramowitz, J. S., Whiteside, S., Kalsy, S. A., &Tolin, D. F. (2003). 
Thought control strategies in obsessive-compulsive disorder: A 
replication and extension. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
41(5), 529-540. doi: 10.10l6/S0005-7967(02)00026-8 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and sta­
tistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Amir, N., Cashman, L., & Foa, E. B. (1997). Strategies of 
thought control in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 35(8), 775-777. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0005-7967(97)00030-2
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brains default net­
work and its adaptive role in internal mentation. The 
Neuroscientist: A Review Journal Bringing Neurobiology, 
Neurology and Psychiatry, 18(3), 251—270. doi: 10.1177/ 
1073858411403316
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316(\), 29—52. 
doi: 10.1111/nyas. 12360
Auerback, A. (1962). Attitudes of psychiatrists to the use of hyp­
nosis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 180( 11), 
917-921. doi: 10.1001 /jama. 1962.03050240013003 
Baars, B. J. (2010). Spontaneous repetitive thoughts can be adap­
tive: Postscript on “mind wandering.” Psychological Bulletin, 
136(2), 208-210. doi: 10.1037/a0018726 
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to the 
future: Autobiographical planning and the functionality of 
mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20(A), 1604— 
1611. doi: 10.10l6/j.concog.2011.08.007 
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2016). Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(2), 87—95. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.tics.2015.10.004
Benca, 
R. 
M. 
(1996). 
Sleep in 
psychiatric disorders. 
Neurologic 
Clinic, 
14(4), 
739-764. 
doi: 
10.1016/
S0733-86l9(05)70283-8
Borkovec, T., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy of applied relax­
ation and cognitive-behavioral therapy in the treatment 
of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 61(A), 611—619.
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
487

Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in 
generalized anxiety disorder: A predominance of thought 
activity. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28(2), 153—158. 
doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(90)90027-G
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2008). The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, 
and relevance to disease, 1124(1), 1-38. doi: 10.1196/ 
annals. 1440.011
Butler, E. A., Egloff, B., Wlhelm, F. H., Smith, N. C., Erickson, 
E. A., & Gross, J. J. (2003). The social consequences of 
expressive suppression. Emotion, 3(1), 48-67. doi:10.1037/ 
1528-3542.3.1.48
Callard, F., Smallwood, J., Golchert, J., & Margulies, D. S. 
(2014). The era of the wandering mind? Twenty-first cen­
tury research on self-generated mental activity. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 4, 891. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00891/ 
abstract
Castillo, 
R. J. 
(1990). 
Depersonalization and medita­
tion. Psychiatry, 53, 158-168. doi: 10.1521/00332747. 
1990.11024497
Chan-Ob, T., & Boonyanaruthee, V. (1999). Meditation in asso­
ciation with psychosis. Journal of the Medical Association of 
Thailand, 82(9), 925-930.
Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2009). Mindfulness-Based Stress 
Reduction for stress management in healthy people: A 
review and meta-analysis. The Journal of Alternative and 
Complementary Medicine, 15(5), 593-600. doi: 10.1089/ 
acm.2008.0495
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants 
and correlates. Brain Research, 1428, 51—59. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.brainres.2011.09.060
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U S A ,  106(21), 8719-8724. doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
Christoff, K., Gordon, A., & Smith, R. (2011). The role of spon­
taneous thought in human cognition. In O. Vartanian & D. 
R. Mandel (Eds.), Neuroscience of decision making (pp. 259— 
284). New York: Psychology Press.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K.C.R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J.R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17(\ 1), 718-731.
Claridge, G., Clark, K., & Davis, C. (1997). Nightmares, 
dreams, and schizotypy, 36(3), 377-386. doi: 10.1111/ 
j .2044-8260.1997. tbO 1245 .x
Cohen, A. S., Barlow, D. H., & Blanchard, E. B. (1985). 
Psychophysiology of relaxation-associated panic attacks. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 94(1), 96—101. doi: 10.1037/ 
0021-843X.94.1.96
Colzato, L. S., Ozturk, A., & Hommel, B. (2012). Meditate to 
create: The impact of focused-attention and open-monitoring 
training on convergent and divergent thinking. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 3, 116. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00116
Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008). The reori­
enting system of the human brain: From environment to 
theory of mind. Neuron, 58(3), 306-324. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuron.2008.04.017
Craske, M. G., & Tsao, J. C. I. (2005). Assessment and treat­
ment of nocturnal panic attacks. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 
9(3), 173-184. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2004.11.003
Cropley, A. J. (2009). Creativity and mental health in everyday 
life. Creativity Research Journal, 3(3), 167—178. doi: 10.1080/ 
10400419009534351
Daniel, C., Lovatt, A., & Mason, O. J. (2014). Psychotic-like 
experiences and their cognitive appraisal under short-term 
sensory deprivation. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 5(8), 106. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00106
Daniel, C., & Mason, O. J. (2015). Predicting psychotic-like 
experiences during sensory deprivation. BioMed Research 
International, 2015(1), 1-10. doi: 10.1155/2015/439379
Domhoff, G. W., & Fox, K. C. R. (2015). Dreaming and the 
default network: A review, synthesis, and counterintuitive 
research proposal. Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 342—353.
Ehlers, A., & Steil, R. (1995). Maintenance of intrusive memo­
ries in posttraumatic stress disorder: A cognitive approach. 
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23(3), 217—249. 
doi: 10.1017/S135246580001585X
Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). 
Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the cre­
ative process. Neuroimage, 59(2), 1783—1794. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuroimage.2011.08.008
Epstein, M. D., & Lieff, J. D. (1981). Psychiatric complica­
tions of meditation practice. The Journal of Transpersonal 
Psychology, 13(2), 137-147.
Flynn, W. R. (1962). Visual hallucinations in sensory deprivation. 
The Psychiatric Quarterly, 36(1—4), 55—65. doi: 10.1007/ 
BF01586100
Foa, E. B., Steketee, G., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1989). Behavioral/ 
cognitive conceptualizations of post-traumatic stress dis­
order. Behavior Therapy, 20(2), 155-176. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0005-7894(89)80067-X
Fox, K. C., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
The neurobiology of self-generated thought from cells to 
systems: Integrating evidence from lesion studies, human 
intracranial electrophysiology, neurochemistry, and neuroen­
docrinology. Neuroscience, 335, 134-150.
Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). Metacognitive facilita­
tion of spontaneous thought processes: When metacog­
nition helps the wandering mind find its way. In S. M. 
Fleming & C. D. Frith (Eds.), The Cognitive Neuroscience of 
Metacognition (pp. 293—319). Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer, 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-45190-4_ 13
Fox, K. C. R., Kang, Y., Lifshitz, M., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
Increasing 
cognitive-emotional 
flexibility with 
medi­
tation and hypnosis: The cognitive neuroscience of 
de-automatization. In A. Raz and M. Liftshitz (Eds.), 
Hypnosis and meditation (pp. 191—219). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff, G. 
W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wander­
ing: Evidence from functional neuroimaging and first-person 
content reports. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. 
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00412
Franklin, M. S., Mrazek, M. D., Anderson, C. L., Smallwood,
J., Kingstone, A., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The silver lin­
ing of a mind in the clouds: Interesting musings are associ­
ated with positive mood while mind-wandering. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 583. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00583
Freud, S. (1920). A general introduction to psychoanalysis (G. S. 
Hall, 
Trans.). 
https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/f/freud/sig- 
mund/general-in troduction-to-psychoanalysis/index.html
Fromm, E. (1980). Values in hypnotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research and Practice, 17(4), 425—430.
488
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Gallagher, A. G., Dinan, T. G., & Baker, L. J. V. (1994). The 
effects of varying auditory input on schizophrenic halluci­
nations: A replication. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory; 
Research and Practice, 67(1), 67—75. doi: 10.111 l/j.2044-
8341.1994. tbO 1771 .x
Gelso, C. J., & Harbin, J. (2015). Insight, action, and the 
therapeutic relationship. In L. G. Castonguay & C. Hill 
(Eds.), Insight in psychotherapy (pp. 293—311). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association, doi: 10.1037/ 
11532-014
Greenberg, M. A. (1995). Cognitive processing of traumas: The 
role of intrusive thoughts and reappraisals. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 25(h4), 1262-1296. doi: 10.111 l/j.1559-
1816.1995. tb02618.x
Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003). Individual differences 
in two emotion regulation processes: Implications for 
affect, relationships, and well-being. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 85(2), 348-362. doi: 10.1037/ 
0022-3514.85.2.348
Grosse Holtforth, M., Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J. F., Wilson, 
L. A., Kakouros, A. A., & Borkovec, T. D. (2015). Insight in 
cognitive-behavioral therapy. In L. G. Castonguay & C. Hill 
(Eds.), Insight in psychotherapy (pp. 57—80). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association, doi: 10.1037/ 
11532-003
Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., & Walach, H. 
(2004). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and health 
benefits. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 57(1), 35—43. 
doi: 10.1016/S0022-3999(03)00573-7
Gruzelier, J. (2000). Unwanted effects of hypnosis: A review of 
the evidence and its implications. Contemporary Hypnosis, 
17(4), 163-193. doi: 10.1002/ch.207
Harvey, A. G. (2000). Pre-sleep cognitive activity: A compari­
son of sleep-onset insomniacs and good sleepers. British 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 39(3), 275-286. doi: 10.1348/ 
014466500163284
Hecker, von, U., & Meiser, T. (2005). Defocused attention in 
depressed mood: Evidence from source monitoring. Emotion, 
5(4), 456-463. doi: 10.1037/1528-3542.5.4.456
Heide, F. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (1983). Relaxation-induced anxi­
ety: Paradoxical anxiety enhancement due to relaxation training. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51(2), 171-182.
Heide, F. J., & Borkovec, T. D. (1984). Relaxation-induced 
anxiety: 
Mechanisms 
and 
theoretical 
implications.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 22(1), 1—12. doi: 10.1016/ 
0005-7967(84)90027-5
Heron, W. (1957). The pathology of boredom. Scientific 
American, 196(1), 52—56.
Hobbs, N. (1962). Sources of gain in psychotherapy. American 
Psychologist, 17(11), 741-747. doi: 10.1037/h0040135
Hoge, E. A., Bui, E., Marques, L., Metcalf, C. A., Morris, L. K., 
Robinaugh, D. J., . . . Simon, N. M. (2013). Randomized 
controlled trial of mindfulness meditation for generalized 
anxiety disorder: Effects on anxiety and stress reactivity. The 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74(8), 786-792. doi: 10.4088/ 
JCP.12m08083
Holzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., Schuman-Olivier, Z., Vago, 
D. R., & Ott, U. (2011). How does mindfulness meditation 
work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual 
and neural perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
6(6), 537-559. doi: 10.1177/1745691611419671
Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998). Influence of 
emotional engagement and habituation on exposure therapy
for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
66(1), 185-192. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.66.1.185 
Johnson, S. L. (2005). Mania and dysregulation in goal pur­
suit: A review. Clinical Psychology Review, 25(2), 241—262. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.cpr.2004.11.002
Kabat-Zinn, Jon, Massion, A., Kristeller, J., Peterson, L., Fletcher,
K., Pbert, L., et al. (1992). Effectiveness of a meditation- 
based stress reduction program in the treatment of anxiety 
disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 149(7), 936— 
943. doi: 10.1176/ajp.l49.7.936 
Kabat-Zinn, Jon. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in 
context: Past, present, and future. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 10(2), 144—156. doi: 10.1093/clipsy.bpg0l6 
Keng, S.-L., Smoski, M. J., & Robins, C. J. (2011). Effects of 
mindfulness on psychological health: A review of empiri­
cal studies. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(6), 1041-1056. 
doi: 10.10l6/j.cpr.2011.04.006
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330(6006), 932-932. 
doi: 10.1126/science. 1192439
Klinger, E. 
(1971). 
Structure and functions of fantasy 
New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Klinger, E. (1977). The nature of fantasy and its clinical uses. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, 14(3), 223—231. 
doi: 10.1037/h0086531
Klinger, E. (2014). Adaptive functions and default nature of 
undirected thought, bliss or not: Correcting some mis­
conceptions. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 4(3), 236—239. 
doi: 10.1080/2153599X.2013.826725 
Kornfield, J. (1979). Intensive insight meditation: A phenom­
enological study. The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 
17(1), 41-58.
Kuijpers, H. J. H., van der Heijden, F. M. M. A., Tuinier, S., & 
Verhoeven, W. M. A. (2007). Meditation-induced psychosis. 
Psychopathology, 40(6), 461-464. doi: 10.1159/000108125 
Lazarus, A. A. (1976). Psychiatric problems precipitated by 
transcendental meditation. Psychological Reports, 39(2), 601— 
602. doi: 10.2466/pr0.1976.39.2.601 
Leiderman, H., Mendelson, J. H., Wexler, D., & Solomon, P. 
(1958). Sensory deprivation; clinical aspects. A.M.A. Archives 
of Internal Medicine, 101(2), 389—396.
Lepore, S. J. (1997). Expressive writing moderates the relation 
between intrusive thoughts and depressive symptoms. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(5), 1030-1037.
Luby, E. D., Gottlieb, J. S., & Cohen, B. D., Rosenbaum, G., & 
Domino, E. F. (1962). Model psychoses and schizophrenia. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 119(1), 61—67. doi: 10.1176/ 
ajp.l 19.1.61
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. 
(2008). Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(4), 163—169. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.tics.2008.01.005
Manzoni, G. M., Pagnini, F., Castelnuovo, G., & Molinari, E. 
(2008). Relaxation training for anxiety: A ten-years system­
atic review with meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 5(1), 100— 
12. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-8-41 
Marchetti, I., Koster, E. H. W., Klinger, E., & Alloy, L. B. 
(2016). Spontaneous thought and vulnerability to mood 
disorders: The dark side of the wandering mind. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 
4(5), 
835-857. 
doi: 
10.1177/
2167702615622383
Margo, A., Hemsley, D. R., & Slade, P. D. (1981). The effects 
of varying auditory input on schizophrenic hallucinations.
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
489

The British Journal of Psychiatry: the Journal of Mental Science, 
139(2), 122-127. doi: 10.1192/bjp. 139.2.122 
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought, 315(5810), 393-395. doi: 10.1126/science. 1131295 
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, and open­
ness to experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
52(6), 1258-1265. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.52.6.1258 
McMillan, R. L., Kaufman, S. B., & Singer, J. L. (2013). Ode to 
positive constructive daydreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 
626. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00626 
McWelling, T. 
(2014). 
Boredom and psychotic disor­
ders: Cognitive and motivational issues. Psychiatry, 66(2), 
146-167. doi: 10.152l/psyc.66.2.146.20623 
Messer, S. B., & McWilliams, N. (2015). Insight in psychody­
namic therapy: Theory and assessment. In L. G. Castonguay 
& C. Hill (Eds.), Insight in psychotherapy (pp. 9—29). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
doi: 10.1037/11532-001
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and 
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 67(1), 11-18. doi: 10.1037/ 
a0031569
Morrison, A. P., Frame, L., & Larkin, W. (2003). Relationships 
between trauma and psychosis: A review and integra­
tion. The British Journal of Clinical Psychology!the British 
Psychological Society, 42(Pt 4), 331-353. doi: 10.1348/ 
014466503322528892
Morrison, A. P, & Wells, A. (2000). Thought control strategies 
in schizophrenia: A comparison with non-patients. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 38(12), 1205—1209. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0005-7967(99)00153-9
Moscovitch, M. (2008). The hippocampus as a “stupid,” 
domain-specific module: Implications for theories of
recent and remote memory, and of imagination. Canadian 
Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue Canadienne De 
Psychologie Experimental, 62(1), 62-79. doi: 10.1037/ 
1196-1961.62.1.62
Moscovitch, M., Cabeza, R., Winocur, G., & Nadel,
L. 
(2016). Episodic memory and beyond: The hip­
pocampus and neocortex in transformation. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 67(1), 105-134. doi: 10.1146/ 
annurev-psych-113011-143733 
Mott, T. (1987). Editorial: Adverse reactions in the use of hyp­
nosis. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 29(3), 147—148. 
doi: 10.1080/00029157.1987.10734343 
Moulding, R., & Kyrios, M. (2006). Anxiety disorders and con­
trol related beliefs: The exemplar of obsessive-compulsive dis­
order (OCD). Clinical Psychology Review, 26(5), 573-583. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2006.01.009
Ostafin, B. D., & Kassman, K. T. (2012). Stepping out of 
history: Mindfulness improves insight problem solv­
ing. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 21(2), 
1031—1036.
doi: 10.1016/j. concog.2012.02.014 
Paulsen, S. (1995). Eye movement desensitization and reprocess­
ing: Its cautious use in the dissociative disorders. Dissociation, 
8(1), 32-44.
Paunovic, N., & Ost, L.-G. (2001). Cognitive-behavior therapy 
vs exposure therapy in the treatment of PTSD in refu­
gees. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39(10), 1183—1197. 
doi: 10.1016/S0005-7967(00)00093-0
Pennebaker, J. W. (1993). Putting stress into words: Health, 
linguistic, 
and 
therapeutic 
implications. 
Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 31(6), 539-548. doi: 10.1016/ 
0005-7967(93)90105-4
Pennebaker, J. W., & Seagal, J. D. (1999). Forming a 
story: The health benefits of narrative. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 55(10), 1243-1254. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097- 
4679( 199910)55:10< 1243::AID-JCLP6>3.0.CO;2-N 
Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1998). The 
immunological effects of thought suppression. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(5), 1264-1272. 
doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.75.5.1264 
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). 
In search of how people change: Applications to addic­
tive behaviors. American Psychologist, 47(9), 1102—1114. 
doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.47.9.1102 
Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (1994). Obsessive intrusive thoughts 
in nonclinical subjects. Part II. Cognitive appraisal, emo­
tional response and thought control strategies. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 32(4), 403-410. doi: 10.1016/ 
0005-7967(94)90003-5
Rachman, S. (1997). A cognitive theory of obsessions. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 35(9), 793-802. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0005-7967(97)00040-5
Rachman, 
S. 
(1998). 
A 
cognitive 
theory 
of obses­
sions: Elaborations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36(4), 
385-401. doi: 10.10l6/S0005-7967(97) 10041-9 
Rauch, S. A. M., Eftekhari, A., & Ruzek, J. I. (2012). Review 
of exposure therapy: A gold standard for PTSD treatment. 
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, 49(5), 
679-688. doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2011.08.0152 
Ross, R. J., Ball, W. A., Sullivan, K. A., & Caroff, S. N. (1989). 
Sleep disturbance as the hallmark of posttraumatic stress dis­
order. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 146(6), 697—707. 
doi: 10.1176/ajp. 146.6.697
Sanavio, E. (1988). Pre-sleep cognitive intrusions and treatment 
of onset-insomnia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26(6), 
451-459. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(88)90139-8 
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 15(7), 319-326. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.tics.2011.05.006
Selimbeyoglu, A., & Parvizi, J. (2010). Electrical stimulation 
of the human brain: perceptual and behavioral phenomena 
reported in the old and new literature. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 4, 46.
Sethi, S., & Bhargava, S. C. (2003). Relationship of meditation 
and psychosis: Case studies. The Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Psychiatry, 37(3), 382.
Shapiro, S. L., Carlson, L. E., Astin, J. A., & Freedman, B. 
(2006). Mechanisms of mindfulness. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 62(3), 373-386. doi: 10.1002/jclp.20237 
Sharma, P., Singh, S., Gnanavel, S., & Kumar, N. (2016). 
Meditation—a two edged sword for psychosis: A case report. 
Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 33(4), 247—249. 
doi: 10.1017/ipm.2015.73
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, 
F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E. (1997). Common 
blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in 
cerebral cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(5), 
648-663. doi: 10.1 l62/jocn.l997.9.5.648
490
P O T E N T I A L  C L I N I C A L  B E N E F I T S  A N D  RISKS OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Singer, J. L. 
(1974). Daydreaming and the stream of 
thought: Daydreams have usually been associated with idle­
ness and inattentiveness. Now, however, through an empirical 
research program, their general function and adaptive possibil­
ities are being elucidated. American Scientist, 62(4), 417-425. 
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective 
on the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 441. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00441
Smallwood, J., O’Connor, R. C., Sudbery, M. V., & 
Obonsawin, M. (2007). Mind-wandering and dyspho­
ria. Cognition & Emotion, 21(4), 816—842. doi: 10.1080/ 
02699930600911531
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of con­
sciousness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66(1), 487-518. 
doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331 
Smyth, J. M. (1998). Written emotional expression: Effect 
sizes, outcome types, and moderating variables. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(1), 174—184. 
doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.66.1.174 
Solomon, P., Leiderman, P. H., Mendelson, J., & Wexler, D. 
(1957). Sensory Deprivation. The American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 114(4), 357-363. doi: 10.1176/ajp.l 14.4.357 
Spiegel, D. (1997). Trauma, dissociation, and memory. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 821(1), 225—237. 
doi: 10.1111 /j. 1749-6632.1997.tb48282.x 
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. N. (2009). The com­
mon neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, 
navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quanti­
tative meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 
489-510. doi: 10.1 l62/jocn.2008.21029 
Squire, L. R., Stark, C. E. L., & Clark, R. E. (2004). The medial 
temporal lobe. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27(1), 279— 
306. doi: 10.1 l46/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144130 
Stewart, J. H. (2005). Hypnosis in contemporary medicine. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 80(4), 511—524. doi: 10.4065/ 
80.4.511
Suresh, T. R., & Srinivasan, T. N. (1994). Mania following hyp­
notherapy. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 36(1), 34—35.
Taylor, S., Thordarson, D. S., Maxfield, L., Fedoroff, I. C., Lovell, 
K., & Ogrodniczuk, J. (2003). Comparative efficacy, speed, 
and adverse effects of three PTSD treatments: Exposure ther­
apy, EMDR, and relaxation training. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 71(2), 330-338. doi: 10.1037/ 
0022-006X.71.2.330
Teyler, T. J., & DiScenna, P (1986). The hippocampal memory 
indexing theory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 100(2), 147—154. 
doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.100.2.147 
Tolin, D. F., Abramowitz, J. S., Brigidi, B. D., & Foa, E. B. 
(2003). Intolerance of uncertainty in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 17(2), 233—242. 
doi: 10.1016/S0887-6185 (02)00182-2 
Toro, R., Fox, P.T., & Paus, T. (2008). Functional coactivation 
map of the human brain. Cerebral Cortex, f#(ll), 2553— 
2559. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn0l4
Travis, F., & Shear, J. (2010). Focused attention, open moni­
toring and automatic self-transcending: Categories to 
organize meditations from Vedic, Buddhist and Chinese 
traditions. Consciousness and Cognition, 19(4), 1110—1118. 
doi: 10.1016/j. concog.2010.01.007
Twombly, J. H. (2000). Incorporating EMDR and EMDR adap­
tations into the treatment of clients with dissociative iden­
tity disorder. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 1(2), 61—81. 
doi: 10.1300/J229v01 n02_05
van den Hurk, P A. M., Janssen, B. H., Giommi, F., 
Barendregt, H. P, & Gielen, S. C. (2010). Mindfulness 
meditation associated with alterations in bottom-up pro­
cessing: Psychophysiological evidence for reduced reactivity. 
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 78(2), 151—157. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2010.07.002
van Der Kolk, B. A., & Fisler, R. (1995). Dissociation and the 
fragmentary nature of traumatic memories: Overview and 
exploratory study. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 8(4), 505-525. 
doi: 10.1002/jts.2490080402
VanderKooi, L. (1997). Buddhist teachers’ experience with 
extreme mental states in Western meditators. The Journal of 
Transpersonal Psychology, 29(1), 31—46.
Walsh, R., & Roche, L. (1979). Precipitation of acute 
psychotic episodes by intensive meditation in indi­
viduals with a history of schizophrenia. The American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 136(8), 1085-1086. doi: 10.1176/ 
ajp.136.8.1085
Warda, G., & Bryant, R. A. (1998). Thought control strat­
egies in acute stress disorder. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 
36(12), 
1171-1175. 
doi: 
10.1016/S0005-
7967(98)00082-5
Wegner, D. M., & Zanakos, S. (1994). Chronic thought suppres­
sion. Journal of Personality, 62(4), 615—640. doi: 10.1111/ 
j. 1467-6494.1994. tb00311 .x
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. 
(1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 5-13. doi: 10.1037/ 
0022-3514.53.1.5
Wells, A. (1990). Panic disorder in association with relaxation 
induced anxiety: An attentional training approach to treat­
ment. Behavior Therapy, 21(3), 273—280. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0005-7894(05)80330-2
Wells, A., & Davies, M. I. (1994). The thought control question­
naire: A measure of individual differences in the control of 
unwanted thoughts. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32(8), 
871-878. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(94)90168-6
West, M. (1979). Meditation. The British Journal of Psychiatry: The 
Journal of Mental Science, 135, 457—467.
Williams, J. M. G., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2011). Mindfulness: 
Diverse perspectives on its meaning, origins, and multiple 
applications at the intersection of science and dharma. 
Contemporary Buddhism, 12(1), 
1—18. doi: 
10.1080/
14639947.2011.564811
Yorston, G. A. (2001). Mania precipitated by meditation: A 
case report and literature review. Mental Health, Religion & 
Culture, 4(2), 209-213. doi: 10.1080/713685624
D Y L A N  S T A N  A N D  K A L I N A  C H R I S T O F F
491


C H A P T E R
35
Candidate Mechanisms of Spontaneous 
Cognition as Revealed by Dementia 
Syndromes
Claire O ’Callaghan and Muireann Irish
Abstract
The capacity to engage in spontaneous self-generated thought is fundamental to the human experience, 
yet surprisingly little is known regarding the neurocognitive mechanisms that support this complex ability. 
Dementia syndromes offer a unique opportunity to study how the breakdown of large-scale functional 
brain networks impacts spontaneous cognition. Indeed, many of the characteristic cognitive changes in 
dementia reflect the breakdown of foundational processes essential for discrete aspects of self-generated 
thought. This chapter discusses how disease-specific alterations in memory-based/construction and 
mentalizing processes likely disrupt specific aspects of spontaneous, self-generated thought. In doing 
so, it provides a comprehensive overview of the neurocognitive architecture of spontaneous cognition, 
paying specific attention to how this sophisticated endeavor is compromised in dementia.
Key W ords: spontaneous cognition, dementia, neurocognition, cognitive change, memory, self-generated 
thought
Neurodegenerative disorders 
are 
associated 
with progressive deterioration in cognition, behav­
ior, and personality, linked to the gradual degen­
eration of large-scale functional brain networks. 
The cognitive signature of the different demen­
tia subtypes is now well established, leading to a 
heightened understanding of how complex cogni­
tive processes such as memory and language are 
represented in the brain. One area that remains 
poorly understood is the relatively newborn field 
of self-generated cognition. As such, we have little 
insight into the frequency or content of spontane­
ous thoughts generated by individuals living with 
dementia, and how alterations in self-generated 
forms of thinking potentially impact psychologi­
cal well-being and quality of life. In addition, it 
remains unclear how the characteristic patterns 
of neuropathology seen across dementia subtypes 
differentially disrupt aspects of self-generated
thought. In this chapter, we propose that unique 
insights can be gleaned into the internal world of 
dementia by studying how foundational memory- 
based/construction and introspection processes are 
disrupted in these syndromes. In essence, we con­
sider cognitive capacities such as autobiographical 
memory and future simulation as providing the 
requisite “building blocks” for memory-based/ 
constructive aspects of self-generated thought, 
while processes such as mentalization and cogni­
tive control are conceptualized as facilitating the 
introspective aspects of internal mentation. Using 
this framework, we will demonstrate that demen­
tia syndromes offer a unique opportunity to study 
how the progressive deterioration of large-scale 
brain networks impacts complex expressions of 
self-generated thought, thus advancing our under­
standing of the neurocognitive architecture of 
spontaneous cognition.
4 9 3

Dementia Syndromes as a Window 
into Large-Scale Brain Networks
Self-generated thought is consistently associated 
with activity in a distributed network of regions 
that comprise the brains default network (Andrews- 
Hanna, 
Reidler, 
Huang, 
& Buckner, 
2010a; 
Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 
2009; Mason et al., 2007; Stawarczyk, Majerus, 
Maquet, & D ’Argembeau, 2011). This large-scale 
brain system encompasses key regions in the pre­
frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices, which con­
verge on core midline hubs in the posterior cingulate 
and anteromedial prefrontal cortices (Andrews- 
Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, Poulin, & Buckner, 2010; 
Greicius, Supekar, Menon, & Dougherty, 2009; 
Raichle et al., 2001). Early characterization of this 
network framed it in terms of the brains “default 
mode” of activity when at rest. Beyond this, how­
ever, convergent evidence from task-based activation 
studies supports active engagement of this network 
during autobiographical memory retrieval, prospec- 
tion, and theory of mind (Spreng, Mar, & Kim,
2009). A functional-anatomical parcellation of the 
default network has been advanced whereby an array 
of complex cognitive functions can be categorized 
on the basis of two distinct subsystems: (1) a system 
supporting memory-based construction/simulation 
anchored in the medial temporal lobe (MTL sub­
system); and (2) a system preferentially involved in 
introspection and theory of mind centered on the 
dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC subsystem) 
(Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014; 
Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008) (see 
Figure 35.1 A).
O f interest in this context is the observation of 
progressive degeneration of large-scale functional 
brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders. 
Notably, the spread of pathology follows a trajec­
tory that recapitulates the underlying functional 
and structural topography of discrete functional 
brain networks (Pievani, de Haan, Wu, Seeley, & 
Frisoni, 2011; Seeley, Crawford, Zhou, Miller, & 
Greicius, 2009). Here, we focus on three dementia 
syndromes— Alzheimer’s disease, semantic demen­
tia, and the behavioral variant of frontotemporal 
dementia— each of which is associated with vary­
ing degrees of structural and functional change 
in the default network (Irish, Piguet, & Hodges,
2012) (Figure 35.IB). These conditions have illu­
minated our understanding of the cognitive and 
behavioral consequences of selective default net­
work damage across a range of complex cognitive 
processes (Irish & Piolino, 2016), underscoring
the importance of discrete nodes within the default 
network for subtending aspects of self-generated 
thought. Regions beyond the default network are 
also affected to varying degrees across these demen­
tia syndromes, in particular, executive or cogni­
tive control networks implicated in self-generated 
thought (e.g., Christoff et al., 2009; Fox, Spreng, 
Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015). 
Given the widespread neural degeneration charac­
teristic of these disorders, it is paramount to estab­
lish how aberrations within the default network, 
but also connectivity between the default network 
and other large-scale brain networks, impact the 
capacity for self-generated thought.
Building Blocks Furnishing the Content 
of Self-Generated Thought 
Memory-Based Construction!Simulation
The capacity to recollect specific events from 
the past via episodic memory represents a largely 
constructive rather than reproductive endeavor 
(Bartlett, 1932; Schacter & Addis, 2007) and one 
that appears particularly well suited to support inter­
nally generated forms of thought. Autobiographical 
memory arguably 
represents 
the 
prototypical 
expression of the brain’s default network, allowing 
an individual to mentally travel back in subjective 
time to relive salient past experiences. This form 
of self-generated thought confers an ongoing sense 
of identity and continuity across subjective time. 
Autobiographical memories are typically emotion­
ally charged, imbued with rich sensory-perceptual 
information, and integrated within a specific spatio- 
temporal and self-referential framework (Conway, 
Singer, &Tagini, 2004). This complexity is reflected 
on the neural level, as a distributed network includ­
ing the hippocampus and surrounding medial tem­
poral regions, frontopolar cortices, lateral temporal 
regions, and lateral and medial posterior parietal 
cortices, including the posterior cingulate cortex, is 
activated when healthy individuals revisit their per­
sonal past (Maguire, 2001; Svoboda, McKinnon, & 
Levine, 2006). This “core network” displays strik­
ing overlap with that of the default network (Spreng 
& Grady, 2010), a finding that resonates with the 
observation that autobiographical experiences con­
stitute a very large proportion of self-generated 
thought during task-free periods in healthy individ­
uals (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Huang, & Buckner, 
2010b). As such, there is close correspondence 
between the cognitive and neural mechanisms that 
must be functional to support autobiographical 
memory and aspects of self-generated thought.
494
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

Figure 35.1. (See Color Insert) (A) The default network. The MTL subsystem (dark gray) encompasses the hippocampal formation, 
parahippocampal cortex, retrosplenial cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and posterior inferior parietal lobule, whereas the 
dmPFC subsystem (light gray) comprises the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, temporoparietal junction, lateral temporal cortex, and 
temporal pole. The midline core (white) refers to the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, and the posterior cingulate cortex. Regional 
anatomical boundaries are approximate. Abbreviations: dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; MTL = medial temporal lobe. (B) 
Characteristic patterns of atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease, semantic dementia, and behavioral variant FTD. Patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease (diagonal stripes) show hippocampal, medial temporal and retrosplenial cortex involvement, spreading to lateral parietal and 
medial prefrontal regions with disease progression. In semantic dementia (dark gray), the typical pattern of atrophy is lateralized 
(generally left greater than right hemisphere), targeting the anterior temporal lobes and temporal pole, including the hippocampal 
formation and amygdala, and spreading to ventromedial prefrontal cortical regions as the disease progresses. Patients with behavioural 
variant FTD (white) show bilateral atrophy in mesial and orbital frontal regions, extending to the temporal pole and hippocampal 
formation as the disease progresses. Regional anatomical boundaries are approximate. Abbreviation: FTD = frontotemporal dementia. 
Figure and legend adapted with permission from Nature Reviews Neurology (Irish, Piguet, et al., 2012).
Interestingly, anticipatory or prospective forms 
of thinking also account for a sizable proportion of 
self-generated thought, suggesting that spontaneous 
cognition, in the absence of external forms of stim­
ulation, serves an important future planning func­
tion (Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, Van der Linden, & 
D ’Argembeau, 2011). Again, this proposal is sup­
ported on the neural level when we consider the 
marked convergence between regions in the default 
network and those that are reliably recruited when 
healthy individuals envisage the future (Addis, Wong, 
& Schacter, 2007; Spreng et al., 2009). Moreover, 
functional neuroimaging studies emphasize distinct 
commonalities between the brain networks mediat­
ing past and future modes of thought, suggesting 
that a common neurobiological substrate underpins 
all forms of memory-based construction (Hassabis
& Maguire, 2009; Schacter et al., 2012). The MTL 
subsystem of the default network is consistently 
implicated across studies that tax these constructive 
capacities (Andrews-Hanna, 2012), and damage to 
medial temporal structures compromises not only 
the ability to recollect the past (Rosenbaum et al.,
2005) but also the ability to envisage the future 
(Race, Keane, & Verfaellie, 2011). We contend 
that these complex cognitive endeavors, in which 
an individual mentally revisits the past, extracts 
relevant sensory-perceptual information, and flex­
ibly assimilates these details into a novel represen­
tation, are some of the foundational processes of 
self-generated thought. In the same manner as the 
sensory-perceptual contextual details extracted from 
episodic memory represent the building blocks of 
episodic future thinking (Schacter & Addis, 2009),
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
4 9 5

we suggest that these contextual elements also sup­
port memory-based construction during periods 
of self-generated thought. We next consider how 
the progressive degeneration of key areas in the 
MTL subsystem of the default network adversely 
impacts memory-based construction/simulation in 
dementia and how these syndromes, in turn, can 
potentially inform our understanding of the neuro­
circuitry subtending self-generated thought.
Importance of the Midline Core 
in Memory-Based Construction
Memory dysfunction is one of the most perva­
sive features of dementia, reflecting the fact that 
the majority of dementia syndromes harbor sig­
nificant atrophy in key nodes of the core memory 
network (Irish, Piguet, et al., 2012). Alzheimer’s 
disease, which is characterized by profound memory 
impairment, is associated with early hippocampal 
and medial temporal pathological changes, as well 
as frontal and parietal changes, which are appar­
ent using neuroimaging and reflect the underlying 
spread of pathology (Braak & Braak, 1991; Jack,
2012). At the network level, both the structural 
and functional alterations seen in Alzheimer’s dis­
ease overlap considerably with the default network 
topography, encompassing the MTL subsystem and 
the posteromedial hub (Buckner et al., 2005; Seeley 
et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2010). The posteromedial 
hub, in particular, represents a key site of patho­
logical deposition from very early in the Alzheimer’s 
disease course (Buckner et al., 2005). Altered con­
nectivity in the default network tracks with disease 
stage in Alzheimer’s disease, beginning in the early 
stages with decreases in the posterior default net­
work regions and increases in anterior and ventral 
regions, before decreased connectivity is seen across 
all default network regions with disease progression 
(Damoiseaux, Prater, Miller, & Greicius, 2012). As 
such, early alterations in the posterior default net­
work are thought to precipitate a “cascade” of con­
nectivity changes throughout the default network, 
eventually affecting other large-scale networks (Jones 
et al., 2016).
Prominent deficits in autobiographical memory 
retrieval are evident from early in the Alzheimer’s 
disease course, often manifesting in temporal gra­
dients whereby retrieval of recently experienced 
events are disproportionately impaired relative 
to remote epochs (Greene, Hodges, & Baddeley, 
1995; Irish et al., 2006). More recently, however, 
the use of fine-grained scoring methods reveals 
a flat gradient of retrieval in Alzheimer’s disease,
with comparable deficits irrespective of time period 
(Barnabe. Whitehead, Pilon, Arsenault-Lapierre, & 
Chertkow, 2012; Irish, Hornberger, et al., 2011). 
In parallel with this loss of contextual detail for key 
events from the past, phenomenological changes 
in the quality and subjective experience of auto­
biographical memory retrieval are also evident in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Patients lose access to sensory- 
perceptual details and experience striking deficits in 
the ability to evoke self-referential visual imagery 
during autobiographical memory recollection (Irish, 
Lawlor, O ’Mara, & Coen, 2011). This inability to 
mentally visualize core elements of formerly evoca­
tive events dovetails with well-documented impair­
ments in visual imagery in Alzheimer’s disease, 
which may in turn disrupt the capacity to envisage 
oneself across past and future contexts (Hussey, 
Smolinsky, Piryatinsky, Budson, & Ally, 2012).
The characteristic impairments in autobiographi­
cal memory retrieval in Alzheimer’s disease have long 
been ascribed to the hallmark pathology that begins 
in the entorhinal cortex and encroaches across the 
hippocampus and then to the neocortex (Braak & 
Braak, 1991). While medial temporal lobe volume 
reduction is unequivocally associated with impaired 
visual and verbal anterograde memory (de Toledo- 
Morrell et al., 2000), recent studies have demon­
strated that damage to midline posterior cortical 
regions may hold the key to memory disruption in 
this syndrome. A study by our group revealed that 
impaired retrieval of recent events significantly cor­
related with the structural integrity of the posterior 
cingulate cortex (Irish, Addis, Hodges, & Piguet, 
2012a), and we replicated this finding in a follow­
up study (Irish, Hodges, & Piguet, 2013). The pos­
terior cingulate cortex represents a site of immense 
interest in this regard as it is one of the main hubs 
of the default network and exhibits dense con­
nections to the MTL subsystem. This structure is 
posited to underpin a range of self-referential and 
motivationally-salient functions, 
including self­
reflection and autobiographical memory (Andrews- 
Hanna, 2012). A recent study has demonstrated 
that vulnerability of a largely posterior brain net­
work in Alzheimer’s disease, which centers on the 
hippocampus but also includes the posterior cin­
gulate cortex, represents the likely neural substrate 
of the prominent episodic memory deficits exhib­
ited by these patients (La Joie et al., 2014), and we 
have corroborated these findings in a subsequent 
study (Irish et al., 2016). As such, the characteris­
tic pathology in the posterior cingulate cortex, evi­
dent from very early in Alzheimer’s disease, appears
496
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

central to understanding compromised autobio­
graphical memory retrieval in this syndrome.
The capacity to simulate personally relevant 
events at a future time point, or episodic future 
thinking (Atance & O ’Neill, 2001), is also deleteri- 
ously altered in Alzheimer’s disease, at a level com­
parable with the deficits observed for past retrieval 
(Addis, Sacchetti, Ally, Budson, & Schacter, 2009; 
El Haj, Antoine, & Kapogiannis, 2015; Irish, 
Addis, et al., 2012a). Interestingly, these symme­
tries in loss of contextual details across past and 
future contexts extend to the phenomenological 
experience in Alzheimer’s disease, as patients tend 
to rate their past and future events comparably in 
terms of personal significance and emotional inten­
sity (Addis et al., 2009; Irish, Addis, et al., 2012b). 
Accordingly, the parallel deficits across past and 
future contexts have been interpreted as reflecting 
the disruption of a common mechanism integral to 
all forms of memory-based construction and simu­
lation. Intuitively, this proposal makes sense, but it 
has been suggested that future simulation deficits 
in Alzheimer’s disease arise due to medial tempo­
ral pathology (Addis et al., 2009). Our ongoing 
work, using automated voxel-based morphometry 
techniques, however, demonstrates that damage 
to the posterior cingulate hub of the default mode 
underpins the future thinking deficit in Alzheimer’s 
disease (reviewed by Irish & Piolino, 2016). 
Notably, integrity of the posterior cingulate cortex 
in Alzheimer’s disease is the crucial determinant of 
performance across past and future contexts (Irish, 
Addis, et al., 2012a; Irish et al., 2013), pointing to 
this region as the core neuroanatomical substrate 
mediating memory-based construction deficits in 
Alzheimer’s disease.
More recently, we have revealed that the pos­
terior cingulate cortex is also crucial for the men­
tal construction of spatially coherent scenes (Irish 
et al., 2015), a process proposed to underlie a host 
of complex cognitive endeavors such as autobio­
graphical memory, future thinking, spatial navi­
gation, and spontaneous cognition (Hassabis & 
Maguire, 2009). Patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
display marked difficulties in mentally generating 
commonplace scenes (e.g., beach, forest, market), 
providing impoverished descriptions that are spa­
tially fragmented and lacking in overall richness. 
Voxel-based morphometry revealed that the core 
region underpinning these construction impair­
ments in Alzheimer’s disease is the posterior cingu­
late cortex (Irish et al., 2015). As such, the evidence 
from Alzheimer’s disease unequivocally points to
the role of the posteromedial hub of the default net­
work in supporting complex memory-based con­
structive endeavors.
From the findings reviewed in the preceding 
section, it becomes apparent that Alzheimer’s dis­
ease patients suffer both a loss of contextual detail 
and the ability to effectively simulate those details 
when evoking personal memories or envisaging the 
future. Given that such a high proportion of mind­
wandering and self-reflection is spent reminisc­
ing and planning for the future (Andrews-Hanna, 
Reidler, et al., 2010a; Baird et al., 2011; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maj, et al., 2011), a loss of contextual 
detail and the inability to mentally simulate spa­
tially contiguous events suggest that the content of 
self-generated thought would be profoundly altered 
in Alzheimer’s disease. It has been suggested that 
Alzheimer’s disease patients tend to draw upon over­
generalized, gist-based details when attempting to 
remember events from the past (Gallo et al., 2006). 
An intriguing question, therefore, is whether such 
semanticized abstracted details remain available for 
Alzheimer’s disease patients to harness during peri­
ods of internally guided thought in their daily life.
Disruption of the Semantic Framework 
for Memory-Based Construction
Whereas Alzheimer’s disease is typically couched 
in terms of episodic memory dysfunction, semantic 
dementia represents the other side of the coin, in 
that the hallmark feature of this syndrome concerns 
the progressive loss of semantic knowledge, clas­
sically manifesting as a loss of memory for words. 
This impairment of general conceptual knowledge 
occurs irrespective of modality and is proposed to 
reflect the degeneration of a central amodal seman­
tic hub located in the anterior temporal lobes 
(Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007). Atrophy in 
semantic dementia preferentially targets the anterior 
temporal lobes, most severe initially on the ventral 
surface and encompassing the anterior fusiform and 
perirhinal cortices (Mion et al., 2010). Key nodes of 
the default network are affected, including the tem­
poral pole, parahippocampal cortex, and hippocam­
pus (Galton et al., 2001; Rosen et al., 2002). This 
pattern of atrophy can be strikingly focal at presen­
tation and is typically lateralized to the left: side of 
the brain. Over time, however, atrophy begins to 
encroach into the contralateral hemisphere with dis­
ease progression, producing bilateral temporal lobe 
damage (Irish, Hodges, & Piguet, 2014; Mion et al.,
2010) and wider network dysfunction in regions 
that incorporate primary sensory and association
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
497

cortices, insula, striatal and thalamic regions, as well 
as medial prefrontal regions of the default network 
(Agosta et al., 2014; Guo et al., 2013).
Despite profound conceptual deficits, patients 
with semantic dementia display an array of rela­
tively intact cognitive functions, including that of 
episodic retrieval (Adlam, Patterson, & Hodges,
2009), particularly on non-verbal tasks (Bozeat 
et al., 2000). This relative preservation of episodic 
memory retrieval is somewhat paradoxical given 
that semantic dementia patients harbor significant 
atrophy in the hippocampus, at a level compa­
rable or sometimes greater than that typically seen 
in Alzheimer’s disease (Chan et al., 2001; Davies, 
Graham, Xuereb, Williams, & Hodges, 2004; La 
Joie et al., 2013). We recently demonstrated that 
the integrity of posterior parietal regions largely 
mediates the capacity for intact episodic retrieval 
in this syndrome (Irish et al., 2016), underscoring 
the importance of regions beyond the medial tem­
poral lobe in supporting complex memory-based 
endeavors.
Studies of autobiographical memory in seman­
tic dementia have yielded mixed results, with 
some revealing interesting dissociations contingent 
on temporal context. A number of studies have 
documented a reverse temporal gradient or, more 
accurately, a step function whereby recent memo­
ries are substantially preserved in the context of 
remote memory dysfunction (Graham & Hodges, 
1997; Graham, Patterson, & Hodges, 1999; Hou, 
Miller, & Kramer, 2005; Irish, Hornberger, et al., 
2011; Matuszewski et al., 2009; Nestor, Graham, 
Bozeat, Simons, & Hodges, 2002). Similarly, 
using a naturalistic anterograde memory paradigm, 
Adlam et al. (2009) demonstrated intact retrieval 
of recently experienced events occurring one day 
prior in semantic dementia. Importantly, however, 
a number of studies have failed to demonstrate a 
reverse temporal gradient in semantic dementia 
(Maguire, Kumaran, Hassabis, & Kopelman, 2010; 
McKinnon, Black, Miller, Moscovitch, & Levine,
2006). These conflicting reports potentially reflect 
differences in experimental paradigms or group 
differences in disease severity (Ivanoiu, Cooper, 
Shanks, & Venneri, 2006).
Remote memory deficits in semantic demen­
tia have been interpreted as largely reflecting the 
loss of semantic information that is integral to the 
memory trace (Westmacott, Leach, Freedman, & 
Moscovitch, 2001). Remote memories are hypoth­
esized to undergo a “transformation” from evoca­
tive, perceptually rich experiences to abstracted
and largely schematic accounts 
(Winocur & 
Moscovitch, 2011). By this view, older memories 
from remote epochs are particularly vulnerable in 
semantic dementia, underscoring the likely seman- 
ticization of these events with repeated rehearsal 
and the passage of time (Irish & Piguet, 2013). 
As such, in concert with the progressive degenera­
tion of semantic knowledge in semantic dementia, 
we see the gradual erosion of conceptual informa­
tion fundamental to successful autobiographical 
memory retrieval (Greenberg & Verfaellie, 2010). 
In contrast, the precise mechanisms supporting suc­
cessful recent autobiographical memory retrieval in 
the face of substantial MTL atrophy in semantic 
dementia remain unclear. It has been suggested that 
preserved anterograde processes in semantic demen­
tia potentially facilitate the encoding and retrieval 
of newly experienced events (Matuszewski et al., 
2009). Further, recent autobiographical memo­
ries disproportionately encompass more sensory- 
perceptual 
elements 
than 
older 
semanticized 
representations from remote memory, and it has 
been posited that semantic dementia patients rely 
on these perceptual features to guide recent retrieval 
(Hodges & Graham, 2001; Irish, Hornberger, et al.,
2011). Interestingly, recent autobiographical mem­
ories have also been shown to retain their autono- 
etic flavor in semantic dementia (Piolino et al.,
2003), allowing the individual to mentally “relive” 
the original event in a rich and evocative manner. 
The accessibility of perceptual details represents a 
plausible candidate mechanism supporting recent 
autobiographical memory in semantic dementia, 
given that these patients perform at control levels 
on sensory-perceptual processing tasks when feature 
ambiguity is low (Barense, Rogers, Bussey, Saksida, 
& Graham, 2010) and appear adept at providing 
sensory-perceptual details when recounting recent 
events (Irish, Hornberger, et al., 2011).
Given their well-documented preservation of 
recent autobiographical memory, patients with 
semantic dementia arguably possess the requisite 
sensory-perceptual building blocks to furnish the 
construction of plausible simulations of the future. 
Notably, however, converging evidence reveals a 
profound inability to envisage future scenarios in 
semantic dementia, despite relatively intact episodic 
memory (reviewed by Irish & Piolino, 2016). These 
deficits are asymmetric, in that semantic dementia 
patients can provide detailed information regard­
ing past experiences and self-representations, yet 
exhibit marked impairments in constructing future 
self-images or in generating contextual information
498
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

to support their conceptions of their future selves 
(Duval et al., 2012). Compromised episodic future 
thinking is closely correlated with semantic pro­
cessing in semantic dementia, suggesting that the 
inability to simulate the future arises as a direct con­
sequence of semantic memory impairment in this 
syndrome (Irish, Addis, et al., 2012a). This observa­
tion is further qualified by voxel-based morphom­
etry findings demonstrating an exclusive association 
between atrophy in core semantic-processing regions 
of the brain and future thinking deficits in semantic 
dementia (Irish, Addis, et al., 2012a). The finding 
that semantic memory is essential for constructive 
simulation of the future represents an expansion of 
the prevailing view in the field, which to date has 
focused mainly on the role of episodic memory 
(Klein, 2013). As such, we have formulated the 
semantic scaffolding hypothesis (Irish, 2016; Irish & 
Piguet, 2013) in which semantic memory is argued 
to provide the critical framework to impart meaning 
and structure to constructive simulation. In many 
ways, conceptual knowledge is ideally suited to 
support constructive processes as it provides undif­
ferentiated information that can be extrapolated 
and generalized across multiple contexts without 
recourse to any specific experience (Abraham & 
Bubic, 2015; Hegde, 2007).
Unsurprisingly, when asked to envisage possible 
future public domain events, semantic dementia 
patients display striking deficits, again reflecting 
their severe anterior temporal lobe dysfunction 
(Irish, Addis, et al., 2012a). Insights can be gleaned 
from closer inspection of the subjective reports of 
semantic dementia patients in this regard.
Can you tell me what you think w ill be the most 
important medical breakthroughs occurring within the 
next ten years?
“There has to be changes [sic] in that because it’s all 
come forward [sic].
Can you think o f any examples?
“No. The brain won’t work. There has to 
be some . . . there has to be heaps [sic]. It’s 
not something I think about lots.” (Irish, 
unpublished data)
The the individual with semantic dementia dis­
plays a profound inability to draw upon general 
conceptual knowledge to form a cogent representa­
tion of possible future developments. In this sense, 
the degraded conceptual knowledge base dramati­
cally disrupts the capacity for future simulation 
irrespective of whether the task requires episodic
(event-based) or semantic (public domain) con­
struction. This pervasive disruption to constructive 
simulation, despite access to relatively preserved 
sensory-perceptual details from episodic memory, is 
intriguing, particularly when viewed in relation to 
self-generated thought. If semantic memory repre­
sents a foundational repository for all forms of mem­
ory-based construction, and given that self-generated 
thought is associated with an anticipatory or prospec­
tive bias in healthy individuals (Stawarczyk, Majerus, 
Maj, et al., 2011), it follows then that self-generated 
thought may be uniformly compromised in this 
syndrome. On the other hand, relatively spared sen­
sory-perceptual details from episodic memory could 
potentially serve a compensatory function, allowing 
the semantic dementia patient to populate his or her 
self-generated thought with content predominantly 
sourced from recent autobiographical experiences.
Foundational Processes That Sustain 
Self-Generated Thought: Mentalizing 
and Cognitive Control 
Mentalizing
Contrasting with memory-based construction/ 
simulation activities that are ascribed to the MTL 
subsystem of the default network, other founda­
tional processes that may enable self-generated 
thought are associated with integrity of the dmPFC 
subsystem (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014). These 
processes include mentalizing, which supports our 
ability to infer the mental states of others and use 
this information to understand and predict behav­
ior (Frith & Frith, 1999). This mentalizing ability 
enables us to have theory of mind— awareness that 
others can have different beliefs and intentions from 
our own, which will govern their behavior— and 
as such, the terms are often used interchangeably. 
Mentalizing reliably recruits regions of the dmPFC 
subsystem in healthy individuals, including the 
dmPFC and temporoparietal junction (Frith & 
Frith, 2006; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003).
It is worth noting that mentalizing remains a 
much-debated construct. Far from being a unitary 
process, successful mentalizing draws upon many 
sub-processes, including fluid executive abilities, 
face and gaze processing, emotion recognition 
and moral reasoning (Schaafsma, Pfaff, Spunt, & 
Adolphs, 2015). Central to mentalizing, however, is 
the capacity to direct ones attention inward and to 
introspect, a process that permits the differentiation 
of one’s own “self” from others (Amodio & Frith,
2006). While the self remains a somewhat nebulous 
construct, the capacity for self-reflection has been
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
499

linked to default network integrity, predominantly 
that of the dorsal medial prefrontal subsystem 
(Brewer, Garrison, & Whitfield-Gabrieli, 2013), 
although the posteromedial hub of the default 
network is also strongly implicated (Northoff & 
Bermpohl, 2004). We propose that self-generated 
thought is supported by the capacity to mental- 
ize to interpret the mental states of others and to 
reflect upon our own mental state, which in turn 
facilitates successful social interactions and pro­
motes psychological well-being (Smallwood & 
Andrews-Hanna, 2013).
O f the dementia syndromes reviewed here, 
the behavioral variant of frontotemporal demen­
tia (FTD) represents the prototypical example 
of compromised capacity for introspection and 
socioemotional processing. Characterized by per­
vasive behavioral dysfunction, hallmark features of 
behavioral variant FTD include disinhibition, loss 
of motivation (apathy), loss of empathy, blunting 
of emotional expression, and rigid and stereotypi­
cal behaviors— all of which contribute to a general 
decline in personal and social conduct (Piguet, 
Hornberger, Mioshi, & Hodges, 2011; Rascovsky 
et al., 2007). Further, patients have little or no 
insight into these changes, suggesting a profound 
inability to introspect. Pathological changes tend 
to begin in the medial and orbitofrontal cortices, 
although widespread atrophy is observed in the 
anterior cingulate/dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, 
insula, amygdala, thalamus, and striatum from the 
early stages (Broe et al., 2003; Seeley et al., 2008). 
These affected regions correspond to key regions 
of the default network, most notably the dmPFC, 
anchoring the dmPFC subsystem, and also the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, a key node in the 
MTL subsystem. In direct contrast to Alzheimer’s 
disease, posterior default network regions show 
increased connectivity in behavioral variant FTD 
(Zhou et al., 2010). The most striking alterations in 
this syndrome, however, occur in the brain’s salience 
network, encompassing dorsal anterior cingulate 
and orbital fronto-insular cortices (Seeley et al., 
2009; Zhou et al., 2010). The salience network has 
been linked to processing emotionally salient stim­
uli, and is thought to serve a function of supporting 
dynamic switches between the internally focused 
default network and externally focused attention/ 
executive networks (Menon & Uddin, 2010). 
Accordingly, salience network dysfunction is pos­
ited to underpin the hallmark socioemotional dis­
turbances typically seen in this dementia syndrome 
(Seeley, Allman, et al., 2007).
A consistent finding in the literature is that the 
capacity for mentalizing is severely compromised 
in behavioral variant FTD (Bora, Walterfang, & 
Velakoulis, 2015; Henry, Phillips, & von Hippel,
2014). Notably, these mentalizing deficits are pro­
posed to contribute to the profound disturbances 
in social behavior seen in behavioral variant FTD, 
as they are unable to appreciate the impact of their 
behavior on others, or to engage in self-monitoring 
(Adenzato, Cavallo, & Enrici, 2010). These impair­
ments occur irrespective of the method of assess­
ment used and include compromised first- and 
second-order belief interpretation (Gregory et al.,
2002), faux pas detection (Bertoux, O ’Callaghan, 
Dubois, & Hornberger, 2015; Torralva et al.,
2007), and drawing emotional inferences from 
facial stimuli and humorous cartoons (Clark et al., 
2015; Gregory et al., 2002; Irish et al., 2014; Lough 
et al., 2006).
The pervasive disruption of mentalizing in 
behavioral variant FTD is typically viewed in light 
of hallmark pathology in the frontoinsular salience 
network, crucial for identifying and process­
ing emotionally relevant information (Dermody, 
Wong, Ahmed, Piguet, Hodges, & Irish, 2016; 
Seeley, Allman, et al., 2007). Empirical stud­
ies combining targeted experimental tasks of 
social cognition and neuroimaging analysis tech­
niques, however, reveal the involvement of both 
the salience network and discrete regions of the 
dmPFC subsystem in this syndrome. Impaired 
performance on mentalizing tasks requiring emo­
tion and intention attribution has been associated 
with gray matter atrophy in the amygdala and 
insula, but also in the posterior-superior temporal 
sulcus extending into the temporoparietal junc­
tion (Cerami et al., 2014). Applying a different 
mentalizing task in behavioral variant FTD and 
semantic dementia, impaired capacity to infer the 
mental states of others correlated with gray matter 
loss in areas of the dmPFC subsystem, including 
the lateral temporal cortices and temporal pole 
(Irish et al., 2014). Bridging structural and func­
tional modalities, emotional attribution deficits 
have been linked to both atrophic changes in the 
salience network and resting state abnormalities 
in the dorsomedial prefrontal node of the default 
network (Caminiti et al., 2015). Together, these 
findings suggest that disrupted salience-default 
network interactions potentially underlie mental­
izing impairments in behavioral variant FTD.
Corroborating 
these 
findings 
of compro­
mised salience and default network interactions in
500
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

behavioral variant FTD, a recent study has linked 
disruptions in a related social process, moral reason­
ing, to diminished functional connectivity between 
the salience network and the default network 
(Chiong et al., 2013). This is consistent with a role 
for the salience network in dynamically modulat­
ing the default network. It follows that, along with 
the direct pathological changes in key regions of 
the dmPFC subsystem, alterations in the interplay 
between the salience and default networks might 
disrupt mentalization in behavioral variant FTD. 
Compromised salience network function may pre­
vent an active switch away from externally directed 
attention to engage the default network in intro­
spective processes. Impaired engagement of the 
default network via this active switching process 
could further compromise any functions that are 
already affected by intrinsic damage to the default 
network, including mentalization or memory-based 
construction/simulation processes. 
Further evi­
dence supporting the impact of between-network 
disturbances is drawn from the observation that 
some of the deficits displayed by behavioral vari­
ant FTD patients on mentalization tasks stem from 
an inability to inhibit their own perspective, as 
opposed to an exclusive deficit in inferring the men­
tal state of another (Le Bouc et al., 2012). Inherent 
in this is the idea that adopting another’s perspec­
tive necessarily entails inhibition of a prepotent 
tendency to take one’s own perspective (Samson, 
Apperly, & Humphreys, 2007). The lack of inhibi­
tion supporting mentalization suggests a potential 
break down in co-operation between default and 
cognitive control networks (Kumfor, Dermody, & 
Irish, 2015). These findings emphasize that it is not 
only intrinsic default mode changes that determine 
alterations in self-generated thought in dementia, 
but changes in the interrelationship between the 
default and other large-scale networks. Initial work 
to elucidate changes in the relationship between 
default and cognitive control networks is discussed 
in more detail in the following section.
Cognitive Control Processes
Dynamic interactions have been noted between 
the default network and the frontoparietal control 
network, which comprises the lateral prefrontal 
cortex, precuneus, anterior inferior parietal lobule, 
medial superior prefrontal cortex, and anterior insula 
(Spreng, Sepulcre, Turner, Stevens, & Schacter,
2013). Frontoparietal and frontal executive control 
networks underpin the ability to flexibly alternate 
between different thought and behavioral states
in response to changing environmental demands, 
as well as supporting aspects of working memory, 
attention, and task switching (Seeley, Menon, et al.,
2007). Frontal control networks have been shown 
to couple with the default network across many 
instances of internal thought, including mental 
simulation, mind-wandering, social processing, and 
creativity (Beaty, Benedek, Silvia, & Schacter, 2016; 
Christoff et al., 2009; Gerlach, Spreng, Gilmore, & 
Schacter, 2011; Meyer, Spunt, Berkman, Taylor, & 
Lieberman, 2012; Spreng, Stevens, Chamberlain, 
Gilmore, & Schacter, 2010). As such, sustaining 
a deliberative, or goal-directed, manner of inter­
nal thought likely relies on a combination of both 
generative and controlled processes, derived from 
cooperation between default and executive control 
systems (Smallwood, Brown, Baird, & Schooler, 
2012; Smallwood & Schooler, 2006).
As described in the preceding section, altera­
tions in the default network in Alzheimer’s disease, 
behavioral variant FTD, and semantic dementia 
differentially underpin impairments in memory, 
simulation, prospection, and theory of mind. In 
Alzheimer’s disease, impairments in attention, exec­
utive function, and cognitive control are related to 
pathological changes in frontoparietal sites and the 
broader executive control networks (Agosta et al.,
2012). Alterations in executive control network 
involvement during memory performance is evi­
dent in Alzheimer’s disease (Dhanjal & Wise, 2014). 
When additional executive regions are recruited 
during memory tasks, patients’ performance is bet­
ter maintained, suggesting a compensatory func­
tion (Grady et al., 2003). Such findings highlight 
the fact that changes in the interaction between 
default network-mediated functions and executive 
control processes have important behavioral rami­
fications in dementia. Alterations within executive 
control networks, and in the interactions between 
the executive and default networks, suggest that 
aspects of internal thought in dementia may also 
be compromised via decreased ability to establish 
and maintain purposeful streams of thought. While 
this proposal is intuitively plausible, the cognitive 
and behavioral consequences of altered cooperation 
between the executive control and default systems 
have not, to date, been thoroughly characterized in 
the dementias.
Elucidating the dynamic interactions between 
functional networks that support the content of 
self-generated thought, and enable our ability to 
sustain it, represents a critical area for future research 
in cognitive neuroscience. In the case of dementia,
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
501

differential damage to the default mode and cogni­
tive control networks will likely manifest in unique 
ways. For example, dissociations may arise where 
spontaneous thought might readily occur, but in 
the absence of intact executive control processes, 
it might be difficult for the individual to organize 
internal thoughts into coherent streams that can 
be maintained over a period of time. Given that 
some of the most adaptive features of self-generated 
thought are to allow us to plan for the future or 
to mentally simulate the consequences of events 
(Smallwood & Andrews-Hanna, 2013; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maj, et al., 2011), an inability to prop­
erly control internal thought could have significant 
consequences for everyday functioning in dementia. 
The functional implications of disordered forms of 
self-generated thought represent another key area 
for future research.
Behavioral Consequences of Impaired 
Spontaneous Thought in Dementia
To date, there is a paucity of literature on the 
topic of self-generated thought in neurodegenera- 
tive disorders. Despite this clear gap in the litera­
ture, it is important to consider how disruptions in 
the internal world of dementia potentially manifest 
on the broader behavioral level. Given the many 
ways in which internally guided cognition may sup­
port adaptive functioning, alterations in the capac­
ity to generate and sustain this form of thinking in 
dementia will likely have grave consequences for the 
everyday functional independence of the individual 
(reviewed by Irish & Piolino, 2016). For example, 
memory-based 
construction/simulation 
deficits 
in dementia could underscore many problems in 
daily life, including difficulties with future planning 
and in simulating possible outcomes for different 
courses of action to guide decision-making pro­
cesses (Dermody, Hornberger, Piguet, Hodges, & 
Irish 2016b; Kamminga, O ’Callaghan, Hodges, & 
Irish, 2014). Mentalization difficulties, which affect 
patients’ ability to both appreciate others’ reactions 
to their behavior and to self-reflect on their own, 
would severely impair their ability to meaningfully 
engage in social settings (Adenzato et al., 2010). 
Alterations in interpersonal relationships as a result 
of these social difficulties can have profound effects, 
including isolation and added strain on friends or 
family members.
In addition, we speculate that a reduced capac­
ity for self-generated thought in dementia could 
potentially underpin something akin to a “mental 
apathy,” whereby an individual has a reduced ability
to engage in, and sustain, internal cognitive activity. 
Apathy is typically associated with a reduction in 
daily activities, reduced emotional responsiveness, 
or self-reported loss of interest or drive (Marin, 
1991). These forms of apathy are highly prevalent 
across neurodegenerative disorders, and are pres­
ent to a degree in all of the dementia syndromes 
we discuss here (Chase, 2010). Although the notion 
of “mental emptiness” has been described in neu­
rodegenerative conditions (Levy & Dubois, 2006), 
it remains unclear whether the diminished outward 
drive and activity we typically associate with apathy 
might be paralleled with a mental apathy reflecting 
reduced self-generative thought. The gross disrup­
tion to the building blocks of self-generated cogni­
tion outlined here, including a loss of content (i.e., 
memory, prospection) and a loss of the sustaining 
processes (i.e., mentalization, cognitive control), 
arise in the context of experimental tasks in which 
the individual is required to respond to external 
task demands. It follows, then, that impairments 
in the foundational processes of self-generated 
thought may be more pronounced when the indi­
vidual is left to her own devices without external 
direction or input. Rather than being “lost in one’s 
own thoughts,” we suggest that the internal world 
of the individual living with dementia may in fact 
lack many of the sophisticated forms of internally 
guided cognition that we so take for granted in our 
daily lives, especially with disease advancement. In 
turn, this impaired capacity to generate and sustain 
complex forms of internally guided cognition may 
render the individual more reliant upon external 
forms of stimulation. This hypothesis would have 
significant implications for the care of individuals 
living with dementia and requires careful empirical 
investigation.
A Path for the Future: Developing Novel 
Procedures to Study Spontaneous Thought 
in Cognitively Impaired Populations
The evidence reviewed here suggests that altera­
tions in the capacity for spontaneous self-generated 
thought are highly likely in dementia. These altera­
tions, however, may have suffered the same fate as 
other “silent” symptoms in neurodegenerative dis­
ease in comparison to more obvious features such 
as movement disturbances, memory loss, disorien­
tation, or personality change. In particular, memory 
loss and behavioral transgressions can overshadow 
subtler cognitive changes, which, in the context of 
lack of insight in dementia, may go unnoticed by 
the caregiver or unreported by the patient.
502
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

One confounding issue with regard to obtain­
ing an accurate appraisal of spontaneous cognition 
in dementia is that many of the currently avail­
able tasks devised to study spontaneous thought in 
healthy populations are ill-suited for use in indi­
viduals with widespread cognitive impairment. 
Common approaches to assessing spontaneous cog­
nition require participants to perform a relatively 
monotonous, but attention-demanding, task to pro­
mote off-task mind wandering, with the underlying 
assumption that participants can accomplish the 
task without using all of their cognitive resources. 
In the various versions of this methodology, experi­
menters might probe at random intervals to capture 
the instances of off-task thoughts, or the participant 
might be trained to self-identify when an off-task 
thought occurs (Christoff et al., 2009; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maquet, et al., 2011). Self-report follow­
ing engagement in a separate task or after a scanning 
session might also be used to retrospectively estab­
lish what the thought content had been during the 
task or scan (Maillet & Rajah, 2013). The various 
demands placed on multitasking, self-awareness, 
and memory processes render such tasks incompat­
ible for use in dementia populations.
The availability of cognitive resources is also 
posited to play a significant role in the frequency 
of mind-wandering occurrences during laboratory 
tasks. Consistent with the notion that cognitive 
resources deplete with healthy aging, decreased 
mind-wandering has been found in older relative 
to younger adults (Jackson & Balota, 2012). The 
demand on cognitive resources in mind-wandering 
assessment therefore can impact the degree to which 
spontaneous off-task thought is elicited. Yet other 
determinants also have a significant effect, includ­
ing level of interest in the task, motivation, and the 
extent to which an individual may have many other 
ongoing current concerns in his life that might dis­
tract from the task at hand (Maillet & Schacter,
2016). Measures developed to assess spontaneous 
thought in clinical cohorts need to carefully con­
sider these potentially confounding factors, as all 
can undergo significant changes in neurodegenera- 
tive disorders.
A key challenge for the future, therefore, is to 
develop appropriate ways of studying spontaneous 
thought processes in dementia populations in a 
manner that circumvents marked cognitive decline. 
Methodological advances in this area will not only 
benefit the study of self-generated thought in 
dementia, but also other neuropsychiatric disorders 
that present with both cognitive impairment and
default network dysfunction (e.g., Schizophrenia; 
Whitfield-Gabrieli and Ford, 2012). We have 
developed a task that addresses many of the meth­
odological issues inherent in the assessment of mind 
wandering in dementia. In the “Shape Expectations” 
task (O’Callaghan, Shine, Lewis, Andrews-Hanna, 
& Irish, 2015), participants are required to view a 
series of colored shapes appearing one by one on a 
computer screen, while letting their minds wander 
freely. Following presentation of each shape, they 
are asked to report on their thought content during 
the time the shape was displayed. Mind-wandering 
frequency is measured by instances where reported 
thoughts are independent from the shape-stimulus, 
the task, or the current environment, and clearly 
demonstrate 
unique 
self-generated 
thought. 
Phenomenology of mind-wandering episodes is 
also established by classifying thought content into
(1) 
memory-based 
construction/simulation, 
or
(2) 
introspection/metacognitive-based thoughts, 
based on the functional-anatomical taxonomy of 
the default network advanced by Andrews-Hanna 
and colleagues (Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Sepulcre, 
et al., 2010). This paradigm therefore permits 
online investigation of both the frequency and 
content of mind-wandering in the context of low 
cognitive demands, making it suitable for demen­
tia populations. Continued development of novel 
paradigms that can probe spontaneous cognition in 
clinical cohorts will offer unique insights into the 
neural mechanisms and component processes that 
sustain adaptive forms of thinking.
Conclusion
We conclude this chapter at an exciting junc­
ture in cognitive neuroscience research. It is clear 
that many of the foundational building blocks and 
facilitative processes of self-generated thought are 
compromised in dementia, attributable to altera­
tions in the structural and functional connectivity 
of large-scale networks in the brain. How such aber­
rations manifest in terms of the everyday adaptive 
functioning of the individual living with dementia 
remain unclear, but there is evidence to support the 
view that internally generated spontaneous forms of 
thought will be significantly dampened. The poten­
tial disruption of uniquely human aspects of cog­
nition speaks to a critical issue in terms of patient 
management and care. Understanding how altera­
tions in self-generated thought impact psychological 
well-being in terms of mood, motivation, and socio- 
emotional engagement represents a crucial area for 
future research and one that ultimately will inform
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
503

the delivery of targeted interventions to improve 
quality of life for individuals living with dementia.
Acknowledgments
C. 
O. is supported by a National Health and 
Medical Research Council Neil Hamilton Fairley 
Fellowship (GNT1091310). M. I. is supported by 
an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship 
(FT 160100096).
References
Abraham, A., & Bubic, A. (2015). Semantic memory as the root 
of imagination. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 325.
Addis, D. R., Sacchetti, D. C., Ally, B. A., Budson, A. E., & 
Schacter, D. L. (2009). Episodic simulation of future events 
is impaired in mild Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 47, 
2660-2671.
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2007). 
Remembering the past and imagining the future: Common 
and distinct neural substrates during event construction and 
elaboration. Neuropsychologia, 45, 1363-1377.
Adenzato, M., Cavallo, M., & Enrici, I. (2010). Theory of mind 
ability in the behavioural variant of frontotemporal demen­
tia: an analysis of the neural, cognitive, and social levels. 
Neuropsychologia, 48, 2-12.
Adlam, A., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. (2009). “I remember it 
as if it were yesterday”: Memory for recent events in patients 
with semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia, 47, 1344-1351. 
Agosta, F., Galantucci, S., Valsasina, E, Canu, E., Meani, A., 
Marcone, A., et al. (2014). Disrupted brain connectome in 
semantic variant of primary progressive aphasia. Neurobiology 
of Aging, 35, 2646-2655.
Agosta, F., Pievani, M., Geroldi, C., Copetti, M., Frisoni, G. 
B., & Filippi, M. (2012). Resting state fMRI in Alzheimer’s 
disease: Beyond the default mode network. Neurobiology of 
Aging, 33, 1564-1578.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds: the 
medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 7, 268-277.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and 
its adaptive role in internal mentation. Neuroscientist, 18, 
251-270.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
F. (2010a). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 322-335. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
F. (2010b). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104, 322-335. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., & 
Buckner, R. F. (2010). Functional-anatomic fractionation of 
the brain’s default network. Neuron, 65, 550-562. 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29-52.
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2001). Episodic future think­
ing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 533-539.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2011). Back to 
the future: Autobiographical planning and the functional­
ity of mind-wandering. Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 
1604-1611.
Barense, M. D., Rogers, T. T., Bussey, T. J., Saksida, F. M., & 
Graham, K. S. (2010). Influence of conceptual knowledge on 
visual object discrimination: Insights from semantic demen­
tia and MTF amnesia. Cerebral Cortex, 20, 2568-2582.
Barnabe, A., Whitehead, V., Pilon, R., Arsenault-Fapierre, G., 
& Chertkow, H. (2012). Autobiographical memory in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: A comparison 
between the Fevine and Kopelman interview methodologies. 
Hippocampus, 22, 1809-1825.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P J., & Schacter, D. F. (2016). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20, 87-95.
Bertoux, M., O’Callaghan, C., Dubois, B., & Hornberger, 
M. (2015). In two minds: Executive functioning versus 
theory of mind in behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 
jnnp-2015-311643.
Bora, E., Walterfang, M., & Velakoulis, D. (2015). Theory of 
mind in behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 86, 714-719.
Bozeat, S., Fambon Ralph, M. A., Patterson, K., Garrard, P, & 
Hodges, J. R. (2000). Non-verbal semantic impairment in 
semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1207-1215.
Braak, H., & Braak, E. (1991). Neuropathological stageing 
of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathologica, 82, 
239-249.
Brewer, J. A., Garrison, K. A., & Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. (2013). 
What about the “self” is processed in the posterior cingulate 
cortex? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 647, 1-7.
Broe, M., Hodges, J. R., Schofield, E., Shepherd, C. E., Kril, 
J. J., & Halliday, G. M. (2003). Staging disease severity in 
pathologically confirmed cases of frontotemporal dementia. 
Neurology, 60, 1005-1011.
Buckner, R. E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. E. (2008). 
The brain’s default network. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1124, 1-38.
Buckner, R. L., Snyder, A. Z., Shannon, B. J., LaRossa, G., Sachs, 
R., Fotenos, A. F., et al. (2005). Molecular, structural, and 
functional characterization of Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence 
for a relationship between default activity, amyloid, and 
memory. The Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 7709-7717.
Caminiti, S. P, Canessa, N., Cerami, C., Dodich, A., Crespi, C., 
Iannaccone, S., et al. (2015). Affective mentalizing and brain 
activity at rest in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal 
dementia. Neuroimage: Clinical, 9, 484-497.
Cerami, C., Dodich, A., Canessa, N., Crespi, C., Marcone,
A., Cortese, F., et al. (2014). Neural correlates of empathic 
impairment in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal 
dementia. Alzheimer s & Dementia, 10, 827-834.
Chan, D., Fox, N., Scahill, R., Crum, W., Whitwell, J., 
Eeschziner, G., et al. (2001). Patterns of temporal lobe atro­
phy in semantic dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Annals of 
Neurology, 49, 433-442.
Chase, T. N. 
(2010). Apathy in neuropsychiatric dis­
ease: 
Diagnosis, 
pathophysiology, 
and 
treatment.
Neurotoxicity Research, 19, 266-278.
Chiong, W., Wilson, S. M., D’Esposito, M., Kayser, A. S., 
Grossman, S. N., Poorzand, P, et al. (2013). The salience 
network causally influences default mode network activity 
during moral reasoning. Brain, 136, 1929-1941.
504
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

Christoff, K., Gordon, A M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106, 8719-8724.
Clark, C. N., Nicholas, J. M., Henley, S. M. D., Downey, 
L. E., Woollacott, I. O., Golden, H. L., et al. (2015). 
Humour processing in frontotemporal lobar degenera­
tion: A behavioural and neuroanatomical analysis. Cortex,
69, 47-59.
Conway, M. A., Singer, J. A., & Tagini, A. (2004). The self and 
autobiographical memory: Correspondence and coherence. 
Social Cognition, 22, 491-529.
Damoiseaux, J. S., Prater, K. E., Miller, B. L., & Greicius, M. 
D. (2012). Functional connectivity tracks clinical deteriora­
tion in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging, 33, 828, 
el9-e28, e30.
Davies, R. R., Graham, K. S., Xuereb, J. H., Williams, G. B., 
& Hodges, J. R. (2004). The human perirhinal cortex and 
semantic memory. European Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 
2441-2446.
de Toledo-Morrell, L., Dickerson, B., Sullivan, M. P., Spanovic, 
C., Wilson, R., & Bennett, D. A. (2000). Hemispheric dif­
ferences in hippocampal volume predict verbal and spatial 
memory performance in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. 
Hippocampus, 10, 136-142.
Dermody, N., Wong, S., Ahmed, R., Piguet, O., Hodges, J. R., 
& Irish, M. (2016a). Uncovering the neural bases of cogni­
tive and affective empathy deficits in Alzheimer’s disease and 
the behavioral-variant of frontotemporal dementia. Journal 
of Alzheimer s Disease, 53, 801-816.
Dermody, N., Hornberger, M., Piguet, O., Hodges, J. R., 
& Irish, M. (2016b). Prospective memory impairments 
in Alzheimer’s disease and behavioral variant frontotem­
poral dementia: Clinical and neural correlates. Journal of 
Alzheimers Disease, 50, 425-441.
Dhanjal, N. S., & Wise, R. J. (2014). Frontoparietal cogni­
tive control of verbal memory recall in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Annals of Neurology, 76, 241-251.
Duval, C., Desgranges, B., de La Sayette, V., Belliard, S., 
Eustache, F., & Piolino, P (2012). What happens to personal 
identity when semantic knowledge degrades? A study of the 
self and autobiographical memory in semantic dementia. 
Neuropsychologia, 50, 254-265.
El Haj, M., Antoine, P, & Kapogiannis, D. (2015). Similarity 
between remembering the past and imagining the future 
in Alzheimer’s disease: Implication of episodic memory. 
Neuropsychologia, 66, 119-125.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (1999). Interacting minds: A biological 
basis. Science, 286, 1692-1695.
Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2006). The neural basis of mentalizing. 
Neuron, 50, 531-534.
Gallo, D. A., Shahid, K. R., Olson, M. A., Solomon, T. M., 
Schacter, D. L., & Budson, A. E. (2006). Overdependence 
on 
degraded 
gist 
memory 
in 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
Neuropsychology, 20, 625-632.
Galton, C. J., Patterson, K., Graham, K., Lambon-Ralph, M., 
Williams, G., Antoun, N., et al. (2001). Differing patterns
of temporal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease and semantic 
dementia. Neurology, 57, 216-225.
Gerlach, K. D., Spreng, R. N., Gilmore, A. W., & Schacter, D. 
L. (2011). Solving future problems: Default network and 
executive activity associated with goal-directed mental simu­
lations. Neuroimage, 55, 1816-1824.
Grady, C. L., McIntosh, A. R., Beig, S., Keightley, M. L., Burian, 
H., & Black, S. E. (2003). Evidence from functional neuro­
imaging of a compensatory prefrontal network in Alzheimer’s 
disease. The Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 986-993.
Graham, K. S., & Hodges, J. R. (1997). Differentiating the 
roles of the hippocampal complex and the neocortex in 
long-term memory storage: Evidence from the study of 
semantic dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology, 
11, 77-89.
Graham, K. S., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. (1999). Episodic 
memory: New insights from the study of semantic dementia. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 9, 245-250.
Greenberg, D. L., & Verfaellie, M. (2010). Interdependence 
of episodic and semantic memory: Evidence from neuro­
psychology. Journal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society, 16, 748-753.
Greene, J., Hodges, J., & Baddeley, A. (1995). Autobiographical 
memory and executive function in early dementia of 
Alzheimer type. Neuropsychologia, 33, 1647-1670.
Gregory, C. A., Lough, S., Stone, V., Erzinclioglu, S., Martin, 
L., Baron-Cohen, S., et al. (2002). Theory of mind in 
patients with frontal variant frontotemporal dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease: Theoretical and practical implications. 
Brain, 125, 725-764.
Greicius, M. D., Supekar, K., Menon, V., & Dougherty, R. F. 
(2009). Resting-state functional connectivity reflects struc­
tural connectivity in the default mode network. Cerebral 
Cortex, 19, 72-78.
Guo, C. C., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Gesierich, B., Henry, M., 
Trujillo, A., Shany-Ur, T., et al. (2013). Anterior temporal 
lobe degeneration produces widespread network-driven dys­
function. Brain, 136, 2979-2991.
Hassabis, D., & Maguire, E. A. (2009). The construction system 
of the brain. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London Series B, Biological Sciences, 364, 1263-1271.
Hegde, J. (2007). Mental time travel sickness and a Bayesian 
remedy. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 30, 323-324.
Henry, J. D., Phillips, L. H., & von Hippel, C. (2014). A meta- 
analytic review of theory of mind difficulties in behavioural- 
variant frontotemporal dementia. Neuropsychologia, 56, 53-62.
Hodges, J. R., & Graham, K. S. (2001). Episodic mem­
ory: 
Insights from 
semantic dementia. 
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological 
Sciences, 356, 1423-1434.
Hou, C., Miller, B., & Kramer, J. (2005). Patterns of autobio­
graphical memory loss in dementia. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 20, 809-815.
Hussey, E. R, Smolinsky, J. G., Piryatinsky, I., Budson, A. E., 
& Ally, B. A. (2012). Using mental imagery to improve 
memory in patients with Alzheimer disease: Trouble generat­
ing or remembering the mind’s eye? Alzheimer Disease and 
Associated Disorders, 26, 124-134.
Irish, M. (2016). Semantic memory as the essential scaffold for 
future-oriented mental time travel. In K. Michaelian, S. 
Klein & K. Szpunar (Eds.), Seeing the future: Theoretical per­
spectives on Juture-oriented mental time travel (pp. 389-408). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
505

Irish, M., Addis, D. R., Hodges, J. R., & Piguet, O. (2012a). 
Considering the role of semantic memory in episodic future 
thinking: Evidence from semantic dementia. Brain, 135, 
2178-2191.
Irish, M., Addis, D. R., Hodges, J. R., & Piguet, O. (2012b). 
Exploring the content and quality of episodic future simula­
tions in semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia, 50,3488-3495.
Irish, M., Bunk, S., Tu, S., Kamminga, J., Hodges, J. R., 
Hornberger, M., et al. (2016). Preservation of episodic mem­
ory in semantic dementia: The importance of regions beyond 
the medial temporal lobes. Neuropsychologia, 81, 50—60.
Irish, M., Cunningham, C. J., Walsh, J. B., Coakley, D., Lawlor,
B. A., Robertson, I. H., et al. (2006). Investigating the 
enhancing effect of music on autobiographical memory in 
mild Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive 
Disorders, 22, 108-120.
Irish, M., Halena, S., Kamminga, J., Tu, S., Hornberger, M., & 
Hodges, J. R. (2015). Scene construction impairments in 
Alzheimer’s disease: A unique role for the posterior cingulate 
cortex. Cortex, 73, 10-23.
Irish, M., Hodges, J. R., & Piguet, O. (2013). Episodic future 
thinking is impaired in the behavioural variant of frontotem­
poral dementia. Cortex, 49, 2377-2388.
Irish, M., Hodges, J. R., & Piguet, O. (2014). Right anterior 
temporal lobe dysfunction underlies theory of mind impair­
ments in semantic dementia. Brain, 137, 1241—1253.
Irish, M., Hornberger, M., Lah, S., Miller, L., Pengas, G., 
Nestor, P. J., et al. (2011). Profiles of recent autobiographi­
cal memory retrieval in semantic dementia, behavioural- 
variant frontotemporal dementia, and Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuropsychologia, 49, 2694—2702.
Irish, M., Lawlor, B. A., O ’Mara, S. M., & Coen, R. F. (2011). 
Impaired capacity for autonoetic reliving during autobio­
graphical event recall in mild Alzheimer’s disease. Cortex, 47, 
236-249.
Irish, M., & Piguet, O. (2013). The pivotal role of semantic 
memory in remembering the past and imagining the future. 
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 7, 27.
Irish, M., Piguet, O., & Hodges, J. R. (2012). Self-projection 
and the default network in frontotemporal dementia. Nature 
Reviews Neurology, 8, 152-161.
Irish, M., & Piolino, P. (2016). Impaired capacity for prospec- 
tion in the dementias-Theoretical and clinical implications. 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 49-68.
Ivanoiu, A., Cooper, J., Shanks, M., & Venneri, A. (2006). 
Patterns of impairment in autobiographical memory in 
the degenerative dementias constrain models of memory. 
Neuropsychologia, 44, 1936-1955.
Jack, C. R. (2012). Alzheimer disease: New concepts on its neu­
robiology and the clinical role imaging will play. Radiology, 
263, 344-361.
Jackson, J. D., & Balota, D. A. (2012). Mind-wandering in 
younger and older adults: Converging evidence from the sus­
tained attention to response task and reading for comprehen­
sion. Psychology and Aging, 27, 106.
Jones, D. T., Knopman, D. S., Gunter, J. L., Graff-Radford, J., 
Vemuri, P., Boeve, B. F., et al. (2016). Cascading network 
failure across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Brain, 139, 
547-562.
Kamminga, J., O’Callaghan, C., Hodges, J. R., & Irish, M. 
(2014). Differential prospective memory profiles in fronto­
temporal dementia syndromes. Journal of Alzheimer s Disease, 
38, 669-679.
506
Klein, S. B. (2013). The complex act of projecting oneself into 
the future. WIREs Cognitive Science, 4, 63-79.
Kumfor, F., Dermody, N., & Irish, M. (2015). Considering the 
impact of large-scale network interactions on cognitive con­
trol. The Journal of Neuroscience, 35, 1—3.
La Joie, R., Landeau, B., Perrotin, A., Bejanin, A., Egret, S., 
Pelerin, A., et al. (2014). Intrinsic connectivity identifies 
the hippocampus as a main crossroad between Alzheimer’s 
and semantic dementia-targeted networks. Neuron, 81, 
1417-1428.
La Joie, R., Perrotin, A., de La Sayette, V., Egret, S., Doeuvre,
L. , Belliard, S., et al. (2013). Hippocampal subfield volum­
etry in mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease and 
semantic dementia. Neuroimage Clinical, 3, 155—162.
Le Bouc, R., Lenfant, P, Delbeuck, X., Ravasi, L., Lebert, F., 
Semah, F., et al. (2012). My belief or yours? Differential 
theory of mind deficits in frontotemporal dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 135, 3026-3038.
Levy, R., & Dubois, B. (2006). Apathy and the functional anat­
omy of the prefrontal cortex-basal ganglia circuits. Cerebral 
Cortex, 16, 916-928.
Lough, S., Kipps, C. M., Treise, C., Watson, P., Blair, J. R., & 
Hodges, J. R. (2006). Social reasoning, emotion and empathy 
in frontotemporal dementia. Neuropsychologia, 44, 950—958.
Maguire, E. A. (2001). Neuroimaging studies of autobiographical 
event memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 356, 1441—1451.
Maguire, E. A., Kumaran, D., Hassabis, D., & Kopelman, M. D. 
(2010). Autobiographical memory in semantic dementia: A 
longitudinal fMRI study. Neuropsychologia, 48, 123-136.
Maillet, D., & Rajah, M. N. (2013). Age-related changes in 
frequency of mind-wandering and task-related interferences 
during memory encoding and their impact on retrieval. 
Memory, 21, 818—831.
Maillet, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). From mind wandering to 
involuntary retrieval: Age-related differences in spontaneous 
cognitive processes. Neuropsychologia, 80, 142—156.
Marin, R. S. (1991). Apathy: A neuropsychiatric syndrome. 
The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 3, 
243-254.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D.
M. , Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 315, 393-395.
Matuszewski, V., Piolino, P, Belliard, S., de la Sayette, V., 
Laisney, M., Lalevee, C., et al. (2009). Patterns of autobio­
graphical memory impairment according to disease severity 
in semantic dementia. Cortex, 45, 456-472.
McKinnon, M., Black, S., Miller, B., Moscovitch, M., & Levine, 
B. (2006). Autobiographical memory in semantic demen­
tia: Implications for theories of limbic-neocortical interac­
tion in remote memory. Neuropsychologia, 44, 2421-2429.
Menon, V., & Uddin, L. Q. (2010). Saliency, switching, atten­
tion and control: A network model of insula function. Brain 
Structure and Function, 214, 655—667.
Meyer, M. L., Spunt, R. P, Berkman, E. T., Taylor, S. E., & 
Lieberman, M. D. (2012). Evidence for social working mem­
ory from a parametric functional MRI study. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 1883-1888.
Mion, M., Patterson, K., Acosta-Cabronero, J., Pengas, G., 
Izquierdo-Garcia, D., Hong, Y. T., et al. (2010). What the 
left and right anterior fusiform gyri tell us about semantic 
memory. Brain, 133, 3256-3268.
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

Nestor, P. J., Graham, K. S., Bozeat, S., Simons, J. S., & Hodges, 
J. R. (2002). Memory consolidation and the hippocam­
pus: Further evidence from studies of autobiographical 
memory in semantic dementia and frontal variant fronto­
temporal dementia. Neuropsychologia, 40, 633-654.
Northoff, G., & Bermpohl, F. (2004). Cortical midline struc­
tures and the self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 102-107.
O’Callaghan, C., Shine, J. M., Lewis, S. J. G., Andrews-Hanna,
J. R., & Irish, M. (2015). Shaped by our thoughts: A new 
task to assess spontaneous cognition and its associated neu­
ral correlates in the default network. Brain and Cognition, 
93, 1-10.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P, & Rogers, T. (2007). Where do you 
know what you know? The representation of semantic 
knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
8, 976-987.
Pievani, M., de Haan, W., Wu, T., Seeley, W. W., & Frisoni, G.
B. (2011). Functional network disruption in the degenera­
tive dementias. The Lancet Neurology, 10, 829-843.
Piguet, O., Hornberger, M., Mioshi, E., & Hodges, J. R. 
Behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia: Diagnosis, 
clinical staging, and management. The Lancet Neurology, 10, 
162-172.
Piolino, P., Desgranges, B., Belliard, S., Matuszewski, V., Lalevee,
C. , De La Sayette, V., et al. (2003). Autobiographical mem­
ory and autonoetic consciousness: Triple dissociation in neu- 
rodegenerative diseases. Brain, 126, 2203—2219.
Race, E., Keane, M. M., & Verfaellie, M. (2011). Medial tempo­
ral lobe damage causes deficits in episodic memory and epi­
sodic future thinking not attributable to deficits in narrative 
construction. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 10262—10269.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 98, 676-682.
Rascovsky, K., Hodges, J. R., Kipps, C. M., Johnson, J. K., 
Seeley, W. W., Mendez, M. F., et al. (2007). Diagnostic 
criteria for the behavioral variant of frontotemporal demen­
tia (bvFTD): Current limitations and future directions. 
Alzheimer Disease & Associated Disorders, 21, S14-S18.
Rosen, H., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Goldman, W. E, Perry, R. J., 
Schuff, N., Weiner, M., et al. (2002). Patterns of brain atro­
phy in frontotemporal and semantic dementia. Neurology, 
58, 198-208.
Rosenbaum, R. S., Kohler, S., Schacter, D. L., Moscovitch, 
M., Westmacott, R., Black, S. E., et al. (2005). The case of
K. C.: Contributions of a memory-impaired person to mem­
ory theory. Neuropsychologia, 43, 989—1021.
Samson, D., Apperly, I. A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2007). 
Error analyses reveal contrasting deficits in “theory of 
mind”: Neuropsychological evidence from a 3-option false 
belief task. Neuropsychologia, 45, 2561-2569.
Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about think­
ing people: The role of the temporo-parietal junction in 
“theory of mind.” Neuroimage, 19, 1835-1842.
Schaafsma, S. M., Pfaff, D. W., Spunt, R. E, & Adolphs, R. 
(2015). Deconstructing and reconstructing theory of mind. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19, 65-72.
Schacter, D. L., & Addis, D. R. (2007). On the constructive 
episodic simulation of past and future events. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 30, 331-332.
Schacter, D. L., & Addis, D. R. (2009). On the nature of medial 
temporal lobe contributions to the constructive simulation
of future events. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London Series B, Biological Sciences, 364, 1245—1253.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., Hassabis, D., Martin, V. C., 
Spreng, R. N., & Szpunar, K. (2012). The future of mem­
ory: Remembering, imagining, and the brain. Neuron, 76, 
677-694.
Seeley, W. W., Allman, J. M., Carlin, D. A., Crawford, R. K., 
Macedo, M. N., Greicius, M. D., et al. (2007). Divergent 
social functioning in behavioral variant frontotempo­
ral dementia and Alzheimer disease: Reciprocal networks 
and neuronal evolution. Alzheimer Disease and Associated 
Disorders, 21, S50-S57.
Seeley, W. W., Crawford, R., Rascovsky, K., Kramer, J. H., 
Weiner, M., Miller, B. L., et al. (2008). Frontal paralimbic 
network atrophy in very mild behavioural variant frontotem­
poral dementia. Archives of Neurology, 65, 2249-2255.
Seeley, W. W., Crawford, R. K., Zhou, J., Miller, B. L., & 
Greicius, M. D. (2009). Neurodegenerative diseases target 
large-scale human brain networks. Neuron, 62, 42.
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, G. 
H., Kenna, H., et al. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectiv­
ity networks for salience processing and executive control. 
The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 2349-2356.
Smallwood, J., & Andrews-Hanna, J. (2013). Not all minds that 
wander are lost: The importance of a balanced perspective on 
the mind-wandering state: Towards a balanced perspective 
of the mind-wandering state. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,441.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K., Baird, B., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). 
Cooperation between the default mode network and the 
frontal-parietal network in the production of an internal 
train of thought. Brain Research, 1428, 60-70.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946.
Spreng, R. N., & Grady, C. L. (2010). Patterns of brain activ­
ity supporting autobiographical memory, prospection, and 
theory of mind, and their relationship to the default mode 
network. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 1112—1123.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009). The com­
mon neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, 
navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quan­
titative meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 
489-510.
Spreng, R. N., Sepulcre, J., Turner, G. R., Stevens, W. D., & 
Schacter, D. L. (2013). Intrinsic architecture underlying 
the relations among the default, dorsal attention, and fron­
toparietal control networks of the human brain. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 74-86.
Spreng, R. N., Stevens, W. D., Chamberlain, J. P., Gilmore, 
A. W., & Schacter, D. L. (2010). Default network activity, 
coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports 
goal-directed cognition. NeuroImage, 53, 303-317.
Stawarczyk, 
D., 
Majerus, 
S., 
Maj, 
M., 
Van 
der 
Linden, 
M., 
& D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011). 
Mind­
wandering: Phenomenology and function as assessed with 
a novel experience sampling method. Acta Psychologica, 
136, 370-381.
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D’Argembeau, 
A. (2011). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLoS One, 6, e l6997.
Svoboda, E., McKinnon, M. C., & Levine, B. (2006). The func­
tional neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: A meta­
analysis. Neuropsychologia, 44, 2189—2208.
C L A I R E  O C A L L A G H A N  A N D  M U I R E A N N  I R I S H
507

Torralva, T., Kipps, C., Hodges, J. R., Clark, L., Bekinschtein, 
T., Roca, M., et al. (2007). The relationship between affec­
tive decision-making and theory of mind in the frontal 
variant of fronto-temporal dementia. Neuropsychologia, 45, 
342-349.
Westmacott, R., Leach, L., Freedman, M., & Moscovitch, 
M. (2001). Different patterns of autobiographical mem­
ory loss in semantic dementia and medial temporal lobe 
amnesia: A challenge to consolidation theory. Neurocase, 
7, 37-55.
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Ford, J. (2012). Default mode network 
activity and connectivity in psychopathology. Annual Review 
of Clinical Psychology, 8, 49.
Winocur, G., & Moscovitch, M. (2011). Memory transforma­
tion and systems consolidation. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 17, 766-780.
Zhou, J., Greicius, M. D., Gennatas, E. D., Growdon, M. E., 
Jang, J. Y., Rabinovici, G. D., et al. Divergent network 
connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 133, 1352-1367.
508
S P O N T A N E O U S  C O G N I T I O N  M E C H A N I S M S

C H A P T E R
36
Rumination Is a Sticky Form 
of Spontaneous Thought
Elizabeth DuPre and R. Nathan Spreng
Abstract
This chapter examines rumination as a unique mode of thought capable of arising in both normative 
and pathological contexts. Although there has been extensive interest in rumination as a trait-level 
contributor to psychopathology, research on the neural correlates of ongoing rumination is relatively 
recent. Viewed through the lens of spontaneous thought, the chapter considers rumination as a 
spontaneously occurring form of thought that becomes “stuck” in a repetitive, highly constrained 
context. In considering the implications of this viewpoint, the chapter explores the contexts in which 
rumination has been identified, as well as its relationship to other forms of spontaneous thought such as 
mind-wandering.
Key Words: rumination, mind-wandering, pathology, spontaneous thought, psychopathology
Spontaneous thoughts form currents in our 
stream of consciousness. These thoughts can be 
defined as effortlessly arising, non-instrumental 
cognition, moving the stream of consciousness in 
ways unbidden by the thinker (Klinger, 2009). 
Although these currents generally flow forward, 
they can also loop and circle back as an eddy. 
Thoughts that form such mental eddies are marked 
by their perseverative and repetitive nature and are 
commonly referred to as ruminations (Watkins,
2008). Rumination is a form of repetitive thinking 
that is often self-referential in nature (Segerstrom, 
Stanton, Alden, & Shortridge, 2003), and it has 
been recognized both as a trait-level contributor to 
psychopathology (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000) and as a 
more state-like mode of thought (LeMoult, Arditte, 
D ’Avanzato, & Joormann, 2013).
In this chapter, we review the research litera­
ture on rumination through the lens of spontane­
ous thought. Although rumination is a stereotyped 
thought process, its spontaneous emergence can pro­
vide important insight into its neural correlates and 
behavioral outcome. In this chapter, we therefore
consider rumination as a spontaneously occurring 
form of thought whose progression is highly con­
strained and repetitive (see Christoff, Irving, Fox, 
Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016, for a review of 
spontaneous thought). We begin by defining trait 
and state rumination and examine how they are 
operationalized and measured in research and clini­
cal settings. We examine the factors that precipitate 
ruminative thoughts, the contexts in which they per­
sist, and the impact of ruminative thinking on other 
domains of cognitive and affective function. We then 
review the cognitive neuroscience of rumination, 
characterizing the brain regions involved. Finally, we 
contrast rumination with another commonly studied 
form of spontaneous thought— mind-wandering. 
This comparison will serve to challenge commonly 
held conceptions of rumination and suggests the 
possibility of ruminative thought as a protracted, or 
“sticky,” form of spontaneous mind-wandering. We 
conclude the chapter by describing potential research 
and clinical implications and how rumination may 
provide a unique vantage point from which to inves­
tigate the role of affect in spontaneous thought.
509

Rumination: Definition and Measurement
Rumination is defined primarily by its perse- 
verative nature, with a specific focus on the self 
and self-relevant concerns. The theoretical con­
ceptualization of rumination remains an area of 
debate (see Smith & Alloy, 2009). For example, the 
goal-progress model (Martin, Tesser, & McIntosh, 
1993) considers rumination to be a general self­
regulation strategy; in contrast, the response styles 
theory (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991) regards rumi­
nation as a specific form of cognitive dysfunc­
tion, associated with a heightened vulnerability 
to depression. These differing perspectives have 
shaped much of the research into rumination. In 
particular, the response styles theory has been the 
most influential model in cognitive neuroscience 
investigations of rumination, which have empha­
sized rumination’s role as a precipitating factor in 
psychopathology. Response styles theory defines 
rumination as a passive, repetitive, and self-relevant 
thought process occurring in reaction to or in con­
cert with negative affect (Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, 
& Lyubomirsky, 2008). This definition considers 
rumination to be a stable, trait-like response that 
is triggered in reaction to negative events, such 
as the death of a loved one (Nolen-Hoeksema & 
Davis, 1999).
Response styles theory studies of rumination 
typically measure rumination using the Ruminative 
Responses Scale (RRS; Treynor, Gonzalez, & 
Nolen-Hoeksema, 2003), a 22-item questionnaire 
that assesses the tendency to experience thoughts 
such as “Why do I always react this way?” As the 
RRS measures the degree to which individuals gen­
erally engage in ruminative thoughts, it provides a 
marker of trait rumination. Trait rumination can be 
conceived of as an individual difference in cognitive 
bias toward ruminative thoughts. As we discuss in 
greater depth later in the chapter, trait rumination 
has been associated with functional brain organiza­
tion, consistent with the idea that the tendency to 
ruminate may arise from stable individual differ­
ences (Ray et al., 2005).
A cognitive bias toward rumination, however, 
is distinct from engaging in a ruminative episode. 
Active, or state, rumination is a mode of thought 
that has been associated with specific affective states 
and cognitive abilities. State rumination following 
a stressor negatively predicts emotional recovery, 
even after controlling for trait rumination lev­
els (LeMoult et al., 2013). State rumination has 
also been associated with cognitive functions such 
as increased abstract-verbal processing, reduced
concrete imagery (Goldwin & Behar, 2011), and 
poor task switching ability (Whitmer & Gotlib,
2012b).
Obtaining reliable measures of rumination has 
proven challenging. This is particularly the case for 
assessments of trait rumination, where measures 
can have markedly different stability estimates. Trait 
rumination, as measured by RRS scores, exhibits 
low reliability over time. In individuals who recover 
from depression over a six-month period, a signifi­
cant relationship between change in RRS scores and 
change in depressive symptoms was found (r = 0.41, 
p  < 0.01; Kasch, Klein, & Lara, 2001). This suggests 
that rumination as measured by the RSS is closely 
related to clinical status, rather than measuring 
a non-pathological individual difference. Others 
have argued that this low stability across diagnostic 
categories derives from the inclusion of symptom- 
focused items of the RRS, which can be expected 
to change with improved clinical status (Bagby, 
Rector, Bacchiochi, & McBride, 2004). They thus 
propose that RRS items with a symptom focus may 
reflect a current depressive episode, while items that 
assess individual differences in ruminative tendency 
may be more self-focused and therefore better pre­
dict future occurrence of depressive episodes.
This parcellation of the RRS into symptom- and 
self-focused items has been further refined into three 
RRS subscales: reflection, brooding, and depression- 
related (Treynor et al., 2003). The depression-related 
RRS subscale has been criticized for its overlap with 
the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck, Rush, Shaw, 
& Emery, 1979) and is not widely used in assessing 
the unique determinants of non-depressive rumina­
tion. RRS-Reflection (RRS-R) items are considered 
to reflect an intentional, internal evaluation of nega­
tive affect as a means of cognitive problem-solving; 
RRS-Brooding (RRS-B) items reflect a passive, per­
sistent comparison of one’s response style with an 
unachieved ideal (Treynor et al., 2003). Both RRS- 
R and RRS-B subscales share negative outcomes, 
including current major depressive episode sever­
ity and memory biases toward negative informa­
tion (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). Nonetheless, 
these subscales have been differentially implicated 
in depressive episode duration, leading to the sug­
gestion that RRS-R reflects an adaptive form of 
rumination, in contrast with the more maladaptive 
RRS-B (Treynor et al., 2003). This is in agreement 
with individual subjective experience, where par­
ticipants with high RRS-R scores are more likely to 
self-report that their ruminations enable productive 
problem-solving (Watkins & Moulds, 2005).
510
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

The close association between rumination and 
psychopathology in the response styles theory 
model has led to suggestions that a normative range 
of rumination cannot exist within a response styles 
theory framework. Instead, the RRS-R, rather than 
reflecting a subtype of rumination, would repre­
sent a distinct form of repetitive thought known as 
reflection (Watkins, 2008). This is an important, 
if unresolved, distinction, and it has been largely 
unexplored in investigations of state rumination. 
Repetitive thought has been linked to positive 
behaviors, including improved problem-solving 
(Watkins & Baracaia, 2002), suggesting that state 
rumination can yield constructive outcomes (Baars,
2010). In considering rumination as a form of spon­
taneous thought, exploration of such normative, 
reflective forms of rumination will be an important 
avenue for future research.
Rumination: Causes and Contexts
Rumination has been identified in both healthy 
(Piguet et al., 2014) and clinical populations, 
such as those with depression, anxiety, obsessive- 
compulsive disorder (OCD), and post-traumatic 
stress-disorder (PTSD; Nolen-Hoeksema et al.,
2008). Exploring rumination in these populations 
provides insight into the factors that affect the 
emergence and maintenance of ruminative thought.
Rumination in Healthy Populations
In healthy individuals, several factors affect the 
emergence and persistence of rumination. Perhaps 
the most robust of these is gender. A meta-analysis 
by Johnson and Whisman (2013) found that 
women are significantly more likely to report higher 
levels of trait rumination, regardless of diagnostic 
status (Cohens d  = 0.24). This is consistent with 
the increased prevalence of depression in women 
(Kessler et al., 2015). Indeed, response styles theory 
was developed in part to explain the higher inci­
dence of depression in women (Nolen-Hoeksema 
et al., 2008). The cognitive and neural mechanisms 
associated with sex differences in rumination have 
yet to be investigated (but see Belleau, Taubitz, & 
Larson, 2015).
Age is also an important moderator of rumina­
tion, with decreasing prevalence across the lifespan. 
Although rumination has been relatively underex­
plored in children, the significant gender difference 
noted in adults has been reported in adolescents as 
young as 12 years of age (Jose & Brown, 2007). At 
the other end of the lifespan, rumination is seen 
to markedly decrease from its adolescent peak,
reaching its lowest levels in individuals over 60 years 
of age (Siitterlin, Paap, Babic, Kiibler, & Vogele,
2012). As with sex disparities, the mechanisms 
underlying these age-related differences in rumina­
tion have yet to be fully investigated. Recent interest 
in the impact of aging on spontaneous cognition 
(Maillet & Schacter, 2016; see also O ’Callaghan & 
Irish, Chapter 35 in this volume), however, prom­
ises future developments.
Rumination in Psychopathology
Unlike studies of healthy adults, substantially 
more work has characterized the prevalence, presen­
tation, and determinants of rumination in psycho­
pathology. In major depressive disorder, rumination 
is characterized as an uncontrollable, intrusive focus 
on the causes and consequences of depressed mood 
(Morrow & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1990). Initial work 
with response styles theory focused largely on rumi­
nation as a risk factor in the development and main­
tenance of depression (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991). In 
a longitudinal study of bereaved adults, rumination 
was found to be associated with higher depression 
levels at six months post-loss, independent of other 
factors such as social supports, negative cognitive 
outlook, baseline depression, and co-occurring 
environmental stressors (Nolen-Hoeksema, Parker, 
& Larson, 1994).
The association between rumination and depres­
sion has been argued to be an artifact of its definition 
within the response styles theory model. For exam­
ple, work investigating the stability of trait rumi­
nation in longitudinal samples has observed low 
test-retest reliability, with RRS total scores strongly 
influenced by depression status (Kasch et al., 2001). 
Nonetheless, the association between rumination 
and depression has been reliably observed in stud­
ies that have adopted alternative theoretical frame­
works. The self-regulatory executive function model 
advanced by Matthew and Wells (2004) also sug­
gests that rumination may play a role in the onset of 
depression as well as other mood disorders.
In recent years the response styles theory concep­
tualization of rumination has been investigated as 
a thought-pattern associated with other psychiatric 
disorders, including non-suicidal self-injury, anxi­
ety, substance abuse, and eating disorders (Nolen- 
Hoeksema et al., 2008). Initial work focused largely 
on the expression of rumination in these disorders 
when comorbid with depression, such as mixed anx- 
iety/depressive disorders (Nolen-Hoeksema, 2000). 
Although depression has a high comorbidity with 
other psychopathology, particularly anxiety (Kessler
511
E L I Z A B E T H  D U P R E  A N D  R. N A T H A N  S P R E N G

et al., 1996), rumination has been demonstrated to 
occur in these illnesses independent of depression. 
Rumination is a dominant feature of generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD), OCD, and PTSD.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Rumination scores on the RRS correlate strongly 
with anxiety symptoms (Brozovich et al., 2015), 
although this is not the most common form of 
repetitive thought in GAD. The core cognitive 
feature of GAD is a predominance of worry— an 
intrusive apprehension of future events (American 
Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013). There are 
several similarities between worry and rumination, 
such as their shared description as unproductive, 
repetitive thought patterns; their abstract-verbal 
nature; and their close associations with psycho­
pathology (Fresco, Frankel, Mennin, Turk, & 
Heimberg, 2002). Both worry and rumination 
correlate significantly with anxiety and depressive 
symptoms (Segerstrom, Tsao, Alden, & Craske, 
2000) and are associated with neuroticism (Perkins, 
Arnone, Smallwood, & Mobbs, 2015).
Nonetheless, worry and rumination have dis­
tinguishing characteristics. For instance, a factor 
analysis of worry and rumination items reveals that 
they load upon separate factors (Fresco et al., 2002). 
Rumination and worry differentially mediate the 
relationship between neuroticism and psychopa­
thology, with worry contributing more to anxiety 
disorders and rumination contributing more to 
depression (Muris, Roelofs, Rassin, Franken, & 
Mayer, 2005). Importantly, worry and rumination 
also have different time orientations, with worry 
focused on future events or outcomes and rumi­
nation concentrating on past experience (Nolen- 
Hoeksema et al., 2008). Accordingly, worry has 
been hypothesized as a form of emotional coping 
via cognitive distancing from threatening internal 
experiences (Behar, DiMarco, Hekler, Mohlman, 
& Staples, 2009), while rumination involves fixa­
tion on the source and symptoms of distress (Curci, 
Lanciano, Soleti, & Rime, 2013).
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
There is a substantial comorbidity between OCD 
and depression, with approximately 17% of indi­
viduals meeting criteria for both disorders in an epi­
demiological sample (Andrews, Slade, & Issakidis, 
2002). Individuals suffering from non-comorbid 
OCD, however, also report high scores on the RRS 
(Dar & Iqbal, 2015). This may be due in part to 
the similarities between rumination and compulsive
thoughts. The characterization of rumination as a 
failure to disengage from repetitive, internal thought 
is remarkably similar to obsessive-compulsive disor­
der, a condition characterized by the occurrence of 
persistent, repetitive thoughts (obsessions) and the 
completion of rituals (compulsions) in response to 
those thoughts (Bokor & Anderson, 2014).
Similar behavioral deficits have been docu­
mented in both OCD and rumination, including 
reduced task-switching ability (Meiran, Diamond, 
Toder, & Nemets, 2010). Unlike rumination, how­
ever, obsessions can be both visual and verbal and 
are not necessarily self-focused, instead involving 
general concerns such as fear of harm or contami­
nation (Franklin & Foa, 2011). These concerns 
arouse feelings of anxiety and distress, thereby driv­
ing subsequent compulsions. Rumination, on the 
other hand, reduces the likelihood that individuals 
will enact solutions to perceived problems (Ward, 
Lyubomirsky, Sousa, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2003).
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
Rumination is a common symptom of PTSD, 
with 94% of assault survivors in one study report­
ing ruminating on their experience of the assault 
(Michael, 
Halligan, 
Clark, 
& Ehlers, 2007). 
Interestingly, high levels of rumination have been 
suggested to play a causal role in the course of 
PTSD, particularly in the development and main­
tenance of intrusive memories (Ball & Brewin,
2012). Such memories, a central feature of PTSD, 
are a spontaneous re-experiencing of previous nega­
tive events and cause substantial subjective distress 
(APA, 2013).
Although both intrusive memories and rumi­
nation focus on past experiences, there are impor­
tant differences. Chief among them is the ability 
of rumination to extend beyond a specific event 
(e.g., thinking “Why do I always react this way?”). 
There is also a strong difference in their subjective 
experience, with intrusive memories experienced as 
primarily visual (Ehlers et al., 2002) whereas rumi­
nations are largely abstract in nature and verbally 
mediated.
Rumination is also reported as a feature in patho­
logical aging. Although rumination has been shown 
to decrease with advancing age (Siitterlin et al., 
2012), high trait rumination has been suggested 
to play a role in Alzheimer’s disease (Marchant & 
Howard, 2015). Further explorations of the preva­
lence of rumination in aging and neurodegenerative 
disease will be helpful in characterizing the neural 
basis of ruminative thought.
512
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Impact of Rumination on Cognitive and 
Emotional Functioning
In the previous section we considered the preva­
lence of ruminative thought in health and psycho­
pathology. Here we examine associations between 
rumination and specific areas of cognitive and affec­
tive functioning.
Rumination and Memory
Memory plays a critical role in rumination. 
Rumination involves a fixation on past experiences 
and their subsequent effects (Nolen-Hoeksema 
et al., 2008), a process that depends in large part on 
memory for these previous experiences. Memory in 
rumination, however, has been suggested to exhibit 
specific cognitive biases. These include negative 
memory bias, such that individuals recall negatively 
valenced events more easily than those of neutral or 
positive valence (Lyubomirsky, Caldwell, & Nolen- 
Hoeksema, 
1998). Rumination has also been 
associated with over-general memory, or reduced 
specificity of recalled events (Raes, Hermans, 
Williams, Geypen, & Eelen, 2006; Watkins & 
Teasdale, 2001).
There has been debate as to whether negative 
memory bias and over-general memories are spe­
cific to rumination or are simply associated with 
rumination due to their more general occurrence 
in depression (Elliott, Rubinsztein, Sahakian, & 
Dolan, 2002; Park, Goodyer, & Teasdale, 2004). 
Perhaps the strongest evidence for their dissociation 
comes from neuroimaging work. In treatment-naive 
depressed patients, high levels of trait rumination 
were associated with increased resting-state func­
tional connectivity (RSFC) of the medial prefrontal 
cortex and anterior cingulate cortex to the broader 
default network (DN) (Zhu et al., 2012), includ­
ing the posterior cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal 
cortex, medial temporal lobe, and inferior pari­
etal lobule (Bucker, Andrews-Hanna & Schacter, 
2008; Raichle et al., 2001). In the same patients, 
increased RSFC of the posterior cingulate cortex to 
the D N  correlated with more over-general memory 
(Zhu et al., 2012). This anterior-posterior dissocia­
tion suggests that, at least in depressed individuals, 
distinct neural mechanisms may support cognitive 
biases toward trait rumination as compared to over­
general memory. However, a recent investigation 
suggests that the brooding subtype of rumination is 
specifically associated with an over-general memory 
bias (Romero, Vazquez, & Sanchez, 2014), opening 
future lines of inquiry into the mechanism for this 
association.
The role of rumination in memory biases con­
tinues to be explored (e.g., Hach, Tippett, & Addis,
2014), but this work is complicated by the co­
occurrence of depression. It is likely that part of the 
difficulty in disentangling the effects of rumination 
and depression on memory is due to the assessment 
of trait rather than state measures of rumination. 
Trait rumination has been seen to fluctuate with 
depression (Kasch et al., 2001), making it difficult 
to parse their relative impact on memory biases.
Rumination and Executive Control
Executive control appears to be closely associ­
ated with ruminative thought. Both state (Watkins 
& Brown, 2002) and trait (Joormann, Levens, & 
Gotlib, 2011) rumination have been associated 
with a failure of executive control. Behavioral stud­
ies demonstrating associations between executive 
control and rumination have operationalized execu­
tive control in myriad ways, including stereotyped 
responding (Watkins & Brown, 2002) and work­
ing memory manipulation (Joormann et al., 2011). 
Studies investigating the impact of trait rumina­
tion on executive control using a working memory 
paradigm, have reported increased activation of DN  
regions (Bartova et al., 2015) and decreased activa­
tion of visual areas (Piguet et al., 2014).
Task-switching paradigms have also been used 
to examine the effect of rumination on executive 
function. Indeed, rumination has been likened 
to a difficulty in switching between internal and 
external attention (Northoff & Sibille, 2014), sug­
gesting that rumination should yield significant 
impairments in task switching. In line with this 
hypothesis, trait rumination has been associated 
with impaired filtering of currently irrelevant tasks 
(Owens & Derakshan, 2013). State rumination, in 
contrast, has been demonstrated to yield the oppo­
site pattern of results, with slower task switching 
but no impairment in filtering of irrelevant tasks 
(Whitmer & Gotlib, 2012b). However, this asso­
ciation was only observed in depressed participants 
(Whitmer & Gotlib, 2012).
The attentional scope m odel o f rum ination pro­
posed by Whitmer and Gotlib (2013) addresses this 
discrepancy by arguing that individual differences 
in executive control are associated with susceptibil­
ity to rumination. The authors suggest that trait 
rumination as a cognitive bias may be more likely 
to impact automatic inhibition processes such as 
inhibiting irrelevant tasks; state rumination as an 
ongoing mode of thought would instead impact 
inhibition that relies on executive control (Whitmer
E L I Z A B E T H  D U P R E  A N D  R. N A T H A N  S P R E N G
513

& Gotlib, 2013). This is in contrast to the suggestion 
that rumination depletes cognitive resources, yield­
ing impaired executive control (Curci et al., 2013).
Rumination and Negative Affect
Rumination has been closely associated with 
negative affect. Indeed, within the framework of 
response styles theory, rumination is defined to 
occur in reaction to or in concert with negative 
affect (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 2008). Experimental 
results have confirmed this relationship, and nega­
tive affect has been reliably associated with experi­
mentally induced state rumination as well as with 
high levels of trait rumination (Thomsen, 2006).
Negative affect is also a defining feature of major 
depression (APA, 2013). The association between 
depression and rumination, particularly trait rumi­
nation (Kasch et al., 2001), therefore provides a 
potential complication in assessing the unique effects 
of rumination on affect. By examining state rather 
than trait rumination, however, these processes have 
been reliably dissociated. Studies that have induced 
rumination in depressed individuals have seen an 
increase in negative affect beyond baseline (Nolen- 
Hoeksema & Morrow, 1993). Similarly, inducing 
rumination in healthy individuals increases nega­
tive affect (Huffziger et al., 2012), which is distinct 
from depressive symptoms (Pasyugina, Koval, De 
Leersnyder, Mesquita, & Kuppens, 2015). These 
studies suggest that there is a clear positive relation­
ship between state rumination and negative affect. 
However, the direction of this relationship is com­
plicated by evidence that individuals who engage 
in rumination have a bias toward negative stimuli 
(Ray et al., 2005). That is, ongoing rumination may 
directly feed forward into negative affect, or pref­
erentially interpreting negative stimuli may create 
a feedback loop that then yields increased rumina­
tion. Future work using a state assessment of rumi­
nation will continue to provide a clearer picture of 
the relationship between rumination and affect.
Neural Basis of Ruminative Thought
Spontaneous thought has been consistently 
linked with a core set of brain regions including 
the medial prefrontal cortex, medial temporal lobe, 
posterior cingulate cortex, and inferior parietal 
lobule (Andrews-Hanna, 2012; Andrews-Hanna, 
Smallwood & Spreng, 2014; Bucker et al., 2008). 
These regions constitute the DN, a large-scale neu­
ral network implicated in self-relevant thoughts 
such as memory, prospection, and theory-of-mind 
(Buckner & Carroll, 2007; Spreng, Mar, & Kim,
2009). Recent meta-analytic work has suggested 
that non-DN regions are equally important in 
spontaneous thought, including the lingual gyrus, 
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, temporopolar cor­
tex, insula, and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (Fox, 
Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff,
2015). In examining rumination as a form of spon­
taneously occurring thought, it is valuable to see 
how its associated functional neuroanatomy— both 
in trait and state assessments— aligns with other 
forms of spontaneous thought.
Trait Rumination
Resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used 
tool to investigate the intrinsic functional architec­
ture of the human brain. Patterns of RSFC reveal 
important relationships with individual differences 
in cognition and behavior (Stevens & Spreng, 2014). 
Among groups assumed to exhibit different levels of 
trait rumination— such as healthy individuals versus 
those with psychopathology— early investigations 
attributed differences in RSFC profiles to differ­
ing ruminative tendencies (Grecius et al., 2007). 
In depressed individuals, increased RSFC between 
the subgenual prefrontal cortex and D N  structures 
was associated with higher RRS scores, particularly 
on the brooding subscale (Berman et al., 2011; 
Hamilton, Farmer, Fogelman, & Gotlib, 2015). 
High RRS scores in remitted depression have also 
been associated with reduced middle frontal gyrus 
connectivity with the D N  and the subgenual ante­
rior cingulate cortex of the salience network (SN) 
(Jacobs et al., 2014). The SN, including the dor­
sal anterior cingulate and fronto-insular cortex, has 
been suggested to play a crucial role in attending 
to biologically relevant stimuli (Seeley et al., 2007). 
That both the SN and D N  exhibit altered con­
nectivity at high levels of trait rumination aligns 
with the triple-network model of psychopathology 
(Menon, 2011). According to this view, psychopa­
thology emerges from impairment in the DN, SN, 
a central executive network, or their interactions. 
The central executive network, including the poste­
rior parietal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cor­
tex, is thought to be responsible for the control of 
attention and planning (Menon, 2011). Indeed, all 
three networks have been implicated in depression 
(Hamilton, Chen, & Gotlib, 2013; Nejad, Fossati, 
& Lemonge, 2013; Sheline et al., 2009).
Both functional and structural neural correlates of 
trait rumination have been explored in healthy popu­
lations. Gray matter volume in the inferior frontal
514
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, and mid-cingulate 
cortex is associated with higher RRS scores (Kuhn 
et al., 2012). In the same study, reduced amplitude 
of intrinsic, low-frequency fluctuations in functional 
connectivity among these regions is also associated 
with greater trait levels of rumination. Increased 
entorhinal cortex and reduced middle occipital gyrus 
activation during resting intervals has also been asso­
ciated with higher RRS scores (Piguet et al., 2014). 
During a negative cognitive reappraisal task investi­
gated with functional MRI, higher RRS scores have 
been associated with greater amygdala activity (Ray 
et al., 2005).
The identification of regions outside of the D N  
in studies of trait rumination is perhaps surpris­
ing, given the clinical focus on the D N  as the 
neural substrate of ruminative thought (Hamilton 
et al., 2013; Marchetti, Koster, Sonuga-Barke, & 
De Raedt, 2012). However, this association of 
the D N  and rumination may be an artifact of a 
priori selection of the D N  as regions of interest 
in previous research. Hamilton and colleagues 
(2011) specifically isolated activation from the 
D N  to compare with activations outside the DN. 
The authors reported that depressed individuals 
with more consistent D N  activations, or “D N - 
dominance,” reported higher RRS-Depression 
Related scores. They hypothesized that this over­
activation might reflect a failure of the right 
fronto-insular cortex to attenuate D N  activity. 
Another study used posterior cingulate seed-based 
connectivity to define the D N  in depressed and 
healthy individuals (Berman et al., 2011). Berman 
and colleagues found that greater RSFC between 
the D N  and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex 
correlated with higher RRS scores (2011). A more 
recent study assessed the dynamic RSFC— or fluc­
tuation of RSFC across a scanning session— of a 
medial prefrontal cortex seed region to investigate 
differential D N  trajectories in depression (Kaiser 
et al., 2015). Here, increased medial prefron­
tal cortex and insula dynamic connectivity was 
linked to higher levels of self-reported rumination 
within the past two weeks (Kaiser et al., 2015). 
Despite their explicit focus on the D N , each of 
these studies implicates non-DN regions in trait 
rumination, particularly in the presence of depres­
sive symptomatology.
State Rumination
State rumination, in contrast to the cognitive 
bias of trait rumination, reflects ongoing ruminative 
thought and is commonly examined via rumination
induction. When compared to rest, rumination 
induction is associated with heightened functional 
connectivity between the right frontal pole and 
left lateral occipital cortex, as well as between the 
right basolateral amygdala and left inferior fron­
tal gyrus (Milazzo et al., 2016). Berman and col­
leagues (2014) found that the brain activation in 
depressed individuals during ongoing rumination 
significantly differed from that observed in a sepa­
rate unconstrained resting-state run, with increased 
connectivity between the posterior cingulate cortex 
and regions including the inferior frontal gyrus and 
subgenual cingulate cortex. Such studies of rumi­
nation induction are rare, however, and significant 
work remains to be done examining task-evoked 
ruminative states.
Distraction has been suggested as an adaptive 
reaction to rumination (Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991). 
For this reason, task-based functional MRI has 
examined state rumination relative to distrac­
tion. In a study by Cooney and colleagues (2010), 
induced rumination (“Think about why things 
turn out the way they do”) was contrasted with 
concrete (“Think about a fan slowly rotating back 
and forth”) and abstract (“Think about what con­
tributes to team spirit”) forms of other-focused 
distraction. The authors found that in healthy 
individuals, rumination relative to concrete dis­
tractions was associated with increased activation 
in inferior parietal lobule, precuneus, pre- and 
post-central gyrus, and superior parietal lobule. 
Rumination relative to more abstract distrac­
tions was associated with increased activation in 
the cuneus, precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex, 
and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The engage­
ment of D N  regions, such as the precuneus, infe­
rior parietal lobule, and medial prefrontal cortex, 
is consistent with the self-referential nature of 
rumination. The increased activation of non-DN 
regions such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 
however, suggests that other networks play a sig­
nificant role in ongoing rumination. The involve­
ment of multiple large-scale cortical networks in 
rumination suggests comparisons to another form 
of spontaneous thought, mind-wandering.
Rumination and Mind-Wandering as Forms 
of Spontaneous Thought
Spontaneous thought occupies a large part of 
daily experience (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010; 
Singer & McCraven, 1961). However, as the work 
in this volume clearly demonstrates, defining the 
nature and the content of spontaneous cognition
E L I Z A B E T H  D U P R E  A N D  R. N A T H A N  S P R E N G
515

is an active area of research. Much of the research 
literature investigating spontaneous thought has 
focused on m ind-wandering—also known as day­
dream ing or stim ulus-independent thought. It is a 
form of internal cognition related to individual 
goals, concerns, and experiences (Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2015). While rumination is also internally 
directed and self-referential in nature, there has 
been little consideration of rumination as a form of 
spontaneously occurring cognition, and no studies 
to date have directly contrasted mind-wandering 
and rumination as different forms of spontaneous 
thought. In this final section, we briefly compare 
mind-wandering and rumination with respect to 
their life-span prevalence, functional impacts, and 
cognitive and neural correlates. We conclude the 
section by proposing a novel perspective on rumi­
nation as a form of protracted— or “sticky”— mind­
wandering and spontaneous thought.
Rumination 
and 
mind-wandering 
both 
show decreasing prevalence in older adulthood 
(Jackson & Balota, 2012; Siitterlin et al., 2012), 
as older adults report less spontaneous cognition 
than young adults (Maillet & Schacter, 2016). 
Rumination and mind-wandering have also both 
been associated with negatively valenced thought 
and negative affect (Wilson et al., 2014; but see 
Fox, Thompson, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 
2014; Poerio, Totterdell, & Miles, 2013). Mind­
wandering, however, has also been associated with 
positive psychological outcomes, including future 
planning and an enhanced sense of meaning 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015), whereas rumina­
tion has been associated with negative outcomes 
and the emergence of psychopathology (but see 
Andrews & Thomson, 2009). Nonetheless, as dis­
cussed earlier, there is evidence that the reflective 
subtype may be an adaptive form of rumination 
(Treynor et al., 2003).
Cognitively, mind-wandering is associated with 
flexible thinking and creative problem-solving 
(Baird et al., 2012). In contrast, rumination is asso­
ciated with cognitive rigidity and reduced problem­
solving capacity, especially in dynamically changing 
contexts. However, this consideration of context 
may be the critical link between mind-wandering 
and rumination as forms of spontaneous thought. 
Both can occur automatically, disrupting ongoing 
thought processes and leading to off-task behav­
iors. While mind-wandering may facilitate mental 
flexibility and adaptive responding to a dynami­
cally shifting problem-space, rumination, particu­
larly the reflective subtype, may open the way to
516
a more considered appreciation of long-standing, 
entrenched problems. Consistent with this view, 
rumination has recently been associated with an 
adaptive and intentional reprocessing of events 
(Fawcett et al., 2015).
This association between mind-wandering and 
rumination as forms of spontaneous thought may 
also be observed at a neural level. The mental flex­
ibility linked to mind-wandering is associated with 
efficient coupling and decoupling of the default and 
frontoparietal control networks (Andrews-Hanna, 
Smallwood, & Spreng, 2014). In contrast, rumina­
tion, which has been linked with cognitive rigid­
ity, has been associated with greater coupling of 
the default and salience networks (Carew, Miline, 
Tatham, MacQueen, & Hall, 2013). Critically, 
both the frontoparietal and salience networks are 
associated with shifting between internal and exter­
nal foci of attention (Goulden et al., 2014; Spreng 
et al., 2013). This suggests that inefficient network 
coupling may lead to increased DN  activity and the 
intrusion of off-task thoughts, whether brief wan­
derings or more protracted ruminations, into ongo­
ing, goal-directed cognition.
These network interactions have recently been 
synthesized in a proposed model for spontaneous 
thought, put forward by Christoff and colleagues
(2016). In it, the authors argue that mind-wan­
dering arises as a result of differential variability 
and constraint between sensorimotor areas as well 
as dorsal attention, frontoparietal, salience, and 
default networks. In particular, variability within 
the medial temporal lobe (MTL)-centered subsys­
tem of the D N  may generate spontaneous thought, 
which is then automatically constrained by the 
core component of D N  and the SN to personally 
relevant concerns. When mind-wandering occurs, 
the frontoparietal control network can shift inter­
nal attention to impose deliberate constraints on 
the flow of spontaneous thought, thus ending the 
mind-wandering episode. We propose that rumi­
nation may emerge from the mechanisms outlined 
in this model but with an inefficient engagement 
of the frontoparietal control network to shift inter­
nal attention. Instead, the tight coupling of the 
salience and default networks yields a “sticky” pat­
tern of highly self-relevant thought from which an 
individual is unable to shift internal attention.
Considering these similarities between rumi­
nation and mind-wandering as manifestations of 
spontaneously occurring thought— at the level 
of the brain and behavior— we therefore propose 
that rumination should be considered as a more
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

protracted or “sticky” form of mind-wandering 
and spontaneous thought. Seen through this lens, 
the mental eddy currents of rumination emerge as 
spontaneous thoughts that become mired in affec­
tively salient and entrenched problems. In this way, 
it is the content and context of spontaneous thought 
that delineate mind-wandering and rumination. If 
correct, this reconceptualization of rumination as a 
protracted form of mind-wandering and spontane­
ous cognition may open new paths for identifying 
novel diagnostic markers and intervention strategies 
to mitigate the negative functional impacts of rumi­
native thought.
Future Directions
Future investigations of rumination, utilizing this 
framework of spontaneous thought, will be impor­
tant in guiding the development of new interven­
tions to attenuate ongoing depressive rumination. 
The role of mindfulness meditation in reducing 
depressive rumination has shown some promise (van 
Vugt, Hitchcock, Shahar, & Britton, 2012). There 
is also evidence that distraction-based interventions 
may be helpful (Hilt & Poliak, 2012), though the 
extent to which this is true may vary with the novelty 
of the distractor (Bar, 2009). Transcranial direct cur­
rent stimulation has also been examined in decreas­
ing both mind-wandering (Kajimura & Nomura,
2015) and rumination (Vanderhasselt et al., 2015), 
providing further support that these processes may 
share a common neural substrate.
In sum, rumination, long recognized as a cogni­
tive bias in psychopathology, may also be a more 
protracted mode of spontaneous thought, perhaps 
reflecting altered interactivity between large-scale 
neural networks. Clear challenges lie ahead in the 
development of paradigms to more reliably probe 
aspects of rumination and its associated neural sub­
strates. Doing so, however, will open the way for 
more effective treatments and provide a novel lens 
through which to study the cognitive, affective, and 
neural basis of spontaneous thought.
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and sta­
tistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author.
Andrews, G., Slade, T., & Issakidis, C. (2002). Deconstructing 
current comorbidity: Data from the Australian National 
Survey of Mental health and Well-being. The British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 181, 306-314.
Andrews, P. W., & Thomson, J. A. Jr. (2009). The bright side of 
being blue: Depression as an adaptation for analyzing com­
plex problems. Psychological Review, 116, 620—654
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2012). The brain’s default network and 
its adaptive role in internal mentation. Neuroscientist, 18, 
251-270.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29—52.
Baars, B. J. (2010). Spontaneous repetitive thoughts can be adap­
tive: Postscript on “mind wandering.” Psychological Bulletin, 
136, 208-210.
Bagby, R. M., Rector, N. A., Bacchiochi, J. R., & McBride, C. 
(2004). The stability of the response styles questionnaire 
rumination scale in a sample of patients with major depres­
sion. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 28, 527—538.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y., 
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by dis­
traction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. 
Psychological Science, 23, 1117-1122.
Ball, S. C., & Brewin, C. R. (2012). The effect of rumination 
on intrusive images and mood: An experimental investiga­
tion using the trauma film paradigm. Journal of Experimental 
Psychopathology, 3, 297-309.
Bar, M. (2009). A cognitive neuroscience hypothesis of mood 
and depression. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 456—463.
Bartova, L., Meyer, B. M., Diers, K., Rabl, U., Scharinger, 
C., Popovic, A., . . . Pezawas, L. (2015). Reduced default 
mode network suppression during a working memory task 
in remitted major depression. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 
64, 9-18.
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). 
Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Behar, E., DiMarco, I. D., Hekler, E. B., Mohlman, J., & Staples, 
A. M. (2009). Current theoretical models of generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD): Conceptual review and treatment 
implications. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1011—1023.
Belleau, E. L., Taubitz, L. E., & Larson, C. L. (2015). Imbalance 
of default mode and regulatory networks during externally 
focused processing in depression. Social Cognitive and 
Affective Neuroscience, 10, 744—751.
Berman, M. G., Misic, B., Buschkuehl, M., Kross, E., Deldin, 
P.J., Peltier, S.,. ..  Jonides, J. (2014). Does resting-state con­
nectivity reflect depressive rumination? A tale of two analy­
ses. Neuroimage, 103, 267-279.
Berman, M. G., Peltier, S., Nee, D. E., Kross, E., Deldin, P. J., & 
Jonides, J. (2011). Depression, rumination and the default net­
work. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 6, 548—555.
Bokor, G., & Anderson, P.D. (2014). Obsessive-compulsive dis­
order. Journal of Pharmacy Practice, 27, 116—130
Brozovich, F. A., Goldin, P., Lee, I., Jazaieri, H., Heimberg, 
R. G., Gross, J. J. (2015). The effect of rumination and 
reappraisal on social anxiety symptoms during cognitive- 
behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 208-218.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, and rel­
evance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1124, 1-38.
Buckner, R. L., & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the 
brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 49—57.
Carew, C. L., Miline, A. M., Tatham, E. L., MacQueen, G. M., 
& Hall, G. B. C. (2013). Neural systems underlying thought 
suppression in young women with, and at-risk, for depres­
sion. Behavioral Brain Research, 257, 13—24.
E L I Z A B E T H  D U P R E  A N D  R. N A T H A N  S P R E N G
517

Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17, 718-731.
Cooney, R. E., Joormann, J., Eugene, F., Dennis, E. L., & 
Gotlib, I. H. (2010). Neural correlates of rumination in 
depression. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 
10, 470-478.
Curci, A., Lanciano, T., Soleti, E., & Rime, B. (2013). Negative 
emotional experiences arouse rumination and affect working 
memory capacity. Emotion, 13, 867-880.
Dar, K. A., & Iqbal, N. (2015). Worry and rumination in gen­
eralized anxiety disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. 
The Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 149, 
866-880.
Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., Steil, R., Clohessy, S., Wenninger K., 
& Winter, H. (2002). The nature of intrusive memories after 
trauma: The warning signal hypothesis. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 40, 995-1002.
Elliott, R, Rubinsztein, J. S., Sahakian, B. J., & Dolan R.
J. (2002). The neural basis of mood-congruent process­
ing biases in depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 
597-604.
Fawcett, J. M., Benoit, R. G., Gagnepain, P., Salman, A., 
Bartholdy, S., Bradley, C., . . . Anderson, M. C. (2015). The 
origins of repetitive thought in rumination: Separating cog­
nitive style from deficits in inhibitory control over memory. 
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
47, 1-8.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff,
K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commentary on 
Wilson et al.’s “Just think: the challenges of the disengaged 
mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1—4.
Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2011). Treatment of obsessive 
compulsive disorder. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 7, 
229-243.
Fresco, D. M., Frankel, A. N., Mennin, D. S., Turk, C. L., & 
Heimberg, R. G. (2002). Distinct and overlapping features 
of rumination and worry: The relationship of cognitive pro­
duction to negative affective states. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 26, 179-188.
Goldwin, M. & Behar, E. (2011). Concreteness of idiographic 
periods of worry and depressive rumination. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 36, 840-846.
Goulden, N., Khusnulina, A., Davis, N. J., Bracewell, 
R. M., Bokde, A. L., McNulty, J. P., & Mullins, P. G. 
(2014). The salience network is responsible for switching 
between the default mode network and the central execu­
tive network: Replication from DCM. Neuroimage, 99, 
180-190.
Grecius, M. D., Flores, B.H., Menon, V., Glover, G. H., Solvason, 
H. B., Kenna, H .,. . . Schatzberg, A. F. (2007). Resting-state 
functional connectivity in major depression: Abnormally 
increased contributions from subgenual cingulate cortex and 
thalamus. Biological Psychiatry, 62, 429—437.
Hach, S., Tippett, L. J., & Addis, D. R. (2014). Neural changes 
associated with the generation of specific past and future 
events in depression. Neuropsychologia, 65, 41—55.
Hamilton, J. P., Chen, M. C., Gotlib, I. H. (2013). Neural 
systems approaches to understanding major depressive dis­
order: An intrinsic functional organization perspective. 
Neurobiology of Disease, 52, 4—11.
Hamilton, J. P, Farmer, M., Fogelman, P., & Gotlib, I. H. (2015). 
Depressive rumination, the default-mode network, and the 
dark matter of clinical neuroscience. Biological Psychiatry, 78, 
224-230.
Hamilton, J. P., Furman, D. J., Chang, C., Thomason, M. E., 
Dennis, E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Default-mode and 
task-positive network activity in major depressive disor­
der: Implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination. 
Biological Psychiatry, 70, 327-333.
Hilt, L. M. & Poliak, S. D. (2012). Getting out of rumina­
tion: Comparison of three brief interventions in a sample of 
youth. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 40, 1157—1165.
Huffziger, S., Ebner-Priemer, U., Koudela S., Reinhard, I., 
& Kuehner, C. (2012). Induced rumination in everyday 
life: Advancing research approaches to study rumination. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 790—795.
Jackson, J. D., & Balota, D. A. (2012). Mind-wandering in 
younger and older adults: Converging evidence from the 
Sustained Attention to Response Task and reading for com­
prehension. Psychology and Aging, 27, 106—19.
Jacobs, R. H., Jenkins, L. M., Gabriel, L. B., Barba, A., Ryan, 
K. A., Weisenbach, S. L .,. .. Welsh, R. C. (2014). Increased 
coupling of intrinsic networks in remitted depressed youth 
predicts rumination and cognitive control. PLoS One, 
9, 1-11.
Johnson, D. P., & Whisman, M. A. (2013). Gender differences 
in rumination: A meta-analysis. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 55, 367-374.
Joormann, J., Levens, S. M., Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Sticky 
thoughts: Depression and rumination are associated with 
difficulties manipulating emotional material in working 
memory. Psychological Science, 22, 979-983.
Jose, P. E., & Brown, I. (2007). When does the gender differ­
ence in rumination begin? Gender and age differences in 
the use of rumination by adolescents. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 37, 180-192.
Kaiser, R. H., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Dillon, D. G., Goer, F., 
Beltzer, M., Minkel, J .,... Pizzagalli, D. A. (2015). Dynamic 
resting-state functional connectivity in major depression. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 41, 1822—1830.
Kajimura, S., & Nomura, M. (2015). Decreasing propensity to 
mind-wander with transcranial direct current stimulation. 
Neuropsychologia, 75, 533-537.
Kasch, K. L., Klein, D. N., & Lara M. E. (2001). A construct 
validation study of the Response Styles Questionnaire rumi­
nation scale in participants with a recent-onset major depres­
sive disorder. Psychological Assessment, 13, 375-383.
Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., Liu, J., Swartz, 
M., & Blazer, D. G. (1996). Comorbidity of DSM-III-R 
major depressive disorder in the general population: Results 
from the US National Comorbidity Survey. The British 
Journal of Psychiatry: Supplement, 196, 17—30.
Kessler, R. C., Sampson, N. A., Berglund, P., Gruber, M. J., 
Al-Hamzawi, A., Andrade, L., . . . M. A. Wilcox. (2015). 
Anxious and non-anxious major depressive disorder in the 
World Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. 
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 24, 210—226.
Killingsworth, M. A., & Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering 
mind is an unhappy mind. Science, 330, 932-932.
5 i 8
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

Klinger, E., (2009). Daydreaming and fantasizing: Thought flow 
and motivation. In K. D. Markman, W. M. P. Klein, & J. A. 
Suhr (Eds.), Handbook of imagination and mental simulation 
(pp. 225-240). New York: Psychology Press.
Kuhn, S., Vanderhasselt, M. A., De Raedt, R., & Gallinat, J.
(2012) . Why ruminators won’t stop: The structural and rest­
ing state correlates of rumination and its relation to depres­
sion. Journal of Affective Disorders, 141, 352—360.
LeMoult, J., Arditte, K. A., D’Avanzato, C., & Joormann, J.
(2013) . State rumination: Associations with emotional 
stress reactivity and attention biases. Journal of Experimental 
Psychopathology, 4, 471—484.
Lyubomirsky, S., Caldwell, N. D., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. 
(1998). Effects of ruminative and distracting responses to 
depressed mood on retrieval of autobiographical memories. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 166—177.
Maillet, D., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). From mind wandering to 
involuntary retrieval: Age-related differences in spontaneous 
cognitive processes. Neuropsychologia, 80, 142—156.
Marchant, N. L., & Howard, R. J. (2015). Cognitive debt 
and Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 44, 
755-770.
Marchetti, I., Koster, E. H. W., Sonuga-Barke, E. J., & De 
Raedt, R. (2012). The default mode network and recurrent 
depression: A neurobiological model of cognitive risk factors. 
Neuropsychology Review, 22, 229—251.
Martin, L. L., Tesser, A., & McIntosh, W. D. (1993). Wanting 
by not having: The effects of unattained goals on thoughts 
and feelings. In D. Wegner & C. Papageorgiou (Eds.), 
Handbook of mental control (pp. 552—572). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Matthews, G., & Wells, A. (2004). Rumination, depression, 
and metacognition: The S-REF model. In C. Papageorgiou 
& A. Wells (Eds.), Depressive rumination: Nature, theory, 
and treatment (pp. 125-151). Chichester, UK: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Meiran, N., Diamond, G. M., Toder, D., & Nemets, B. (2010). 
Cognitive rigidity in unipolar depression and obsessive com­
pulsive disorder: Examination of task switching, Stroop, 
working memory updating and post-conflict adaptation. 
Psychiatry Research, 185, 149-156.
Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathol­
ogy: A unifying triple network model. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 15, 483-506.
Michael, T., Halligan, S. L., Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (2007). 
Rumination in posttraumatic stress disorder. Depression and 
Anxiety, 24, 307-317.
Milazzo, A.-C., Ng, B., Jiang, H., Shirer, W., Varoquaux, G., 
Poline, J. B., . . . Greicius, M. D. (2016). Identification 
of mood-relevant brain connections using a continuous, 
subject-driven rumination paradigm. Cerebral Cortex, 26, 
933-942.
Morrow, J., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1990). Effects of responses 
to depression on the remediation of depressive affect. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 519-527.
Muris, P, Roelofs, J., Rassin, E., Franken, I., & Mayer, B. (2005). 
Mediating effects of rumination and worry on the links 
between neuroticism, anxiety and depression. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 39, 1105-1111.
Nejad, A. B., Fossati, P, & Lemogne, C. (2013). Self- 
referential processing, rumination, and cortical mid­
line structures in major depression. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7, 1—9.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their 
effects on the duration of depressive episodes. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 100, 569-582.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2000). The role of rumination in depres­
sive disorders and mixed anxiety/depressive symptoms. The 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 504—511.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Davis, C. G. (1999). “Thanks for shar­
ing that”: Ruminators and their social support networks. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 801—814.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1993). Effects of rumina­
tion and distraction on naturally occurring depressed mood. 
Cognition and Emotion, 7, 561—570.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Parker, L. E., & Larson, J. (1994). 
Ruminative coping with depressed mood following loss. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 92—104.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). 
Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
3, 400-424.
Northoff, G., & Sibille, E. (2014). Why are cortical GABA neu­
rons relevant to internal focus in depression? A cross-level 
model linking cellular, biochemical and neural network find­
ings. Molecular Psychiatry, 19, 966-977.
Owens, M., & Derakshan, N. (2013). The effects of dysphoria 
and rumination on cognitive flexibility and task selection. 
Acta Psychologica, 142, 323-331.
Park, R. J., Goodyer, I. M., & Teasdale, J. D. (2004). Effects of 
induced rumination and distraction on mood and overgen­
eral autobiographical memory in adolescent major depres­
sive disorder and controls. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 45, 996-1006.
Pasyugina, I., Koval, P., De Leersnyder, J., Mesquita, B., & 
Kuppens, P. (2015). Distinguishing between level and impact 
of rumination as predictors of depressive symptoms: An expe­
rience sampling study. Cognition & Emotion, 29, 736—746.
Perkins, A. M., Arnone, D., Smallwood, J., & Mobbs, D. (2015). 
Thinking too much: Self-generated thought as the engine of 
neuroticism. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19, 492—498.
Petrican, R., Saverino, C., Shayna Rosenbaum, R., & Grady, 
C. (2015). Inter-individual differences in the experience of 
negative emotion predict variations in functional brain archi­
tecture. Neuroimage, 123, 80-88.
Piguet, C., Desseilles, M., Sterpenich, V., Cojan, Y., Bertschy, 
G., & Vuilleumier, P. (2014). Neural substrates of rumi­
nation tendency in non-depressed individuals. Biological 
Psychology, 103, 195-202.
Poerio, G. L., Totterdell, P. & Miles, E. (2013). Mind-wandering 
and negative mood: Does one thing really lead to another? 
Consciousness and Cognition, 22, 1412—1421.
Raes, F., Hermans, D., Williams, J. M. G., Geypen, L., & Eelen, 
P. (2006). The effect of overgeneral autobiographical retrieval 
on rumination. Psychologica Belgica, 46, 131—141.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 98, 676-682.
Ray, R. D., Ochsner K. N., Cooper J. C., Robertson, E. R., 
Gabrieli, J. D. E., & Gross, J. J. (2005). Individual differ­
ences in trait rumination modulate neural systems support­
ing the cognitive regulation of emotion. Cognitive, Affective 
& Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 156—168.
Romero, N., Vazquez, C., & Sanchez, A. (2014). Rumination 
and specificity of autobiographical memory in dysphoria. 
Memory, 22, 646-54.
E L I Z A B E T H  D U P R E  A N D  R. N A T H A N  S P R E N G
519

Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, 
G. H., Kenna, H., . . . Greicius, M. D. (2007). Dissociable 
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing 
and executive control. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 
2349-2356.
Segerstrom, S. C., Stanton, A. L., Alden, L. E., & Shortridge, 
B. E. (2003). A multidimensional structure for repetitive 
thought: What’s on your mind, and how, and how much? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 909—921.
Segerstrom, S. C., Tsao, J. C. I., Alden, L. E., & Craske, M. G. 
(2000). Worry and rumination: Repetitive thought as a con­
comitant and predictor of negative mood. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 24, 671-688.
Sheline, Y. E, Barch, D. M., Price, J. L., Rundle, M. M., 
Vaishnavi, S. N., Snyder, A. Z., . . . Raichle, M. E. (2009). 
The default mode network and self-referential processes in 
depression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U 
SA, 106, 1942-1947.
Singer, J. L., & McCraven, V. (1961). Some characteristics of 
adult daydreaming. Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary 
and Applied, 51, 151-164
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Smith, J. M., & Alloy, L. B. (2009). A roadmap to rumination: A 
review of the definition, assessment, and conceptualization 
of this multifaceted construct. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 
116-128.
Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A., & Kim, A. S. (2009). The common 
neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navi­
gation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quantitative 
meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 489—510.
Spreng, R. N., Sepulcre, J., Turner, G. R., Stevens, W. D., & 
Schacter, D. L. (2013). Intrinsic architecture underlying 
the relations among the default, dorsal attention, and fron­
toparietal control networks of the human brain. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 1—10.
Stevens, W. D., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). Resting-state functional 
connectivity MRI reveals active processes central to cogni­
tion. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 5, 
233-245.
Siitterlin, S., Paap, M. C. S., Babic, S., Kiibler, A., & Vogele, C. 
(2012). Rumination and age: Some things get better .Journal 
of Aging Research, 2012, 1-10.
Thomsen, D. K. (2006). The association between rumination 
and negative affect: A review. Cognition and Emotion, 20, 
1216-1235.
Treynor, W., Gonzales, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). 
Rumination reconsidered: A psychometric analysis. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 27, 247-259.
van Vugt, M. K., Hitchcock, P., Shahar, B., & Britton, W. (2012) 
The effects of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy on affec­
tive memory recall dynamics in depression: A mechanistic 
model of rumination. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
6, 1-13.
Vanderhasselt, M., De Raedt, R., Namur, V., Lotufo, P. A., 
Bensenor, I. M., Boggio, P. S., & Brunoni, A. R. (2015). 
Transcranial electric stimulation and neurocognitive training 
in clinically depressed patients: A pilot study of the effects 
on rumination. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & 
Biological Psychiatry, 57, 93-99.
Ward, A., Lyubomirsky, S., Sousa, L., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. 
(2003). Can’t quite commit: Rumination and uncertainty. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 96—107.
Watkins, E. R. (2008). Constructive and unconstructive repeti­
tive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 163-206.
Watkins, E., & Baracaia, S. (2002). Rumination and social 
problem-solving in depression. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 40, 1179-1189.
Watkins, E., & Brown, R. G. (2002). Rumination and execu­
tive function in depression: An experimental study. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 72, 400—402.
Watkins, E., & Moulds, M. (2005). Positive beliefs about rumi­
nation in depression: A replication and extension. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 39, 73—82.
Watkins, E. & Teasdale, J. D. (2001). Rumination and over­
general memory in depression: Effects of self-focus and 
analytic thinking. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 110, 
353-357.
Whitmer, A. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Switching and backward 
inhibition in major depressive disorder: The role of rumina­
tion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 121, 570—578.
Whitmer, A. J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2013). An attentional 
scope model of rumination. Psychological Bulletin, 139, 
1036-1061.
Wilson, T. D., Reinhard, D. A., Westgate, E. C., Gilbert, D. 
T., Ellerbeck, N., Hahn, C., . . . Shaked, A. (2014). Just 
think: The challenges of the disengaged mind. Science, 
345, 75-77.
Zhu, X., Wang, X., Xiao, J., Liao, J., Zhong, M., Wang, W., & 
Yao, S. (2012). Evidence of a dissociation pattern in resting- 
state default mode network connectivity in first-episode, 
treatment-naive 
major 
depression 
patients. 
Biological 
Psychiatry, 71, 611-617.
520
R U M I N A T I O N  IS A S T I C K Y  F O R M  OF S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

C H A P T E R
37
Pain and Spontaneous Thought
Aaron Kucyi
Abstract
Pain is among the most salient of experiences, while also, curiously, being among the most malleable.
A large body of research has revealed that a multitude of explicit strategies can be used to effectively 
alter the attention-demanding quality of acute and chronic pains and their associated neural correlates. 
However, thoughts that are spontaneous, rather than actively generated, are common in daily life, and so 
attention to pain can often temporally fluctuate because of ongoing self-generated experiences. Classic 
pain theories have largely neglected to account for unconstrained fluctuations in cognition, but new 
studies have demonstrated the behavioral relevance, putative neural basis, and individual variability of 
interactions between pain and spontaneous thoughts. This chapter reviews behavioral studies of ongoing 
fluctuations in attention to pain, studies of the neural basis of spontaneous mind-wandering away from 
pain, and the clinical implications of this research.
Key W ords: pain, acute pain, chronic pain, cognition, behavioral, spontaneous thought, mind-wandering
Pain is among the most salient of experiences, 
while also, curiously, being among the most mallea­
ble. Although pain signals danger and thus demands 
attention, a simple difference in context or fram­
ing can drastically change the experience. Someone 
who is undergoing a tongue piercing can experience 
increased pain if focusing on the fear of further 
injury, or can have decreased pain if being dis­
tracted by the calming remarks of a friend or if mus­
ing about the desired aesthetic effect. The past few 
decades of research have revealed that a multitude of 
explicit strategies can be used to effectively alter the 
attention-demanding quality of pain (reviewed by 
Eccleston & Crombez, 1999; Seminowicz & Davis, 
2007; Torta, Legrain, Mouraux & Valentini, 2017; 
Wiech, 2016). Modern electrophysiology and func­
tional neuroimaging studies have revealed how 
placebo analgesia, active distraction, reappraisal, 
anticipation, and mood manipulation modify the 
activity of brain networks that respond during pain 
(reviewed by Wiech, Ploner, & Tracey, 2008).
An overwhelming proportion of studies on pain- 
attention interactions involve either an intervention 
to explicitly manipulate the cognitive state or an 
instruction requiring an individual to actively con­
trol or distract from pain. In naturalistic settings, 
however, attention to acute and chronic pain can 
often fluctuate because of ongoing spontaneous 
thoughts. Whether a persons thought contents 
during a tongue piercing procedure are focused on 
negative or positive aspects of the procedure, or are 
completely unrelated, may not be under her active 
control and may not even be directly influenced by 
the present sensory environment. While classic pain 
theories have largely neglected to account for such 
unconstrained fluctuations in cognition, spontane­
ous thoughts are a defining part of daily life— as 
illustrated throughout this Handbook— that must 
be included in any comprehensive, ecologically 
valid description of the pain experience (reviewed 
by Kucyi & Davis, 2015, 2016). The contents of 
spontaneous thoughts are also critical to consider
5 2 1

clinically in acute and chronic pain. In this chapter, 
I review behavioral studies of ongoing fluctuations 
in attention to pain, studies of the neural basis of 
spontaneous mind-wandering away from pain, and 
the clinical implications of this research.
Spontaneous Attentional Fluctuations 
and Pain
Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional 
experience that can be measured only by self-report. 
Advances in functional neuroimaging allow predic­
tion of self-reported acute pain states with greater 
than 90% accuracy under certain contexts (Wager 
et al., 2013; Woo et al., 2017). Importantly, these 
applications rely on comparison with self-report as 
the gold-standard measure, and there is currently 
no validated technology that can objectively con­
firm or rule out the presence of pain (reviewed by 
Davis, Kucyi, & Moayedi, 2015). Reliance on self- 
report, however, has several shortcomings and may 
be inadequate for fully capturing all aspects of the 
pain experience (reviewed by Wager & Atlas, 2013).
When assessing pain-attention interactions, one 
major issue is that being asked to rate pain inher­
ently biases attention toward that pain. In daily life, 
attention may naturally wax and wane. Pain quali­
ties cannot be reported on in a valid manner dur­
ing moments when attention is on something other 
than pain. Indeed, people experiencing prolonged 
pain may not commonly be in states in which atten­
tion is fully engaged with features such as the exact 
current intensity or unpleasantness of pain.
One way to study how attention to pain natu­
rally varies over time is to use the experience­
sampling approach. This method, in which people 
are probed at random intervals about their atten­
tion, is similar to that often used in the study of 
spontaneous thought (reviewed by Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2006). In a handful of studies, experience 
sampling has been used in patients with chronic 
pain, who were probed about their level of attention 
to pain (e.g., rating the statement “Right now, I am 
focusing on my pain”) at random intervals during 
daily life (Crombez, Viane, Eccleston, Devulder, & 
Goubert, 2013; Peters & Crombez, 2007; Roelofs, 
Peters, Patijn, Schouten, & Vlaeyen, 2004; Viane, 
Crombez, Eccleston, Devulder, De Corte, 2004). 
These studies confirm that attention to pain varies 
naturally over time, and that some patients tend to 
attend away from pain more than others. However, 
it has not been fully determined whether atten­
tion away from pain is typically due to spontane­
ous thought or to other distractors (e.g., externally
driven events). Given that mind-wandering occurs 
frequently in everyday waking life (Kane et al., 
2007), it is likely that spontaneous thoughts com­
monly drive attention away from pain in daily 
life, and that the content and frequency of these 
thoughts vary both within and across individuals.
While interactions of spontaneous thought with 
chronic pain remain to be characterized, significant 
advances have been made in the study of acute pain. 
In research that combined painful stimulation, 
experience sampling, and neuroimaging, 51 healthy 
adults were asked after several 20-second trials of 
painful 
(transcutaneous 
electrical) 
stimulation 
whether their attention had just been on pain or on 
something else (Kucyi, Salomons, & Davis, 2013). 
Although stimulus intensity was kept constant to 
evoke a predetermined pain intensity level, the 
degree of self-reported attention varied across trials. 
At the group level, subjects reported on average that 
thoughts away from pain were mostly due to mind­
wandering (i.e., thoughts completely unrelated to 
the stimulus or other features of the present sen­
sory environment), but sometimes attention away 
from pain was due to distinct factors such as exter­
nal distractions (e.g., hearing sounds). Importantly, 
subjects were tested with this experience-sampling 
paradigm on two separate days, and the degree of 
self-reported attention away from pain was highly 
consistent between sessions, suggesting that peo­
ple may have trait-like tendencies that predispose 
them either to attend to pain or instead to become 
immersed in spontaneous thoughts.
Supporting this idea of trait-like tendencies, 
in a separate, demanding cognitive task (with­
out experience sampling), individual differences 
in self-reported mind-wandering away from pain 
(as previously recorded with experience sampling) 
were predictive of the effect of pain on behavior. 
Specifically, reaction time showed greater slowing in 
the presence of pain in subjects who had reported 
more attention to pain (Kucyi et al., 2013). This 
behavioral link, together with brain activity mea­
surements (described in the following), was critical 
to validating the self-reports obtained with experi­
ence sampling.
Neural Basis of Mind-Wandering Away 
from Pain
The relationship between brain activity and spon­
taneous thought during painful stimulation must 
be interpreted in light of what is currently known 
about pain- and attention-related brain networks. 
Critically, nociceptive signals in the peripheral
522
P A I N  A N D  S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

nervous system (the sensory response to harmful or 
potentially harmful stimuli) do not always result in 
pain (Melzack & Wall, 1965). Pain arises from a 
specific pattern of dynamic brain activity that may 
sometimes get engaged, and may at other times not 
get engaged, by the same input stimulus (reviewed 
by Kucyi & Davis, 2015). When engaged, ascending 
spinal cord and brainstem pathways send signals to 
several regions within the cerebral cortex (including 
insula, somatosensory cortex, and cingulate cortex) 
(Apkarian, Bushnell, Treede, & Zubieta, 2005) that 
are thought to reflect the characteristic sensory, 
cognitive-affective, and motivational aspects of pain 
perception (Melzack & Casey, 1968). When not 
engaged, a separate system known as the descend­
ing pain modulatory system (or antinociceptive sys­
tem) is likely to be at play. This descending system, 
first characterized in animal models (reviewed by 
Basbaum & Fields, 1984) and now with support­
ing evidence from human functional neuroimaging 
studies (reviewed by Tracey & Mantyh, 2007), is 
thought to include specific areas within the cerebral 
cortex (including prefrontal subregions) that project 
to key brainstem nodes (periaqueductal gray [PAG] 
and rostroventral medulla) that inhibit incoming 
nociceptive input from the spinal cord.
Importantly, modern neuroimaging has revealed 
pain-related networks that may be preferentially 
involved in attentional aspects of pain. The salience 
network (Seeley et al., 2007), a bilateral system 
including the anterior insula and an anterior part 
of the temporoparietal junction, is activated with 
general, salient changes in the environment arising 
from any input modality, including pain (Downar, 
Crawley, Mikulis, Davis, 2000; Downar, Mikulis, 
& Davis, 2003), and some subregions of this net­
work show greater within-network connectivity for 
right- compared to left-hemisphere homologous 
regions (Kucyi, Hodaie, & Davis, 2012a; Kucyi, 
Moayedi, Weissman-Fogel, 
Hodaie, 
& Davis, 
2012b). Attentional modulation of pain through 
active distraction has been shown to decrease activity 
in areas within the salience network and to engage 
the descending pain modulatory system (reviewed 
by Seminowicz & Davis, 2007; Kucyi & Davis,
2015). Another system known as the default mode 
network (DM N), which generally deactivates when 
attention is directed to the external environment 
(Raichle et al., 2001), is typically deactivated dur­
ing pain (Coghill et al., 1994; Loggia et al., 2012). 
A highly consistent effect in functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies is that the DM N 
shows increased activation during self-reported
mind-wandering (Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews- 
Hanna, & Christoff, 2015), although recent studies 
have revealed a non-exclusive role in self-reported 
mind-wandering and potential importance to 
other aspects of attention (Crittenden, Mitchell, & 
Duncan, 2015; Kucyi, Esterman, Riley, & Valera, 
2016a).
When healthy adults performed experience 
sampling during fMRI with noxious stimulation, 
several patterns of state-related activity were found 
in pain- and attention-related networks (Kucyi 
et al., 2013) (summarized in Figure 37.1). First, 
self-reported attention to pain was associated with 
greater activation within right hemisphere areas 
of the salience network (particularly the anterior 
insula, dorsolateral prefrontal subregions, and tem­
poroparietal junction), as well as regions impli­
cated in a distinct “frontoparietal control network” 
(anterior intraparietal sulcus, dorsolateral prefrontal 
subregions). The engagement of salience network 
regions, particularly those in the right hemisphere, 
during sustained attention to pain is consistent with 
previous work (Downar et al., 2003) and with the 
notion that the automatic, attention-demanding 
quality of pain is reflected in this network. While 
more speculative, the activity of regions in the fron­
toparietal control network could reflect a “high­
jacking” via interactions with active regions of the 
salience network to impair the ability to shift: away 
from pain.
A second finding was that self-reported attention 
away from pain was associated with lesser deacti­
vation of the DM N, including the medial prefron­
tal cortex (mPFC) and posterior cingulate cortex 
(PCC)/retrosplenial cortex, as well as areas within 
the medial temporal lobe and dorsomedial prefron­
tal DM N subsystems. The subjects who reported 
that their attention away from pain was due to a high 
degree of mind-wandering (as opposed to external 
distraction) showed the greatest decrease of DM N 
deactivation. Finally, during self-reported attention 
away from pain, there was also increased functional 
connectivity (greater correlation of signals) between 
the PAG, a key node of the descending pain modu­
latory system, and core areas of the DM N (includ­
ing mPFC, PCC, and retrosplenial cortex). The 
change in PAG-DMN coupling occurred over-and- 
above regional (de)activation effects, thus highlight­
ing the important role of inter-regional interactions 
in mind-wandering (see also Kucyi, 2017).
Further insights came from study of individually 
varying tendencies in relation to brain structural 
and functional connectivity (Kucyi et al., 2013).
A A R O N  K U C Y I
52.3

Attention to Pain
a  0.6 ■
u  0.4
| 0-2
CO
£ O.o
RTPJ
RalN S
R dlPFC
Pain 
Else
Pain 
Else
Pain 
Else
LalNS
:_£al_j£L l_llL Lf
Pain 
Else
Attention Away from Pain
PCC/Prec 
§> 0.2
R TOJ
Pain 
Else
Pain 
Else
Pain 
Else 
Pain 
Else
mPFC-PAG Functional Connectivity
Figure 37.1. (See Color Insert) Brain dynamics of self-reported attention to and spontaneous mind-wandering from pain. Brain 
regions within salience and frontoparietal networks show increased activation during attention to pain, compared to attention 
away from pain (top). During attention away from compared to toward pain, brain regions in the default mode network show 
decreased deactivation (middle) and the periaqueductal gray shows increased functional connectivity with the medial prefrontal 
node of the default mode network. alNS = anterior insula; alPS = anterior intraparietal sulcus; mPFC = medial prefrontal cortex; 
dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; dlPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; MTL = medial temporal lobe; mPFC = medial 
prefrontal cortex; PAG = periaqueductal gray; PCC = posterior cingulate cortex; Prec = precuneus; TOJ = temporo-occipital junction; 
TPJ = temporoparietal junction. Adapted with permission from Kucyi et al. (2013).
An analysis of diffusion MRI data revealed that 
individuals who reported more frequent attention 
away from pain were found to have higher frac­
tional anisotropy (a measure potentially indicating 
stronger, or more intact, structural connectivity; 
Johansen-Berg & Rushworth, 2009) in the path­
way between the mPFC (within DMN) and PAG. 
Additionally, the spontaneous activity between these 
same two regions during approximately nine min­
utes of wakeful rest was similarly related to individ­
ual differences. Subjects who reported more frequent
attention away from pain had greater functional 
connectivity variability (possibly indicating more 
dynamic communication) between the mPFC and 
PAG (Kucyi et al., 2013). Spontaneous resting-state 
functional connectivity on the timescale of minutes 
is well known to be largely reflective of intrinsic, 
individual-specific functional anatomy (reviewed by 
Buckner, Krienen, & Yeo, 2013), and so these find­
ings further support the idea of a trait-like nature 
of the tendency to mind-wander from pain (Kucyi 
et al., 2013). Taken together, the work suggests that
524
P A I N  A N D  S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

brain activity underlying mind-wandering away 
from pain may share some similarities with active 
distraction from pain (e.g., decreased salience net­
work activity), but that idiosyncrasies are also likely 
(e.g., decreased DM N deactivation and interaction 
with the descending pain modulatory system).
The study of the neural basis of mind-wandering 
and pain is in its infancy, and several caveats of the 
described neuroimaging findings should be con­
sidered. Perhaps most critically, to classify a neu­
ral process as truly antinociceptive, it is necessary 
to establish that the process underlies decreased 
pain. When measuring self-reported attention with 
experience sampling, pain ratings cannot be taken 
together with attention ratings. Possible interfer­
ence with spontaneous attentional fluctuations 
may occur, and the validity of such ratings when 
attention is away from pain would be question­
able. Thus, independent experiments, or a different 
paradigm, would be needed to confirm that mind­
wandering away from pain involves antinociception 
(cf. Krakauer, Ghazanfar, Gomez-Marin, Maclver, 
& Poeppel, 2017). Further experiments are also 
needed to determine the neural correlates of differ­
ent types of spontaneous thoughts (e.g., past- versus 
future-related, positive versus negative emotional 
content, etc.). Another critical question for future 
research is whether altered communication occurs 
between the DM N and antinociceptive system dur­
ing all mind-wandering (i.e., away from any sensory 
modality), or specifically during mind-wandering 
away from pain.
Although studies in non-human animals can help 
to provide insights when generating hypotheses, the 
nuanced self-reports needed to measure interactions 
between spontaneous thought and pain limit direct 
studies of the underlying physiological processes 
to humans— and thus, mainly to non-invasive 
neuroimaging modalities with limited spatial and 
temporal resolution. Invasive studies of structural 
connectivity in non-human primates provide sup­
port for plausible direct neuroanatomical pathways 
underlying the human findings that emphasize a 
role of connectivity between DM N areas and the 
PAG. Evidence indicates that areas within mPFC 
and within retrosplenial cortex have efferent con­
nections to the PAG (An, Bandler, Ongur, & 
Price, 1998; Parvizi, Van Hoesen, Buckwalter, & 
Damasiom, 2006).
Further evidence is needed to demonstrate 
that the full antinociceptive system 
(beyond 
PAG; see model in Figure 37.1) is spontaneously 
engaged during mind-wandering away from pain.
Key brainstem and spinal cord nuclei within the 
antinociceptive system are relatively small in size 
(sometimes below the scale of millimeters) and are 
difficult to study with fMRI due to technical limita­
tions. Complicating matters, the PAG is composed 
of several subregions with distinct connectivity and 
function (Coulombe, Erpelding, Kucyi, & Davis, 
2016; Linnman, Moulton, Barmettler, Becerra, & 
Borsook, 2012). Recently, advances with relatively 
high-resolution human spinal cord fMRI have 
allowed detection of the modulation of nociceptive 
signals in placebo analgesia (Eippert, Finsterbusch, 
Bingel, & Buchel, 2009), nocebo hyperalgesia, and 
active distraction from pain (Sprenger et al., 2012). 
The applications of spinal cord functional imaging 
and high-resolution brainstem imaging could be 
fruitful in the study of the antinociceptive system 
during paradigms involving measures of both pain 
and spontaneous thought.
Finally, the neurochemical basis, electrophysi- 
ological dynamics, and causal neural circuitry of 
mind-wandering away from pain remain unknown. 
The PAG is rich in opiate-containing neurons that 
mediate endogenous functions of the antinocicep­
tive system (reviewed by Millan, 2002), and further 
studies could provide insight into whether fluc­
tuations within the opioidergic system co-occur 
with spontaneous thought in the context of pain. 
Feedforward and feedback communication can­
not be determined from fMRI changes, whereas 
frequency-specific signals from electrophysiologi- 
cal measurements could give mechanistic clues 
pointing toward the nature of dynamics within 
the salience network and DM N during mind­
wandering away from pain (reviewed by Ploner, 
Sorg, & Gross, 2017). Interventions that involve 
perturbation of activity within these networks, for 
example with electrical brain stimulation, could be 
critical to establishing the causal roles of various 
structures in spontaneous levels of attention to pain. 
In summary, findings to date provide a platform for 
testable hypotheses regarding detailed neural mech­
anisms of interactions between pain and spontane­
ous thought.
Clinical Implications
Although not often explicitly considered within 
clinical contexts, a close look at the pain field reveals 
that clinicians and researchers widely recognize the 
potentially important role of spontaneous thought 
in coping with chronic pain. Commonly used clini­
cal scales include inquiries about the temporal fluc­
tuations of pain (e.g., the McGill Pain Questionnaire
A A R O N  K U C Y I
52.5

[Melzack, 1975] and painDETECT [Freynhagen, 
Baron, 
Gockel, 
& Tolle, 
2006]), 
including 
some scales that directly inquire about how pain 
tends to intrinsically capture attention. The Pain 
Catastrophizing Scale (Sullivan, Bishop, & Pivik,
1995) includes a subscale on rumination about 
pain, defined as perseverative negative thinking 
about pain and its possible causes or consequences 
(i.e., a lack of spontaneity in thought [Christoff, 
Irving, Fox, Spreng, & Andrews-Hanna, 2016]; see 
also DuPre and Spreng, Chapter 36 in this volume). 
The Pain Vigilance and Awareness Questionnaire 
(McCracken, 1997) and Experience of Cognitive 
Intrusion of Pain scale (Attridge, Crombez, Van 
Ryckeghem, Keogh, & Eccleston, 2015) include 
probes about the tendency to attend to or mind- 
wander away from pain. Spontaneous thoughts 
are predominantly accompanied by positive or 
neutral affect (at least in healthy populations; see 
Fox, Thompson, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 
2014) and thus could be protective against negative 
emotions commonly associated with rumination 
about and excessive attention to pain.
Individual variability in rumination about 
chronic pain has been studied both behaviorally and 
at the neural level. Studies of chronic pain popu­
lations have revealed that patients with a greater 
tendency to ruminate about pain tend to experi­
ence a greater level of pain and have poorer clinical 
outcomes (Buenaver et al., 2012; Sullivan, Bishop, 
& Pivik, 2002; Van Damme, Crombez, Bijttebier, 
Goubert, & Van Houdenhove, 2002). In chronic 
pain patients with temporomandibular disorder, 
enhanced 
resting-state 
functional 
connectivity 
within the DM N was associated with greater rumi­
nation about pain (Kucyi et al., 2014). The same 
study also found a positive correlation between 
rumination and functional connectivity between 
the mPFC and PAG areas (among others) (Kucyi 
et al., 2014). This could suggest a compensatory 
mechanism, given that mPFC-PAG functional con­
nectivity increases during mind-wandering away 
from pain (Kucyi et al., 2013). While intriguing, 
such findings should be replicated and further 
extended in independent cohorts and in other 
chronic pain populations.
A theme in this chapter has been that the ten­
dency to attend to spontaneous thoughts in the 
presence of nociceptive input may be a trait-like 
quality. However, an important, unanswered ques­
tion concerns whether trainable cognitive states 
could allow patients to overcome excessive atten­
tion to pain in tandem with reorganization of brain
structure and function. There has been considerable 
recent progress in development of and research on 
mindfulness meditation-based training for chronic 
pain, in which patients are encouraged to attend 
to and accept sensory (but not affective) aspects 
of their pain from a non-evaluative standpoint 
(reviewed by Zeidan & Vago, 2016). While mind­
fulness is thus proposed to work therapeutically via 
a specific form of enhanced attention to pain, there 
is currently no comparable, established behavioral 
treatment that specifically focuses on reducing atten­
tion to pain (e.g., increasing spontaneous thoughts 
away from pain and/or reducing rumination about 
pain). If an intervention could reliably increase lev­
els of mind-wandering away from pain, a testable 
hypothesis would be that such a therapy is effective 
in patients who may not benefit from mindfulness.
The practice of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT) for pain, a structured psychotherapeutic 
approach, involves training patients to actively con­
trol their pain and the associated negative affect 
(Thorn, 2004; Turk, Meichenbaum, & Genest, 
1983). A goal of this approach is to get learned cop­
ing strategies to trickle into everyday spontaneous 
coping. Potential effects on the tendency to mind- 
wander from pain could be considered in future 
studies as a clinical outcome measure. Interestingly, 
cognitive-behavioral training has been shown to 
alter DM N resting connectivity, as well as DM N 
deactivation during acute pain (Kucyi, Salomons, 
& Davis, 2016b). Also, in chronic pain, CBT led 
to increased resting connectivity between DM N 
areas and the PAG (among additional effects in 
other networks) (Shpaner et al., 2014). These neu­
ral changes in brain systems relevant to spontaneous 
pain-attention interactions suggest that CBT could 
influence the tendency to mind-wander, but inde­
pendent studies directly testing this hypothesis are 
needed.
Uncovering the brain mechanisms of spon­
taneous thought in the context of chronic pain 
could inform the development of neurorehabilita­
tion strategies. Based on available data in acute 
pain and preliminary findings in chronic pain, 
pathways between the D M N and descending pain 
modulatory system (e.g., between mPFC and 
PAG) could represent potential neuromodulatory 
targets for alleviating excessive attention to and 
rumination about pain. However, the causal roles 
of these pathways in spontaneous pain-attention 
interactions and the potential importance of 
broader networks associated with these path­
ways have not yet been clarified. It also remains
526
P A I N  A N D  S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

to be seen whether the brain dynamics of mind­
wandering away from acute pain are representa­
tive of what occurs in chronic pain. Thus, any 
development of a relevant, potentially effective 
therapy must be informed by detailed future stud­
ies with a specific focus on the qualities of sponta­
neous thought, and associated brain mechanisms, 
in patients with chronic pain.
References
An, X., Bandler, R., Ongur, D., & Price, J. L. (1998). Prefrontal 
cortical projections to longitudinal columns in the mid­
brain periaqueductal gray in macaque monkeys. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 401, 455-479.
Apkarian, A. V., Bushnell, M. C., Treede, R. D., & Zubieta, J.
K. (2005). Human brain mechanisms of pain perception and 
regulation in health and disease. European Journal of Pain, 
9, 463-484.
Attridge, N., Crombez, G., Van Ryckeghem, D., Keogh, E., 
& Eccleston, C. (2015). The experience of cognitive intru­
sion of pain: Scale development and validation. Pain, 156, 
1978-1990.
Basbaum, A. I., & Fields, H. L. (1984). Endogenous pain con­
trol systems: Brainstem spinal pathways and endorphin cir­
cuitry. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 7, 309-338.
Buckner, R. L., Krienen, F. M., & Yeo, B. T. (2013). 
Opportunities and limitations of intrinsic functional con­
nectivity MRI. Nature Neuroscience, 16, 832-837.
Buenaver, L. F., Quartana, P. J., Grace, E. G., Sarlani, E., 
Simango, M., Edwards, R. R., Haythornthwaite, J. A., & 
Smith, M. T. (2012). Evidence for indirect effects of pain 
catastrophizing on clinical pain among myofascial temporo­
mandibular disorder participants: The mediating role of sleep 
disturbance. Pain, 153, 1159-1166.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & Andrews- 
Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spontaneous 
thought: A dynamic framework. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
17, 718-731.
Coghill, R. C., Talbot, J. D., Evans, A. C., Meyer, E., Gjedde, A., 
& Bushnell, M. C. (1994). Distributed processing of pain 
and vibration by the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 
14, 4095-4108.
Coulombe, M. A., Erpelding, N., Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. 
(2016). Intrinsic functional connectivity of periaqueductal 
gray subregions in humans. Human Brain Mapping, 37, 
1514-1530.
Crittenden, B. M., Mitchell, D. J., & Duncan, J. (2015). 
Recruitment of the default mode network during a demand­
ing act of executive control. eLife, 4, e06481.
Crombez, G., Viane, I., Eccleston, C., Devulder, J., & Goubert,
L. (2013). Attention to pain and fear of pain in patients with 
chronic pain. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 36, 371—378.
Davis, K. D., Flor, H., Greely, H. T., Iannetti, G. D., Mackey, 
S., Ploner, M., . . . Wager, T. D. (2017). Brain imaging tests 
for chronic pain: medical, legal and ethical issues and recom­
mendations. Nature Reviews Neurology, 13, 624—638 
Davis, K. D., Kucyi, A., & Moayedi, M. (2015). The pain 
switch: An “ouch” detector. Pain, 156, 2164-2166.
Downar, J., Crawley, A. P, Mikulis, D. J., & Davis, K. D. (2000). 
A multimodal cortical network for the detection of changes 
in the sensory environment. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 277—283.
Downar, J., Mikulis, D. J., & Davis, K. D. (2003). Neural 
correlates of the prolonged salience of painful stimulation. 
Neuroimage, 20, 1540-1551.
Eccleston, C., & Crombez, G. (1999). Pain demands atten­
tion: A cognitive-affective model of the interruptive function 
of pain. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 356—366.
Eippert, F., Finsterbusch, J., Bingel, U., & Buchel, C. (2009). 
Direct evidence for spinal cord involvement in placebo anal­
gesia. Science, 326, 404.
Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C., Thompson, E., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, 
K. (2014). Is thinking really aversive? A commentary on 
Wilson et al.’s “Just think: the challenges of the disengaged 
mind.” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1427.
Freynhagen, R., Baron, R., Gockel, U., & Tolle, T. R. (2006). 
painDETECT: A new screening questionnaire to identify 
neuropathic components in patients with back pain. Current 
Medical Research and Opinion, 22, 1911-1920.
Johansen-Berg, H., Rushworth, M. F. (2009). Using diffusion 
imaging to study human connectional anatomy. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience, 32, 75—94.
Kane, M. J., Brown, L. H., McVay, J. C., Silvia, P. J., Myin- 
Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. R. (2007). For whom the mind 
wanders, and when: An experience-sampling study of work­
ing memory and executive control in daily life. Psychological 
Science, 18, 614-621.
Krakauer, J. W., Ghazanfar, A. A., Gomez-Marin, A., Maclver,
M. A., & Poeppel, D. (2017). Neuroscience needs behav­
ior: Correcting a reductionist bias. Neuron, 93, 480-490.
Kucyi, A. (2017). Just a thought: How mind-wandering is rep­
resented in dynamic brain connectivity. Neuroimage, doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.001.
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2015). The dynamic pain connec- 
tome. Trends in Neurosciences, 38, 86—95.
Kucyi, A., & Davis, K. D. (2016). The neural code for pain: 
From single-cell electrophysiology to the dynamic pain con- 
nectome. The Neuroscientist, 23, 397—414.
Kucyi, A., Esterman, M., Riley, C. S., & Valera, E. M. 
(2016a). Spontaneous default network activity reflects 
behavioral variability independent of mind-wandering. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U S A, 113, 
13899-13904.
Kucyi, A., Hodaie, M., & Davis, K. D. (2012a). Lateralization 
in intrinsic functional connectivity of the temporoparietal 
junction with salience- and attention-related brain networks. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 108, 3382-3392.
Kucyi, A., Moayedi, M., Weissman-Fogel, I., Goldberg, M. B., 
Freeman, B. V., Tenenbaum, H. C., & Davis, K. D. (2014). 
Enhanced medial prefrontal-default mode network func­
tional connectivity in chronic pain and its association with 
pain rumination. The Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 3969—3975.
Kucyi, A., Moayedi, M., Weissman-Fogel, I., Hodaie, M., & 
Davis, K. D. (2012b). Hemispheric asymmetry in white 
matter connectivity of the temporoparietal junction with the 
insula and prefrontal cortex. PloS One, 7, e35589.
Kucyi, A., Salomons, T. V., & Davis, K. D. (2013). Mind wan­
dering away from pain dynamically engages antinociceptive 
and default mode brain networks. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 110, 18692-18697.
A A R O N  K U C Y I
527

Kucyi, A., Salomons, T. V., & Davis, K. D. (2016b). Cognitive 
behavioral training reverses the effect of pain exposure on 
brain network activity. Pain, 157, 1895-1904.
Linnman, C., Moulton, E. A., Barmettler, G., Becerra, L., & 
Borsook, D. (2012). Neuroimaging of the periaqueductal 
gray: State of the field. Neuroimage, 60, 505-522.
Loggia, M. L., Edwards, R. R., Kim, J., Vangel, M. G., 
Wasan, A. D., Gollub, R. L., Harris, R. E., Park, K., & 
Napadow, V. (2012). Disentangling linear and nonlinear 
brain responses to evoked deep tissue pain. Pain, 153, 
2140-2151.
McCracken, L. M. (1997). “Attention” to pain in persons with 
chronic pain: A behavioral approach. Behavior Therapy, 28, 
271-284.
Melzack, R. (1975). The McGill pain questionnaire: Major prop­
erties and scoring methods. Pain, 1, 277-299.
Melzack, R., & Casey, K. L. (1968). Sensory, motivational, and 
central control determinants of pain: A new conceptual 
model. In D. Kenshalo (Ed.), The skin senses (pp. 423-439). 
Springfield, IL: C. C. Thomas.
Melzack, R., & Wall, P. D. (1965). Pain mechanisms: a new 
theory. Science (New York, NY), 250(3699), 971.
Millan, M. J. (2002). Descending control of pain. Progress in 
Neurobiology, 66, 355-474.
Parvizi, J., Van Hoesen, G. W., Buckwalter, J., & Damasio, A. 
(2006). Neural connections of the posteromedial cortex in 
the macaque. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the USA, 103, 1563-1568.
Peters, M. L., & Crombez, G. (2007). Assessment of attention 
to pain using handheld computer diaries. Pain Medicine, 8, 
S110—S120.
Ploner, M., Sorg, C., & Gross, J. (2017). Brain rhythms of pain. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21, 100-110.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., 
Gusnard, D. A., & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode 
of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA, 98, 676-682.
Roelofs, J., Peters, M. L., Patijn, J., Schouten, E. G., & Vlaeyen, 
J. W. (2004). Electronic diary assessment of pain-related fear, 
attention to pain, and pain intensity in chronic low back 
pain patients. Pain, 112, 335-342.
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, 
G. H., Kenna, H., Reiss, A. L., & Greicius, M. D. (2007). 
Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience pro­
cessing and executive control. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 
2349-2356.
Seminowicz, D. A., & Davis, K. D. (2007). A re-examination of 
pain-cognition interactions: implications for neuroimaging. 
Pain, 130, 8-13.
Shpaner, M., Kelly, C., Lieberman, G., Perelman, H., Davis, M., 
Keefe, F. J., & Naylor, M. R. (2014). Unlearning chronic 
pain: A randomized controlled trial to investigate changes 
in intrinsic brain connectivity following cognitive behavioral 
therapy. Neuroimage: Clinical, 5, 365-376.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 946-958.
Sprenger, C., Eippert, F., Finsterbusch, J., Bingel, U., Rose, 
M., & Buchel, C. (2012). Attention modulates spinal cord 
responses to pain. Current Biology, 22, 1019-1022.
Sullivan, M. J., Bishop, S. R., & Pivik, J. (1995) The pain cata- 
strophizing scale: Development and validation. Psychological 
Assessment, 7, 524-532.
Sullivan, M. J., Sullivan, M. E., & Adams, H. M. (2002.) Stage 
of chronicity and cognitive correlates of pain-related disabil­
ity. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 31, 111-118.
Thorn, B. (2004). Cognitive therapy for chronic pain: A step-by-step 
guide. New York: Guilford Press.
Tinnermann, A., Geuter, S., Sprenger, C., Finsterbusch, J., & 
Buchel, C. (2017). Interactions between brain and spinal 
cord mediate value effects in nocebo hyperalgesia. Science, 
358(6359), 105-108.
Torta, D. M., Legrain, V., Mouraux, A., & Valentini, E. 
(2017). Attention to pain! A neurocognitive perspective on 
attentional modulation of pain in neuroimaging studies. 
Cortex, 89, 120-134.
Tracey, I., & Mantyh, P. W. (2007). The cerebral signature for 
pain perception and its modulation. Neuron, 55, 377-391.
Turk, D. C., Meichenbaum, D., & Genest, M. (1983). Pain 
and behavioral medicine: A cognitive behavioral perspective. 
New York: Guilford Press.
Van Damme, S., Crombez, G., Bijttebier, P, Goubert, L., & Van 
Houdenhove, B. (2002). A confirmatory factor analysis of the 
Pain Catastrophizing Scale: Invariant factor structure across 
clinical and non-clinical populations. Pain, 96, 319-324.
Viane, I., Crombez, G., Eccleston, C., Devulder, J., & De Corte, 
W. (2004) Acceptance of the unpleasant reality of chronic 
pain: Effects upon attention to pain and engagement with 
daily activities. Pain, 112, 282-288.
Wager, T. D., & Atlas, L.Y. (2013) How is pain influenced 
by cognition? Neuroimaging weighs in. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 8, 91-97.
Wager, T. D., Atlas, L. Y., Lindquist, M. A., Roy, M., Woo, C. 
W., & Kross, E. (2013). An fMRI-based neurologic signature 
of physical pain. The New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 
1388-1397.
Wiech, K. (2016) Deconstructing the sensation of pain: The 
influence of cognitive processes on pain perception. Science, 
354, 584-587.
Wiech, K., Ploner, M., & Tracey, I. (2008). Neurocognitive 
aspects of pain perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 
306-313.
Woo, C. W., Schmidt, L., Krishnan, A., Jepma, M., Roy, M., 
Lindquist, M. A., Atlas, L. Y., & Wager, T. D. (2017). 
Quantifying cerebral contributions to pain beyond nocicep­
tion. Nature Communications, 8, 14211.
Zeidan, F., & Vago, D. R. (2016) Mindfulness meditation-based 
pain relief: A mechanistic account. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1373, 114-127.
528
P A I N  A N D  S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T

C H A P T E R
38
Spontaneous Thought in 
Contemplative Traditions
Halvor Eifring
Abstract
For more than two millennia, contemplative traditions across the Eurasian continent have seen 
spontaneous thought as a distraction that binds the devout to the phenomenal world, clogs the gateway 
to fundamental aspects of reality, and is used by demons to tempt the pious away from their prayer or 
meditation. At the same time, many traditions have believed the fruits of contemplative practice to come 
about spontaneously, rather than as a result of deliberate effort, and they have treated certain aspects 
of spontaneous thought as helping the process forward. Various traditions have recommended different 
approaches to spontaneous thought, including active suppression, mindful observation, harmonious 
regulation, reluctant or wholehearted acceptance, and either gently or forcefully turning one’s attention 
to the object of meditation or prayer. Specific antidotes have included the recital of sacred texts or 
mantras, as well as the performance of good deeds, ascetic exercises, or rituals of repentance and 
confession.
Key W ords: contemplation, Eurasia, spontaneous thought, meditation, prayer, mantra
Long before the rise of modern psychology and 
literary modernism, the many contemplative tradi­
tions of the Eurasian continent vehemently debated 
the nature of spontaneous thought and the various 
ways to deal with it. This chapter focuses on mind­
wandering and other forms of spontaneous thought 
occurring during wakefulness; dreams, though of 
great interest, are often treated differently and will 
not be discussed here.
This chapter covers several contemplative tra­
ditions, in particular Christian mysticism, Yoga, 
Mahayana Buddhism, and early Chinese thought. 
All of these traditions focus on practice, not just 
philosophical understanding. They tend to be 
concerned with meditation and prayer, ritual, and 
worship, as well as various forms of asceticism, 
withdrawal, and moral behaviour. The typical pur­
pose is to approach and integrate into one’s life the 
most fundamental aspects of existence, whether 
these are conceived of as belonging to God, the Self, 
Buddhahood, or the Way.
As we shall see, contemplatives often view mind­
wandering and other forms of spontaneous thought 
as distractions, disturbances, and obstacles, some­
times believed to come from demons or the Devil. 
On the other hand, they often see the results of con­
templative practice as depending on spontaneous 
impulses beyond human control, sometimes in the 
form of fortuitous and inspirational constellations 
within mind and body, at other times externalized 
as the grace of God or aid offered by angels, dei­
ties, or buddhas. The attitude toward spontaneous 
processes, therefore, is often ambivalent and full of 
contradictions.
Most contemplative traditions exist to this day 
in only slightly modernized form. Even more pop­
ular, however, are meditation practices that have 
been pulled out of their original religious contexts 
and are taught within secular and science-oriented 
settings, most notably non-directive meditation 
and mindfulness meditation. The former includes 
Transcendental 
Meditation, Acem 
Meditation,
529

Relaxation Response, and Clinically Standardized 
Meditation, all of which involve the gentle repeti­
tion of a meditation sound while both peripheral 
and digressive thought are given full freedom. The 
latter includes a number of breath- and body- 
based practices conveniently divided into Focused 
Attention, which typically aims to minimize both 
peripheral and digressive thought, and Open 
Monitoring, which deliberately directs the atten­
tion toward aspects of spontaneous thought. While 
modern meditation practices and their neural cor­
relates are discussed in more detail in Hasenkamp s 
Chapter 39 in this volume, this chapter will focus 
on the extended historical context of contemplative 
traditions.
The cultural history of spontaneous thought is 
not yet well studied (see Pang, Chapter 12 in this 
volume). The following exposition builds on my 
own admittedly modest comparative work, partly 
presented in Eifring (2015), and the work by other 
scholars on individual contemplative traditions.
Concepts
The various contemplative traditions conceptu­
alize spontaneous thought in different ways. None 
of the relevant concepts corresponds exactly to any 
modern notion of “spontaneous thought” or “mind­
wandering.” There is, however, sufficient overlap to 
justify comparison between the various traditions, 
as well as between the traditional and the modern 
material.
The early Christian understanding of spontane­
ous thought centers on three Greek terms: logismoi\ 
pathos, and fantasia. The first of these is the plural 
form of logismos (“thinking; reasoning; calculation”), 
and may denote both spontaneous and deliber­
ate thinking. The famous desert ascetic Evagrius 
Ponticus (ca. 345-399) is the one who begins to 
use the term consistently to refer to the thoughts 
(including feelings and images) that spontaneously 
enter into the mind during prayer or other ascetic 
practices.1 He and other early Christian mystics 
relate it to pathos (“passion”), which denotes “an 
experience undergone passively; hence an appetite 
or impulse such as anger, desire or jealousy, that 
violently dominates the soul”2 and thus explicitly 
refers to spontaneous impulses. The Christians and 
the slightly earlier Neo-Platonists of Late Antiquity 
inherited the ideal of apatheia (“dispassion”) from 
the Stoics, not necessarily implying a lack of pas­
sion (and not “apathy” in its modern sense), but a 
detached or “pure” way of relating to passion.3 The 
term fantasia (“fantasy; imagination”) resembles
some terms in modern cognitive science in specifi­
cally referring to mental images that are “spontane­
ous,” “task-unrelated,” and “stimulus-independent,” 
but is primarily concerned with experiences during 
contemplative prayer, not everyday life. It typically 
refers to images produced by the mind, or emerging 
from the subconscious, as the contemplative process 
deepens and the impact of external sensations and 
ordinary thoughts is reduced.4
In the Yoga tradition, based on the second- 
century Yoga Sutra, one of the most famous con­
cepts is the technical term citta-vrtti (“fluctuations 
of the mind”). While clearly relevant, this term 
provides less of a concrete reference to specific 
spontaneous thoughts and more of an abstract 
philosophical concept covering a ll mental states 
and processes, which the contemplative process is 
expected to bring to rest. Only slightly more spe­
cific and concrete is citta-viksepa (“distractions of 
the mind”), which again is a technical term referring 
widely to all things that are thought of as afflictions 
(klesa) or disturbances (antaraya) for the contem­
plative process— in other words, mental factors that 
activate the fluctuations of the mind rather than 
bringing them to rest. In contrast, the three succes­
sive stages of focused concentration and meditative 
absorption called dharana, dhyana, and sam adhi all 
refer to states in which these fluctuations have been 
brought to rest. As in the early Christian tradition, 
this presupposes dispassion, called vairagya, derived 
from the term rdga (“passion”; literally, “color”), 
which is perhaps the closest we get to a concrete 
and specific term for spontaneous thought or mind­
wandering in the Yogic material.5
In the Chinese version of Mahayana Buddhism, 
spontaneous thought is often referred to by the term 
nidn 
which is inherited from a Classical Chinese 
verb meaning “to bear in mind; to remember” 
and is used in Buddhist contexts to translate the 
Sanskrit nouns sm rti (“mindfulness; remembrance”) 
and ksana (“moment of time; thought-moment”).6 
The frequent reference to spontaneous thought 
is based on the latter meaning. It often occurs in 
compounds, such as wang-nian 
(“deluded
thoughts”), zd-nidn 
(“diverse thoughts”),
and wan-nian 
(“myriad thoughts”); these are 
sometimes contrasted with zheng-nian IE ^  (“right 
mindfulness”; from the former meaning). Another 
compound frequently used to refer to spontaneous 
thought is wang-xiang 
(“deluded thoughts”),
the Classical Chinese verb xiang S i (“to think”) 
being used in Buddhist terminology to translate 
the Sanskrit noun samjnd (“conceptualization;
530
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  I N  C O N T E M P L A T I V E  T R A D I T I O N S

ideation”), referring to how ideas regarding shape, 
color, length, pleasure and pain, and so on, are 
brought together and associated with an object.7 
Technically, neither nian nor xiang refers specifi­
cally to spontaneous thought; wang-xidng includes 
any kind of “deluded conceptualization,” and 
wang-nian any kind of “deluded thought,” whether 
spontaneous or actively produced. In many texts, 
however, both terms are almost exclusively used to 
refer to spontaneous thought and mind-wandering.
In the writings of pre-imperial (and pre- 
Buddhist) China (before 2 2 1  b c e ), the closest we 
come to notions of spontaneous thought is a num­
ber of fixed or semi-fixed lists of natural emotions, 
such as
xt nil ai le
“joy and anger, sadness and pleasure” 
xt nil you huan 5*^55 S  
“joy and anger, worry and vexation” 
you le xt nuyu
“worry and pleasure, joy and anger, desire and 
profit-seeking”
The first of these survives as a current phrase 
even in Modern Chinese. Toward the end of the 
pre-imperial period, such lists begin to be associ­
ated with the notion of q in g\If (“inborn response”), 
which gradually acquires the meaning “emotion,” 
and which is closely connected to the notion of 
xin g\^ t (“human nature”). Both qing and especially 
xing had been part of the philosophical debate for a 
couple of centuries before this, and they remained 
so throughout the more than two millennia-long 
imperial period. The treatment of emotions plays a 
central role in both the Confucian and Daoist forms 
of self-cultivation.
Thoughts as Digressions
Contemplative traditions differ from each other 
in their practices, concepts, and underlying world­
views, and these differences are reflected in their 
attitudes toward spontaneous thought. Despite all 
the differences, however, the various traditions have 
surprisingly much in common.
First of all, almost all contemplative traditions 
display a skeptical attitude toward spontaneous 
thought. Contemplative texts from different histori­
cal periods and various cultural backgrounds often 
describe in detail the struggle to achieve a mind 
without thoughts.
This skepticism is partly related to the frustra­
tions felt by anyone who has tried and failed to
concentrate on a task. The contemplative process is 
typically linked to a high degree of absorption and 
single-mindedness, and digressions or distractions 
are easily perceived as running counter to this pro­
cess. When the mind begins to wander, it is brought 
away from its intended contemplative focus.
For instance, the notion of “undistracted prayer” 
repeatedly used by Evagrius Ponticus and other 
early Christians partly builds on this view of spon­
taneous thought. So does the notion ofy l xln nian fo  
—
(“wholeheartedly recite the name of the 
buddha”) in Chinese Pure Land Buddhism.
Thoughts as Phenomena
The skeptical attitude toward spontaneous 
thought is also linked to a dichotomy that is wide­
spread within contemplative traditions, though 
hardly present in the modern scientific discourse 
on mind-wandering. In contrast to the Cartesian 
distinction between mind and body (or spirit and 
matter), contemplative traditions typically see mind 
and body as belonging on the same side of a more 
fundamental distinction between what we might 
call, for lack of a better term, the phenomenal and 
the non-phenomenal aspects of reality.
Along with the body and the senses, thoughts, 
feelings, and fantasies belong to the phenomenal 
realm and are often seen as keeping the mind from 
entering the non-phenomenal domain to which 
contemplatives aspire. In widely different contem­
plative traditions, this more fundamental aspect of 
existence is frequently declared to be ineffable and 
is described as being beyond the senses and beyond 
conception, emotion, and imagination. Cultural 
historians debate to what extent the descriptions of 
different traditions actually refer to the same under­
lying reality, as the perennialists would argue, or to 
different cultural creations, as the cultural construc­
tivists insist.8
Variants of this dichotomy are found in all 
the contemplative traditions under discussion, 
whether they are classified as dualist (Christianity 
and Yoga), non-dualist (Mahayana Buddhism), or 
squarely monist (Daoism). The skepticism toward 
mind-wandering and spontaneous thought in 
these traditions is often implicitly or explicitly 
linked to this dichotomy. In Christian mysticism, 
the dichotomy is conceptualized as an opposition 
between the uncreated ( = God) and the created 
( = God’s creation), as when Evagrius Ponticus says 
that “though . . . contemplation [of inner essences] 
is dispassionate, yet since it is of created things, 
it impresses their forms upon the intellect and
H A L V O R  E I F R I N G
531

keeps it away from God,”9 or when the fourteenth- 
century English work The C loud o f  Unknowing 
urges the contemplative to hide all creation under 
a cloud of forgetting “whether you think of [the 
creatures] as physical or spiritual beings, or of 
their states or actions, or of their goodness or bad­
ness.”10 In Yoga, a similar distinction holds between 
purusa (the ultimate Self) and prakrti (the material 
world), since Yoga “regard[s] not just the physi­
cal body but also the mind, ego, and all cognitive 
functions as belonging to the realm of inert mat­
ter.”11 Mahayana Buddhism rejects, in theory, all 
forms of duality, but in practice often displays a 
keen concern with the contrast between “empti­
ness” (Chinese kong j?; Sanskrit sunyata) and the 
five “aggregates” (Chinese yu n §1; Sanskrit skan- 
dha), and although “emptiness” is a metaphysical 
term denoting the absence of a perdurable self or 
an intrinsic nature of all things, the term is often 
used quite concretely to refer to a mind that is 
empty of thoughts.12 In Daoist thinking, the Way 
(Chinese dao iH) is an overarching metaphysical 
principle that permeates everything as part of a 
monist worldview. Even so, Daoist texts often dis­
play a clear dichotomy between this principle and 
all other forms of existence, including spontaneous 
thoughts and impulses. In the attempt to realize the 
Way, the natural emotions included in the semi­
fixed lists mentioned in the preceding are often 
seen as keeping the mind away from it.13
Thoughts as Obstructions
The role of mind-wandering and spontaneous 
thought within the distinction between phenom­
enal and non-phenomenal aspects of reality is, how­
ever, quite complex. The fact is that everything we 
see, hear, or feel belongs to the phenomenal realm. 
And while some contemplative traditions advocate 
a certain degree of withdrawal from the outer world, 
there is no expectation that the material world, or 
even the individual body, will disappear. Thoughts 
are a different matter, as shown by the widespread 
thirst for thoughtlessness.
So why are mind-wandering and spontaneous 
thought regarded as particularly problematic? The 
most plausible answer is that the mind is seen as a 
gateway to the dimension beyond our worldly real­
ity, in some sense closer to it than other parts of our 
mundane existence. For this gateway to function, 
it must be built of subtle material. The continuous 
stream of spontaneous thought is far from subtle 
in this sense. It is coarse and therefore threatens to 
block or clog the gateway.
In fact, most contemplative traditions make dis­
tinctions between different kinds of spontaneous 
thought, of which some are subtler and thus less 
problematic than others. In Christian mysticism, 
Evagrius Ponticus distinguishes between angelic, 
demonic and simply human thoughts. In Yoga, 
fluctuations of the mind may be either associated 
with “afflictions” or not {klistdklistdh), and kar­
mic imprints (sarhskdra) may be either “outgoing” 
(vyutthana; detrimental) or “restraining” (nirodha; 
conducive). In Daoism, plain emotions are often 
seen as detrimental,14 while other mental states, 
such as tranquillity (jing Iff), calmness {an $:) and 
stability {ding /£) help the mind in its quest for the 
Way. The various lists of conducive and detrimental 
factors, to which we shall return later, point in the 
same direction. Thus, some forms of spontaneous 
thought, or states of mind, are conceived of as being 
subtler and closer to the non-phenomenal realm 
and therefore more helpful to the contemplative 
process than plain, coarse mind-wandering. In the 
end, however, even these belong to the phenomenal 
realm and need somehow to be transcended.
In a modern reading of Teresa of Avila (15IS­
IS 82), Vilma Seelaus gives a more process-oriented 
understanding of the impact of spontaneous 
thought, in her terminology referred to as “distrac­
tions in prayer.” They are negative in the sense that 
they temporarily pull the contemplative out of his 
or her prayers, but positive in the sense of con­
taining important information about areas of the 
mind in need of further cultivation. “God speaks 
to us through them, . . . inviting us to greater self- 
knowledge and to deeper surrender of the mind and 
heart to God.”15 For instance, the “anxiety viz experi­
ence around fear of losing either possessions or sta­
tus” tells us that “addictions/attachments still have a 
strong hold on the psyche.”16 In the end, “to attempt 
to completely rid oneself of distractions in prayer 
could prove to be another form of distraction.”
Thoughts as Demons
In some traditions, spontaneous thought is 
linked to demons. This is most obviously the case 
in the early Christian discourse on prayer and 
the Buddhist discourse on meditation. Both in 
Christian prayer and Buddhist meditation, demons 
are seen as envious beings that cannot stand the 
sight of a true contemplative, and in order to lure 
the contemplative over to their side, they typically 
try to disguise their true identity.
In the Christian case, spontaneous thought is 
sometimes seen as a means by which demons enter
532-
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  I N  C O N T E M P L A T I V E  T R A D I T I O N S

the mind to tempt the contemplative away from his 
or her pious practice, the way Satan tried to tempt 
Jesus away from the right path after 40 days of fast­
ing in the wilderness. Evagrius Ponticus makes fre­
quent reference to demons, and all the eight kinds 
of thought with which he is concerned reflect differ­
ent kinds of demons. Not all thoughts are demonic, 
since “the mind itself naturally brings up appear­
ances of created things.”17 As already mentioned, 
Evagrius distinguishes between “angelic, human 
and demonic thoughts.”18 However, his writings 
are clearly much more concerned with demonic 
thoughts than with either angelic or human ones. 
The demons make use of thoughts, memories, 
images, and physical sensations to lure the con­
templative away from his enterprise. Although they 
usually cannot be seen, their presence is often sur­
prisingly physical:
Some say that the demons set in motion the passion 
of fornication by fastening on to the bodily members 
by dreams; and this movement relates defiled 
fantasies to the mind. But some say that they set 
in motion the desire by appearing to the mind in 
shameful forms and lightly touching the members.19
Based on the brain theory of Galen, Evagrius 
held that a demon can “ [attach] himself to the area 
around the brain” and thereby “[manipulate] the 
light around the mind at will,”20 making the con­
templative falsely believe that the light is divine and 
that it signals spiritual achievement.
In the Buddhist case, spontaneous thought is 
taken to be a sign of the presence of demons that 
need to be dealt with, whether they are seen as prod­
ucts of the mind or as having external and inde­
pendent existence, or both. The Buddhist demons 
also have a scriptural basis, as many poetic pas­
sages in the early Buddhist Canon relate how the 
demon Mara tries to tempt the Buddha away from 
his contemplative goals. Mara is also supposed to 
have turned himself into a frightening vulture in an 
unsuccessful attempt to distract Buddhas disciple 
Ananda from his meditation.21
The highly influential Chinese Buddhist medi­
tation master Zhiyi 
(538-597) was deeply
concerned with the challenges posed by demons. 
His early Sm all Treatise o f Concentration a n d  Insight 
(Xiao zhiguan ^ i t H )  and the later and more 
comprehensive Great Treatise o f Concentration an d 
Insight (Mohe zhiguan 0 lP fltlS ) both contain a 
chapter entirely devoted to the problem. We are 
told how demons appear in a number of different 
disguises to confuse the contemplative and make
him lose his meditative absorption. Their external 
shapes include those of wild animals, insects, or 
even parents or siblings, but also various sounds 
or odors. In the end, however, we are told that the 
basic problem resides in the mind of the practitio­
ner, not in the demons themselves. The “armies” of 
the demons include the following aspects of sponta­
neous thought:22
1. desire (yii 
2. worries (youchou
3. hunger and thirst {jike M S ), 4. craving {keai 
M S ), 5. sleep {shuimian iSBS), 6. fear (biiwei 
ffi-S), 7. doubts and regrets (yihui ®1$), 8. anger 
(chenhui W d ), 9. profit-seeking (liyang 
10. arrogance (zigdo § (hj).
Significantly, both Jesus and the Buddha met 
with temptation when they were on the verge of a 
spiritual breakthrough and, after they had defeated 
their tempters, went on to gather disciples to whom 
they preached their message. They had defeated the 
demonic forces.
Lists of Detrimental Factors
Since contemplative traditions are more con­
cerned with practice than theory, they need to pro­
duce knowledge that is easy to remember. One way 
of ensuring the practical value of their viewpoints 
is to create mnemonic lists of factors that influence 
the contemplative process. Many types of spontane­
ous thought end up on lists of detrimental factors, 
much like Zhiyfs list of demonic thoughts cited in 
the preceding.
One such list is Evagrius Ponticus s enumeration 
of “eight kinds of thought”:23
1. gastrimargia “gluttony,” 2. porneia “fornication,”
3. philargyria “greed,” 4. lype “sadness,” 5. orge 
“anger,” 6. akedia “listlessness,” 7. kenodoxia 
“vainglory,” 8. hyperephania “pride.”
This list was translated into Latin by Evagrius s 
disciple John Cassian, after which, a couple of cen­
turies later, Pope Gregory I (ca. 540-604) combined 
sadness with anger and vainglory with pride, and 
added envy, resulting in the famous list of “seven 
deadly sins.”
In a similar vein, the Yoga Sutra provides a list 
of nine primary and five secondary “disturbances” 
(an tardy ah):24
1. vyadhi “disease,” 2. sty ana “idleness,” 3. samsaya 
“doubt,” 4. pram ada “carelessness,” 5. alasya “sloth,”
6. avirati “lack of detachment,” 7. bhranti-darsana 
“misapprehension,” 8. alabdha-bhumikatva “failure
H A L V O R  E I F R I N G
533

to attain a base for concentration,” 9. anavasthitatva 
“instability.”
1 . duhkha “suffering,” 2 . daurmanasya “dejection,”
3. angam-ejayatva “trembling,” 4. svasa “inhalation,”
3. prasvasa “exhalation.”
It also contains a list of five “afflictions” (klesd)-P
1 . avidya “ignorance,” 2. asmita “egotism,” 3 . rdga 
“desire,” 4. dvesa “aversion,” 3. abhinivesah “clinging 
to life.”
Most notably, it provides a list of five “fluctua­
tions” {vrtti):1G
1 . pram dna “right knowledge,” 2. viparyaya “error,”
3. vikalpa “imagination,” 4. nidra “sleep,” 5. smrti 
“memory.”
However, although the fluctuations bind the 
mind to the wheel of rebirth, they are not always 
considered detrimental to the contemplative pro­
cess. The commentaries to the Yoga Sutra distin­
guish between subtle fluctuations, associated with 
the lucid primordial element of sattva, and coarse 
fluctuations, associated with the impassionate rajas 
and the dark tamas.27
The various lists of emotions from early Chinese 
texts have already been mentioned. In some texts, 
these are codified as an inventory of “seven emo­
tions” (qi qingp), which becomes a standard term, 
referring to the following enumeration:
xt nu a iju  ai w iiyii
“joy and anger, sadness and fear, love, aversion and 
desire”
The equally old notion of “six desires” (liu yu) 
sounds like a reference to a similar list, but the list 
itself is nowhere to be found in the early material. 
While the texts most closely associated with Daoism 
are often skeptical toward emotions and desires, 
many of the texts considered Confucian see them as 
starting points for self-cultivation.
Buddhism 
contains 
several 
different 
lists 
of “afflictions” (Sanskrit klesa, Pali kilesa). The 
Theravada canon, written in Pali, lists ten such 
afflictions:
1 . lobha “desire,” 2. dosa “aversion,” 3 . moha 
“ignorance,” 4. mdna “pride,” 5. ditthi “wrong 
view,” 6. vicikiccha “doubt,” 7. thinam “torpor,”
8. uddhaccam “restlessness,” 9. ahirikam 
“shamelessness,” 10. anottappam “recklessness.”28
O f these, the first three are given special promi­
nence as the roots of suffering.
Mahayana texts, written in Sanskrit, sometimes 
list five afflictions:
1 . moha avidya “ignorance,” 2. rdga “desire,” 3 . dvesa 
“aversion,” 4. mdna “pride,” 5. irsya “envy.”
Other Mahayana texts list six afflictions:
1 . rdga “desire,” 2. pratigha “anger,” 3. avidya 
“ignorance,” 4. mdna “pride,” 5. vicikitsa “doubt,”
6. drsti “wrong view.”
Again, the first three afflictions are seen as the 
most basic ones. Yet other Buddhist lists include up 
to 50 afflictions.
There are also several different lists of “five obsta­
cles” (panca dvaranani; pahca nivaranani), of which 
the following is perhaps the most famous one:29
1 . rdga “desire,” 2. pratigha “anger,” 3. styana “torpor,” 
4. auddhatya-kaukrtya “restlessness,” 5. vicikitsa 
“doubt.”
It is not surprising that several lists in Yoga and 
Buddhism contain many of the same items, since 
both traditions derive from the same ancient Indian 
culture. More remarkable is the fact that similar 
items also occur in Evagrius Ponticus’s list. A his­
torical link is possible even here, since Evagriuss 
writings have been linked to Buddhism,30 though 
more plausibly these similarities have to do with the 
common challenges that contemplatives need to 
face wherever they are located.
Lists of Conducive Factors
The relationship between spontaneous thought 
and the contemplative process is sometimes closer 
and more positive than one would think. We have 
already seen that Chinese Buddhism uses the same 
basic term, nidn 
for thoughts considered to be 
disturbing and for the mindfulness that is consid­
ered to be essential for progress on the spiritual path. 
This term is also used in a third sense— “to recite”—  
and the recital of the Buddha Amitabhas name 
(Chinese A m ituo Fo) is a widespread practice not 
only in the Pure Land school, but throughout East 
Asian Buddhism. Sometimes the double ambiguity 
of the term nidn is utilized for rhetorical purposes:
So the Tathagata teaches people to recite [nidn] the 
phrase Amitabha Buddha, so that they may assimilate 
all their hundreds or thousands or 850 million 
scattered thoughts [nidn] into mindful absorption 
[nidn], and recite [nidn] until not a single thought 
[nidn] arises, and spontaneously get a fully realised 
view of Amitabha Buddha.31
534
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  I N  C O N T E M P L A T I V E  T R A D I T I O N S

* i m t & .
In the same vein, we note that Evagrius Ponticus s 
Greek term logismoi is derived from logos, which 
both he and other Christians closely associate with 
Gods inner nature; hence the connotations of the 
term logismoi are far from entirely negative.
As mentioned earlier, contemplative traditions 
are sometimes explicit in seeing certain aspects of 
spontaneous thought as conducive to contempla­
tion. The demonic thoughts of early Christian mys­
ticism have their counterpart in angelic thoughts 
that help the practitioner come closer to God, and 
both the “fluctuations of the mind” and the “karmic 
imprints” of the Yoga tradition are sometimes seen 
as helping, rather than disturbing, the contempla­
tive process. Any attempt at ridding the mind of 
spontaneous thought, therefore, must not get in the 
way of such conducive factors.
Some states of mind often seen as conducive or 
even essential to contemplative practice are typically 
characterized by the absence of thoughts, images, and 
disruptive emotions. This includes the widespread 
focus on “emptiness” or “void,” “absorption” or “con­
centration,” “silence” or “stillness,” and “tranquillity” 
or “calm,” perhaps even “joy” or “bliss.” The texts are 
often ambiguous as to whether these states are delib­
erately produced by the person or come about as 
spontaneous results of contemplative practice.
In the latter case, even these states should be 
included in a wide definition of “spontaneous 
thought.” This would fit well with the idea that 
the results of contemplative practice come “with­
out effort,” as the grace of God or as a spontaneous 
response to fortuitous constellations of circum­
stances inside or outside the person. Contemplative 
practice may increase the chances of this happening, 
but does not come with a guarantee, and the end 
result is not believed to depend on human effort 
as much as it depends on factors beyond human 
control, including particular kinds of spontaneous 
thought. In early Daoism, for instance, the realiza­
tion of the Way is repeatedly said to “come by itself” 
(§515), “arrive by itself” ( §  H ), “return by itself” 
( §  Iff), or “become stable by itself” ( §  aEi).32
Antidotes to Spontaneous Thought
According to contemplative traditions, the most 
obvious antidote to the disturbing influence of
spontaneous thought is perseverance in the con­
templative undertaking (i.e., continued meditation, 
prayer, ritual, worship, etc.). In many cases, how­
ever, the challenges involved are seen as so substan­
tive that they call for special treatment.
Some traditions are explicit in recommending 
the active suppression of thoughts. This is most 
common within Christianity, as in the following 
suggestions from The C loud o f Unknowing?5
• quickly put [the thoughts] down
• trample them down under foot
• suppress all thought under the cloud of 
forgetting
• as often as they come up, push them down.
Yoga, Buddhism, and Daoism are less prone to 
endorse active suppression, and sometimes explic­
itly warn against it, as in the following statement by 
the Chinese Buddhist meditation master Hanshan 
D eq in g ^ L ijtitf (1546-1623):34
You must not oppose [the thoughts] or seek to cut
them off on purpose, nor should you seek to stop
them on purpose or prolong them.
i H f c ,
Even when explicitly rejecting suppression, how­
ever, many traditions advocate an increased con­
centration on the object of meditation or prayer, 
the intensity of which would probably be hard to 
achieve without an element of suppression. Hanshan 
Deqing, for instance, tells meditators to “act bru­
tally” (T flS ^ ) and “clench [their] teeth and refuse 
to let go” 
“as if exerting
all the strength of the body pushing a heavy cart
up the Mir
Since at the same time he (like many other medi­
tation teachers) also advocates “gentleness” 
we are perhaps witnessing the kind of ambivalence 
and inner contradiction spontaneous thought often 
seems to elicit. Reminiscent of modern mindfulness 
practitioners, he advocates “again and again letting 
go” (W C f^ L W C f) of the thoughts, without clarify­
ing how this differs from suppression.
An alternative approach involves an increased 
awareness of the thoughts passing through the 
mind, whether in terms of the “mindfulness” 
(Sanskrit smrti; Chinese nian lv& or gudn IS35) of 
the Buddhist (and sometimes Yogic) practices or 
the “watchfulness” (Greek nips is), “attentiveness” 
(prosochi), or “guarding of the heart” (phylaki/tirisis 
kardias) of early Christianity.36 Even this, however,
H A L V O R  E I F R I N G
535

is often believed to eventually make the thoughts 
go away, or at least stay away from the inner core 
of the mind.
In much of Daoism, spontaneous thought, usu­
ally in the form of emotions, is seen as harmful only 
when it is excessive. The best antidote, therefore, is 
to regulate them and keep them in harmony, rather 
than to attempt to get rid of them, though both 
approaches are mentioned.37
The open acceptance of spontaneous thought 
is also sometimes recommended. The twelfth- 
century Jain scholar Hemachandra compares the 
lustful mind to a sexually aroused elephant, which 
becomes wilder and more dangerous the more one 
tries to stop it, but soft and supple if one lets it sat­
isfy its desires.38
Both Christianity and Asian traditions often see 
thoughts as such as natural and unproblematic, as 
long as one does not hold on to their sometimes 
unhealthy and unholy content. If, on the other 
hand, one “deliberately conjure[s] up the memory 
of somebody or something or other” and “allow[s] 
houseroom to this thing that you naturally like or 
grouse about,” then it is “deadly sin,” according to 
The C loud o f Unknowing.
While The C loud o f  U nknowing recommends 
that all thoughts be “quickly put down,” it also 
recognizes that this will not always be possible, 
in which case it suggests the use of a “spiritual 
dodge.” Either “do everything you can to act as 
if you did not know that [the thoughts] were 
so strongly pushing in between you and God,” 
or “cower down before [the thoughts] like some 
cringing captive overcome in battle, and reckon 
that it is ridiculous to fight against them any 
longer.”39 Both “dodges” amount to a kind of 
acceptance, albeit unwilling, of the presence of 
spontaneous thought.
Beyond the direct treatment of spontaneous 
thought itself, many contemplative activities are 
specifically designed to deal with the problems that 
such thought poses and the obstacles it represents. 
According to Evagrius Ponticus, man “destroys 
desire through fasting, vigils and sleeping on the 
ground, and he tames his incensive [i.e., impas- 
sionate and wild] power through long-suffering, 
forbearance, forgiveness and acts of compassion” 
(Palmer et al., 1979-1999, p. 39). In Buddhist con­
texts, repentance rituals are often considered effec­
tive antidotes, as are simpler forms of meditative 
practice, such as sutra reading and the recitation of 
buddha names. As a treatment for excessive desire, 
visiting a charnel ground and contemplating the
gradual rotting process of corpses in different stages 
are considered particularly helpful!40
When the thoughts are associated with demons, 
one way of countering them is to identify who or 
what the demons are and speak out their names. 
Zhiyi suggests that the best way to determine the 
identity of the demon is to see at what time of day 
or night it appears:41
By noticing the time when the demon typically 
appears, the contemplative will know its animal 
spirit, and saying its name and rebuking it will make 
it disappear.
bp^
rai.
Zhiyi gives detailed instructions of how to drive 
away a demon by closing the eyes in full concentra­
tion and rebuking it, saying “I know who you are” 
and “I keep the precepts and do not fear you.” Then, 
we are told, the demon will turn around and leave.
The Buddha is himself supposed to have defeated 
Mara by showing that he had identified him in spite 
of the latter’s disguise. In terms of structure (not 
content), this kind of identification is similar to the 
modern practice of “labeling” thoughts before “let­
ting go” of them, as is sometimes taught by mind­
fulness instructors.
Another way to counter such demons is to 
recite sacred texts, the way Jesus is thought to have 
defeated Satan by quoting Holy Scripture. The title 
of Evagrius Ponticus s b ook Antirrhetikos is translated 
as Talking Back, and the entire book is a collection 
of Bible quotations suitable for rebuking the eight 
demons associated with the eight kinds of thought.42 
In Buddhism, reciting entire sutras rather than 
shorter excerpts is supposed to be most efficacious.
Similar examples include the saying of specific 
prayers or the chanting of specific mantras. In both 
Christianity and Buddhism, repentance rituals 
and, in Christianity, confession, are also considered 
effective means to deal with demons. The borderline 
between the external demon and the internal mind 
is sometimes blurred.
According to Evagrius Ponticus, the practitioner 
stands a good chance of winning the fight:
Against the demonic thought there are three 
opposing thoughts that cut it off if it endures in our 
thinking. They are the angelic thought, the thought 
that is influenced by our resolve for the better, and 
the thought given by human nature in keeping with 
which even pagans are moved to love their own 
children and honour their parents. But against the
536
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  I N  C O N T E M P L A T I V E  T R A D I T I O N S

good thought there are only two opposing thoughts. 
They are the demonic thought and the thought that 
devolves from our resolve for the worse.43
It also helps that “no thought is evil from nature.” 
Traces of the Past
Most contemplative traditions focus on sponta­
neous thought as a negative influence originating 
in the past. This sometimes relates to the concrete 
past-oriented content that often fills the mind, as 
in the following statements by Evagrius Ponticus:44
. . . when the intellect is activated by man it is its 
nature to bring forth the images of past events.
When you pray, keep close watch on your memory, 
so that it does not distract you with recollections of 
your past.
While you are praying, the memory brings before 
you fantasies either of past things, or of recent 
concerns, or of the face of someone who has 
irritated you.
At other times, the relation to the past is more 
philosophical. The fourteenth-century Christian 
work The Cloud o f  Unknowing is loath to link spon­
taneous thought to the past sins of the individual, 
but instead links it to original sin:
For a spontaneous thought, springing to mind 
unsought and unwittingly, cannot be reckoned to be 
sin. It may be sin, if you like, in the sense that it is 
the result of original sin, depriving you of power over 
all your thoughts—you were cleansed from the guilt 
of that when you were baptized.45
In the various Indie traditions, spontaneous 
thought is typically seen as a product of karmic 
imprints (sarhskdra) from this or earlier lives. The 
connection is a complex one and goes both ways, 
since “klesas [which include such spontaneous states 
as ignorance, egotism, desire, aversion, and the 
clinging to life, H. E.] provoke karm a, and karm a 
fuels the klesas?AG
This orientation toward the past is in some ways 
reminiscent of (though by no means identical to) 
the Freudian view of free association as a key to the 
understanding of inner conflicts that ultimately 
originate in childhood traumas. The strong link 
between spontaneous thought and the past is also 
often emphasized within recent cognitive studies.
Conclusion
Spontaneous thought, whether conceptualized 
as mind-wandering, thoughts, passions, fantasies,
emotions, thought-moments, or fluctuations of the 
mind, plays a central role in contemplative tradi­
tions across the Eurasian continent.
It is often seen as a problem, a mental factor 
distracting the person from his or her prayer or 
meditation, binding him or her to the phenomenal 
world, in its coarseness clogging the gateway to non- 
phenomenal and fundamental aspects of reality, and 
being used by demons to tempt the person away 
from the contemplative process. On the other hand, 
some aspects of spontaneous thought are typically 
seen as elements conducive to prayer and medita­
tion, and the fruits of contemplative practice are 
often thought to come spontaneously, rather than 
as a direct result of deliberate effort. Moreover, even 
distractive thought is sometimes seen as provid­
ing some help to the contemplative process, since 
it contains information about areas of the mind in 
need of further progress and cultivation.
The various contemplative traditions recom­
mend different approaches to spontaneous thought, 
including harsh suppression, mindful observation, 
and harmonious regulation, as well as reluctant or 
wholehearted acceptance. Alternatively, attention 
can be either gently or forcefully turned to the object 
of meditation and prayer, away from spontaneous 
thought. There are also specific contemplative prac­
tices, such as the reading, recitation, or chanting of 
religious texts, the repetition of mantras, the perfor­
mance of repentance rituals or confession, various 
ascetic exercises, or the practice of good deeds.
While modern secularized meditation practices 
tend to be more accepting of spontaneous thought 
than the traditional religious approaches, many of 
the same issues remain. This includes, most nota­
bly, the contrast between non-directive medita­
tion, which accepts thoughts without reservations, 
and mindfulness meditation, which tends to mix 
the acceptance of thoughts with ideals of their 
disappearance.
Notes
1. Casiday, 2006; Brakke, 2009; Stewart, 2005.
2. Palmer et al., 1979-1999, vol. 1, p. 363.
3. Louth, 2009.
4. Palmer et al., 1979-1999, vol. 4, pp. 430f.
5. On vairdgya, cf. Yoga Sutra 1.12, 1.13, 1.15, 1.16, III.50; on 
ra g d y  cf. 1.37, II.3, II.7; see Bryant, 2009; Feuerstein, 1989.
6 . Digital dictionary of Buddhism:
7. Digital dictionary of Buddhism: ^!.
8. Forman (1996) represents the perennial view, while Katz 
(1978) represents the cultural-constructivist view.
9. Palmer et al., 1979-1999, vol. 1, p. 62.
10. Wolters, 1978, p. 67.
11. Bryant, 2009, p. xlv.
H A L V O R  E I F R I N G
537

12. Buswell & Lopez, 2014: sunyata. For instance, Yunqi 
jingtu huiyu says, “If you are unable to empty your mind, 
then just practice buddha recollection. Keep doing so 
incessantly, and the mind will by itself become empty.”
13. Eifring, 2015, p. 208.
14. See Roth 1999: “It is lost inevitably because of sor­
row, happiness, joy, anger, desire, and profit-seeking.” 
J
t
@
T
(
p
.
 51); “When you are 
anxious or sad, pleased or angry, the Way has no place within 
you to settle.” 
(p. 9 5).
15. Seelaus, 2005, p. 2 .
16. Seelaus, 2005, p. 23.
17. Casiday, 2006, p. 92.
18. Casiday, 2006, p. 95.
19. Casiday, 2006, p. 174
2 0 . Casiday, 2006, p. 194.
2 1 . Buswell & Lopez, 2014: grdhrakutaparvata.
22. LiAn, 1996, p. 48f.
23. Casiday, 2013, p. 1 2 0.
24. Bryant, 2009, p. 118ff.
25. Bryant, 2009, p. 175.
26. Bryant, 2009, p. 32.
27. Bryant, 2009, p. 31.
28. The Pali Text Society's Pali-English dictionary: kilesa.
29. Cfyu, 1985, p. 1194.
30. Tiso, 2005.
31. Lianbang shixuan.
32. Roth, 1999.
33. Wolters, 1978.
34. Hanshan laoren mengyou jt.
35. Gudn ®  is originally the Chinese translation of Sanskrit 
vipasyana rather than smrti.
36. Palmer et al., 1979-1999, p. 437f.
37. Roth, 1999.
38. See Bronkhorst, 2016.
39. Wolters, 1978, p. 98.
40. Dessein, 2014; Shaw, 2006.
41. Li An, 1996, p. 47.
42. Brakke, 2009.
43. Casiday, 2006, p. 1 1 0.
44. Palmer et al., 1979-1999, vol. 1, pp. 39 and 61.
45. Wolters, 1978, pp. 74-75.
46. Bryant, 2009, p. 196.
References
Brakke, David. (2009). Evagrius of Pontus: Talking back—a 
monastic handbook for combating demons. Collegeville, MN: 
Liturgical Press.
Bronkhorst, Johannes. (2016). The history of Jaina meditation. 
In Halvor Eifring (Ed.), Asian traditions of meditation (pp. 
9 3- 1 02). Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Bryant, Edwin F. (2009). The Yoga Sutras ofPatanjali:A new edi­
tion, translation, and commentary— with insights from the tra­
ditional commentators. New York: North Point Press.
Buswell, Robert E., Jr., & Lopez, Donald S., Jr. (2014). The 
Princeton dictionary of Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Casiday, Augustine. (2013). Reconstructing the theology of 
Evagrius Ponticus: Beyond heresy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Casiday, Augustine. (2006). Evagrius Ponticus. Abingdon: 
Routledge.
Clyi ^ to . (1985). Foguang da ctdian 
Beijing:
Beijing tushuguan chubanshe.
Dessein, Bart. (2014). Contemplation of the repulsive: Bones 
and skulls as objects of meditation. In Halvor Eifring (Ed.), 
Hindu, Buddhist and Daoist meditation (pp. 117-147). 
Oslo: Hermes.
Digital dictionary of Buddhism (A. Charles Muller, Ed.), http:// 
www. buddhism-diet. net/ddb/
Eifring, Halvor. (2015). Spontaneous thoughts in medita­
tive traditions. In Meditation and culture: The interplay of 
practice and context (pp. 200-215). London: Bloomsbury 
Academic.
Feuerstein, Georg. (1979/1989). The Yoga-Sutra of Patanjali: A 
new translation and commentary. Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions International.
Forman, Robert K. C. (1996). The problem of pure con­
sciousness: Mysticism and philosophy New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Hanshan laoren mengyou ji 
http://tripitaka.
cbeta.org/ko/X73nl456
Katz, Steven T. (1978). Mysticism and philosophical analysis. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Li 
An 
^:£c. 
(1988/1996). 
Tongmeng zhiguan jiaoshi
Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.
Lianbang shixuan 
http://tripitaka.cbeta.org/ko/
X62nl207_001
Louth, Andrew. (2007/2009). The origins of the Christian mysti­
cal tradition: From Plato to Denys, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Palmer, G. E. H., Philip Sherrard, & Kallistos Ware. (1979- 
1999). Philokalia: The complete text compiled by St 
Nikodimos of the Holy Mountain and St Makarios of Corinth. 
London: Faber and Faber.
Roth, Harold D. (1999). Original Tao: Inward training and 
the foundations of Taoist mysticism. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Seelaus, Vilma. (2005). Distractions in prayer: Blessing or 
curse—St. Teresa of Avilas teachings in The Interior Castle. 
New York: St. Pauls.
Shaw, Sarah. (2006). Buddhist meditation: An anthology of texts 
from the Pali Canon. London: Routledge.
Stewart, Columba. (2005). Evagrius Ponticus and the eight 
generic logismoi. In R. Newhauser (Ed.), In the garden of 
evil: The vices and culture in the Middle Ages (pp. 3-34). 
Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies.
The Pali Text Society's Pali-English dictionary. http://dsal.uchicago. 
edu/dictionaries/pali/
Tiso, Francis V. (2005). Evagrius of Pontus and Buddhist 
Abhidharma. Religion East & West, 5, 41-71.
Wolters, Clifton. (1961/1978). The cloud of unknowing and other 
works. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.
Yunqi jingtu huiyu 
http://tripitaka.cbeta.org/zh-
cn/X62n1170_001
538
S P O N T A N E O U S  T H O U G H T  I N  C O N T E M P L A T I V E  T R A D I T I O N S

C H A P T E R
39
Catching the Wandering Mind: Meditation 
as a Window into Spontaneous Thought
Wendy Hasenkamp
Abstract
This chapter considers a form of attention-based meditation as a novel means to gain insight into the 
mechanisms and phenomenology of spontaneous thought. Focused attention (FA) meditation involves 
keeping one’s attention on a chosen object, and repeatedly catching the mind when it strays from 
the object into spontaneous thought. This practice can thus be viewed as a kind of self-caught mind­
wandering paradigm, which suggests it may have great utility for research on spontaneous thought. 
Current findings about the effects of meditation on mind-wandering and meta-awareness are reviewed, 
and implications for new research paradigms that leverage first-person reporting during FA meditation 
are discussed. Specifically, research recommendations are made that may enable customized analysis of 
individual episodes of mind-wandering and their neural correlates. It is hoped that combining detailed 
subjective reports from experienced meditators with rigorous objective physiological measures will 
advance the understanding of human consciousness.
Key Words: meditation, mind-wandering, meta-awareness, spontaneous thought, focused attention
One of the central challenges in studying sponta­
neous thought is the fact that mind-wandering often 
occurs without intention or awareness (Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015). This leads to inevitable difficulty 
in assessment, as participants cannot accurately 
report on mental experiences about which they are 
unaware. In light of this, strategies that may increase 
awareness of mental states would seem to have par­
ticular utility for the study of spontaneous thought. 
In this chapter, I consider a form of attention-based 
meditation as a novel means to gain insight into the 
processes underlying spontaneous thought and the 
ability to detect it.
In Western culture, scientific as well as popular 
interest in various forms of meditation has bur­
geoned over the last decade. In 2012, the National 
Health Interview Survey estimated that 18 million 
Americans used meditation as a complementary 
health approach (Black, Clarke, Barnes, Stussman, 
& Nahin, 2015). In addition, scientific research on 
contemplative practices like meditation continues
to accumulate at a rapid pace, with over 2,000 pub­
lications since just 2010. While the field is still in 
its infancy, early results point to some promising 
clinical applications, as well as neural changes asso­
ciated with repeated meditation practice (e.g., Fox 
et al., 2014; Goyal et al., 2014; Tang, Holzel, & 
Posner, 2015).
Most forms of meditation currently used in the 
West have Buddhist origins, but many have been 
adapted in a secular way to emphasize the mental 
training aspects and avoid the more religious or ritu­
alistic elements of traditional practices (McMahan, 
2008). Meditations vary widely in the cognitive and 
emotional states they endeavor to foster, as well as 
the instructions they use to achieve these goals. For 
example, open monitoring styles of meditation seek 
to strengthen and expand awareness to include any­
thing entering the mind, while compassion practices 
are used to cultivate specific emotional states toward 
oneself and others (Dahl, Lutz, & Davidson, 2015; 
Lutz, Slagter, Dunne, & Davidson, 2008).
539

Despite this plurality, many contemplative prac­
tices are based on a foundation o f attention train­
ing that serves to familiarize a person with his or 
her thoughts and emotions and to gain control over 
cognitive faculties (Dahl et al., 2015; Lutz et al., 
2008; Wallace, 2006). It is this basic attention train­
ing that I would like to consider in this chapter, as 
it may hold potential to advance our understanding 
o f the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying 
the arising and detection o f spontaneous thought.
Cognitive and Neural Dynamics During 
Focused Attention (FA) Meditation
One common meditation practice— known as 
focused attention (FA), concentration meditation, 
or shamatha— can be viewed from a cognitive per­
spective as a kind o f sustained attention task. During 
FA meditation, attention is placed and maintained 
on a chosen object (e.g., sensations of breathing, 
ambient sounds, a visual image, etc.). Because spon­
taneous thought, or mind-wandering, will almost 
invariably occur, the practitioner is instructed to 
simply notice when the mind has strayed from the 
object o f focus, and return her or his attention to 
the object without engaging in elaborative thinking 
or judgment (Wallace, 2006). At some point after 
attention is returned to the chosen object, mind­
wandering will usually occur again, and the cycle 
repeats. Thus, a session o f FA meditation practice 
is an iterative cycle through the dynamic cogni­
tive states o f focused attention (FOCUS), mind­
wandering (MW ), awareness o f mind-wandering 
(AWARE), and shifting attention back to the 
object (SHIFT; Hasenkamp, Wilson-Mendenhall, 
Duncan, & Barsalou, 2012). A basic cognitive 
model o f this process is shown in Figure 39.1.
An interesting aspect o f FA meditation is that 
the instructions are to keep one’s attention on a 
given object, which sets up an apparent “goal state” 
o f single-pointed focus. In this situation, any cogni­
tive state that diverges from that goal (e.g., MW ) 
becomes a “target” to detect using the faculty of 
meta-awareness. In effect, the selection o f an atten- 
tional object in this practice sets up a subjective 
counterpoint to the normal fluctuating contents of 
the mind, bringing the scattered nature o f thought 
into relief against the contrast o f a steady object. 
Over time and with repeated practice, the medita­
tor is actually building skills not only of sustaining 
or maintaining attention (FOCUS), but also— and 
perhaps more important— o f monitoring and rec­
ognizing naturally arising mental states or spontane­
ous thoughts (AWARE), as well as disengaging and
Figure 39.1. Cognitive dynamics of FA meditation. A session 
of FA meditation is an iterative cycle of mental states including 
object-focused attention (FOCUS), mind-wandering (MW), 
awareness of mind-wandering (AWARE), and shifting 
attention back to the object (SHIFT). The FOCUS state is the 
intended “goal,” while MW represents a deviation from that 
goal, and becomes a salient mental target in the context of FA 
meditation. Image modified with permission from Hasenkamp (2014).
redirecting attention (SHIFT). Even though these 
additional skills may not be the instructed goal o f 
the practice, a major aim o f this kind o f training, in 
both its traditional and current applications, is to 
develop meta-awareness alongside attentional con­
trol (Dahl et al., 2015; Lutz et al., 2008).
Given that FA meditation is characterized by an 
oscillation between states o f focus and spontaneous 
thought, it may be o f particular benefit in the context 
o f cognitive research. My colleagues and I developed 
a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
paradigm that leverages the unique framework o f 
FA meditation, coupled with subjective report, to 
study the neural correlates o f mind-wandering and 
attention (Hasenkamp et al., 2012). We studied 
meditation practitioners who had experience with 
FA meditation, assessing brain activity with fMRI 
as they engaged in this practice for 20 minutes. 
Participants were instructed to keep their attention 
on the sensations o f breathing (specifically, the air 
coming in and out o f the nostrils), and whenever 
they noticed their mind had wandered completely 
away from this object, to press a button and then 
return their focus to the breath. Thus, the task was 
similar to a typical FA meditation session, simply 
adding a button press at the moment o f awareness 
o f mind-wandering (AWARE; see Figure 39.2). As 
participants are asked to identify and report epi­
sodes o f spontaneous thought, this design can also 
be considered a self-caught mind-wandering task.1
In our study, the button press provided a tempo­
ral marker for the moment o f awareness o f mind­
wandering, and presumably also the end o f the 
mind-wandering episode. Based on this marker, 
we divided the data into four distinct phases (3
540
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

Figure 39.2. (See Color Insert) Brain networks involved in FA meditation. Using a button-press from the participant to mark the 
moment of awareness, four brief cognitive phases were defined around this time point, and neural activity was analyzed accordingly. 
These results show activity during the FOCUS, AWARE, and SHIFT phases compared to the MW phase; MW activity is compared 
to SHIFT activity. Mind-wandering was associated with default mode regions (gray), awareness of mind-wandering was associated 
with the salience network (gray; dark gray shows activations due to a motor control for the button press), and shifting and maintaining 
attention was associated with the executive network (gray, light gray). Image modified with permission from Hasenkamp (2014).
seconds each) corresponding to the cognitive model 
in Figure 39.1. By analyzing fMRI data within only 
these brief phases, we could restrict our window of 
analysis to a specific time, during which we could be 
relatively confident o f the participant s mental expe­
rience. Notably, even though this approach meant 
including only a fraction o f our data in the analy­
sis, our findings were quite robust, and consistent 
with the functions o f well-studied brain networks 
(see discussion later in this chapter). O f course, 
significant 
variability 
undoubtedly 
still 
exists 
both between and within individuals, making this 
model highly oversimplified and subject to noise 
(see Hasenkamp et al., 2012; Hasenkamp, 2014, 
for a discussion o f limitations and possibilities for 
extending the model). Nevertheless, it appears that 
using subjective report to define a narrow window 
o f analysis served to increase the signal-to-noise 
ratio rather than reduce power.
Comprehensive results from this study have 
been discussed elsewhere (Hasenkamp & Barsalou, 
2012; Hasenkamp et al., 2012; Hasenkamp, 2014), 
but a short summary is provided here for reference 
(Figure 39.2). During the M W  phase, analyses 
revealed activity in brain regions associated with 
the default mode network (medial prefrontal cor­
tex and posterior cingulate cortex), which have 
been strongly implicated in spontaneous thought 
(Andrews-Hanna, Reidler, Huang, & Buckner,
2010; Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, & Spreng, 
2014; Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008; 
Davey, Pujol, & Harrison, 2016; Ellamil et al., 
2016; Fox, Spreng, Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & 
Christoff, 2015; Mason et al., 2007; Raichle, 2015). 
In the AWARE phase, the salience network (bilateral 
anterior insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cor­
tex) was strongly activated. This network has been 
implicated in the identification o f salient or relevant 
stimuli across domains, and helps to engage and 
control attention (Mooneyham, Mrazek, Mrazek, 
& Schooler, 2016; Seeley et al., 2007). During the 
SHIFT phase, elements o f the executive network 
were active that have been implicated in disengage­
ment and reorienting o f attention (dorsolateral pre­
frontal cortex and inferior parietal lobule; Corbetta, 
Patel, & Shulman, 2008; Mooneyham et al., 2016; 
Posner & Petersen, 1990; Seeley et al., 2007). 
Finally, a region o f the dorsolateral prefrontal cor­
tex associated with working memory and sustained 
attention (Curtis & D ’Esposito, 2003; D ’Esposito, 
2007; Miller & Cohen, 2001) was active during 
the FOCUS period, indicating continued executive 
network activity.
In general, the functions o f brain networks 
that were activated during these four brief cogni­
tive phases aligned with the mental functions we 
believed to be occurring at those times. Specifically, 
mind-wandering was associated with default mode
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
54i

regions, awareness o f mind-wandering was associ­
ated with the salience network, and shifting and 
maintaining attention were associated with the 
executive network. Additional analyses showed that 
neural activity during these cognitive phases, as well 
as resting state functional connectivity, were modu­
lated by lifetime meditation experience, suggesting 
experience-dependent plasticity in relevant net­
works (Hasenkamp & Barsalou, 2012; Hasenkamp 
et al., 2012). This work highlights the utility and 
importance o f subjective report in the study of 
dynamic mental states, and has helped to refine our 
understanding o f the complex neural and cognitive 
correlates o f FA meditation.
Meditation Practice and Cognitive 
Processes Around Spontaneous Thought
Given the overarching goals o f FA meditation 
and its emphasis on catching the wandering mind, 
it is often assumed that with repeated practice, med­
itators will experience decreased mind-wandering 
and increased attentional control. Such cognitive 
effects have long been noted within contemplative 
traditions (Dahl et al., 2015; Wallace, 2006), and 
recent research also supports these claims to varying 
degrees.
Contemplative research has found evidence of 
reduced mind-wandering following brief mind­
ful breathing (Mrazek, Smallwood, & Schooler, 
2012), following several weeks o f meditation prac­
tice (Jazaieri et al., 2015; Jha, Morrison, Parker, 
& Stanley, 2016; Morrison, Goolsarran, Rogers, 
& Jha, 2014; Mrazek, Franklin, Phillips, Baird, & 
Schooler, 2013; but see Banks, Welhaf, & Srour,
2015), and following one and three months of 
intensive retreat practice (Zanesco et al., 2016). 
In addition, experienced meditators reported less 
mind-wandering than non-meditators in several 
studies (Brewer et al., 2011; Garrison, Zeffiro, 
Scheinost, Constable, & Brewer, 2015; Levinson, 
Stoll, Kindy, Merry, & Davidson, 2014), and 
showed reduced default mode network activa­
tion compared to controls during various types of 
meditation (Brewer et al., 2011). This agrees with 
other studies suggesting that meditation experience 
is associated with differential default mode activity 
and connectivity (Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013; 
Garrison et al., 2015; Hasenkamp & Barsalou, 
2012; Jang et al., 2011; Mooneyham et al., 2016; 
Taylor et al., 2013). Several lines o f research also 
suggest that repeated meditation improves vari­
ous aspects o f attention (Jha et al., 2015; Jha, 
Krompinger, & Baime, 2007; Lutz et al., 2009;
MacLean et al., 2010; Malinowski, 2013; Sahdra 
et al., 2011; Slagter et al., 2007; Zanesco, King, 
Maclean, & Saron, 2013). Moreover, many studies 
have found evidence for neural changes in relevant 
networks following meditation, supporting the idea 
that a process o f experience-dependent neuroplasti­
city may underlie the development o f these cogni­
tive effects (see Fox et al., 2014; Tang, Holzel, & 
Posner, 2015 for review).
Thus, a growing body o f evidence supports the 
notion that repeated meditation leads to changes 
in attentional capacity and reductions in mind­
wandering. A related question is whether medita­
tion practice can enhance meta-awareness. This is a 
reasonable hypothesis, as monitoring for distraction 
is an essential part o f maintaining focused atten­
tion. By setting up the specific cognitive framework 
o f FA meditation in the mind o f the practitioner, 
spontaneous thought becomes highlighted because 
it diverges from the goal state o f directed focus. In 
this context, the processes around, and contents of, 
mind-wandering acquire increased salience because 
they have become a target for meta-awareness 
to detect. In our study, the moment o f detection 
(AWARE) was associated with robust activation o f 
the brains salience network, similar to results from 
simple target-detection tasks in other modalities 
(Seeley et al., 2007; Uddin, 2014).2 This neural 
convergence across tasks suggests that during FA 
meditation, the cognitive state o f mind-wandering 
(e.g., an internal, mental target) may function in 
the same way as standard visual or auditory targets 
used in other tasks (e.g., external, sensory targets)—  
something that is arbitrarily defined as salient, 
which the mind then monitors for and detects when 
it is identified. This finding extends our understand­
ing o f the function o f the salience network, which 
has often been described as detecting mainly exter­
nal stimuli, toward a more general salience detector 
that can be equally tuned to internal events such 
as mind-wandering (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014; 
Uddin, 2014). In FA meditation, then, repeatedly 
ascribing salience to internal thoughts and train­
ing oneself to detect them may well enhance meta- 
cognitive abilities.
Anecdotal reports com m only affirm that the 
arising o f spontaneous thought becomes more 
readily detectable in experienced practitioners 
(Wallace, 2006), presumably reflecting such an 
increase in meta-awareness or monitoring capacity. 
W hile meta-awareness is a challenging construct 
to operationalize due to difficulties in confirming 
accuracy, recent work has begun to approach this
542
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

question as it relates to meditation. One study 
found that experienced meditators performed 
more accurately than novices on a breath-counting 
measure (confirmed with physiological tracking o f 
breathing), suggesting improved meta-awareness 
in practitioners (Levinson et al., 2014). Another 
study found that following 8 weeks o f m indful­
ness training, participants who practiced more 
exhibited 
greater self-reported meta-awareness 
o f mind-wandering during the sustained atten­
tion to reponse task (SART) (Jha et al., 2016). 
Introspective accuracy also appears to be improved 
by meditation training, as shown in metacogni- 
tive ability for memory (Baird, Mrazek, Phillips, 
& Schooler, 2014) and emotional self-awareness 
(Sze, Gyurak, Yuan, & Levenson, 2010). Finally, 
two longitudinal studies found that after inten­
sive meditation training, practitioners reported a 
greater proportion o f self-caught mind-wandering 
episodes following training, after adjusting for 
a reduced overall number o f episodes (Zanesco 
et al., 2016).
W hile these studies are suggestive o f increases 
in meta-awareness following meditation, they do 
not speak directly to whether meditators can more 
accurately or validly detect mind-wandering. For 
example, probes about meta-awareness during 
the SART, as well as reports o f self-caught m ind­
wandering during a task, rely only on self-report 
with no behavioral validation; breath counting, 
while validated with a physiological measure, does 
not address awareness o f spontaneous thoughts. 
Along these lines, Zedelius and colleagues (2015) 
used a novel paradigm to determine whether incen- 
tivizing people to catch task-unrelated thoughts 
during reading would increase their accuracy. By 
correlating self-caught mind-wandering with a 
covert behavioral measure o f mind-wandering, 
the researchers found that motivating participants 
to monitor their thoughts did indeed increase the 
number o f self-catches, as well as increasing the 
validity o f these reports.3 Future studies could use 
this kind o f approach to investigate whether medi­
tation training affects ones capacity to monitor 
thoughts and detect them accurately.
Thus, while research is still in the early stages, 
initial results, coupled with considerable anecdotal 
evidence, suggest that repeated meditation may 
improve meta-awareness, leading to an enhanced 
ability to detect spontaneous thought. If this is the 
case, experienced meditators may be particularly 
beneficial as participants in studies o f self-caught 
mind-wandering.
Defining an Episode of Spontaneous 
Thought
A challenge in all studies o f spontaneous 
thought is that the temporal window o f mind­
wandering is extremely variable, and our ability 
to define it highly imprecise. To make progress in 
understanding the phenomenology and physiology 
o f mind-wandering, we will need to more clearly 
outline the criteria for— and temporal boundaries 
o f—the onset and termination o f a single episode 
(Ellamil et al., 2016; Metzinger, 2013; Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2015). Existing paradigms are subject 
to several limitations in this regard. Using self- 
caught designs, experimenters can only measure 
the moment o f detection o f mind-wandering, not 
its onset. Probe-caught paradigms similarly do not 
shed light on the temporality o f a mind-wandering 
episode, again only collecting subjective input at the 
moment o f the probe. In a recent review, Smallwood 
and Schooler (2015, p. 511) suggest that the field 
should work to identify “reliable behavioral and 
physiological measures that can indicate the onset 
and offset o f mind wandering without having 
to rely on individuals’ self-reports.” W hile these 
third-person measures will certainly be important, 
researchers may also be able to leverage self-report 
in a more careful way to address current limitations.
Particularly when attempting to determine neural 
correlates o f mind-wandering, defining the temporal 
boundaries of a single episode is essential, but meth­
ods for doing so have been elusive. In our study, we 
chose a relatively short window (3 seconds prior to 
detection) in an attempt to limit variability in cog­
nitive states during the M W  phase. Previous stud­
ies have used longer temporal windows to examine 
neural activity prior to self-reported mind-wandering 
in response to thought probes (e.g., 10 seconds or 
more, see Allen et al., 2013; Christoff, Gordon, 
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Stawarczyk, 
Majerus, Maquet, & D ’Argembeau, 2011). While 
this approach increases statistical power by using 
more data, it may complicate the interpretation of 
related brain activity by including time points that 
correspond to cognitive states occurring prior to the 
onset of mind-wandering (i.e., attentional/on-task 
states; Figure 39.3). W ithin a given temporal win­
dow defined by the experimenter, the signal-to-noise 
ratio o f actual mind-wandering depends on the par­
ticipant’s subjective state during each TR,4 which will 
vary trial by trial. In some cases, mind-wandering will 
have begun before the window of analysis, making 
the data fully representative o f the neural correlates 
o f spontaneous thought (Figure 39.3A). In other
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
543

FOCUS 
MW
FOCUS 
MW
FOCUS 
HYBRID 
MW
TR
(e.g., 2 sec)
Figure 39.3. (See Color Insert) Defining the temporal window of analysis. This schematic depicts three hypothetical cognitive 
scenarios and related window of analysis for a neuroimaging study of self-caught mind-wandering. Tick marks denote TRs (the 
fMRI scanner’s sampling rate, here 2 seconds each), and the light gray bar represents an analytical window of 10 seconds prior to the 
button press. (A) A scenario where the window of analysis is accurate and only includes mind-wandering states. (B) A scenario where 
the window is too long, and includes contaminating focused states. (C) A graded transition between focused attention and mind­
wandering, showing a hybrid state where some portion of the attention remains on the object for a time, but spontaneous thought 
still occurs. In this case, the window contains all three mental states, again confounding the analysis.
cases, mind-wandering may be brief, and focused 
attention will also have occurred within the window 
o f analysis— if this happens, the signal-to-noise ratio 
is reduced, and attempts to interpret neural activity 
become confounded (Figure 39.3B).5
A related and largely unexplored issue is whether 
conscious attention can be directed toward mul­
tiple objects at the same time. Many experiments 
using probe-caught mind-wandering ask not just 
whether the participants mind was on- or off-task, 
but provide a continuous scale for reporting (e.g., 
one endpoint representing completely on-task 
and the other representing completely off-task). 
Participants often answer somewhere in the middle 
(e.g., Allen et al., 2013; Christoff et al., 2009; Jha 
et al., 2016; M. Mrazek, personal communication), 
suggesting that the transition from focused atten­
tion into mind-wandering is not a dichotomous 
experience, but rather occurs in a graded way— at 
least phenomenologically.6 This results in a kind 
o f “hybrid” subjective experience of being partially 
focused and partially distracted (Figure 39.3C ).7 
Splitting o f attention has been examined in studies 
o f visual attention (Awh & Pashler, 2000; Kramer
& Hahn, 1995; Muller, Malinowski, Gruber, & 
Hillyard, 2003), but has rarely been considered in 
studies o f spontaneous thought (see Dixon, Fox, & 
Christoff, 2014). As it seems likely that this kind o f 
parallel attention is a common phenomenological 
experience that would have important implications 
for the accurate identification o f neural correlates, 
it warrants further study in cognitive science and 
represents another area for more detailed subjective 
reporting.
Regardless o f the duration o f the temporal win­
dow o f analysis, it is notable that all studies to date 
have calculated the start time o f a mind-wandering 
or off-task episode relative to the endpoint (either 
self-caught or probe-caught), and not based on any 
other subjective input. This introduces an obvious 
lack o f precision in analysis, which may hinder our 
ability to accurately understand the neurophysi­
ological underpinnings o f spontaneous thought.
Potential Utility of Subjective Report 
During FA Meditation
The FA meditation paradigm outlined here is well 
suited to highlight the unfolding o f spontaneous
5 4 4
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

thought in the mind o f the participant, and could 
be leveraged in numerous ways to obtain more 
detailed and accurate subjective information about 
the onset, contents, and termination o f mind-wan­
dering episodes. It is also likely that experienced FA 
meditation practitioners would be able to provide 
very fine-grained reports on both the temporal and 
phenomenal unfolding o f spontaneous thought, 
thereby enabling a heretofore unavailable level of 
analysis in cognitive research (Lutz & Thompson,
2003) . Previous studies have leveraged experienced 
meditators’ heightened cognitive and emotional 
control as well as nuanced reporting ability to exam­
ine experiences such as non-referential compassion 
(Lutz, Greischar, Rawlings, Ricard, & Davidson,
2004) , non-dual awareness (Josipovic, 2014), spe­
cific degrees o f intensity o f compassion generated 
during meditation (Klimecki, Leiberg, Lamm, & 
Singer, 2013), and mind-wandering (Ellamil et ah, 
2016; Hasenkamp et ah, 2012). The motivation 
for such an approach is informed by the project of 
neurophenomenology put forth by Francisco Varela 
(Varela, 1996). As explained by Lutz and Thompson 
(2003), within this framework, “phenomenologi­
cally precise first-person data produced by employ­
ing first-person methods provide strong constraints 
on the analysis and interpretation o f the physiologi­
cal processes relevant to consciousness.” In the fol­
lowing sections, I examine the potential utility of 
incorporating such subjectively derived constraints 
in the study o f spontaneous thought.
From a temporal perspective, it is notable that 
meditation practitioners may be able to detect 
mind-wandering relatively quickly after its onset. 
Evidence to support this claim comes from a recent 
study (Zanesco et ah, 2016) in which experienced 
meditators performing a reading task identified gib­
berish text more quickly than non-meditators in 
other studies using the same paradigm (Smallwood, 
Fishman, & Schooler, 2007; Zedelius, Broadway, & 
Schooler, 2015), suggesting faster detection o f cog­
nitive targets. Indeed, a recent study was based on 
this assumption, using an FA meditation paradigm 
with experienced Vipassana practitioners, asking 
them to indicate the arising o f a thought with a but­
ton press as soon as they were aware o f it (Ellamil 
et al., 2016). Presuming that the button press in fact 
occurred very shortly after thought onset based on 
the heightened introspective ability o f these partici­
pants, they set the window o f analysis at 4 seconds 
(2 TRs) prior to the button press. Contrasting brain 
activity associated with detection o f thoughts versus 
words (which were presented at the same frequency
as detected thoughts via online stimulus matching), 
and subsequently modeling hemodynamic response 
functions, they identified distinct brain areas related 
to the generation o f thoughts. This study offers an 
excellent example o f careful neurophenomenology, 
coupling the introspective ability o f meditators, an 
FA paradigm, and third-person brain imaging mea­
sures to advance our knowledge o f the neural cor­
relates o f spontaneous thought.
There are many possible next steps to continue 
leveraging this kind o f unique methodological mar­
riage. One promising avenue involves further cus­
tomization o f thought regressors, with the aim o f 
estimating individual parameters on a trial-by-trial 
basis. It is readily apparent that each experience o f 
spontaneous thought is distinct in both duration 
and content, but our methodological approaches 
to date have “flattened” them by averaging across 
episodes, assuming similarities where none may in 
fact exist. This kind o f experimental design, while 
understandable from a research perspective, is far 
from ideal, and may be significantly limiting our 
ability to understand the subtlety and complexity o f 
the mind’s natural activity.
Figure 39.4 depicts several examples o f report­
ing options that could be used alone or in various 
combinations to characterize individual episodes 
o f spontaneous thought that occur within an FA 
meditation paradigm. O f course, it is important to 
remember that requiring multiple subjective reports 
will interfere with the naturalistic flow of medita­
tion; however, if the aim is to enable more detailed 
characterization o f each spontaneous thought epi­
sode, some interruption o f the normal medita­
tion process seems acceptable. Indeed, as noted by 
Ellamil and colleagues, this type o f “noting” strat­
egy, in which the practitioner quickly categorizes 
thoughts as they arise, is a common variant o f FA 
meditation (Ellamil et al., 2016; Sayadaw, 2002). 
Even so, care should be taken to avoid employing 
too many measures simultaneously, as such “over­
characterization” may begin to reduce accuracy and 
would also limit statistical power.
Onset and Termination of Mind-Wandering
Assuming thoughts could be detected within 
several seconds o f onset, advanced meditators could 
likely provide fairly accurate estimates o f the dura­
tion o f each mind-wandering episode upon detec­
tion, thus enabling a rough estimation o f start time 
(Figure 39.4A). Using a trial-by-trial approach with 
the help o f such skilled participants, researchers may 
thus be able to construct not only very fine-grained
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
545

FOCUS
MW
FOCUS
MW
TR
(2 sec)
episode 1
-'7|C '
/
episode 2
&
I---------1---------[..........J............j
A
How long was M W  episode?
>2s 
2 -4 s 
4 -6 s 6 -8 s(C l0 s )> 1 0 s
A
H o w  long was M W  episode?
>2s ^ - 4 s )  4 - 6 s  6 - 8 s  8 -1 0 s  > 10s
B
Percent o f attention off breath?
B
Percent o f  attention o ff breath?
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 10100
thought qualities
0
 
r
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 y j  
I 
I 
I 
1 /? ! I 
I
1 r
past |-
1 
1 @  1 
• 
• 
1 
( I I I  
| / ? \ |
| other
sticky |- 1 
1 
1 
1 
' W
] tree
thought qualities
n^aorivp 1 
1 lt\ 1 I 
1 
1 
1
livganw | Mi l l  | 1 1 1 
_ 1 #« 1 1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1
| positive
past M ill—1—|—1—1—r 
--ic 1 > ■ . ■ A  ■ 1
-| future
self | 1 1 1 l^ ljl 1 1° "
sucjey | 
1 
1 | 
1 
1 
1 | tree
Figure 39.4. (See Color Insert) Possible characterization of individual thought episodes through first-person reports during FA 
meditation. This schematic shows two temporally and phenomenally different episodes of mind-wandering that could occur during 
the course of FA meditation. In this kind of design, each time the practitioner becomes aware of mind-wandering, she would press 
a button, and then provide subjective report on any number of variables, including (A) the estimated duration of the episode (based 
on units of analysis, such as TRs); (B) percentage of off-task attention; and (C) various dimensions of thought content. These and 
other measures could be gathered alone or in combination, depending on the research question. Subjective data could then be used 
to drive analyses of physiological correlates by providing both temporal and phenomenological constraints. For example, the window 
of analysis for mind-wandering could be customized for each episode, as shown by the gray bars. Other approaches could combine 
episodes with similar characterizations (e.g., percent attention, thought content, etc.) to determine specific neural correlates.
but also customized maps o f the temporal unfold­
ing o f spontaneous thought in an individual. Such 
maps could then be correlated with physiological 
measures to allow for a more detailed understand­
ing o f both the arising and cessation o f spontane­
ous thought. In other words, each episode could 
be ascribed its own unique duration, and statisti­
cal averaging would be applied only across episodes 
with similar durations, thereby constraining analy­
sis and increasing precision.
A similar approach could be taken to estimate 
the proportion o f attention remaining on the object 
for each mind-wandering episode, thus beginning 
to address the neural underpinnings o f a hybrid 
or split attention discussed earlier (Figure 39.4B). 
From a qualitative perspective, participants could 
also provide phenomenological data on the expe­
rience o f perceptual decoupling (Schooler et al.,
2011)— the process o f disengaging attention from 
current perceptions 
that initiates spontaneous 
thought— as well as the arising o f meta-awareness 
that enables self-catching. Further refinements of 
the phenomenology o f mind-wandering could also 
be explored. For example, Metzinger (2013) has 
proposed that a “self-representational blink” occurs 
at the moment o f perceptual decoupling, which he
defines as the subjective loss o f attentional control 
and the sudden appearance o f unintentional men­
tal behavior. He further suggests that at the same 
moment, there may be a shift in the “unit o f identi­
fication”— the phenomenal content with which one 
identifies as an autonomous self. All o f these subtle 
subjective states could be illuminated with precise 
first-person reports at the moment o f their occur­
rence in the context o f FA meditation.
Phenomenal Qualities of Thought Content
Another challenge in studying spontaneous 
thought is the sheer variety o f content that can 
be experienced. Significant advances have recently 
been made in distinguishing phenomenal qualities 
o f mind-wandering episodes. Comm on dimen­
sions include past-future, positive-negative, and 
self-other (e.g., Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013; 
Hoffmann, Banzhaf, Kanske, Bermpohl, & Singer, 
2016; Jazaieri et al., 2015; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 
2010; Ruby, Smallwood, Engen, & Singer, 2013). 
One intriguing aspect o f spontaneous thought that 
is beginning to be studied is the difficulty with 
which one disengages from it, also referred to as 
the “stickiness” o f thoughts (van Vugt & Broers,
2016). These qualities have been found to influence
54 6
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

mood, task performance, caring behavior, and con­
structs such as depression, rumination, and mind­
fulness (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2013; Hoffmann 
et al., 2016; Jazaieri et al., 2015; Killingsworth 
& Gilbert, 2010; Ruby et al., 2013; van Vugt & 
Broers, 2016). Using the approach described here, 
trial-by-trial reporting could also be employed to 
learn more about the neural correlates of specific 
thought content. For example, upon detection of 
mind-wandering within an FA paradigm, partici­
pants could categorize thought content along these 
or other dimensions. Customized regressors could 
then be created for each episode, and those with 
similar characterizations could be combined to 
identify brain activity underlying distinct types or 
qualities of spontaneous thoughts (Figure 39.4).
Participant Selection
While this suggested approach assumes that 
participants are experienced meditators, it should 
be noted that careful phenomenological inter­
views have also been used successfully with non­
meditators to gather richly detailed accounts of very 
narrow windows of experience (Le Van Quyen & 
Petitmengin, 2002; Petitmengin, 2006). In addi­
tion, non-meditating groups of participants have 
often been used to gather data on the content of 
spontaneous thoughts (Andrews-Hanna et al., 
2013; Jazaieri et al., 2015; Killingsworth & Gilbert, 
2010; Ruby et al., 2013; van Vugt & Broers, 2016). 
Moreover, in piloting our study, we found that 
novices were easily able to perform FA meditation 
and report awareness of mind-wandering episodes. 
Thus, it may be that the approaches outlined earlier 
need not be restricted to experienced meditators. 
However, it is likely that beginners will have lower 
levels of meta-awareness, and therefore experience 
more frequent mind-wandering and/or longer peri­
ods of mind-wandering before detection occurs. If 
this is true, novices may not be ideal for providing 
highly fine-grained subjective reporting, particu­
larly with respect to precise temporal estimations of 
mind-wandering.
While experienced meditators are preferable as 
participants for this careful work, studying novices 
as they engage in meditation over tim e may offer 
another unique opportunity to gain new insights 
into the landscape of spontaneous thought. For 
example, longitudinal studies could examine the 
time course and trajectory of changes in meta­
awareness and self-caught mind-wandering in a 
group of novices as they train in FA meditation. 
Frequency and periodicity of spontaneous thought
could be tracked even during home practice, yield­
ing behavioral information at a level that has not 
been explored previously. Participants could also 
be studied in lab-based paradigms designed to 
probe meta-awareness, thus increasing our under­
standing of how this capacity can be trained and 
fostered. Neuroimaging studies could investigate 
whether and how repeated meditation influences 
activity within brain networks related to cognitive 
control. Finally, changes in the content of specific 
mind-wandering episodes may be detectable over 
time; it is tempting to speculate that shifts toward 
more positive or other-focused thoughts may occur 
as practice proceeds (e.g., Jazaieri et al., 2015), 
although this remains an open question for future 
research.
Conclusion
The study of spontaneous thought has advanced 
rapidly in recent years. As we seek to further refine 
our understanding of both the phenomenology and 
neural underpinnings of this ubiquitous mental 
experience, we will need novel methods of gathering 
and integrating first-person subjective information 
into experimental design and analysis. In this chap­
ter, I’ve examined the practice of FA meditation as 
a kind of self-caught mind-wandering paradigm, 
involving repeated fluctuations between focused 
attention and mind-wandering. By considering this 
common contemplative practice through the lens 
of cognitive research, numerous opportunities arise 
that may further the study of spontaneous thought.
Specifically, by leveraging the enhanced abil­
ity of experienced meditators to detect episodes of 
mind-wandering during FA meditation, researchers 
could obtain richly detailed information about the 
duration and content of individual episodes. This 
may substantially increase analytical precision in the 
search for neural correlates of spontaneous thought, 
allowing for averaging across only those episodes 
with similar characteristics. Such a trial-by-trial 
approach, dovetailed with the reporting abilities of 
experienced meditators, may hold great promise for 
advancing our understanding of the mind s natural 
fluctuations.
On a broader scale, relying more heavily on 
subjective input to drive analysis may help us shift 
toward a more nuanced approach to the scientific 
study of consciousness. As it becomes increasingly 
clear that the mind is ever-changing and strongly 
influenced by multiple contexts, we must find 
alternatives to traditional, reductive methods that 
assume similarities across individuals and even
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
547

across a single individuals varied mental experi­
ences. The integration of first-person information 
into our research paradigms will be essential if we 
are to deeply understand and honor the true com­
plexity of human thought.
Notes
1. Two major approaches to studying spontaneous thought 
include probe-caught and self-caught designs (Smallwood 
& Schooler, 2006, 2015). In probe-caught paradigms, the 
experimenter introduces thought probes during an ongoing 
task to assess whether the participant was on-task or off-task. 
In self-caught designs, the participant is instructed to report 
mind-wandering whenever she becomes aware of it. The self- 
caught approach is not as accurate as probe-caught for deter­
mining frequency of spontaneous thought because it depends 
on the participant’s awareness of mind wandering, which is 
only intermittent. However, self-caught designs are more 
useful for understanding the mechanisms underlying the 
emergence and detection of spontaneous thought, and have 
strong potential for elucidating general processes through 
which people become aware of mental states (Smallwood & 
Schooler, 2006).
2. The insula, a major hub of the salience network, is also 
proposed to be a “switch” between the default mode net­
work, associated with mind-wandering, and the executive 
network, associated with attentional control (Menon & 
Uddin, 2010; Sridharan, Levitin, & Menon, 2008). This 
is supported by the findings shown in Figure 39.2, with 
insula activity bridging default mode and executive net­
work activity.
3. If one considers the explicit intention behind FA meditation 
as a type of motivation to detect mind-wandering, this find­
ing may provide further support for the idea that repeated FA 
practice will increase meta-awareness.
4. An fMRI scanner acquires an image of brain activity data 
once every few seconds depending on the parameters of 
the scan; the time it takes to collect a full pass of data is 
called a TR.
5. It should be noted that even a 3-second window of analysis 
is relatively long when compared to the subjective experi­
ence of transient states (e.g., a moment of meta-awareness, or 
shifting attention between two objects), and our analysis may 
well have included data from non-mind-wandering states, as 
discussed in Hasenkamp et al. (2012).
6. Interestingly, Buddhist psychology theorizes that even 
though from a phenomenological perspective it may seem 
like attention can be placed on two objects simultaneously, 
in reality attention is rapidly shifting from one object to 
another and back again. This happens more quickly than our 
conscious awareness can process, so the mind blurs moments 
together, creating an illusion that we are attending to mul­
tiple things at once (Wallace, 2006).
7. In piloting our experiment described earlier, many partici­
pants reported this kind of parallel or hybrid attention, with 
some percentage of attention retained on the breath, and 
some portion engaged in thought. In light of this, our task 
instructions were to press the button only when they noticed 
their attention was completely off the object and they were 
immersed in thought—in this way, we hoped to identify the 
most robust periods of mind-wandering for analysis.
References
Allen, M., Smallwood, J., Christensen, J., Gramm, D., 
Rasmussen, B., Jensen, C. G., . . . Lutz, A. (2013). 
The balanced mind: The variability of task-unrelated 
thoughts predicts error monitoring. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7(November), 743. http://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2013.00743
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Kaiser, R. H., Turner, A. E. J., Reineberg, 
A. E., Godinez, D., Dimidjian, S., & Banich, M. T. (2013). 
A penny for your thoughts: Dimensions of self-generated 
thought content and relationships with individual differences 
in emotional wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology, ^(November), 
1-13. http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00900
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Huang, C., & Buckner, R. 
L. (2010). Evidence for the default network’s role in spon­
taneous cognition. Journal of Neurophysiology, 104{\), 322— 
335. http://doi.org/10T 152/jn.00830.2009
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component 
processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316(f), 29—52. http:// 
doi.org/10.1111/nyas. 12360
Awh, E., & Pashler, H. (2000). Evidence for split attentional 
foci. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception 
and Performance, 26(2), 834-846. http://doi.org/10.1037/ 
0096-1523.26.2.834
Baird, B., Mrazek, M. D., Phillips, D. T., & Schooler, J. W. 
(2014). Domain-specific enhancement of metacognitive 
ability following meditation training. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 143(6), 1972-1979. http://doi.org/ 
10.1037/a0036882
Banks, J. B., Welhaf, M. S., & Srour, A. (2015). The protec­
tive effects of brief mindfulness meditation training. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 33, 277-285. http://doi.org/ 
10.10l6/j.concog.2015.01.0l6
Black, L. I., Clarke, T. C., Barnes, P. M., Stussman, B. J., 
& Nahin, R. L. (2015). Use of complementary health 
approaches among children aged 4-17 years in the United 
States: National Health Interview Survey, 2007-2012. 
National Health Statistics Reports. Hyattsville, MD: National 
Center for Health Statistics.
Brewer, J. A., Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, 
J., & Kober, H. (2011). Meditation experience is associ­
ated with differences in default mode network activity and 
connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
U S A ,  108(56), 20254-20259. http://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.l 112029108
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. 
(2008). The brain’s default network: Anatomy, function, 
and relevance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1124, 1-38. http://doi.org/10.1196/annals. 
1440.011
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 106(21), 8719-8724. http://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.0900234106
Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008). The reorient­
ing system of the human brain: From environment to theory 
of mind. Neuron, 58(3), 306-324. http://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.neuron.2008.04.017
548
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

Curtis, C. E., & D’Esposito, M. (2003). Persistent activity in 
the prefrontal cortex during working memory. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 7(9), 415-423.
D’Esposito, M. (2007). From cognitive to neural models of 
working memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1481), 761.
Dahl, C. J., Lutz, A., & Davidson, R. J. (2015). Reconstructing 
and deconstructing the self: Cognitive mechanisms in medi­
tation practice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(9), 515-523. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j .tics.2015.07.001 
Davey, C. G., Pujol, J., & Harrison, B. J. (2016). Mapping the self 
in the brains default mode network. Neuroimage, 132, 390— 
3 9 7. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.022 
Dixon, M. L., Fox, K. C. R., & Christoff, K. (2014). A frame­
work for understanding the relationship between exter­
nally and internally directed cognition. Neuropsychologia, 
62, 
321-330. 
http://doi.0rg/lOTOl6/j.neuropsychok>-
gia.2014.05.024
Ellamil, M., Fox, K. C. R., Dixon, M. L., Pritchard, S., Todd, 
R. M., Thompson, E., & Christoff, K. (2016). Dynamics 
of neural recruitment surrounding the spontaneous aris­
ing of thoughts in experienced mindfulness practitio­
ners. Neuroimage, 136, 186-196. http://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j .neuroimage.2016.04.034
Farb, N. A. S., Segal, Z. V, & Anderson, A. K. (2013). Mindfulness 
meditation training alters cortical representations of intero­
ceptive attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 
5(1), 15-26. http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nss066 
Fox, K. C. R., Nijeboer, S., Dixon, M. L., Floman, J. L., Ellamil, 
M., Rumak, S. P., . . . Christoff, K. (2014). Is meditation 
associated with altered brain structure? A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of morphometric neuroimaging in medi­
tation practitioners. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
43, 48-73. http://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.neubiorev.20l4.03.0l6 
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. 
R., & Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta­
analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of mind­
wandering and related spontaneous thought processes. 
Neuroimage, 
111, 
611—621. 
http://doi.org/10.10l6/
j.neuroimage.2015.02.039
Garrison, K. A., Zeffiro, T. A., Scheinost, D., Constable, R. T., 
& Brewer, J. A. (2015). Meditation leads to reduced default 
mode network activity beyond an active task. Cognitive, 
Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 15(3), 712—720. http:// 
doi.org/10.3758/sl 3415-015-0358-3 
Goyal, M., Singh, S., Sibinga, E. M. S., Gould, N. F., Rowland- 
Seymour, A., Sharma, R.,... Haythornthwaite, J. A. (2014). 
Meditation programs for psychological stress and well­
being: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Internal 
Medicine, 
174(3), 
357-368. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2013.13018
Hasenkamp, W (2014). Using first-person reports during medi­
tation to investigate basic cognitive experience. Meditation: 
Neuroscientific Approaches and Philosophical Implications, 2, 75— 
93. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-01634-4 
Hasenkamp, W., & Barsalou, L. W. (2012). Effects of meditation 
experience on functional connectivity of distributed brain 
networks. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6(March), 1—14. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00038 
Hasenkamp, W., Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Duncan, E., & 
Barsalou, L. W. (2 0 1 2). Mind wandering and attention dur­
ing focused meditation: A fine-grained temporal analysis of
fluctuating cognitive states. Neuroimage, 59(1), 750-760. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.008 
Hoffmann, F., Banzhaf, C., Kanske, R, Bermpohl, F., & Singer, T. 
(2016). Where the depressed mind wanders: Self-generated 
thought patterns as assessed through experience sampling as 
a state marker of depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
198, 127-134. http://doi.Org/10.10l6/j.jad.20l6.03.005 
Jang, J. H., Jung, W. H., Kang, D.-H., Byun, M. S., Kwon, S. 
J., Choi, C.-H., & Kwon, J. S. (2011). Increased default 
mode network connectivity associated with meditation. 
Neuroscience Letters, 487(3), 358-362. http://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neulet.2010.10.056
Jazaieri, H., Lee, I. a., McGonigal, K., Jinpa,T., Doty, J. R., Gross, 
J. J., & Goldin, P. R. (2015). A wandering mind is a less caring 
mind: Daily experience sampling during compassion medita­
tion training. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 9760(]\Ay), 
1-14. http://doi.org/10.1080/17439760.2015.1025418 
Jha, A. P., Krompinger, J., & Baime, M. J. (2007). Mindfulness 
training modifies subsystems of attention. 
Cognitive, 
Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 7 (2), 109—119. http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd 
=Retrieve&dopt=AbstractPlus&list_uids= 17672382 
Jha, A. R, Morrison, A. B., Dainer-Best, J., Parker, S., 
Rostrup, N., & Stanley, E. A. (2015). Minds “at atten­
tion”: Mindfulness training curbs attentional lapses in 
military cohorts. PLoS One, 10(2), 1-19. http://doi.org/ 
10.1371 /journal.pone.0116889
Jha, A. R, Morrison, A. B., Parker, S. C., & Stanley, E. A. (2016). 
Practice is protective: Mindfulness training promotes cogni­
tive resilience in high-stress cohorts. Mindfulness, 5(1), 46— 
58. http://doi.org/10.1007/s 12671 -015-0465-9 
Josipovic, Z. (2014). Neural correlates of nondual awareness 
in meditation. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
1307(1), 9-18. http://doi.org/10.llll/nyas.1226l 
Killingsworth, M., & Gilbert, D. (2010). A wandering mind is 
an unhappy mind. Science (New York, NY), 330(6006), 932. 
http://b2816fd0-bd65-41 d2-9aff-25c27c501990/Paper/ 
p44l
Klimecki, O. M., Leiberg, S., Lamm, C., & Singer, T. (2013). 
Functional neural plasticity and associated changes in posi­
tive affect after compassion training. Cerebral Cortex, 23(7), 
1552-1561. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs 142 
Kramer, A. F., &Hahn, S. (1995). Splitting the beam: Distribution 
of attention over noncontiguous regions of the visual field. 
Psychological Science, 6(6), 381-386. http://doi.org/10T 111/ 
j. 1467-9280.1995.tb00530.x
Le Van Quyen, M., & Petitmengin, C. (2 0 0 2). Neuronal 
dynamics and conscious experience: An example of recipro­
cal causation before epileptic seizures. Phenomenology and 
the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 169-180. http://doi.org/10.1023/ 
A: 1020364003336
Levinson, D. B., Stoll, E. L., Kindy, S. D., Merry, H. L., & 
Davidson, R. J. (2014). A mind you can count on: Validating 
breath counting as a behavioral measure of mindfulness. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 5(October), 1-10. http://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01202
Lutz, A., Greischar, L. L., Rawlings, N. B., Ricard, M., & 
Davidson, R. J. (2004). Gamma synchrony during mental 
practice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101(46), 16369-16373. 
http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0407401101 
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. 
(2008). Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation.
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
549

Trends in Cognitive Sciences-, 12(4), 163—169. http://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.tics.2008.01.005
Lutz, A., Slagter, H. A., Rawlings, N. B., Francis, A. D., 
Greischar, L. L., & Davidson, R. J. (2009). Mental train­
ing enhances attentional stability: Neural and behavioral evi­
dence. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(42), 13418—13427. http:// 
doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI. 1614-09.2009 
Lutz, A., & Thompson, E. (2003). Neurophenomenology inte­
grating subjective experience and brain dynamics in the neu­
roscience of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 
10, ,9(10), 31—52. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?db=pubmed&cmd=Retrieve&dopt=AbstractPlu 
s&list_uids= 12726911 l62577704044related:bNRltUUSn 
7AJ
MacLean, K. A., Ferrer, E., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A., 
Zanesco, A. R, Jacobs, T. L., . . . Saron, C. D. (2010). 
Intensive meditation training improves perceptual discrimi­
nation and sustained attention. Psychological Sciences, 21(6), 
829-839. http://doi.org/10T 177/0956797610371339 
Malinowski, R (2013). Neural mechanisms of attentional con­
trol in mindfulness meditation. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7,
8. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00008 
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Horn, J. D. Van, Wegner, D. 
M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering 
minds: The default network and stimulus-independent 
thought. Science, 375(5810), 393-395. http://doi.org/ 
10.1126/science. 1131295
McMahan, D. L. (2008). The making of Buddhist modernism.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Menon, V., & Uddin, L. Q. (2010). Saliency, switching, atten­
tion and control: A network model of insula function. Brain 
Structure and Function, 214(5-6), 655-667. http://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00429-010-0262-0.Saliency 
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal 
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy. 
Frontiers in Psychology, ^(December), 1—19. http://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00931
Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of 
prefrontal cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
24(1), 167.
Mooneyham, B. W., Mrazek, M. D., Mrazek, A. J., & Schooler, 
J. W. (2016). Signal or noise: Brain network interactions 
underlying the experience and training of mindfulness. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 5, 240—256. 
http://doi.org/10T 11 l/nyas.13044 
Morrison, A. B., Goolsarran, M., Rogers, S. L., & Jha, A. P. 
(2014). Taming a wandering attention: Short-form mind­
fulness training in student cohorts. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 
7(January), 
897. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2013.00897
Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Phillips, D. T., Baird, B., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2013). Mindfulness training improves work­
ing memory capacity and GRE performance while reducing 
mind wandering. Psychological Science, 24, 776—781. http:// 
doi.org/10.1177/0956797612459659 
Mrazek, M. D., Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). 
Mindfulness and mind-wandering: Finding convergence 
through opposing constructs. Emotion (Washington, D.C.), 
12(3), 442-448. http://doi.org/10.1037/a0026678 
Muller, M. M., Malinowski, P, Gruber, T., & Hillyard, S. A. 
(2003). Sustained division of the attentional spotlight. 
Nature, 
424(6946), 
309-312. 
http://doi.org/10.1038/
nature02l48
Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing ones subjective experience 
in the second person: An interview method for the science of 
consciousness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 5(3— 
4), 229-269. http://doi.org/10.1007/sl 1097-006-9022-2 
Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of 
the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25—42. 
http://doi.org/10T 146/annurev.ne. 13.030190.000325 
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain’s default mode network. Annual 
Review of Neuroscience, 35(April), 413-427. http://doi.org/ 
10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014030 
Ruby, F. J. M., Smallwood, J., Engen, H., & Singer, T. (2013). 
How self-generated thought shapes mood: The relation 
between mind-wandering and mood depends on the socio­
temporal content of thoughts. PLoS One, 5(10), e77554. 
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0077554 
Sahdra, B. K., MacLean, K. A., Ferrer, E., Shaver, P. R., 
Rosenberg, E. L., Jacobs, T. L., & Saron, C. D. (2011). 
Enhanced response inhibition during intensive meditation 
training predicts improvements in self-reported adaptive 
socioemotional functioning. Emotion, 11, 299—312. http:// 
psycnet.apa.org/ ?&fa=main.doiLanding&doi= 10.1037/ 
a0022764
Sayadaw, M. (2002). Fundamentals of Vipassana meditation.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s 13398-014-0173-7.2 
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C., 
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness, 
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 75(7), 319-326. http://doi.org/10.10l6/ 
j.tics.2011.05.006
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, 
G. H., Kenna, H., . . . Greicius, M. D. (2007). Dissociable 
intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and 
executive control. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(9), 2349—2356. 
http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5587-06.2007 
Slagter, H. A., Lutz, A., Greischar, L. L., Francis, A. D., 
Nieuwenhuis, S., Davis, J. M., & Davidson, R. J. (2007). 
Mental training affects distribution of limited brain 
resources. PLoS Biology, 5(6), 1228-1235. http://doi.org/
10.1371 /journal.pbio.0050138
Smallwood, J., Fishman, D. J., & Schooler, J. W. (2007). 
Counting the cost of an absent mind: mind wandering as 
an underrecognized influence on educational performance. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2), 230—236. http://doi. 
org/10.3758/BF03194057
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2006). The restless mind. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 946-958. http://doi.org/ 
10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.946
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66(f), 487—518. http:// 
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015331 
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D. J., & Menon, V. (2008). A critical 
role for the right fronto-insular cortex in switching between 
central-executive and default-mode networks. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences U S A ,  105(34), 12569— 
12574. http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800005105 
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maquet, P., & D’Argembeau, A. 
(2011). Neural correlates of ongoing conscious experi­
ence: Both task-unrelatedness and stimulus-independence 
are related to default network activity. PLoS One, 6(2). 
http://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.OO 16997 
Sze, J. A., Gyurak, A., Yuan, J., & Levenson, R. W. 
(2010). Coherence between emotional experience and
550
C A T C H I N G  T H E  W A N D E R I N G  M I N D

physiology: Does body awareness training have an impact? 
Emotion, 10(6), 803-814. http://doi.org/doirl0.1037/ 
a0020l46
Tang, Y.-Y., Holzel, B. K., & Posner, M. I. (2015). The neurosci­
ence of mindfulness meditation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
16(A), 213-225. http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn39l6 
Taylor, V. A., Daneault, V., Grant, J., Scavone, G., Breton, E., 
Roffe-vidal, S., . . . Beauregard, M. (2013). Impact of medi­
tation training on the default mode network during a restful 
state. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 5(1), 4—14. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsr087 
Uddin, L. Q. (2014). Salience processing and insular corti­
cal function and dysfunction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
16(1), 55-61. http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3857 
van Vugt, M. K., & Broers, N. (2016). Self-reported sticki­
ness of mind-wandering affects task performance. Frontiers 
in 
Psychology, 
7(May), 
1-8. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00732
Varela, F. J. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological 
remedy for the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 
3(A), 330-349.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1992). The embodied 
mind: Cognitive science and human experience. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Wallace, B. A. (2006). The attention revolution: Unlocking 
the power of the focused mind. Somerville, MA: Wisdom 
Publications.
Zanesco, A. P., King, B. G., MacLean, K. A., & Saron, C. D. 
(2013). Executive control and felt concentrative engagement 
following intensive meditation training. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, /(September), 566. http://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2013.00566
Zanesco, A. P., King, B. G., MacLean, K. A., Jacobs, T. L., 
Aichele, S. R., Wallace, B. A., . . . Saron, C. D. (2016). 
Meditation training influences mind wandering and mind­
less reading. Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, 
and Practice, 
3(1), 
12-33. 
http://doi.org/10.1037/
cns0000082
Zedelius, C. M., Broadway, J. M., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). 
Motivating meta-awareness of mind wandering: A way to 
catch the mind in flight? Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 
44-53. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.05.016
W E N D Y  H A S E N K A M P
55i


C H A P T E R
40
Spontaneous Mental Experiences in Extreme 
and Unusual Environments
Peter Suedfeld, A. Dennis Rank, and Marek Malus
Abstract
This chapter reviews the effects of a special category of environments on cognitive and cognitive/ 
emotional processes. These extreme and unusual environments (EUEs) are characterized by drastic 
differences from the individual’s accustomed milieu, and by posing serious challenges to well-being, 
health, and survival. There is a massive and wide-ranging body of writing on this topic, from history, 
anthropology, sociology, literature, and biography, as well as from psychology. The chapter covers 
information from studies of religion and ritual, mysticism, exploration, spaceflight, artistic endeavor, 
psychotherapy, and laboratory experiments. Sojourners in EUEs have experienced changes in memory 
and cognitive performance, perceptual anomalies, states of dissociative fugue, and unusual flights of 
imagination, among other consequences. Both positive and negative effects have been found and are 
discussed.
Key W ords: extreme, exploration, environment, cognition, spaceflight
This chapter summarizes much of what we 
know concerning the free-floating thoughts, mem­
ories, emotions, and imagery of people in envi­
ronments that are out of the ordinary for most of 
the world. The environments range from the most 
highly technical life-support capsules that modern 
science and technology have devised, to the des­
erts, icefields, and other natural environments of 
mystics and explorers, and to experimental and 
therapeutic apparatus. Accounts of life (and death) 
in such situations, recounted in history, biography, 
literature, and film, show seldom-observed aspects 
of human nature, and have therefore attracted 
the interest of millions of readers and viewers. 
Behavioral scientists have been somewhat slower 
to pay much attention to the phenomena encoun­
tered in these environments, although interest has 
been increasing in the past several decades, and a 
growing body of knowledge is developing.
Extreme and Unusual Environments (EUEs)
Extreme and/or unusual environments (hereafter 
referred to as EUEs) have an aura of being rare and 
exotic, and possibly fearsome and awe-inspiring. 
This is at least in part due to the fact that the term 
“extreme” in the label is related to the discom­
forts and in many cases dangers that characterize 
such environments— and anything “unusual” is 
mysterious, daunting, and perhaps unsafe. EUEs 
include experimental or therapeutic facilities such 
as flotation tanks and other restricted stimulation 
environments, life-support shelters located in areas 
of dangerous or lethal natural areas, such as polar 
and space stations (and their analogues), and the 
situations of individuals or small groups who find 
themselves in such dangerous or lethal areas but 
without safe shelter. The last, unlike the earlier two 
examples, sometimes— but by no means always—  
involves people who have no desire to be there, no
553

preparation for being there, and a high probability 
o f injury or death.
In this chapter, we review both scientific find­
ings and historical accounts from many sources 
related to the thoughts, memories, emotions, and 
perceptions that have been reported from a wide 
range o f EUEs. The distinctions among these and 
other kinds o f mental experiences can be blurry. The 
“continuity hypothesis” (Savage, 1975) posits that 
there is a continuum spanning sensations, percep­
tions, thoughts, fantasies, dreams, memories, illu­
sions and hallucinations; and the transitions among 
these may be especially subtle under the condi­
tions discussed here. The chapter is organized by 
the type o f environment in which different kinds 
o f spontaneous mental experiences occur, and con­
centrates on EUE environments that are relatively 
low in the level and/or variety o f physical and social 
stimulation.
Isolated, Confined Environments (ICEs)
EUEs can be almost anywhere on the Earth, or 
off it, as in the case o f spacecraft. Many o f the places 
described by the abbreviation EUE also fit the 
acronym ICE, which stands for isolated, confined 
environments. In general, ICEs are also EUEs, at 
least for the majority o f the human population: that 
is, most people are seldom isolated or confined, 
which makes either situation unusual for them. 
Further, many ICEs are located in places that are 
either permanently or temporarily extreme along 
such dimensions as temperature, altitude, danger, 
or the availability o f food, water, shelter, and other 
resources required for safety and comfort. On the 
other hand, not all EUEs are also ICEs: soldiers on 
the battlefield, citizens surviving an earthquake or 
a tsunami, and teams trekking through a desert or 
jungle are neither isolated nor confined.
O f course, these labels really mean extreme 
and/or unusual, isolated and/or confined; in both 
contractions, environments that fit the definition
Table 40.1 EUE/ICEs Disaggregated: A Few Examples
o f one often, but not necessarily, fit the other 
(see Table 40.1). The criteria for judging whether 
a given environment is an EUE or ICE are relative 
rather than absolute. They must be applied against 
a background o f diverse life experiences, cultural 
norms, and individual personalities. In general, 
“isolated” includes not only lone individuals, 
but also small groups in locations far removed 
from populated areas; “confined” includes hav­
ing restricted mobility, such as polar winter crews 
that can move freely inside their base but are 
restricted by the weather to go beyond its im m e­
diate vicinity.
Some environments are unquestioningly accepted 
as meeting the criteria, such as submarines, Antarctic 
stations, spacecraft, and the top o f M ount Everest. 
But obviously, what is low in stimulation (or extreme, 
unusual, isolated, or confined) for a New York apart­
ment dweller may not be so for a nomadic High 
North caribou herder, and vice versa. Most studies 
o f EUE/ICE take as the baseline from which these 
environments differ to be a populated community 
located between about 60° North and South latitude 
and not too far above or below sea level— that is, the 
environments in which most o f the human popula­
tion lives. Underwater habitats and space beyond the 
atmosphere are EUE/ICEs, by definition.
Another way to categorize EUE/ICEs is on the 
basis o f why they are entered, and by what kind 
o f people (Suedfeld, 2012). For example, the most 
extreme EUEs require special, and often high-tech, 
life-support systems, the failure o f which can mean 
instant or prolonged death (e.g., spacecraft, sub­
marines, polar trekking). Yet highly trained, physi­
cally and psychologically able, properly equipped 
volunteers enter such environments almost every 
day. M ost o f them not only survive, but flourish, 
accounting themselves better for the experience. 
Figure 40.1 shows Bruce McCandless II, during 
the first-ever untethered extravehicular activity 
in space.
Isolated, Not Confined
Confined, Not Isolated
Isolated and Confined
Extreme, not unusual
Lone sailing vessels, highest 
mountains
Air raid shelters
Commercial fishing vessels
Unusual, not extreme
Mining or logging camps
Prisons, nursing homes
Missile silos
Extreme and unusual
Desert caravans, deep-sea 
construction
Concentration camps, 
nuclear submarines
Spacecraft, polar outposts
554
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

Figure 40.1. (See Color Insert) Bruce McCandless II, floating alone in the darkness of space. Source: NASA.
O n the other hand, survivors o f natural disasters 
or concentration camps, civilians trapped in com ­
bat zones, and the like, are not volunteers for those 
environments. As a rule, they are highly diverse 
in age, physical and mental fitness, and life expe­
rience. They have little or no training, specialized 
equipment, or escape routes. But, again, many or 
most survive; and testimonies as to post-experience 
growth and resilience are more the rule than the 
exception (Cherry & Galea, 2015; Suedfeld, 2012).
In this chapter, we concentrate on the many 
EUE/ICE environments that are low in the level 
and/or variety o f physical and social stimulation. 
There has been abundant research on how such 
environments affect human psychology and physi­
ology. But for the most part, the focus o f researchers 
and their sponsors has been on such issues as job 
performance, group dynamics, leadership, com­
munications, and physical safety. The studies use 
a wide variety of instruments and methods: self- 
report questionnaires (including standard psycho­
metric measures), interviews, content analyses of 
memoirs and diaries, participant observation, and 
the sampling and recording o f blood, saliva, urine, 
hormonal secretions, brain waves, skin conduc­
tance, heart rate, and so on. Perhaps because it is
much more difficult to quantify, and its connection 
to survival is less obvious, spontaneous thought is 
seldom considered, much less investigated.
The paucity o f systematic investigation does 
not translate into a lack o f information; but that 
information is mostly anecdotal, derived from remi­
niscences. It roughly divides (with a fuzzy border 
and many exceptions) into dramatic tales o f how 
the individual or group faced and survived adver­
sity and peril, characteristic o f many accounts o f 
explorers and adventurers facing (and some histori­
ans writing about) exotic natural environments, and 
more matter-of-fact descriptions of life in a space 
vehicle, polar weather station, or political prison. 
The former group is represented by titles such as 
The Worst Journey in the World (Cherry-Garrard, 
1922) and Arctic Hell-Ship (Barr, 2007); the lat­
ter, by Riding Rockets (Mullane, 2006) and A Silent 
World (Cousteau & Dumas, 1953).
Free Time, Busy Time, Dream Time
One 
step 
toward 
turning 
interviews 
and 
reminiscences 
into 
quantitative 
data was 
the 
analysis o f materials from the diaries o f partici­
pants in six Arctic and seven Antarctic explora­
tions that took place between 1865 and 1916
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
555

(Mocellin & Suedfeld, 1991). The diaries were 
divided into four temporal phases, from the ship­
board journey to the polar regions until shortly 
before the return home. Content codes were devised 
for the physical and social environments and their 
effects, positive and negative appraisals o f experi­
ences, and altered states o f consciousness.
Although dreams are seldom described in dia­
ries or interviews, possibly because to do so might 
contradict the tough and stoic image o f the EUE 
explorer, they are not completely absent from his­
tory. Early polar explorers, like other groups in 
EUEs where food is restricted or sparse, often 
mentioned dreaming and daydreaming about lav­
ish meals, favorite restaurants, well-loved recipes, 
and so on. In personal interviews with contempo­
rary EUE personnel, such dreams are seldom men­
tioned; instead, there are dreams o f coming home 
to find that ones spouse or lover has found another 
mate or has simply disappeared. This change may 
be informative as to what was both important and 
uncertain in the two different eras. In earlier centu­
ries, the explorers’ food supply was often uncertain 
and always monotonous, but relationships were 
stable and reliable; in our own time, there is usu­
ally plenty o f nutritious, interesting food and secure 
resupply; but what is happening at home?
Although most o f the comments had to do with 
the physical environment, the diarists also noted 
homesickness, self-insight, anxiety, increased sensi­
tivity, and declines in alertness. Dreams (including 
nightmares) and daydreams, a few visual halluci­
nations, and religious or transcendental emotions 
were recorded by 74% o f the Arctic and 94% of 
the Antarctic explorers (but bear in mind the small 
sample size). Captain Scott, for example, increased 
his references to God as his journey back from the 
Pole became increasingly traumatic, as did three 
spacefarers on M ir as they survived one malfunction 
and emergency after another (Geiger, 2009).
People committed to long-duration EUE or 
ICE experiences often find themselves in alternat­
ing periods o f intense, even frantic activity and 
boring, empty time. This is true of, among oth­
ers, deployed soldiers, nineteenth-century sailors, 
search-and-rescue operators, 
and space station 
astronauts. During the times o f activity, they focus 
on the task and the goal, whether that be chasing 
down a harpooned whale, performing an extrave­
hicular activity (EVA) or vehicle docking in space, 
or charging an enemy formation. Alan Shepard, 
the first American in space (1961), recounted how 
he mentally rehearsed what he would have to do if
something went wrong during the launch (Shepard 
interview, 1991); 37 years later, as his Space Shuttle 
launched, Canadian astronaut Dafydd Williams 
was concentrating on successfully taking photos out 
the window, his assigned task (Williams, personal 
communication).
But the in-between periods are times when 
thoughts often turn to home and family. Ship’s offi­
cers and crewmembers wrote about their family and 
friends at home in diaries and letters, talked about 
them among themselves and when visiting other 
ships, and missed them, especially on holidays, 
birthdays, and anniversaries (Johnson & Suedfeld,
1996). For present-day astronauts, the most popu­
lar free-time activity is looking out the window, tak­
ing photographs, and identifying places o f personal 
interest: their home, places they had visited, or 
landmarks o f importance (Johnson, 2013). It must 
be remembered that much o f this may have changed 
with advances in communication technology: both 
in the polar regions and in space, the Internet and 
communications satellites have made it possible to 
see and speak frequently and easily with one’s family 
at home.
These are also times when sensible leaders and 
home organizations provide activities to stave off 
boredom. In earlier days, polar expeditions and ships 
published periodicals, organized athletic contests, 
encouraged hobbies, held lectures, presented musi­
cal shows, and produced theatrical performances. 
Such distractions remain typical o f environments 
that are lacking in more modern distractors, such 
as prisoner o f war camps. These forms o f amuse­
ment are still important in polar stations and other 
ICEs, supplemented by the Internet, along with 
movie D V D s and home videos. The inventive mind 
also turns to activities unique to the environment, 
such as the pranks and ceremonies o f the astronauts 
(Johnson, 2013) and the Antarcticans’ 300° Club 
(dashing naked, except for footwear, from a 2 0 0 °F 
sauna out onto the -100°F  ice).
Cognitive Phenomena
Both in Antarctica and in space, cognitive activ­
ity seems to deteriorate during empty time. South 
polar sojourners can experience a period colloqui­
ally known as “Long Eye: the twenty-foot stare in 
the ten-foot room.” Long Eye is a brief, nonpatho- 
logical episode o f dissociation, in which the indi­
vidual becomes unaware not only o f people and 
objects in the surrounding environment, but also 
o f his or her own mental processes. It is not a focus 
on inner experience; there are no ideas, imagery,
556
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

memories, daydreams, or any other activity— at 
least none that the person can recall afterward. 
Some interpretations o f mild dissociative reactions 
view them as coping mechanisms that can reduce 
the stress o f boredom or conflict (Dell & O ’Neill,
2009). Long Eye episodes can end spontaneously, 
or when an external stimulus is intense enough to 
interrupt them. Interestingly, although it is known 
as an Antarctic phenomenon, no study has been 
made o f whether it occurs elsewhere.1
There is also a phenomenon o f temporary cogni­
tive decrements whose effects can range from the 
trivial to the disastrous. One experienced Antarctic 
researcher, for example, strapped on his skis and was 
about to venture out into a blizzard— and certain 
death— after the weather had confined his group for 
a week or more in a small shelter. Another story, 
later denied and relabeled as a joke (as often hap­
pens), is that a cosmonaut was about to begin an 
unscheduled exit from his spacecraft without fas­
tening the tether that would have enabled him to 
return. He was pulled back at the last minute by his 
teammate.
In the space community, such lapses o f atten­
tion and operational errors are known by various 
names, including “the space stupids,” “space fog,” 
and “space dementia.” Roscosmos, the Russian 
space agency, recognizes a syndrome called asthenia, 
a “weakening o f the nervous system” that can lead 
to fatigue, mood swings, and difficulties in con­
centration and attention, among other symptoms. 
The extent to which this is a true, diagnosable syn­
drome, and if so, whether its cause is psychological 
or neurological, is moot (Kanas et ah, 2013).
The Sensed Presence Phenomenon
A dramatic experience in some EUE/ICE situ­
ations has been the feeling, and often the actual 
visual and auditory perception, o f another entity 
being present. This entity may be another person, 
and in that case either someone actually familiar, or 
a supernatural being such as an angel. In a surpris­
ing number o f cases, the apparition provides sugges­
tions or help to the recipient.
The first episode o f this sort was the account of 
Joshua Slocum, the first man (of well over 200, to 
date) to circumnavigate the world alone (1895— 
1898). Figure 40.2 shows him aboard his sloop, 
Spray. At one point during the voyage, Slocum 
was ill at sea, possibly from food poisoning, when 
a storm began. He was unable to move, but he 
also knew that if he could not steer his sloop into 
the wind, it would likely sink in the rough waters.
Suddenly, there was an unknown sailor at the helm, 
steering the boat through high winds and waves. 
Slocum identified the stranger as the pilot o f one 
o f Christopher Columbus’s ships (Slocum had been 
reading a biography o f Columbus). The man assured 
Slocum that he would keep him safe— which he 
did, through a 48-hour storm. The “pilot” showed 
up again during a storm o f thunder, lightning, and 
hail, when Slocum was very tired from working the 
boat (Slocum, 1900).
Suedfeld and M ocellin (1987) assembled a col­
lection o f similar events from a variety o f extreme 
environments. These included the accounts o f 
several other single-handed sailors, the traumatic 
experiences reported by shipwreck and air crash sur­
vivors, climbers and skiers trapped on a mountain, 
and polar explorers. O f the last, the most famous 
is the account o f a sensed presence described inde­
pendently by Sir Ernest Shackleton and his two 
companions on a desperate trek to find succor for 
other crew members who had been left behind 
(Shackleton, 1919). It is famous not only because 
Shackleton was (and is) one o f the most admired 
polar explorers in history, but also because the epi­
sode featured in T. S. Eliot’s The Wasteland. Eliot 
took some poetic license, writing as though there 
were only two people present plus the apparition
ZVC* 1WT FV** In 
Bm tt CWm
Figure 40.2. Captain Joshua Slocum in his sloop, Spray.
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
5 5 7

(“W ho is the third who walks always beside you?”), 
but the allusion was clear.
Later research (Geiger, 2009; Suedfeld & Geiger, 
2008) added many more examples o f the phenom­
enon. It has been reported by a fairly large number 
o f shipwrecked sailors and ship passengers, trekkers, 
and explorers, as well as by trapped survivors of 
terrorist attacks. Helpfulness may be the criterion 
that differentiates the sensed presence phenomenon 
from hallucinations, dreams, delirious images, and 
so on. However, there has been at least one counter­
example. A participant in the Yukon Quest, a long­
distance dogsled race, was becoming exhausted 
when he “met” a fellow racer who suggested that he 
rest for a while. He agreed, and went into a hotel, 
where he lay down to sleep in a warm, comfortable 
bed. Another racer, coming along a little while later, 
found him sleeping in the snow and managed to 
revive him before he died of hypothermia. Neither 
the original encounter nor the hotel was real (Firth, 
1998). Table 40.2 shows Suedfeld and Geigers cat­
egorization o f the major environmental conditions 
that are known to produce the sensed presence 
phenomenon.
In many cases, although not in Shackletons, the 
“presence” provided encouragement, instructions, 
warnings, and other forms o f help. The foregoing 
list implies that the sensed presence phenomenon 
is evoked when the person is under extreme stress. 
However, several present-day polar station crew­
members have also reported it. Nevertheless, the 
precipitating environment seems to require isola­
tion, monotonous surroundings, and frequently 
some debilitating condition such as fear o f im mi­
nent death, illness, injury, fatigue, sleep deprivation, 
hypoxia, or hunger (Geiger, 2009).
Explanations o f the phenomenon include dis­
missing it as mirages, elaborated and misinterpreted
Table 40.2 Sources of Sensed Presence Reports
Environment
Percentage 
of Reports
Mountains
41
Oceans (ships, boats, shipwrecks)
21
Polar regions
16
Prisons; POW and concentration camps
9
Air/Space
7
Other
7
actual sensations, or dreams. Theorists who have 
not dismissed the experience have attributed it 
to changes in brain functioning, neurochemical 
and hormonal secretions (Suedfeld & Mocellin, 
1987), and regression to an earlier stage o f human 
consciousness, in which spontaneous ideas and 
emotions were attributed to outside, supernatu­
ral forces (Jaynes, 1982).2 There now seem to be 
enough anecdotes that a systematic analysis o f the 
phenomenon, its boundary conditions and defi­
nitional criteria, should be possible; but none has 
appeared so far. As one example, the helpfulness o f 
the presence might be a defining characteristic to 
differentiate it from hallucinations, dreams, and 
other such experiences.
Spiritual and Mystical Experiences 
in EUE/ICEs
N ow  and again it is necessary to seclude your­
self among deep mountains and hidden valleys
to restore your link to the source of life.
— Morihei Ueshiba, founder of Aikido
Closely tied to the sensed presence phenomenon 
discussed in the preceding are the experiences o f 
mystics, spiritual seekers, and members o f many 
indigenous groups who go into environments that 
fit one or more o f the EUE/ICE criteria with the 
specific goal o f making contact with such presences. 
We can begin by looking at the founders or central 
figures o f several o f todays major world religions, 
as their experiences are recorded in the seminal his­
tories o f each religion. The examples in Table 40.3 
are listed and described in chronological order; in 
some cases, especially the oldest, there may not be 
sufficient factual evidence to establish the accuracy 
o f the information. Nor, o f course, are we in a posi­
tion to judge the accuracy o f the accounts as to the 
individuals encounter with divinity. The table is not 
meant to imply otherwise.
Spiritual encounters in EUEs are by no means 
restricted to such towering pioneers as those listed 
in Table 40.3. Monasticism in some form exists 
in most major religions, and many believers seek 
enlightenment or contact with the ineffable by 
entering EUEs. Solitude in a wilderness or hermit­
age is perhaps the most common o f these. Among 
the other methods used are rhythmic chanting, 
drumming, and other kinds o f monotonous stimu­
lation, including the Sufi Muslim semazen, in col­
loquial English referred to as the Whirling Dervish. 
This tradition, begun in the thirteenth century 
c e , is designed to unite the human mind, heart
558
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

(emotions), and body as testimony and worship to 
God (Whirling Dervishes, undated).
Eremite, herm it, and anchorite are all Christian 
terms for individuals who isolate themselves from 
the world, often in situations of low stimulation 
and minimal physical comfort, for religious rea­
sons (Kingsley, 1869/2016). Those reasons may be 
the search for contact with the “source of life,” as 
Ueshiba wrote (in other words, for a transcendental 
contact); or to concentrate without distractions on 
prayer, contemplation, or meditation; or to punish 
oneself for sins committed earlier in life; or because 
the individual believes that worldly comfort and 
pleasure lead one away from God.
The Christian Desert Fathers (and a much 
smaller number of Mothers) who flourished in the 
Middle Eastern desert in the early centuries after 
the life of Jesus were ascetics who lived alone or in 
communities that became the forerunners of the 
monasteries and nunneries of later eras. Although 
practices differed, most spent much of the day in 
prayer and contemplation, and tried to live accord­
ing to the precepts laid down by Jesus and the 
Gospels. Eventually, there were thousands of such 
seekers. Their surviving musings, usually referred to 
as the sayings of the Desert Fathers (e.g., Wortley,
2013), give clues not only to how they lived, but 
also to the sensed presences they encountered. These
Table 40.3 EUEs and Religious Enlightenment or Inspiration
Name
Religion
Life
EUE and Seminal Experience
Moses
Judaism
I6th-13th Century b c e
Moses fled to the desert of Midian after killing an 
Egyptian slave-driver. As a shepherd tending his 
flock on Mount Horeb in the desert, he met God in 
the form of a burning bush. He was told to return 
to Egypt, liberate the Hebrews, and convert them to 
monotheism. After leading his people from Egypt, 
he again ascended Mt. Horeb, where God gave him 
the tablets of the Ten Commandments.
Gautama Buddha
Buddhism
6th-4th Century b c e
After sitting and meditating for 49 days under a 
pipal tree, the Buddha attained Enlightenment, 
formulated the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism, 
and encountered both harmful (Mara) and 
benevolent (Brahma) gods.
Jesus
Christianity
7-2 BCE 
30-33 c e
Jesus was tested during 40 days of fasting in the 
desert (“wilderness”). During that time, the devil 
appeared and tempted him to perform miracles to 
prove his divinity, and then offered him kingship 
over the world if he would worship Satan. Jesus 
refused each temptation with a quotation from 
Scripture.
Muhammad
Islam
570-632 c e
Muhammad made repeated retreats alone to 
a mountain cave, where he was visited by the 
Archangel Gabriel bearing divine revelations that 
formed the basis of the Koran.
Joseph Smith
Mormonism
1805-1844 c e
God and Jesus appeared to Smith as he knelt in a 
forest and prayed for divine guidance. He was told 
that no current religion was the true one, and over 
time received the tenets of the Book of Mormon.
Mirza Husayn-’AK 
(“Bahau’llah”)
Bahai
1817-1892 c e
Imprisoned in a dungeon as a heretic, he 
experienced a divine revelation that eventually led 
to a two-year retreat in the mountains of Kurdistan. 
During this period he wrote the seminal works of 
Bahai.
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
559

included not only God and Jesus, of course, as well 
as the saints of the Bible and later myths and leg­
ends, but also demons and Satan himself. In fact, 
the most famous Desert Father, St. Antony the 
Great, encountered so many evil spirits during his 
lone quest (about 279-356 c e ) that he created the 
taxonomy and science of demonology (Kingsley, 
1869/2016). As far as we know, such sensed pres­
ence entities did not evidence the compassionate 
helpfulness of those reported by explorers and sail­
ors on the verge of death.
Another form of mystical seeking is the spirit 
quest, also known as the vision quest. This was a 
rite of passage once common to many indigenous 
cultures, but now in decline. The spirit quest, most 
standard for male adolescents about to become men, 
had to be endured stoically to warrant the candidate 
fit to become a husband, warrior, and full member 
of the community. Although in some cultures girls 
had a counterpart process, it was not as common 
and, where it existed, tended to be less taxing, pain­
ful, and dangerous (e.g., Markstrom, 2008).
The male spirit quest usually consisted of a 
period of isolation, sometimes with other aspirants 
but sometimes alone, food deprivation, abstinence 
from pleasant activities, and sometimes the inflic­
tion of serious pain. At the end of this time, the boy 
was sent into whatever the natural environment of 
the area offered: desert, mountain, forest, or jungle. 
In some traditions, he would wander around ran­
domly or to visit holy sites; in others, he stayed still 
in a chosen location.
The quest ended when the boy found what he 
was questing for. This could be a totemic animal, 
a sacred dream, a magic song, an ancestor or spirit 
conferring his adult name on him, or an amulet that 
would inspire him and keep him safe. This form of 
the sensed presence experience was the culmination 
of an extended set of experiences that met some 
of the criteria we mentioned previously: solitude, 
weakness from fasting and pain, discomfort and 
sometimes danger, and fear of failure; and, in addi­
tion, the culturally normative expectation that the 
presence would eventually appear.
The vision quest could also be undertaken later 
in life, in a search for inspiration and spiritual sup­
port. As is often the case in human affairs, unex­
pected consequences could follow. The case of the 
Ghost Dance religion is instructive.
Wovoka, a Paiute mystic, having spent four days 
and nights during a solar eclipse (1889) alone on a 
mountain, described how he had been guided by 
God to a village populated by ghosts of Wovokas
deceased relatives. Wovoka announced that the spir­
its taught him a magic ghost dance, and perhaps—  
accounts differ as writers with differing sympathies 
interpret ambivalent stories— told him the secret 
of a magic ghost shirt that would ward off bullets. 
Wovoka then preached either a message of indig­
enous reunion, the alliance of the tribes with the 
spirits and each other, and a peaceful retreat by the 
whites who were encroaching on native lands— or 
the message that the shirt would make warriors 
bullet-proof when fighting the whites (e.g., Mooney, 
1896; Tebbel, 1967).
The Ghost Dance cult spread across the 
American West (Figure 40.3). Eventually, it reached 
tribes that were more activist than the Paiute, such 
as the Oglala Sioux. The increasing popularity of 
the Ghost Dance and the implications of its bullet- 
repelling power sparked a heightening of tension, 
whether as the result of the emboldened natives 
or the rising fear of the settlers and soldiers that 
an uprising was imminent (or both). The eventual 
result was the killing of several hundred Lakota 
(Sioux) at Wounded Knee in 1890, apparently in 
response to the accidental discharge of a weapon, 
which was followed by firing from both sides 
(Tebbel, 1967).
Adopting and adapting the concept as the origi­
nal inspiration wanes in aboriginal cultures, there is 
now a commercial company called Rites of Passage, 
whose website offers
Vision Quests, retreats and training programs that 
bring people into a deep encounter with the natural 
world, exploring the human-nature connection to 
reflect and transform the inner world. This work 
begins with hearing the call to quest, an impulse 
as ancient as humanity: the path of the hero/ine. It 
will appeal to men, women and young people in life 
transition or change, and to those wanting to deepen 
their spiritual path and sense of purpose. . . . These 
ceremonies, with their challenges of solitude, fasting 
and exposure to nature, help us to affirm our inner 
strengths and capacities, face our fears, and listen 
to the song of our own soul rather than the world s 
distracting drumbeat. They will appeal to people 
who are at a point of change or transition in their 
lives, and to those who wish to deepen a spiritual or 
healing path. (Rites of Passage, undated)
A brief excursion from the topics of EUEs and 
ICEs to a topic that shares one, but not all, of their 
characteristics may be informative. The virtues of 
solitude and reduced stimulation for creativity and 
contemplation have been lauded by many people
560
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

Figure 40.3. The Ghost Dance by the Oglala Lakota at Pine Ridge Agency. Drawn by Frederic Remington from “sketches taken on 
the spot.” Published in Harper's Weekly, December 6, 1890, pp. 960-961. Image in the US Library of Congress; in the public domain.
who did not find it necessary to withdraw totally 
from society (Suedfeld, 1980). The British psychia­
trist Anthony Storr (1988) published a compen­
dium of painters, composers, writers, philosophers, 
and other creative individuals who needed to live 
and work in isolation. For many, this need went 
beyond the periods while they were actually engaged 
in achieving their creations, but permeated their 
whole life. Imagination, Storr suggested, flourishes 
best in solitude. Among the writers, musicians, and 
artists who recorded their views on the benefits of 
solitude are (in no particular order) Mozart, Picasso 
(“Without great solitude no serious work is possi­
ble”), Goethe, Sandburg, Kafka, Shelley, Gauguin, 
Aldous Huxley, Emily Dickinson, Thomas Carlyle, 
and Hermann Hesse. Scientists such as Einstein 
and Tesla did likewise. We can add to the list 
Descartes, Rousseau, Virginia Woolf, and— not to 
neglect creative psychologists— Raymond Cattell 
(Axieti, 1976; Suedfeld, 1974; Suedfeld, Metcalfe, 
& Bluck, 1987).
There can be unexpected life-changing experi­
ences in EUEs, even when the person is not seeking 
them. One of the most surprising examples is the 
sudden emergence of spirituality and universalism
among those who have traveled in space. At least 
four American astronauts (Eugene Cernan, James 
Irwin, 
Edgar 
Mitchell, 
and 
Russell 
“Rusty” 
Schweickart) have disclosed such changes (Simpson,
2016).3 These ranged from a newfound belief in 
transcendental meditation and telepathic healing at 
a distance, to accepting UFOs as evidence of extra­
terrestrial intelligence, and organizing expeditions 
to look for Noah’s Ark. Four astronauts is a small 
sample, but one must remember three relevant fac­
tors. One is that these astronauts were all practical, 
hard-headed men: military test and fighter pilots 
and engineers, who had passed the grueling tests 
of coping ability under stress that piloting high- 
performance jets and the ingenuity of NASA selec­
tors had administered to them. The second is that 
NASA, the other astronauts, and the public percep­
tion of space explorers did not encourage “mystical” 
experiences. And last, these three examples are well 
known because the subsequent changes in the men’s 
values were so dramatic, public, and long-lasting. 
We do not know how many of their colleagues, 
Americans and others, had less drastic reactions or 
remained quiet about them to safeguard their image 
and space career.
5 6 1
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S

Solitude may be an important component of 
mental processes in EUEs and ICEs. Although there 
clearly is a need for human contact, its ubiquity is 
perhaps overrated in modern society. In a paper 
published over 40 years ago, I [P. S.] quoted a mar­
ginal note written in 1884 in my copy of the book 
Solitude, published 80 years earlier (Zimmerman, 
1804). James P. Marsh, the previous owner, had 
commented: “One must collect his data in the 
city, he must judge and reason upon that data in 
solitude.” My remark at that time was that the 
judgment seemed equally valid in 1973 (Suedfeld, 
1974); and, in 2 0 1 6 ,1 still think so.
Stimulus Reduction in the Laboratory and 
in Therapy
In situations of severely reduced environmen­
tal input, human beings experience disruption 
of their accustomed levels of both stimulation 
and information. These two aspects are obviously 
related, although research has shown that they are 
not synonymous (Jones, 1969). Stimulus hunger 
leads to physical activity that increases the level of 
stimulation, such as increased movement or self­
stimulation. It may also give rise to increased men­
tal activity, some cognitive, such as trying to think 
about a life problem or trying to remember exciting 
events, but others that include some sort of altered 
state of consciousness: vivid daydreams and dreams, 
out-of-body experiences, and quasi-hallucinations 
(Zubek, 1969).
Researchers at McGill University, led by the emi­
nent psychologist Donald O. Hebb, designed a pro­
cedure they named “perceptual isolation” in order 
to study the effects of monotonous and unpatterned 
stimulation. Experimental participants lay on a bed 
in a small, enclosed room, experiencing constant 
diffuse light and noise through the use of a trans­
lucent eye-shield and the transmission of white 
noise. The researchers reported the occurrence of 
complex and realistic hallucinations, including the 
iconic and often-quoted “squirrels marching across 
the visual field” (e.g., Heron, 1957). Strangely, the 
procedure and its dramatic consequences became 
known as “sensory deprivation,” although in fact 
the subjects had been exposed to sensory overload. 
Constant light and noise, 24 hours a day for several 
days, is far above the normal level of stimulation 
encountered in ordinary life (Suedfeld, 1980).
Later, overstimulation was replaced by experi­
ments employing a wide variety of techniques to 
achieve stimulus reduction. The most popular 
method was the use of dark, soundproof chambers 
(Figure 40.4). The terminology has also changed, 
to become more accurate and less anxiety-arousing. 
The terms sensory deprivation perceptual isolation, 
and so on, common in the 1950s and 1960s, have 
generally been replaced by the labels restricted envi­
ronmental stimulation technique or therapy (depend­
ing on whether the purpose is research or clinical 
treatment). Both versions are appropriately abbre­
viated to the acronym REST, which is both more
Figure 40.4. (See Color Insert) REST chamber, University of British Columbia. Photo by Peter Suedfeld.
562
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

accurate regarding the environment and free of 
the negative aura that came to surround the earlier 
labels (Suedfeld, 1980).
Subjects in REST chambers have reported spon­
taneous visual and auditory experiences uncon­
nected to any stimulus that is obviously present in 
the chamber (Zuckerman, 1969). However, these 
were very different from those reported earlier, and 
did not meet the criteria for hallucinations: the 
subjects did not believe them to be real, were able 
to make them appear and disappear, and so on 
(Suedfeld & Vernon, 1964).
A more recent method for achieving deep lev­
els of stimulus reduction is the flotation tank (Lilly, 
1977). Tanks come in a variety of designs and sizes, 
but they have some common elements. All reduce 
the levels of ambient light and sound. Tanks are
also located in an environment that itself is dark 
and sound-reducing— in a way, a REST chamber. 
They contain a dense, skin-temperature solution of 
water and Epsom salts, which is about 30 centime­
ters deep. The solution is thick and buoyant enough 
to make turning over a major effort, and to enable 
the participant to float on his or her back, with the 
face and ventral part of the body out of the water 
(Figure 40.5).
Floating in the solution has three major physi­
cal consequences: after a period of adaptation, the 
floater loses the sensation of where the skin ends and 
the ambient environment begins; the pull of grav­
ity becomes imperceptible; and as a consequence 
of the latter, the muscular tension usually needed 
to counter the pull of gravity becomes superfluous, 
and deep muscle relaxation follows. Many floaters
Figure 40.5. (See Color Insert) REST flotation tank. Reproduced by permission of Float O n LLC, Portland, OR.
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
563

report feeling as though they were floating in inter­
planetary outer space. Both the chamber and the 
tank have a range of beneficial effects, and have 
been widely used for stress management, relaxation, 
improved learning and athletic performance, and 
habit modification (Suedfeld, 1980; Suedfeld & 
Borrie, 1999). Table 40.4 summarizes some of the 
known aspects of the two major forms of REST.
REST subjects, whether in the chamber or the 
tank, have reported a great range of sensory expe­
riences. Some of these are connected to the subtle 
progression between sleep and wakefulness expe­
rienced by many: hypnagogic or hypnopompic 
images, fleeting imagery during micro-sleeps, or 
actual dreams when the subject was not aware of 
having been asleep (a common phenomenon in 
REST). Many participants report pleasant images 
and memories of varying degrees of complex­
ity, some of which are later recognized as dreams 
(Suedfeld & Borrie, 1978).
Other sensations are almost certainly due to 
actual stimuli that permeate the chamber or tank 
from the surrounding environment due to imper­
fect sound- or light-proofing. Total darkness can 
be created in either REST environment, but total 
silence is more difficult. In both modalities, the 
removal of salient stimuli would lower the sensory 
threshold so that normally undetected inputs can
Table 40.4 Established Aspects of Chamber and 
Flotation REST
Variables
Chamber
Flotation Tank
Research begun
1950s
1970s
Am bient light
None
None
Am bient sound
Residual
Residual, music
Tactile stimuli
Bedding, food, 
toilet
Epsom salts 
solution
Standard
duration
24 hours
60-90 minutes
Special aspects
Diverse
environments
Commercial
facilities
Negative
Brainwashing,
New age,
connotations
torture
mysticism
Applications
Learning, 
recall, habit 
modification, time 
out
Stress
management, 
pain relief, 
motor
performance
suddenly be sensed. In the tank, small ripples of the 
solution and the smell of the dissolved Epsom salts 
also provide low-intensity stimulation. Other sen­
sations may have arisen from endogenous stimuli 
such as bodily noises and spontaneous neural firing 
behind closed eyelids, sometimes actually keeping 
the person from falling asleep.
Many sensations, images, and spontaneous 
thoughts experienced in REST can be traced back to 
the subjects concerns in daily life. These, and some 
exploration of the immediate vicinity of one’s body, 
usually last for the first quarter-hour or so of the 
session, but some of these thoughts and daydreams 
become persistent. For example, a mother who was 
worried about her children “heard” the childrens 
voices, which became more and more insistent 
and sounded increasingly anxious. Eventually, she 
became convinced that something was wrong at 
home, and cut the session short because she could 
not shake the thought that the children were in 
danger. A man spending 24 hours in the chamber 
REST as part of a smoking cessation study kept 
thinking he smelled cigarette smoke; another, part 
of a weight-loss study, used the intercom to compli­
ment the monitor on the appetizing aroma of the 
morning coffee being brewed (which, of course, was 
not happening). Some people dream about events 
that break the monotony of the 24-hour chamber 
session: people coming in to visit, or the subject 
taking a walk or trip outside (Suedfeld & Borrie, 
1978). This can include a dream that the REST ses­
sion had been terminated, and the individual was 
back in the customary environment, sometimes 
feeling frustrated at having had to leave the cham­
ber. A writer who went into the tank in order to 
write about the experience reported,
During the first phase of every float, a sort of frantic 
summary of the immediate conditions of my life 
intermingles with random, angsty [sic] ruminations. 
The personal blends with the general, the trivial with 
the profound.
When are tax returns due? Am I eating too much 
wheat? I’m bored. Is it too hot in here? Everyone 
I know will one day die. Must remember to buy 
toilet roll. Should I be putting “all the best” or merely 
“best” at the end of my emails? Overpopulation. My 
first kiss. Can I actually muster anything meaningful 
to say about this for Aeon? What is the difference 
between flotsam and jetsam? This is what the dark 
initially provides. A psychic carnival of just about 
everything that isn’t the eminently worry-free 
present. (Owen, 2015)
564
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

After the first period of exploration and mind­
wandering, people tend to settle into a state of 
relaxed, free-flowing mental process. From the ear­
liest days of REST research, it has been clear that 
allowing and enjoying this free flow of thought, 
memory, and imagery is conducive to a pleasant 
session in the chamber or tank. Personal memo­
ries while floating tend to be those that are more 
frequently retrieved in daily life, and are on the 
whole culled from the more pleasant items in that 
storehouse (Suedfeld & Eich, 1995). Some report a 
meditative state; a Zen master who spent an hour 
floating in my own laboratory tank told me that 
although he meditated for several hours every day 
of his adult life, the depth of meditation that he had 
achieved in the tank was matched by only three or 
four that he reached during any year.
Lilly’s seminal book (1977) has a section reproduc­
ing the remarks of people who floated in his program. 
Many were veterans of Esalen and other consciousness­
expanding projects, sometimes including hallucino­
genic drugs, and they prepared for the float by reading 
Lilly’s publications. Some, but not all, of these more 
than 80 people were famous for their creative work 
in various fields. This group included the epistemolo- 
gist and systems theory pioneer Gregory Bateson; 
the satirical journalist Paul Krassner; human poten­
tial guru Werner Erhard; actor and show business 
entrepreneur Burgess Meredith, who merely found 
the tank restful; and Louis Jolyon West, the eminent 
UCLA psychiatrist. A very public and charismatic 
figure, West studied the “brainwashing” of American 
prisoners of war in Korea, the forced conversion of 
kidnap victim Patricia Hearst, hallucinations, sleep 
deprivation, and the effects of child abuse, and vocif­
erously opposed Scientology, the death penalty, and 
corporal punishment for children. He gained more 
notoriety for inadvertently administering a lethal dose 
of LSD to Tusko, a much-loved Oklahoma City zoo 
elephant, in the course of an experiment. For such 
a colorful person, West’s response to the tank was 
bland: “a smoothly unbroken flow of both digital and 
analog information. . . . Emerged refreshed” (Lilly, 
1977, p. 250). On the other hand, physics Nobelist 
Richard Feynman reported “the usual out-of-body 
or out-of-the-right-time hallucinations” [emphasis 
mine; P. S.] and judged that “the hallucinations are 
a delightful and entrancing union of spontaneity of 
detail with a pattern or set which you have made or 
can make about their overall character” (Lilly, 1977, 
pp. 199-200).
Most of Lilly’s participants floated for more than 
the now-standard hour and a half, and more than
once. Some had amazing “trips”: Myron Glatt, for 
instance, reported flying past the Orion nebula and 
then “hitting a few stars and barns and generally 
getting it on” (p. 204). Auditory sensations also 
occurred, one floater hearing many voices, com­
ing from different directions— but all of the voices 
were his own. The range of spontaneous thoughts, 
emotions, and images is vast, and for the most part 
within the range of those reported later.
Lilly himself (1977) provided us with detailed, 
unusual, but probably idiosyncratic introspections 
about what happens in the flotation tank, based on 
his neuropsychological and transcendental specula­
tions. He described leaving his own body in the tank 
and achieving contacts with “guardians”: “beings 
other than himself, not human, in whom he existed 
and who control him and other human beings” 
(p. 259). These experiences occurred in experiments 
combining flotation with LSD, one of several psy­
chotropic drugs that he ingested in the course of 
flotation studies. In this later work, he rejected 
attempts to quantify people’s experiences in REST, 
to eliminate artifacts such as expectancy effects, or 
to incorporate replications or control conditions in 
his experiments. In general, he disdained the stan­
dard parameters of scientific rigor.4
Participants in chamber studies tend to think 
about personal matters, such as their friends, or a 
specific problem they want to deal with; but the 
thoughts they rate as the most useful in passing the 
time in the chamber deal with the future or the past. 
Other useful mental activities were trying to guess 
the time, identifying sounds, and “staring at the 
wall”— presumably meaning just keeping one’s eyes 
open, since the wall would have been invisible in the 
dark chamber. The same study found that memory 
for materials learned prior to entering the chamber 
had improved by the post-session test, confirming 
previous findings of memory improvement during 
chamber REST (Suedfeld et al., 1985-1986).
Especially in 24-hour or longer chamber stud­
ies, people who try to maintain control over their 
thoughts frequently find themselves unable to do so 
for long. Many then relax and enjoy the flow, and 
even turn it into a creative reverie (as many tank 
floaters do). Psychoanalysts consider this the result 
of being comfortable with primary process ideation, 
the product of the unconscious flow uncontrolled 
by the reality-oriented ego; individuals who are not 
comfortable when this happens tend to find the 
chamber period unpleasant (Goldberger & Holt, 
1961). Although this chapter is not the place for 
a discussion of REST theories, one for which both
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
565

psychological and neurological evidence exists is 
that in REST neural processing shifts somewhat, to 
the advantage of the non-verbal, non-linear func­
tions (Suedfeld et al., 1994).
Attempts have been made to establish whether 
REST enhances creativity. Several studies of diver­
gent thinking during or after time in the chamber 
failed to find any consistent pattern; but divergent 
thinking tests are a questionable measure of creativ­
ity. “Real” creative thinking has been studied in a 
few flotation experiments. Experimenters reported 
that flotation enhanced conceptual synthesis and 
scientific thinking among chemistry students 
(Shore, 1970; Taylor, 1990), and one found that 
psychology faculty members produced more cre­
ative research and theoretical ideas after floating 
than they did during a session of sitting in their 
office (Suedfeld et al., 1987). It is interesting that 
there have been no published studies of changes in 
artistic, as opposed to scientific, creativity, except 
for one study. It reported that a small number of 
music students performing jazz improvisation were 
rated by their professor as more technically profi­
cient after several floats than a non-floating con­
trol group. However, they were not superior in 
improvisation quality. In other words, floating had 
improved their perceptual-motor skills, as it has 
been shown to do in a string of studies on sport 
performance; but its effect on creativity per se was 
moot (Vartanian & Suedfeld, 2011).
It may be that the structured procedure of the 
REST laboratory is not conducive to artistic creativ­
ity, or inviting to creative artists. The past few years 
have seen an amazing proliferation of commercial 
tank facilities, offering one or two hours of floating 
at a reasonable cost. There are at least 300 such facil­
ities in North America, with many others spread 
around the world. Many invite their customers to 
sit for a while after they leave the tank, and some 
provide writing materials for them to record their 
thoughts and feelings. So far, no one has collected 
and edited the results, but a quick look through 
some of the folders reveals drawings, poetry, short 
essays and fiction, profound musings, jokes, lim­
ericks, and so on. Vividly described visual imagery 
is common, as are thoughts about humanity, the 
Earth, and the universe.
In an innovative project, a float tank operation 
in the United States recruited 150 artists in its city 
and offered them floats in exchange for their post­
float reactions. The results have been published in 
an intriguing book (Talley & Jahromi, 2011). The 
contributions span verbal and graphic art, both
abstract and representational. A few of the pages 
communicate anger or anxiety, but most of the 
images in both modalities convey a feeling of rest­
fulness (no pun intended). There are many images 
of water, many recumbent or otherwise clearly 
relaxed human and supernatural figures, animals 
(including fish, birds, insects, and a giant snail with 
two children on its back), and a centering of the 
physical and psychological self, such as a creation 
by Cora Pearl, filled with different representations 
of the word “Breathe,” and ending with “I remem­
ber now.” Another of my favorites is Cori Kindred s 
page, with small panels around the sides showing 
drawings of plants, birds, and geometric patterns. 
The central panel depicts “My heart twinkling in 
the Dark” (Figure 40.6).
If researchers cant document the spontaneous 
creative consequences of floating, we may have been 
overlooking the most promising subject popula­
tion. But these products of the REST tank were 
physically created after the session, not during it, so 
their status as “spontaneous thought in an unusual 
environment” is arguable; and, just as in the case of 
Lilly and his project, the nature of the participants 
leaves unanswered the question of whether flotation 
enhances creativity in a general population.
“Darkness Therapy”
There have been well over a hundred published 
reports of REST (both chamber and flotation tech­
niques) being used in therapy. Most concentrate on 
the reduction of symptoms, but a few have given 
clients the opportunity to verbalize freely about 
their REST experience. There has been worldwide 
publicity about the proliferation of float centers 
during the past decade, but little attention has been 
paid to a resurgence of chamber REST, either in 
research or in applied use. Such a resurgence has 
been the use of “Darkness Therapy” in several places 
in Europe, especially in the Czech Republic (e.g., 
Kupka, Malus, Kavkova, & Nemcfk, 2014; Urbis,
2012). Although some participants are seeking a 
novel experience or a chance for self-exploration, 
many are clients in stressful life situations. They are 
looking for an opportunity to relax and regenerate, 
take time out, and concentrate on problem-solving 
in a low-demand, low-pressure environment that 
has been compared to a walk-in Rorschach blot 
in its freedom to explore the mental landscape. 
Participants may be seeking a new direction in life, 
professionally, romantically, or personally, and may 
view Darkness Therapy as a rite of passage to that 
new direction. Some use the analogy of the chamber
566
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

Figure 40.6. (See Color Insert) Art from the flotation tank. Created by Cori Kindred and reproduced by permission of the publisher and 
copyright holder, Float On.
being like the womb, from which they emerge into 
the light and a new life.
Each facility is a small, isolated building divided 
into at least two rooms, with a sound-reducing and 
light-proof wall separating the room next to the 
outside door from the inner space. This is necessary 
because the participant stays in the room for at least 
one week, and the antechamber is daily restocked 
with food and liquids as needed (stimulants and 
alcohol are barred). When that happens, the partici­
pant remains in the back room so that the condition 
of darkness, silence, and isolation is not disrupted.
Unlike in the much more restrictive REST labo­
ratory, Darkness Therapy clients are free to move
about the environment, which contains furniture, 
exercise equipment, and in some facilities a tele­
phone that connects to a monitoring station. The cli­
ent can use it to transmit any requests or problems. 
Unless asked to stay away, the therapist enters the 
facility every day for a session of interviewing and 
counseling. Clients and therapists both report that 
the course and speed of therapeutic progress is facili­
tated by the experience of darkness, recalling similar 
observations by clinicians using the older versions of 
chamber REST (Solomon et al., 1961). One of us 
(M. M.) hypothesizes that the environment creates 
an improved connection between the body and the 
mind, between reality and imagination.
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
567

Post-experience growth, analogous to post- 
traumatic growth, is well supported. For example, 
a pilot study with a non-clinical Darkness Therapy 
sample, which administered a questionnaire in a 
test-retest design, found self-reported increases in 
the experience of the meaning of life, mindfulness, 
and self-esteem; and decreases in many psycho- 
pathological categories (Kupka et al., 2014).
Visual and auditory sensations are frequent, as 
are vivid dreams. The connection between mood 
and endogenous sensation can be vivid, as in the 
following (translated from the Czech by M. M.):
With each day spent in the dark, a pallet of colours 
was growing within me which I perceived and 
could not get enough of. During the day we see 
hundreds of shades of vivid colours and it is natural 
for us. In the dark the colours were toned down 
and were changing quickly, creating patterns of 
endless shapes. . . . On the last but one day, the 
bringer did not bring me the apples I was craving.
I was so upset, I was not able to perceive anything. 
Immediately, there was a thick dark matter around 
me descending lower and lower, so in a while I had 
the impression that I had to bow my head so I do not 
bump it. Because it was on the sixth day, I proudly 
stood upright and was awaiting what was to happen 
next. I probably cursed too. Then it occurred to 
me that I could be cool about it, not getting angry 
because of a couple of apples, and as I calmed down, 
everything around me started to brighten. I could 
see the amazing shapes and their movement again.
I accepted it as a great lesson. Don't get upset, be 
yourself, do not deal with trivialities. And that is 
great art in normal life. . . . (quoted in Malus, Kupka, 
& Kavkova, 2013, p. 326)
The Darkness Therapy facility contains materials 
for clients to record their feelings and thoughts as 
these occur, as well as for doing that retrospectively. 
Figure 40.7 shows a work o f art produced by one 
such client.
Analyzing his own Darkness Therapy session, 
one o f the researchers wrote:
In breaks between individual meditation sessions the 
process of active imagination started. It was mostly a 
spontaneous process which was related to key events 
in my life. From the point of time perspective it dealt 
with the past. The images of situations and events 
were vivid and in full detail. It was an authentic 
“inner film.” What was absolutely essential for me 
was meeting my dead relatives and close people; 
their understanding, forgiveness and acceptance.
Those images were emotionally and behaviourally 
very strong, with a huge potential for personal and 
therapeutic growth.
The account continues, combining the personal 
with the professional:
Surprisingly, I was able to remember faces and 
names of my former classmates from primary school, 
stories with my first friends from the childhood.
I remembered family events and stories. They were 
unpleasant, sometimes embarrassing, anxious, 
tragic and desperate, and also lovely, funny and 
inspirational. The years of my life had passed and 
I realized how rich the life was and what was hidden 
in it. It came to mind Jung’s simile on an iceberg 
(1994) that we could see only a very small part of 
a person, that every person is more than he knows 
about himself and what he can say about himself. 
Almost all imagination material has an interpersonal 
component. It is the interpersonal recapitulation 
that we consider to be therapeutically beneficial. . . . 
Regarding staying in the darkness, silence and 
solitude we find it logical it is the solitude that evokes 
the need to fill the empty space with people. (Malus 
et al., 2014, pp. 183-186)
Not everything experienced during the week-long 
session is necessarily pleasant. One of the current 
authors (M. M.) was working through a great vari­
ety of mental states, including negative emotions, 
thoughts, and memories, during the fourth day of 
his first stay in Darkness Therapy. Experiencing 
many physiological symptoms of arousal and anxi­
ety, he developed a strong feeling that he could see a 
devils face with burning red eyes. He was filled with 
dread of insanity or death. Gradually reinterpreting 
the image as a rejected part of himself that wanted 
to be integrated, he came to accept that part of his 
personality. As a result, he wrote,
From my existential anxiety I am now experiencing 
strength, joy, gratitude and love. Is it another piece 
of the puzzle of my life fitting into its place? . ..  I am 
going to bed, it’s time to go to sleep (tomorrow 
another sizeable portion of my past is going to be 
purified). I think that the “real” stay in darkness, for 
which I came, started in earnest (and it was not for 
free)! (One of the current authors [M.M.])
Conclusion
As we have seen, extreme and unusual envi­
ronments vary tremendously along a number of 
both physical and psychological dimensions. Even 
when we restrict— as we did in this chapter— our
568
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

Figure 40.7. (See Color Insert) “Lady Darkness”: Art from Dark Therapy.
discussion only to those EUEs that are character­
ized by relatively low levels of social and sensory 
stimulation, we are left with the gamut from the 
immensity of space to the micro-environment of 
the flotation tank.
Nevertheless, we can draw at least a few con­
clusions. Perhaps the most striking is that in envi­
ronments that most people (even human behavior 
professionals) tend to consider aversive and difficult 
to tolerate, most actual participants adapt well and 
even flourish. They also tend to report feelings of 
post-experience benefits: greater self-confidence, 
courage, and optimism about the future; stronger 
belief in their own abilities; increased awareness of 
love for family and friends, care for human beings in 
general and for future generations especially.
During their time in the EUE, they can relax 
with free-flowing ideas, pleasant memories, and 
various forms of imagery. Some of that can be 
focused to deal with life problems, enhance per­
formance, make spiritual contact with a transcen­
dental world, and benefit more from counseling 
or therapy by achieving a deeper understanding of
one’s own self. Other experiences of this sort may 
just be enjoyed. The lesson, we think, is that look­
ing at events and experiences from the outside does 
not give us a trustworthy picture of what those are 
like for the people actually living through them. The 
implication of this, in turn, is that although many 
people deliberately seek out EUEs for these positive 
experiences, most of them have little sense of what 
the experience will actually be like— at least not the 
first time.
This is not to deny that there are also negative 
experiences. We have discussed the lapses of ratio­
nal thinking and awareness that can occur in EUEs 
characterized by monotony and “empty time.” Not 
all of the images conjured up in the course of EUE 
life are pleasant, and not all of the human inter­
actions are friendly. But as is so often the case, 
situations and events that look daunting and even 
traumatic to observers may be felt as much less— or 
not at all— so by participants.
Among the most intriguing spontaneous reac­
tions is the sensed presence phenomenon. Despite 
the many reports and competing theories of
569
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S

subjectively similar experiences such as hallucina­
tory, out-of-body, and near-death reports (see, e.g., 
Choi, 2011; Persinger & Makarec, 1992), the appa­
rition who actually helps still leaves everyone baf­
fled. There is an old saying that “science is the search 
for new questions.” We leave this one to the reader.
Notes
1. No study; but one of us [P. S.] has had a Long Eye event in 
an Arctic station after finishing work and while having to 
wait for several days with nothing to do because bad weather 
repeatedly delayed the scheduled air-evac flight out.
2. I [P. S.] must add one more hypothesis: out-of-body travel. 
After I described these cases at an anthropological conference, 
a member of the audience challenged the theories I had sum­
marized. She said that she was a member of a group that on 
several nights sensed an urgent need for help or rescue some­
where in the world, left their bodies, traveled to the site of 
the emergency, and helped in any way they could. They then 
returned, and next morning woke up physically tired, and 
sometimes with minor injuries such as scrapes and bruises from 
handling tools and moving rocks, dirt, construction materials, 
and so on. When she asked me why I had not mentioned this 
as the possible explanation of the “presence” phenomenon, 
all I could say was that it was outside the empirically testable 
theories that circumscribe my scientific worldview. This para­
graph should atone for my earlier omission; note, though, that 
reports of sensed groups are extremely rare.
3. I (P. S.) thank Dr. Gloria Leon for drawing this article to my 
attention.
4. In fact, he rejected the term “restricted environmental stimu­
lation technique,” and came up with his own expansion of 
“REST”: restore energy safely traveling.”
References
Arieti, S. (1976). Creativity: The magic synthesis. New York: 
Basic Books.
Barr, W. (2007). Arctic hell-ship: The voyage o/HMS Enterprise 
1850-1855. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press.
Cherry, K., & Galea, S. (2015). Resilience after trauma. In 
D. Ajdukovic, S. Kimhi, & M. Lahad (Eds.), Resiliency: 
Enhancing coping with crisis and terrorism (pp. 35-40). 
Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Cherry-Garrard, A. (1922). The worst journey in the world. 
London: Carroll & Graf.
Choi, C.Q. (2011, Sept. 12). Peace of mind: Near-death expe­
riences now have scientific explanations. Scientific American 
onhne. m http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/peace- 
of-mind-near-death/
Cousteau, J.-Y., & Dumas, F. (1953). The silent world: A story of 
undersea discovery and adventure. New York: Harper.
Dell, P. F., & O ’Neil, J. A. (2009). Dissociation and the dissocia­
tive disorders: DSM-Vand beyond. New York: Routledge. 
Firth, J. (1998). Yukon quest: The 1000-mile dog race through the 
Yukon and Alaska. Pender Harbour, Canada: Harbour.
Geiger, J. (2009). The third man factor: Surviving the impossible. 
New York: Weinstein.
Goldberger, L., & Holt, R. R. (1961). Experimental interference 
with reality contact: Individual differences. In P. Solomon 
et al. (Eds.), Sensory deprivation (pp. 130-142). Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Heron, W. (1957). The pathology of boredom. Scientific 
American, 196, 52—56.
Jaynes, J. (1982). The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of 
the bicameral mind. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnson, P. J., & Suedfeld, P. (1996). Coping with stress through 
the microcosms of home and family among Arctic whalers 
and explorers. The History of the Family, 1, 41—62.
Johnson, P. J. (2013). The roles of NASA, U.S. astronauts, and 
their families in long-duration missions. In D. A. Vakoch 
(Ed.), On orbit and beyond (pp. 69-89). Heidelberg: Springer.
Jones, A. (1969). Stimulus-seeking behavior. In J. P. Zubek (Ed.), 
Sensory deprivation: Fifteen years of research (pp. 167—206). 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Kanas, N., Sandal, G. M., Boyd, J. E., Gushin, V.I., Manzey, D., 
North, R., Leon, G.R., Suedfeld, P., Bishop, S.I., Fiedler, E.R., 
Inoue, I., Johannes, B., Kealey, D.J., Kraft, N.O., Matsuzaki, 
I., Musson, D., Palinkas, L.A., Salnitskiy, V.P., Sipes, W., 
Stuster, J., & Wang, J. (2013). Psychology and culture during 
long-duration space missions. In D. A.Vakoch (Ed.), On orbit 
and beyond (pp. 153-184). Heidelberg: Springer.
Kingsley, C. (1869). The hermits. New York: McClennan. http:// 
www.online-literature.com/charles-kingsley/the-hermits/
Kupka, M., Malus, M., Kavkova, V., & Nemcfk, P. (2014). 
Terapeuticke a osobnl rustove moznosti techniky omezene zevnl 
stimulace: lecebne vyuzitt terapie tmou a floatingu. [ Therapeutic 
and personal growth possibilities in restricted environmental 
stimulation: Darkness therapy andflotation]. Olomouc, Czech 
Republic: Univerzita Palackeho v Olomouci.
Lilly, J. C. (1977). The deep self. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Malus, M., Kupka, M., & Kavkova, V. (2013). Technika ome­
zene zevnf stimulace (REST): Vypovedi ze tmy. [Restricted 
Environmental Stimulation Technique (REST): Statements 
from the dark]. In A. Neusar & L. Vavrysova (Eds.), 
Kvalitativnlpnstup a metody ve veddch o cloveku XII: Hranice 
normality (pp. 322—330) [Qualitative approach and methods 
in the science of human beings XII: The boundaries of normal­
ity] . Olomouc, Czech Republic: Univerzita Palackeho.
Malus, M., Kupka, M., & Kavkova, V. (2014, March). My first 
week in darkness: Chamber REST experience. Proceedings of 
the First Biannual CER Research Track Conference (pp. 183— 
186). London: Sciemcee.
Markstrom, C. A. (2008). Empowerment of North American 
Indian girls: Ritual expressions at puberty. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press.
Mocellin, J. S. P. & Suedfeld, P. (1991). Voices from the ice: 
Diaries of polar explorers. Environment and Behavior, 23, 
704-722.
Mooney, J. (1896). The Ghost Dance religion and Wounded Knee. 
New York: Dover Publications.
Mullane, M. (2006). Riding rockets. New York: Scribner.
Owen, M. M. (2015). Into the deep. Aeon online, https:// 
aeon.co / essays/climb-in-float-off-zone-out-why-floatation- 
blows-my-mind
Persinger, M. A., & Makarec, K. (1992). The feeling of a pres­
ence and verbal meaningfulness in context of temporal lobe 
function: Factor analytic verification of the Muses? Brain and 
Cognition, 20, 217-226.
Rites of Passage (undated), http://www.ritesofpassagevisionquest.org/
Savage, C. W. (1975). The continuity of perceptual and cognitive 
experiences. In R. K. Siegel & J. L. West (Eds.), Hallucinations, 
behavior, experience, and theory. New York: Wiley.
Shackleton, E. (1919). South: The story of Shackletons last expedi­
tion 1914—1917. London: Century.
570
S P O N T A N E O U S  M E N T A L  E X P E R I E N C E S  I N  E X T R E M E  A N D  U N U S U A L  E N V I R O N M E N T S

Shepard, A. (1991). Interview for Academy of Achievement. 
http://achievement.org/autodoc/printmember/sheOint-l
Shore, E. (1970). Sensory deprivation, preconscious processes 
and scientific thinking. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry., 
41, 574-580.
Simpson, D. (2016). The metaphysical astronauts. http://moth- 
erboard.vice.com/read/the-metaphysical-astronauts
Slocum, J. (1900). Sailing alone around the world. London: 
Century.
Solomon, P., Kubzansky, P. E., Leiderman, P. H. Jr., Mendelson, 
J. H., Trumbull, R., & Wexler, D. (Eds.) (1961). Sensory 
deprivation: A symposium held at Harvard Medical School. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Storr, A. (1988). Solitude: A return to the self. New York: Free Press.
Suedfeld, P. (1974). Social isolation: A case for interdisciplinary 
research. Canadian Psychologist, 15, 1—15.
Suedfeld, P. (1980). Restricted environmental stimulation: Research 
and clinical applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Suedfeld, P. (2 0 1 2). Extreme and unusual environments: 
Challenges and responses. In S. Clayton (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of environmental and conservation psychology (pp. 
348-371). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Suedfeld, R, Ballard, E. J., Baker-Brown, G., & Borrie, R. A. 
(1985-1986). Flow of consciousness in restricted environ­
mental stimulation. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 
5, 219-230.
Suedfeld, P., & Borrie, R. A. (1978). Altering states of conscious­
ness through sensory deprivation. In A. A. Sugerman & R. 
E. Tarter (Eds.), Expanding dimensions of consciousness (pp. 
226-252). New York: Springer.
Suedfeld, P., & Borrie, R. A. (1999). Health and therapeutic 
applications of chamber and flotation restricted environ­
mental stimulation therapy (REST). Psychology and Health, 
14, 545-566.
Suedfeld, P., & Eich, E. (1995). Autobiographical memory and 
affect under conditions of reduced environmental stimula­
tion. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 15, 321—326.
Suedfeld, P., & Geiger, J. (2008). Sensed presence as cop­
ing resource in extreme environments. In R. W. Hood, Jr. 
(Ed.), Mysticism and the paranormal (Vol. 3, pp. 1—15). 
New York: Praeger.
Suedfeld, P., Metcalfe, J., & Bluck, S. (1987). Enhancement 
of scientific creativity by flotation REST (Restricted 
Environmental 
Stimulation 
Technique). 
Journal 
of 
Environmental Psychology, 7, 219—231.
Suedfeld, P., & Mocellin, J. S. P. (1987). The “sensed presence” in 
unusual environments. Environment and Behavior, 19, 33—52.
Suedfeld, P., Steel, G. D., Wallbaum, A. B. C., Bluck, S., Livesey, 
N., & Capozzi, L. (1994). Explaining the effects of stimu­
lus restriction: Testing the dynamic hemispheric asymmetry 
hypothesis. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 14, 87—100.
Suedfeld, P., & Vernon, J. A. (1964). Visual hallucinations in 
sensory deprivation: A problem of criteria. Science, 145, 
412-413.
Talley, G., & Jahromi, A. (Eds.) (2011). Artwork from the void. 
Portland, OR: Write On.
Taylor, T. 
(1990). 
The 
effects 
of flotation 
Restricted 
Environmental Stimulation therapy on learning: Subjective 
evaluation and EEG measurement. In P. Suedfeld, J. W. 
Turner, Jr., & T. H. Fine (Eds.), Restricted environmental 
stimulation: Theoretical and empirical developments in flotation 
REST (pp. 125-134). New York: Springer Verlag.
Tebbel, J. (1967). The compact history of the Indian Wars. 
New York: Tower.
Ueshiba, M. (undated), http://www.hermitary.com/sayings/
Urbis. A. A. (2 0 1 2). Terapie tmou [Darkness therapy]. Brno, 
Czech Republic: ALPRESS.
Vartanian, O., & Suedfeld, P. (2 0 1 1). The effect of the flotation ver­
sion of restricted environmental stimulation technique (REST) 
on jazz improvisation. Music and Medicine, 3, 234—238.
“Whirling Dervishes” (undated), http://whirlingdervishes.org/ 
whirlingdervishes.htm
Wortley, J. (Ed.). (2013). The anonymous sayings of the Desert 
Fathers: A select edition and complete English translation. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Zimmerman, J. G. (1804). Solitude. London: Vernon & Hood.
Zubek, J. P. (Ed.) (1969). Sensory deprivation: Fifteen years of 
research. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Zuckerman, M. (1969). Hallucinations, reported sensa­
tions, and images. In J. P. Zubek (Ed.), Sensory depriva­
tion: Fifteen years of research (pp. 85—125). New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
P E T E R  S U E D F E L D ,  A. D E N N I S  R A N K ,  A N D  M A R E K  M A L U S
57i


C H A P T E R
41
Cultural Neurophenomenology of 
Psychedelic Thought: Guiding the 
“Unconstrained” Mind Through 
Ritual Context
Michael Lifshitz, Eli Oda Sheiner, and Laurence J. Kirmayer
Abstract
This chapter explores psychedelics as catalysts of spontaneous thought. Classic serotonergic psychedelics 
such as psilocybin, LSD, and ayahuasca can induce potent alterations in cognition and perception. The 
chapter reviews research on these substances through the lens of cultural neurophenomenology, 
which aims to trace how neurobiology and sociocultural factors interact to shape experience. After 
a decades-long hiatus, the scientific study of psychedelics is rediscovering the potential of these 
substances to promote creative insight, evoke mystical experiences, and improve clinical outcomes. 
Moreover, neuroimaging experiments have begun to unravel the influence of psychedelics on large- 
scale connectivity networks of the human brain. Tapping perspectives from the social sciences, the 
chapter underscores how culture and context constrain the flexible cognitive states brought about 
by psychedelics. This integrative approach suggests that seemingly spontaneous psychedelic thought 
patterns reflect a complex interaction of biological, cognitive, and cultural factors—from pharmacology 
and brain function to ritual, belief, and expectation.
Key Words: psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca, psychedelic, cognition, mystical experience, 
neurophenomenology
Psychedelic substances can profoundly alter the 
phenomenology of thought. The term psychedelic 
(from the Greek psyche, ^yy), meaning “spirit” or 
“self,” and deloun, Svjlouv, meaning “to reveal”) 
denotes a broad range of natural and synthetic sub­
stances that evoke a variety of culturally mediated 
experiences, including atypical visual and auditory 
phenomena, shifts in temporal and spatial percep­
tion, and intense emotions ranging from terror to 
wonder. Although the empirical study of psychedel­
ics began in earnest only in the twentieth century, 
cultural groups have consumed psychedelic plants 
in ritualized contexts for millennia (Schultes, 1972). 
The use of these substances may pose social and psy­
chological risks when ingested without prudence,
but they can also be consumed safely (Johansen & 
Krebs, 2015; Nutt, King, Saulsbury, & Blakemore, 
2007). Indeed, psychedelics continue to play a vital 
role in many spiritual and healing practices around 
the world (Goldsmith, 2010).
Throughout the history of experimental research 
on psychedelics, scholars have often emphasized 
the capacity of these pharmacological agents to 
loosen the hold of habit over patterns of thought 
(Busch & Johnson, 1950; Cohen, 1964; Huxley, 
1977). A growing body of empirical evidence lends 
support to this view: experimental findings indicate 
that classical serotonergic psychedelics such as psi­
locybin (found in over 200 species of mushrooms), 
ayahuasca 
(an 
Amazonian 
plant-based 
brew
573

containing 
dimethyltryptamine— i.e., 
DM T—  
and monoamine oxidase inhibitors), and lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD) can increase the flex­
ibility of human brain function, promote creative 
insights, foster therapeutic outcomes, and engen­
der mystical experiences (Carhart-Harris, Leech, 
et al., 2014; Chambers, 2014; Fadiman, 2011; 
Richards, 2015).
Subjective reports of experiences with psyche­
delic substances frequently highlight the uncon­
strained, spontaneous nature of the phenomena, 
which are often described as involuntary, surpris­
ing, and profoundly different from ordinary expe­
rience. However, the anthropological literature 
suggests that psychedelic experiences are strongly 
constrained by social factors related to culture, con­
text, and individual disposition (Dobkin de Rios, 
1972; 1984; Labate & Cavnar, 2014; Langlitz, 
2012). Indeed, ethnographic research documents a 
wide range of ritual practices among diverse cultural 
groups that aim to evoke specific experiences or to 
strategically direct the flow of thought stimulated 
by psychedelics to achieve personal and social ben­
efits (Calabrese, 2013).
In this chapter, we focus on classical psychedel­
ics, which act primarily on the serotonin receptor 
system, and leave out discussion of other neigh­
boring classes of substances, including dissocia­
tive psychedelics (e.g., ketamine) and entactogens 
(e.g., MDMA). While these other substances are 
sometimes referred to as psychedelics, they involve 
distinct albeit overlapping alterations in phenom­
enology, display different neurochemical binding 
properties, and likely exert their behavioral and 
experiential effects through separate mechanisms 
(Nichols, 2004).
We approach classical serotonergic psychedelics 
in terms of cultural neurophenomenology, which aims 
to trace how neurobiology and sociocultural knowl­
edge and practice interact to give rise to experience. 
We synthesize quantitative experimental data with 
qualitative accounts, including from ethnographic 
fieldwork by one of the lead authors of this chap­
ter studying a transnational religion centered on 
the ritual consumption of the ayahuasca brew (Oda 
Sheiner, 2016). We begin by reviewing research 
that examines how psychedelics impact functional 
organization among brain networks related to per­
ception, higher-order control, and spontaneous 
thought. We then explore the implications of this 
supposedly unconstrained cognitive state by exam­
ining psychedelic effects on creative thinking, mys­
tical experience, and therapeutic practice. In the
final sections of this chapter, we incorporate eth­
nographic and social scientific perspectives to illus­
trate how culture and context constrain the flexible 
cognitive states brought about by psychedelics. This 
approach allows us to explore nuances of interac­
tions between phenomenology and ritual context 
that complement laboratory findings grounded in 
behavioral, cognitive, and neuroscientific investiga­
tion. The integrative perspective we present suggests 
that seemingly spontaneous psychedelic thought 
patterns reflect a complex interaction of biologi­
cal, cognitive, and cultural factors— from phar­
macology and brain function to ritual, belief, and 
expectations.
Historical Context
Research on psychedelics has been strongly influ­
enced by prevailing cultural attitudes toward sub­
stance use. The theoretical models, assumptions, 
and goals that researchers have historically brought 
to bear to examine psychedelics have shaped the 
very experiences they aimed to understand. For 
example, researchers in the mid-twentieth century 
typically viewed psychedelic experiences as models 
or mimics of psychoses, hence the designation of 
“psychotomimetics” (Dyck, 2006; Hoffer, 1970; 
Osmond, 1957). Research on psychedelics was pur­
sued because it might shed light on schizophrenia 
or other psychiatric disorders. Some researchers 
even encouraged clinicians to try LSD themselves 
in order to empathize with their patients and obtain 
a deeper understanding of psychotic experience 
(Dyck, 2006; Sessa, 2005; Pahnke, Kurland, Unger, 
Savage, & Grof, 1970).
Although the study of psychedelics as a model 
for psychosis persists to this day (e.g., Geyer & 
Vollenweider, 2008; Steeds, Carhart-Harris, & 
Stone, 2015), it was not long before researchers 
emphasized important differences between psy­
chedelic and psychotic experiences— most notably, 
that judicious psychedelic use often yields toward 
positive experiences, while psychosis is more often 
marked by distress (Osmond, 1957; for a contem­
porary study addressing these issues, see Carhart- 
Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016). Around 
the same time, researchers began to note the poten­
tial for psychedelics to catalyze vivid spiritual and 
mystical experiences (Huxley, 1954; Panhke, 1963). 
Moreover, positive subject reports, as well as over­
laps between psychedelic experiences and clinical 
conditions, inspired clinicians to begin experiment­
ing with the use of these substances in therapy 
(Osmond, 1957; Pahnke et al., 1970).
574
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

The striking variety of responses induced via 
pharmacologically identical agents led early theo­
rists to emphasize the role of contextual factors in 
shaping psychedelic outcomes (Mogar, 1965). As 
described in a guidebook penned by a group of 
Harvard scholars— including Timothy Leary—  
that promoted psychedelic culture, therapy, and 
spirituality: “the nature of the experience depends 
almost entirely on set and setting. Set denotes the 
preparation of the individual, including his person­
ality structure and his mood at the time. Setting 
is physical— the weather, the rooms atmosphere; 
social— feelings of persons present towards one 
another; and cultural— prevailing views as to what is 
real” (Leary, Metzner, & Alpert, 1964/1971, p. 9).
By the 1960s, more than 40,000 subjects had 
participated in studies on psychedelics, and more 
than 1,000 clinical papers had been published 
(Grinspoon & Bakalar, 1979). Access to psyche­
delic substances trickled from university and hospi­
tal laboratories into the public. Excessive claims and 
misuses began to surface from both researchers and 
recreational users, and associations between psy­
chedelics and countercultural movements became 
increasingly salient. Eventually, prominent mem­
bers of the medical establishment urged government 
agencies to tighten regulation of psychedelics. For 
example, psychiatrist Roy Grinker, then-president 
of the American Medical Association, accused 
researchers of “using uncontrolled, unscientific 
methods. In fact, these professionals are widely 
known to participate in drug ingestion, rendering 
their conclusions biased by their own ecstasy. . . . 
The psychotomimetics are being “bootlegged,” 
and as drugs now under scientific investigation 
they are being misused” (Grinker, 1964, pp. 768). 
By the end of the 1960s, recreational use of psy­
chedelics was largely illegal, and research on these 
substances entered a hiatus (Grinspoon & Bakalar, 
1979; Grob, 1994). Following almost three decades 
of silence, the past 20 years have witnessed a revival 
of empirical research on psychedelics, with rigorous 
demonstrations of safety and therapeutic effects, 
and a growing body of work exploring cognitive 
and neurobiological mechanisms (Langlitz, 2012; 
Pollan, 2015; Sessa, 2012).
Spontaneity, Flexibility, and Constraints
Many prominent theoretical models frame psy­
chedelics as substances that loosen or unconstrain 
cognition by promoting novel, spontaneous con­
nections among thoughts, emotions, and sensa­
tions that are typically disparate (Carhart-Harris,
Leech, et al., 2014). For example, a hallmark fea­
ture of psychedelic phenomenology is synesthesia­
like experience, in which perception in one sensory 
or cognitive modality activates sensation in a dif­
ferent modality (e.g., tasting sound, or seeing col­
ors in response to digits; Luke & Terhune, 2013; 
Shanon, 2002). Compared to congenital synesthe­
sia, however, synesthesia-like associations induced 
via psychedelics seem less consistent and not as 
specific to the triggering stimulus (e.g., after tak­
ing LSD, seeing the number seven might some­
times trigger a sense of the color green, but might 
other times trigger the sense of a different color 
or no sense of color at all; Terhune et al., 2016). 
Historically, some psychodynamic clinicians viewed 
psychedelic substances as “psycholytic” (i.e., mind­
loosening) to emphasize their value for unlocking 
latent associations essential to the course of therapy 
(Gasser, 1994; Madsen, 0yslebo, & Hoffart, 1996). 
Contemporary approaches continue to emphasize 
the fluid associative quality of psychedelic experi­
ences (Letheby, 2015; Majic, Schmidt, & Gallinat, 
2015; Shanon, 2002).
But what do we actually mean when we call 
thought “spontaneous” or “unconstrained”? In 
the context of the present volume, the notion of 
spontaneous thought arises from ongoing work in 
cognitive science that recognizes the importance 
of studying what the mind and brain do in the 
absence of, or when tuning out, external stimuli 
or task demands (Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, 
& Spreng, 2014; Christoff, Gordon, Smallwood, 
Smith, & Schooler, 2009; Mason et al., 2007). 
One leading perspective defines “self-generated” 
thought as “mental contents that are not derived 
directly 
from 
immediate 
perceptual 
input” 
(Smallwood & Schooler, 2015, p. 489). Cognitive 
scientists have proposed a variety of terms to 
delineate this inner world of cognition: spon­
taneous thought, daydreaming, self-generated 
thought, mind-wandering, undirected thought, 
stimulus-independent 
thought, 
task-unrelated 
thought— the list goes on. As the diversity of 
contributions to this volume attests, these terms 
encompass a wide spectrum of experiences, from 
recalling memories and imagining the future to 
thinking creatively and dreaming. The editors of 
this book propose a helpful taxonomy that further 
specifies the spontaneity of thought in terms of 
types of constraint (Christoff et al., 2016). This 
framework describes two main types of constraint 
on the content and flow of thought: (1) deliber­
ate constraint by cognitive control, such as when
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
575

effortfully attempting to recall the name of your 
first love; and (2) autom atic constraint operating 
involuntarily, such as when thoughts about the 
object of your infatuation intrude during attempts 
to write a chapter.
How does psychedelic phenomenology map 
onto this framework? While psychedelic substances 
may be deliberately ingested, the subsequent 
thought patterns and sensory experiences are often 
viewed as unpredictable and largely involuntary. 
However, as we shall discuss, in many instances of 
ritualized or therapeutic use a measure of deliberate 
constraint or control is exerted by explicit instruc­
tions or other situational factors. For instance, lis­
tening to music plays a key role in many rituals of 
psychedelic healing (Kaelen et al., 2016; Shanon, 
2002). Such external constraints may drive specific 
content, emotional tone, or even the impression 
of having no control over the experience. In gen­
eral, psychedelics likely reduce both deliberate and 
automatic constraints over the content and flow of 
thought, as well as over the processing and inter­
pretation of outside stimuli. In terms of phenom­
enology, psychedelics tend to impede the ability 
to voluntarily control the content and progression 
of thought (Shanon, 2002). The stream of psyche- 
delically mediated visions, sounds, and associations 
is typically experienced as less deliberate and pre­
dictable than everyday thinking, sometimes to the 
point that it seems to flow from an outside source 
(Oda Sheiner, 2016; Strassman, 2000). As we will 
see later in this chapter, the reduction of such vol­
untary and automatic constraints may help foster 
novel associations in creative thinking, open a space 
for atypical modes of subjectivity in mystical expe­
rience, and help overcome maladaptive patterns of 
behavior in therapy.
O f course, even when constraints may appear 
low, our thoughts are inexorably bound to our 
personal histories and broader sociocultural sur­
roundings. Ethnographic and enactivist per­
spectives in cognitive science argue that our 
experiences and expectations— embedded in the 
narratives, symbols, body practices, and scripts of 
specific social and cultural contexts— influence 
the content and process of thought at the most 
basic levels of attention, sensation, and percep­
tion (Barsalou, 2008; Han et al., 2013; Hinton, 
Howes, & Kirmayer, 2008; Kay & Kempton, 
1984; Ramstead, Veissiere, & Kirmayer, 2016). 
No matter how seemingly spontaneous, no 
thought is completely free from such situational 
constraints. For example, although psychedelic
experiences often involve seemingly self-generated 
perceptions, the specific content of these manifes­
tations tend to reflect personal stories and cultural 
concerns— as in the case of religious psychedelic 
users in Canada, who sometimes report visual and 
auditory phenomena ascribed to local Aboriginal 
spirits (Oda Sheiner, 2016). While the influence 
of individual and cultural context likely holds 
for most forms of human thinking, it is partic­
ularly pertinent in the context of psychedelics. 
Paradoxically, by virtue of being less constrained 
by voluntary control and certain automatic cog­
nitive patterns, the psychedelic mind may in fact 
become more susceptible to the influence of cues 
arising from individual history and social environ­
ment. The psychedelic mind, we propose, is akin 
to a clay sculpture that, when wet, becomes more 
pliable and therefore more readily shaped by the 
forces of culture and context.
Neuroplasticity is basic to learning and adapta­
tion. Many practices of healing may function by 
inducing cognitive flexibility or an enhanced abil­
ity to shift: psychological sets (Kashdan, 2010). 
Flexibility as such, 
however, 
is not enough. 
Interventions that heal seem to do so by at once 
enhancing flexibility and providing symbolic ritual 
frameworks that encourage shifts to more positive 
mental states marked by openness and optimism 
(Hinton & Kirmayer, 2017). In the case of psyche­
delics, the unconstrained mental state may be highly 
labile or volatile. Feelings of overwhelming anxiety, 
isolation, and confusion surface as readily as expe­
riences of peace, empathy, and insight (Masters & 
Houston, 2000; Shanon, 2002). While popular 
notions of spontaneity may bring to mind states of 
hedonic, free-and-easy play, the spontaneity induced 
by psychedelics is more capricious. Psychedelic 
spontaneity is not inherently pleasant, creative, or 
beneficial; it can at times involve intensely negative 
imagery and emotions, or the disorganized thought 
patterns characteristic of psychotic distress (Carhart- 
Harris, Kaelen, et al., 2016; Osmond, 1957). Thus, 
promoting healing with psychedelics likely requires 
constraining the unconstrained mind through sym­
bolic situational cues and embodied rituals that 
emphasize the potential to move from maladaptive 
patterns toward constructive states and behaviors. 
We will return to such rituals later in this chapter. 
First, we will flesh out the notion of unconstrained 
cognition in empirical terms, beginning at the level 
of neurobiology and working our way up to its 
expression in domains of creativity, mystical experi­
ence, and therapeutic practice.
576
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

Psychedelics Unconstrain Cognitive Brain 
Function
A mounting body of neuroscientific evidence 
supports the general theory that psychedelics 
unconstrain cognition. In this section, we provide a 
selective review of the emerging cognitive neurosci­
ence of psychedelics, focusing on findings that con­
cern the flexibility, disorganization, and integration 
of brain function (for a concise review of these find­
ings accessible to non-experts, see Carhart-Harris, 
Kaelen, & Nutt, 2014; for more in-depth reviews, 
see Carhart-Harris, Leech, et al., 2014; Halberstadt,
2015). At the molecular level, converging work 
with both animal and human models indicate that 
classical psychedelics (such as psilocybin, LSD, 
and ayahuasca) function primarily as agonists at 
the serotonergic 5-HT2A receptor (Nichols, 2004; 
Vollenweider, 
Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, 
Babler, Vogel, & Hell, 1998). Studies have asso­
ciated 5-HT2A receptor signaling with cognitive 
flexibility (Boulougouris, Glennon, & Robbins, 
2008; King, Martin, & Melville, 1974), asso­
ciative learning (Harvey 2003; Romano et al.,
2010) and cortical neuroplasticity (Gewirtz, Chen, 
Terwilliger, Duman, & Marek, 2002; Vaidya, 
Marek, Aghajanian, & Duman, 1997). As noted by 
Carhart-Harris et al. (2015), such findings support 
the proposal that 5-HT2A signaling via psychedel­
ics may promote the plastic reorganization of neural 
circuits.
At the systems level, a number of neuroimaging 
studies have converged on the notion that psychedel­
ics dampen key hubs of cortical integration that are 
closely tied to self-generated thought processes. In 
particular, recent studies from multiple independent 
groups using a variety of imaging techniques (i.e., 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 
magnetoencephalography (MEG), 
and electro­
encephalography (EEG) have linked serotonergic 
psychedelic effects (i.e., intravenous psilocybin and 
LSD, as well as ingested ayahuasca) to alterations 
within the default mode network (DMN; Bouso 
et al., 2015; Carhart-Harris et al., 2012; Carhart- 
Harris et al., 2016; Kometer, Pokorny, Seifritz, & 
Vollenweider, 2015; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 
2013; Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015). The DM N 
is a network of brain regions that show increased 
activity when the person is “at rest” in the scanner, 
that is, in the absence of external stimuli or task 
demands (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 
2008). 
Behavioral 
and 
neuroimaging 
reports 
reveal that, when attention is free from external 
demands, the mind tends to wander spontaneously
through internally-directed thoughts that often 
converge on the sense of self (for a review, see 
Smallwood & Schooler et al., 2015). DM N activ­
ity correlates with such mind-wandering (Mason 
et al., 2007; Christoff et al., 2009; Hasenkamp, 
Wilson-Mendenhall, Duncan, & Barsalou, 2012; 
Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014; but see Fox, Spreng, 
Ellamil, Andrews-Hanna, & Christoff, 2015). In 
addition, the DM N activates in response to tasks 
that recruit an internal locus of attention, includ­
ing self-referential thought, social cognition, meta­
cognition, and moral decision-making (Buckner 
et al., 2008). Based on these findings, some theo­
rists have proposed the DM N as a potential neural 
substrate of narrative selfhood (Qin & Northoff,
2011) or even of the Freudian ego (Carhart-Harris 
& Friston, 2010).
In line with such perspectives, an MEG study 
examining the acute effects of psilocybin found that 
decreases in alpha power localized to the posterior 
cingulate cortex (a key DM N hub) correlated with 
first-person reports endorsing the “ego-dissolution” 
item, “I experienced a disintegration of my ‘self’ or 
ego’” (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013). A more 
recent multimodal (i.e., MEG and fMRI) imag­
ing study replicated this result with LSD, and fur­
ther showed that ratings of ego-dissolution were 
correlated with DM N disintegration— that is, 
the extent to which regions of the DM N became 
less 
functionally 
connected 
(Carhart-Harris, 
Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016). In a separate 
account from the same group, LSD was found to 
reduce mental time travel to scenarios from the 
past, and this reduction correlated with the degree 
of DM N disintegration (Speth et al., 2016). As we 
will see in more detail later in the chapter, such 
alterations in self-related thinking and dissolutions 
of ego boundaries are important facets of classical 
psychedelic-induced mystical experiences.
Imaging findings examining the effects of 
ingested ayahuasca are largely consistent with the 
results concerning intravenous psilocybin and LSD. 
An fMRI study with the Amazonian brew showed 
decreased activity within the DM N, as well as 
decreased connectivity within the posterior cingu­
late cortex (Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015). However, 
this study did not replicate the reduction in con­
nectivity between medial prefrontal and posterior 
cingulate DM N nodes observed in experiments 
with LSD and psilocybin. A separate morphomet­
ric study reported that long-term ritual ayahuasca 
users displayed thinning of gray matter in poste­
rior cingulate structures, and that the degree of
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
577

thinning correlated with self-report scores of self­
transcendence (Bouso et al., 2015). It is worth not­
ing that the posterior cingulate cortex and other 
structures of the DM N consume more energy 
(Raichle & Snyder, 2007) and receive more blood 
flow (Zou, Wu, Stein, Zang, & Yang, 2009) than 
any other regions of the brain. Furthermore, the 
posterior cingulate houses the richest density of 
cortico-cortical connections in the brain (Hagmann 
et al., 2008) and has been proposed as a cortical 
hub facilitating communication among large-scale 
networks (van den Heuval, Kahn, Goni, & Sporns,
2012). Thus, converging evidence from multiple 
imaging modalities, pharmacological substances, 
and methods of administration associates the sero­
tonergic psychedelic experience with decreased 
activity and connectivity in one of the most impor­
tant integrative networks of the human brain, 
the DM N (Bouso et al., 2015; Carhart-Harris 
et al., 2012; Carhart-Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, 
et al., 2016; Kometer, Pokorny, Seifritz, 
& 
Vollenweider, 2015; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 
2013; Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015; Speth et al., 
2016; although at least one fMRI report was unable 
to replicate this predicted DM N effect: Lebedev 
et al., 2015). At first glance these findings might 
seem to indicate that psychedelics render the brain 
less associative (because the DM N connects dispa­
rate regions) or less prone to self-generated think­
ing (because such thinking typically correlates with 
DM N activity); however, the findings we survey in 
the next paragraphs suggest that the dampening of 
activity in this core default network may in fact free 
up other brain processes related to self-generated 
thought and encourage the brain to adopt more 
novel connectivity states.
Cognitive neuroscientists have begun to draw 
functional distinctions between the DM N core (i.e, 
posterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex) 
and its subsystems (i.e, medial temporal lobes and 
lateral parietal regions). Christoff and colleagues
(2016) recently proposed that the DM N core may 
implement automatic constraints on internally ori­
ented thought, which would suggest that reduced 
activity and connectivity in this core network should 
result in weaker automatic constraints on thought. 
This prediction aligns with the imaging results 
reviewed in the previous paragraph, which reveal 
that psychedelic states are associated with dampen­
ing and disintegration of the core DM N. On the 
other hand, Christoff and colleagues (2016) propose 
that the medial-temporal lobe (MTL) subsystem of 
the DM N may actually be a source of variability
in self-generated thought. The MTL— made up of 
the amygdala, hippocampal and parahippocampal 
regions, entorhinal cortex, and septal nuclei— plays 
an important role in memory, thought, and affect. 
Altered activity in MTL regions has been implicated 
in REM sleep, psychosis, depersonalization, and 
dreamlike experiences such as deja vu and waking 
hallucinations (see Carhart-Harris, 2007; Carhart- 
Harris & Nutt, 2014; Zmigrod, Garrison, Carr, 
& Simons, 2016). In addition, studies dating back 
to the 1950s and 1960s used intracranial depth- 
electrodes in humans to demonstrate that ingestion 
of serotonergic psychedelics including LSD and 
mescaline was associated with altered activity in the 
MTL (e.g., Monroe & Heath, 1961; Schwarz, Sem- 
Jacobsen, & Petersen, 1956).
More recent neuroimaging studies corroborate 
the link between the MTL and psychedelic experi­
ence. One experiment found that psilocybin inges­
tion led individual brains to show increased temporal 
variance in the fMRI signal from MTL structures; 
these MTL changes, moreover, correlated with 
reports of a feeling of dreaminess (Carhart-Harris, 
Leech, et al., 2014). In another study, reports of 
mental imagery while listening to music on LSD 
were associated with increased effective connectivity 
(calculated via Bayesian Dynamic Causal Modeling) 
between the parahippocampus (a key hub of the 
MTL system) and the primary visual cortex (Kaelen 
et al., 2016). This specific result accords with the 
more general finding that reports of mental imagery 
while under the influence of LSD correlated with 
increased connectivity between primary visual cor­
tex and a strikingly wide swath of cortical regions 
(Carhart-Harris, 
Muthukumaraswamy, 
et 
al.,
2016). Two additional studies from the same group 
showed that, following infusion of either psilocybin 
or LSD, MTL structures functionally decoupled 
from a variety of neocortical regions including those 
involved in a sensorimotor network, frontoparietal 
control network, and salience network (Carhart- 
Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016; Lebedev 
et al., 2015). Crucially, in both studies the degree 
of decoupling between the MTL and neocortical 
regions correlated with self-reported ratings of ego 
dissolution (Carhart-Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, 
et al., 2016; Lebedev et al., 2015).
Based on their findings, Carhart-Harris and col­
leagues hypothesized that psychedelics may soften con­
straints implemented by higher-order control regions 
over activity in the MTL subsystem (Carhart-Harris, 
Leech, et al., 2014; Lebedev et al., 2015). According 
to this theoretical proposal, the decoupling of MTL
578
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

processes from control regions— including from the 
DM N core— may promote flexibility among thought 
patterns and may contribute to the sense of ego disso­
lution common in psychedelic experiences. Another 
research group recently proposed a related model of 
psychedelic brain function that also centers on a shift 
in top-down control mechanisms, albeit operation­
alized in different brain regions (Alonso, Romero, 
Mananas, & Riba, 2015). This group used EEG and 
a computational measure of information flow called 
“transfer entropy” to compare brain activity follow­
ing ayahuasca ingestion versus placebo. They found 
that during the ayahuasca experience, anterior brain 
regions reduced their influence (computed in terms of 
“information transfer”) over more posterior regions, 
while posterior regions increased their influence over 
frontal regions. Moreover, reductions in information 
transfer from anterior to posterior regions correlated 
to subjective ratings of overall intensity of experi­
ence. Based on these results, the researchers proposed 
that ayahuasca may interrupt neural information­
processing hierarchies by reducing top-down control 
(ostensibly implemented in anterior regions) over 
lower-level perceptual and thought processes (osten­
sibly implemented in posterior regions). While such 
theoretical proposals are intriguing, they remain 
largely speculative.
Beyond alterations in regional and network- 
localized activity, converging evidence suggests that 
psychedelics catalyze a more global brain state that 
is simultaneously disorganized yet highly associa­
tive. Multiple analyses indicate that psilocybin and 
LSD disrupt functional brain architecture by reduc­
ing connectivity and activity within typically robust 
cortical networks (Carhart-Harris et al., 2012; 
Carhart-Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016; 
Lebedev et al., 2015; Muthukumaraswamy et al.,
2013). Further supporting the notion of a global 
functional disorganization, a recent study showed 
that psilocybin decreased connectivity between 
cerebral hemispheres (Lebedev et al., 2015). At the 
level of brain oscillations, which provide a more 
direct and temporally sensitive index of neural activ­
ity, MEG studies showed that psilocybin and LSD 
desynchronized neuronal populations across mul­
tiple frequency bands in a broad array of cortical 
regions, including anterior and posterior nodes of 
the DM N (Carhart-Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, 
et al., 2016; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013). 
On the other hand, psychedelics appear to globally 
increase communication between disparate cortical 
regions and networks (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 
2013; Petri et al., 2014; Roseman et al., 2014) and
enhance the flexibility of dynamic interactions 
between networks (Tagliazucchi, Carhart-Harris, 
Leech, Nutt, & Chialvo, 2014). Altogether, these 
results suggest that psychedelics cause cortical net­
works to become functionally less differentiated, 
more communicative, and more spontaneous in 
their functional properties.
While potentially illuminating, extant neu­
roimaging studies of serotonergic psychedelics 
have important methodological limitations. For 
one, psychedelics tend to generate a high degree 
of motion during brain scans. While researchers 
usually apply stringent compensatory algorithms, 
motion artifacts nonetheless may systematically 
influence results. Moreover, sample sizes are small, 
and most participants in these imaging assays have 
extensive experience with psychedelics; thus, it 
remains to be seen how such brain responses gen­
eralize to, say, participants and patient populations 
naive to these substances. Despite such caveats, the 
available evidence indicates that serotonergic psy­
chedelics simultaneously disorganize the configura­
tion of large-scale brain networks and increase the 
extent and variability of communication between 
these networks. Moreover, some of the key neural 
indices of these effects correlate with self-reports of 
ego dissolution and dreamlike imagery during the 
psychedelic experience. Thus, psychedelics appear 
to render the brain more flexible and prone to 
adopting novel patterns of functional integration 
that may be linked to the classic phenomenological 
hallmarks of the “unconstrained psychedelic mind” 
(for reviews of these findings framed in the formal 
terms of integrated information theory and the free 
energy principle, see Gallimore, 2015, and Carhart- 
Harris, Leech, et al., 2014, respectively).
Such findings may hold important implications 
for applied domains. Particularly striking is the 
finding that the unpredictability of the fMRI time 
series associated with acute LSD experience (i.e., 
sample entropy— a way of formally measuring the 
spontaneity of brain function) predicts subsequent 
increases in the personality trait of Openness two 
weeks later (Lebedev et al., 2016). Other intrigu­
ing findings concern the relationship between the 
DM N and so-called task-positive attention net­
works that are normally anti-correlated with the 
DM N in their temporal fluctuations. One study 
indicated that four classic task-positive networks 
(the dorsal attention, salience, right frontoparietal, 
and auditory networks) become less anti-correlated 
following psilocybin infusion (Carhart-Harris et al.,
2013), similar to patterns observed in individuals at
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
579

high risk for psychosis (Shim et al., 2010), as well 
as during certain forms of meditation (Josipovic, 
Dinstein, Weber, & Heeger, 2012). An independent 
study examining ayahuasca ingestion, however, was 
unable to replicate this reduction of anti-correlation 
between networks (Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015). 
The discrepancies between the results of these stud­
ies (Carhart-Harris et al., 2013; Palhano-Fontes 
et al., 2015) may reflect the use of different psyche­
delic substances (ayahuasca vs. psilocybin), analysis 
methods (seed-based vs. independent component 
analysis), or regions of interest (focusing exclusively 
on the frontoparietal control network vs. analyz­
ing a number of task-positive networks). If this 
anti-correlation finding holds up in other replica­
tions, it may prove relevant for modeling aspects 
of psychosis (Carhart-Harris et al., 2013) as well as 
in the treatment of depression, where an aberrant 
relationship between the DM N and frontoparietal 
network has been linked to maladaptive rumina­
tion (Hamilton et al., 2011; Whitfield-Gabrieli, 
& Ford, 2012; for a general review of psychedelic 
neuroscience pertaining to the treatment of mood 
disorders, see Vollenweider & Kometer, 2010). In 
addition, a few recent studies have reported reduced 
DMN/frontoparietal network anti-correlation dur­
ing moments of creative insight and artistic per­
formance (for a review, see Beaty et al., 2016; also 
Beaty & Jung, Chapter 21 in this volume). Thus, 
alterations in brain function offer intriguing clues as 
to the mechanisms that may link psychedelics with 
creative insight, contemplative experience, as well 
as pathology and healing (see Fox, Girn, Parro, & 
Christoff, 2016).
Applying the Unconstrained
Mind: Psychedelics in Creativity, Mystical
Experience, and Therapy
Creativity
Links 
between 
psychedelics 
and 
creativity 
abound in the popular imagination. These sub­
stances owe their visibility in mainstream culture 
to the traces they have left on the work of many 
of the most prominent artists and personalities of 
the twentieth century, from the Beatles to Steve 
Jobs 
(Rothstein, 2008). 
Indeed, 
ethnographic 
research documents extensive use of psychedelics 
around the globe in many traditions of spiritual 
or religious practice that have creative or artistic 
components (Langlitz, 2012; Schultes, Hofmann, 
& Ratsch, 2001; Taussig, 1987). Cognitive scien­
tists broadly define creativity as the generation of 
ideas or novel associations that are at once original
or innovative and useful or effective (leading to 
developments such as scientific theories, solutions 
to problems, or musical compositions; Sessa, 2008). 
The creative process also connotes the capacity for 
divergent thinking, or the ability to produce mul­
tiple alternative solutions to a question or problem. 
This stands in contrast to the application of specific 
knowledge to achieve a singular, correct solution to 
a problem— sometimes referred to as convergent 
thinking (Frecska, More, Vargha, & Luna, 2012; 
Guilford, 1966).
The most comprehensive phenomenological 
investigation of a psychedelic substance to date doc­
uments the stimulating effects of ayahuasca in cre­
ative disciplines, including music and art (Shanon, 
2002). Unfortunately, the majority of experimental 
studies investigating the link between psychedelics 
and creativity were conducted before the 1960s hia­
tus on research, and thus many of these studies fall 
short of the methodological standards of contempo­
rary research (e.g., lacking adequate control groups 
and experimental blinding). Notwithstanding the 
lack of rigor in early empirical studies, findings 
from a variety of experimental conditions suggest 
that psychedelics may bolster associative thought 
and creativity (for a review, see Krippner, 1985).
An early paradigm designed to probe psyche­
delic creativity involved recruiting visual artists and 
asking them to produce art under the influence of 
specific substances (Berlin et al., 1955; Dobkin de 
Rios & Janiger, 2003). Subsequently, art critics or 
instructors would subjectively evaluate the artists’ 
work produced before, compared to during, the 
psychedelic experience. In one study, an experi­
menter administered LSD to a diverse group of 60 
visual artists over the course of seven years (Dobkin 
de Rios & Janiger, 2003). These artists submitted 
over 250 drawings, created before and during the 
LSD experience, that were evaluated by a profes­
sor of art history who judged that the LSD-related 
works were more impressionistic and aesthetically 
adventurous, conveyed a heightened sense of emo­
tional excitement, displayed a keener use of color, 
and were less bound by typical artistic conventions. 
Janiger also collected numerous qualitative reports 
from his subjects, who reported without exception 
that the LSD experience had been both artisti­
cally and personally profound (Dobkin de Rios & 
Janiger, 2003).
Another early study enlisted individuals work­
ing in creative disciplines to identify problems 
of professional interest that required a creative 
solution, and subsequently administered LSD or
580
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

mescaline to those individuals in a supportive set­
ting. All participants then completed three objec­
tive tests of creativity (Purdue Creativity Test, 
Miller Object Visualization Test, and Witkin 
Embedded Figures Test), and attempted to solve 
the professionally relevant problems they had 
identified earlier. Participants performed signifi­
cantly better on all tests of creative ability when 
under the influence of the psychedelics com­
pared to an earlier baseline assessment (Harman, 
McKim, Mogar, Fadiman, & Stolaroff, 1966). In 
addition, participants reported enhancements in 
their creative process with respect to the problems 
identified in their professional lives, and attrib­
uted these improvements to the psychedelic sub­
stance. Creative solutions included a commercial 
building plan that was subsequently accepted by 
the client, a new approach to the design of a vibra­
tory microtome, an engineering improvement to 
a magnetic tape recorder, and the invention of a 
linear electron accelerator beam-steering device, 
among other innovations (Harman et al., 1966).
After a half-century hiatus, more recent studies 
probing the impact of psychedelics on associative 
thinking and creativity have implemented better 
experimental designs and measures (Frecska et al., 
2012; Humphrey, McKay, Primi, & Kaufman, 
2014; Kuypers et al., 2016). For example, a pilot 
study recruited 40 participants in a two-week- 
long ayahuasca retreat to complete visual compo­
nents of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking 
before and two days after the completion of the 
retreat. The Torrance Tests ask responders to rap­
idly generate creative images based on a series of 
geometric shapes. Compared to a control group 
who did not participate in the retreat, and who 
did not receive any alternative training, partici­
pants who ingested ayahuasca demonstrated a sig­
nificant increase in the number of highly original 
solutions to the tests of creative thinking (Frecska 
et al., 2012). However, one substantial limitation 
of this study is that, compared to participants 
in the control group, those in the experimental 
group were recruited from a different population 
using different inclusion criteria.
Another recent study recruited 26 participants 
from two ayahuasca workshops to complete creativ­
ity tests before and during the acute psychedelic 
experience (Kuypers et al., 2016). The researchers 
found that ayahuasca improved scores of divergent 
thinking and reduced scores of convergent thinking 
on one of the two creativity measures— the picture 
concepts test, which asks participants to identify
associations between color images. However, the 
other creativity measure— the pattern/line mean­
ings test, which asks participants to assign meanings 
to gray-scale configurations of patterns and lines—  
yielded no differences in divergent thinking and 
did not measure convergent thinking. Moreover, 
the researchers included no control condition 
and informed participants ahead of time about 
the aims of their experiment; thus, placebo effects 
and demand characteristics likely influenced the 
reported findings.
A recent placebo-controlled study directly tested 
the influence of LSD on semantic associations using 
a picture-naming task (Family et al., 2016). In this 
task, participants saw pictures of objects presented 
in sequence, and had to name the objects as quickly 
and accurately as possible. Under the influence of 
LSD, participants made more naming errors and 
were more likely to mistakenly substitute seman­
tically related words (e.g., to mistakenly respond 
“arm” when viewing a picture of a “leg,” both of 
which arise from the semantic category “body 
parts”). This pattern of results indicates that LSD 
increased the spread of semantic network activation 
in a manner that promoted associations between 
closely related concepts. These preliminary find­
ings align with earlier evidence suggesting that psy­
chedelics may enhance indirect semantic priming, 
reduce the predictability of speech patterns, and 
promote free-association (Amarel & Clark, 1965; 
Landon & Fischer, 1970; Spitzer et al., 1996).
Despite improvements, many recent studies of 
psychedelic creativity still lack methodological rigor 
especially in terms of implementing adequate exper­
imental controls. Nevertheless, the cumulative evi­
dence from observational, phenomenological, and 
preliminary experimental studies suggests that psy­
chedelics can promote creative, associative think­
ing in a variety of domains (Family et al., 2016; 
Frecska et al., 2012; Kuypers et al., 2016; Sessa, 
2008). Moreover, the connection between psyche­
delics and creativity may have a plausible neurobio- 
logical foundation. As we discussed earlier in this 
chapter, brain network dynamics associated with 
psychedelic experience appear to overlap, in some 
respects, with patterns of brain activity observed in 
moments of creative insight (see Beaty, Benedek, 
Silvia, & Schacter, 2016; Fox, Girn, Parro, & 
Christoff, 2016).
Mystical Experiences
The unconstraining of cognitive patterns via 
psychedelics can lead to “mystical” experiences
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
58 l

that encompass feelings of sacredness, intercon­
nectedness with the world at large, joy, peace, col­
lapse of time and space, ineffability, and a sense 
of numinous truth (Barrett, Johnson, & Griffiths, 
2015; Hood, 2003; Richards, 2015; Stace, 1960). 
Phenomenological and religious descriptions typi­
cally characterize such experiences in terms of a 
revelatory breakdown of habitual cognitive frame­
works that divide the world into categories such 
as self and other, body and mind, or space and 
time (Richards, 2015; James, 1902; Roberts, & 
Winkelman, 2013; Walsh & Vaughan, 1993). An 
influential early study, referred to by psychedelic 
researchers as the “Good Friday Experiment,” 
sought to test whether psilocybin could catalyze 
mystical experiences in a controlled setting at the 
Marsh Chapel of Boston University (Pahnke, 
1963). In this randomized double-blind trial, 20 
divinity students received a capsule of either pla­
cebo or psilocybin in a single group session. While 
a retrospective follow-up account identified meth­
odological drawbacks to the original study (includ­
ing likely breaking of the double-blind due to the 
use of an active placebo with different physiologi­
cal side effects), it confirmed and validated many 
of the original findings— namely that eight of 10 
subjects in the psilocybin group reported having a 
mystical experience, compared to only one subject 
in the control group (Doblin, 1991; Pahnke, 1963). 
Moreover, those participants who had a mystical 
experience reported that significant positive changes 
in attitude and behavior had persisted on six-month 
follow-up (Pahnke, 1963). Twenty years after the 
original findings were published, Rick Doblin— the 
founder of the Multidisciplinary Association for 
Psychedelic Studies (MAPS)— tracked down and 
interviewed seven of the 10 divinity students who 
had received psilocybin (Doblin, 1991). All seven 
affirmed that their psychedelic Good Friday experi­
ence had made uniquely valuable contributions to 
their spiritual lives, with positive changes persisting 
or deepening over time (Doblin, 1991).
Building on these tentative yet promising early 
efforts, a more recent and rigorous double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study reported that admin­
istering a single moderate-to-high dose of psilo­
cybin in a supportive setting led to full-blown 
mystical experiences in over half of participants, all 
of whom had spiritual inclinations but no previous 
experience with psychedelics (Griffiths, Richards, 
McCann, & Jesse, 2006). Moreover, these mystical 
experiences were associated with positive changes 
in self-reported mood and values over a year later
(Griffiths, Richards, Johnson, McCann, & Jesse, 
2008). When the researchers pooled data from 
this study and a subsequent follow-up replication 
(Griffiths, Johnson, Richards, Richards, McCann, 
& Jessse, 2011), they observed that a high propor­
tion of participants who reported mystical-type 
experiences demonstrated enduring changes in the 
personality factor of Openness (MacLean, Johnson, 
& Griffiths, 2011). This shift: is particularly intrigu­
ing given that theorists typically construe such fac­
tors as enduring traits that persist in a largely stable 
manner throughout adulthood (McCrae, 2009; 
Terracciano, McCrae, Brant, & Costa, 2005; cf. 
Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). Thus, research raises 
the possibility that psychedelics can influence struc­
tures of cognition and engender mystical-type expe­
riences that appear, in many cases, to leave lasting 
imprints on core features of personality.
Therapeutic Prospects
The capacity for psychedelics to catalyze dramatic 
changes in cognition, affect, attitudes, and person­
ality, coupled with emerging psychopharmaco- 
logical research, suggests that these substances have 
potential therapeutic applications (for reviews, see 
dos Santos et al., 2016; Majic et al., 2015). Several 
independent research groups are currently investi­
gating the prospect of using psychedelic experiences 
as therapeutic adjuncts in the treatment of clinical 
conditions including substance addiction, depres­
sion, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
In the case of substance use disorders, a meta­
analysis of six randomized controlled trials pub­
lished between 1967 and 1970 found evidence of a 
beneficial effect of a single-dose LSD session in the 
treatment of alcoholism (Krebs & Johansen, 2012). 
More recently, two pilot studies revealed the poten­
tial benefits of psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco 
and alcohol use disorders. When administered 
moderate-to-high doses of psilocybin in three sepa­
rate sessions in conjunction with cognitive behav­
ioral therapy, 12 of 15 tobacco-addicted individuals 
demonstrated smoking abstinence at six-month 
follow-up, as measured by self-report and urinary 
cotinine test (Johnson, Garcia-Romeu, Cosimano, 
& Griffiths, 2014). Similarly, in a proof-of-concept 
study, 10 alcohol-dependent participants receiving 
either one or two moderate-to-high-dose psilocybin 
sessions in addition to motivational enhancement 
therapy showed significant increases in abstinence 
36 weeks later (Bogenschutz et al., 2015).
Beyond addiction, studies have been explor­
ing the potential benefits of psychedelics in the
582
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

treatment of conditions including anxiety, depres­
sion, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. A recent 
double-blind placebo-controlled study employed a 
single moderate dose of psilocybin to address anxi­
ety in patients with advanced-stage cancer (Grob 
et al., 2011). The 12 patients who received psilo­
cybin demonstrated a significant reduction in anxi­
ety at one and three months after treatment and 
an improvement in depressive mood that reached 
significance six months after treatment. A study by 
another group obtained similar placebo-controlled 
results using two moderate-dose LSD sessions 
paired with ongoing intensive psychotherapy to 
treat anxiety associated with terminal cancer (Gasser 
et al., 2014; Gasser, Kirchner, & Passie, 2015). 
The 12 participants in the LSD group reported 
significantly less anxiety and enhanced quality of 
life compared to the 12 participants in the control 
condition, with improvements persisting one year 
after treatment. Another pilot study (which lacked 
a control group) measured the effectiveness of two 
psilocybin sessions escalating from low to moder­
ate dosage in 12 patients with moderate-to-severe, 
treatment-resistant 
depression 
(Carhart-Harris, 
Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016). Patients reg­
istered no serious or unexpected adverse events in 
response to the psilocybin, and reported signifi­
cant reductions in depressive symptoms both one 
week and three months after treatment. However, 
the open-label nature of the study limits the con­
clusiveness of the findings, and about half of the 
patients still demonstrated significant depressive 
symptoms at three-month follow-up (see Cowen, 
2016; Dikkstra, Jacobs, & Cohen, 2016; Hendrie 
& Pickles, 2016). Psilocybin has also been explored 
as a tool for the relief of symptoms of obsessive- 
compulsive disorder: in a pilot study, nine subjects 
received psilocybin in up to four sessions of vary­
ing dosages ranging from low to high (Moreno, 
Wiegand, Taitano, Delgado, 2006). Participants 
showed marked decreases in OCD symptoms, 
with improvements persisting for 24 hours after 
ingestion, long after the psychoactive effects had 
worn off.
While the evidence is promising, we are still in 
the early stages of establishing the therapeutic value 
of psychedelics. Results must be interpreted with 
caution because most data come from small pilot 
studies that often lack adequate control groups and 
blinding procedures. As clinical evidence accumu­
lates, however, it becomes easier for researchers to 
obtain the research funding and ethical approval 
necessary to conduct further trials. Recent work
therefore sets the stage for larger, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials in the near future.
The literature on psychedelic therapy includes 
substantial debate on the relative contributions 
to treatment outcomes of pharmacological and 
psychological mechanisms. In one camp, some 
researchers suggest that psychedelic substances 
can generate clinical benefits when given at doses 
below the threshold for inducing psychedelic 
experiences (Sewell, Halpern, & Pope, 2006). In 
the treatment of addiction, for example, research­
ers have proposed that serotonergic psychedelics 
exert anti-addictive effects by altering brain cir­
cuitry that connects limbic and frontal regions 
(Ross, 2012). These researchers hope that better 
understanding the neural and molecular mecha­
nisms of action of these drugs will eventually 
allow for the development of medications that 
would provide therapeutic effects while obviating 
the need for any psychedelic experience as such—  
especially experiences, including dissociation and 
depersonalization, that might be undesirable for 
certain patient populations who could otherwise 
benefit from the direct pharmacological action 
of psychedelics (see Vollenweider & Kometer,
2010). In the other camp, many researchers and 
clinicians attribute the benefits of psychedelic 
substances to psychological processes that depend 
on or are marked by specific experiences, includ­
ing restructuring of pathological cognitive pat­
terns, enhanced empathy or self-understanding, 
and the adoption of constructive attitudes to one’s 
life circumstances (Majic et al., 2015). Although 
the debate has tended to frame these as oppos­
ing alternatives, it seems likely that pharmacology 
and psychology interact through bodily, psycho­
logical, and social feedback loops to facilitate the 
therapeutic outcomes associated with psychedelic 
substances (Raikhel, 2015).
Constraining the Unconstrained Mind 
Through Ritual and Culture
While a growing body of experimental research 
has begun to explore how psychedelics reorganize 
cognition and promote associative, spontaneous 
dimensions of thought, such scientific approaches 
have given much less empirical attention to the 
role of context in shaping the psychedelic experi­
ence. When attempting to isolate and examine 
neurocognitive mechanisms in controlled experi­
ments, scientists often seek a “neutral” setting that 
avoids biasing participants with expectations about 
their experience. O f course, any situation conveys
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
583

suggestions or expectations that may influence out­
comes. Thus randomized clinical trials— the gold 
standard of evidence-based medicine— employ a 
placebo comparison group to experimentally con­
trol for the effects of context or setting on expec­
tations and attitudes (Kaptchuk, 2001; Servick,
2014) . The emerging science of placebos under­
scores how psychosocial parameters such as con­
textual cues, beliefs, expectations, and empathic 
rapport profoundly influence many pharmaco­
logical outcomes (Brody & Miller, 2011; Finniss, 
Kaptchuk, Miller, & Benedetti, 2010; Kaptchuk 
& Miller, 2015; Kirmayer, 2015; Wager & Atlas,
2015) . In the rest of this chapter we will explore 
how such sociocultural variables may influence psy­
chedelic experiences.
A recent meta-analysis highlighted a variety of 
non-pharmacological factors that shape experiences 
with psilocybin. Pooling data from 23 controlled 
experiments involving 409 psilocybin administra­
tions among 261 healthy participants, this analysis 
revealed that positive and mystical-type experiences 
were more likely among individuals who scored 
highly on the personality trait of Absorption, were 
emotionally excitable immediately before ingestion, 
and had experienced few psychological problems 
in the past weeks (Studerus, Gamma, Kometer, & 
Vollenweider, 2012). Another recent study found 
that LSD renders individuals acutely more suggest­
ible, intimating that psychosocial influences may 
play an especially prominent role in determining 
the effects of psychedelics (Carhart-Harris, Kaelen, 
et ah, 2014). While the neurocognitive mecha­
nisms of suggestion remain poorly understood, 
neuroimaging findings from the domain of hyp­
nosis implicate altered activity in attention and 
control processes, including the DM N (Deeley 
et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2017; Mazzoni, Venneri, 
McGeown, & Kirsch, 2013; McGeown, Mazzoni, 
Vannucci, & Venneri, 2015; McGeown, Mazzoni, 
Venneri, & Kirsch, 2009)— a pattern that overlaps 
in some respects with the altered DM N activity 
associated with psychedelics including psilocybin, 
LSD, and ayahuasca (Carhart-Harris et al., 2012; 
Carhart-Harris, Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016; 
Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015). Thus, experimental 
findings seem to support the idea that the uncon­
strained neurocognitive state induced via psyche­
delics may render individuals especially susceptible 
to the influences of set (expectations, mood, or 
state of mind) and setting (including the physi­
cal and social environment) on drug experience 
(Zinberg, 1984).
The Ritual Use of Psychedelics
Social scientific studies of psychedelics place as 
much emphasis on aspects of historical, cultural, 
political, and environmental context as they do on 
the pharmacological properties of a given psychedelic 
substance (Beyer, 2012; Fernandez, 1982; Labate & 
Cavnar, 2014). According to ethnographic accounts, 
traditional and contemporary ritualized uses of psy­
chedelics provide interpretive frameworks that are 
key to harnessing the pharmacological effects of 
these substances (Calabrese, 2013; Dobkin de Rios, 
1984). The metaphors employed by ritual practitio­
ners corroborate the notion of unconstrained cogni­
tion; for example, in the Santo Daime religion we 
will discuss at length in the following, psychedelics 
are often said to “open” or “reveal” ones mind (Oda 
Sheiner, 2016). Moreover, most traditions, includ­
ing most contemporary approaches to psychedelic 
therapy, recognize that the states of mind evoked 
by psychedelics can expose participants to a range 
of difficult and intimidating emotional and cogni­
tive experiences (Barrett et al., 2015; Strassman, 
1984). To mitigate or prevent negative experiences 
and enhance positive outcomes, many practices 
use highly structured rituals to guide participants’ 
encounters with psychedelic substances.
In the late 1950s, anthropologist Anthony 
Wallace noted a discrepancy between the experi­
ential reports of individuals who were adminis­
tered mescaline in a laboratory environment and 
the accounts of participants in Native American 
rituals centered on the consumption of the sacred 
mescaline-cactus peyote (Wallace, 1959). Based 
on these observations, Wallace proposed to sup­
plement placebo-controlled pharmaceutical trials 
with a “method of cultural and situational con­
trols” (1959, p. 84), whereby researchers would 
modulate the environment and instructions to 
participants as well as pre-select individuals based 
on personality, attitude, and cultural background 
(Langlitz, 2010). While Wallace’s notion of cul­
ture controls never came to fruition in pharma­
cology, his early proposal highlights the value of 
incorporating a more social approach to psycho- 
pharmacological research in general, and to the 
study of psychedelics in particular. In line with 
this perspective, we will now turn to a discus­
sion of ethnographic data collected by one of the 
authors of this chapter (Oda Sheiner) to consider 
how the specific context of a contemporary aya­
huasca religion constrains the spontaneity of psy­
chedelic experience through structured rituals and 
frameworks of interpretation.
584
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

Santo Daime and the Ritual Structuring 
of Psychedelic Experience
Psychedelic substances, consumed as plants or 
plant decoctions, are central to many cultural prac­
tices around the world. Knowledge of the peoples 
and practices that incorporate these psychedelics is 
largely a product of twentieth-century scholarship 
(Schultes, 1972). Yet, ethnobotanists and anthro­
pologists have found evidence in the oral histories 
and archaeological records of indigenous cultures of 
the use of a variety of these substances for hundreds, 
if not thousands, of years (Schultes, 1969). For 
example, carbon dating suggests that some Native 
American peoples of North America have used pey­
ote, a psychedelic cactus, for over 5,000 years (El- 
Seedi, De Smet, Beck, Possnert, & Bruhn, 2005). 
In discussions of this history and current cultural 
practices, there is a tendency to portray the psyche­
delic experience as monolithic— that is, to under­
stand ayahuasca healing or the peyote ceremony as 
enacted in the much the same way, from one gen­
eration to the next, by indigenous healers through­
out the global south (cf. Atkinson, 1992). In fact, 
practices are highly diverse, not only in the use of 
different plant combinations, but also in terms of 
the structure of rituals and desired outcomes.
Contemporary ritualized modes of psychedelic 
practice reflect a blending of traditional cultures and 
current contexts that influence the psychedelic expe­
rience in complex ways. This is well illustrated by 
Oda Sheiner s (2016) ethnographic analysis of Santo 
Daime, a Brazilian ayahuasca religion imported to a 
North American cultural context. Santo Daime is 
a syncretic Christian religion that originated in the 
northwestern region of the Brazilian Amazon in the 
early twentieth century (Dawson, 2013). Members 
of the religion imbibe a beverage, also called Santo 
Daime— an ayahuasca decoction made from the 
Psychotria viridis leaf and the Banisteriopsis caapi 
vine, as a sacrament in rituals called Trabalhos, or 
“Works.” Although Santo Daime emerged in poor, 
mestigo (indigenous and European mixed-ethnicity) 
communities in the Amazonian state of Acre, today 
it is practiced primarily by white, middle-class par­
ticipants living in cosmopolitan areas throughout 
Brazil. The religion maintains congregations in more 
than 30 countries across the world, and as of 2012, 
an estimated 20,000 individuals participate regu­
larly in Santo Daime Works (Dawson, 2013; Feeney 
& Labate, 2014). Collaborations between research­
ers and ayahuasca-using communities such as the 
Santo Daime have stimulated a growing literature 
on health outcomes related to ayahuasca use, which
report beneficial effects pertaining to substance 
abuse, psychiatric health, and general well-being 
(Barbosa, Giglio, & Dalgalarrondo, 2005; Doering- 
Silveira et ah, 2005; Fabregas et al., 2010; Halpern, 
Sherwood, Passie, Blackwell, & Ruttenber, 2008). 
Interestingly, in contrast to participants in clinical 
research with other psychedelic substances, the sub­
jects in studies investigating ayahuasca are typically 
drawn from communities where highly structured 
conventions for ayahuasca use are already in place. 
As such, the efficacy of ayahuasca in these studies is 
deeply entwined with the effectiveness of the ritual 
and social contexts in which it is consumed.
The Santo Daime religion hybridizes practices 
from ayahuasca traditions of South American mes­
tigo or mestizo communities, Amazonian indigenous 
ayahuasca rituals, Afro-Brazilian beliefs and prac­
tices, European esotericism and, most prominently, 
Catholicism (Dawson, 2013). Drawing strands 
from all of these religious traditions, Santo Daime 
rituals offer adherents a highly structured psyche­
delic experience designed to reflect the spiritual aspi­
rations of its membership. The structuring of Works 
ceremonies includes the segregation of participants 
by gender, and the seating of individuals accord­
ing to hierarchy within the religious community. 
Senior members of Santo Daime are typically seated 
at a central table, while more novice daimistas—  
members of Santo Daime— form separate rows of 
women and men that radiate outward from a cen­
tral table. Understood in socio-cognitive terms, this 
spatial configuration focuses joint attention on the 
most experienced practitioners, increasing their 
motivation to enact behaviors commensurate with 
the expectations of the congregation and providing 
performative models for less-seasoned practitioners. 
Ordering the ritual on a visual level, daimistas wear 
simple uniforms with modest symbolic adorn­
ments, serving to de-emphasize personal differences 
in terms of social class or income and to accentuate 
a sense of collective identity. Ritual spaces are often 
decorated with images and objects derived from 
the contributing religious traditions (with a par­
ticular emphasis on Christian symbolism). The cues 
provided by ritual decorations foster expectations 
among participants as to the character and contents 
of visions experienced while under the influence of 
the Daime brew.
Beyond the physical structuring of space, Works 
follow a regimented timeline. While different 
Works entail a degree of variation in the contents 
and sequencing of events, at a rudimentary level, 
rituals involve the recitation of inaugural prayers,
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
585

consumption of Daime, silent seated meditation, 
singing of hymns, coordinated dance, and con­
cluding prayers. Not all Works require these basic 
elements; still others include additional practices. 
Beyond the deliberate chronological arrangement 
of ritual events, participants are expected to sustain 
a degree of synchrony throughout the Works—  
whether staying in harmony while singing hymns, 
keeping the rhythm during dances, or more broadly, 
maintaining a minimum level of consistency in 
behavior with other daimistas throughout the ritual.
The ordering of ritual time and space structures 
the psychedelic experience along multiple modali­
ties. On a pragmatic level, it provides the frame­
work and repeatability required for regular religious 
practice, and codifies Santo Daime such that it can 
spread to new locations while preserving its core 
features. On a social level, Santo Daimes structure 
creates a meritocratic hierarchy of religious senior­
ity, which rewards individuals for their personal 
growth and their ability to maintain and contrib­
ute to the congregations co-development. On a 
metaphysical level, according to adherents, the 
ritual structure allows for the creation of a collec­
tively generated spiritual current, nourished by the 
combined efforts of daim istas, that brings about the 
individual and communal efficacy of Santo Daime 
practice, whether it be personal insight, spiritual 
growth, emotional or physical healing, or any num­
ber of other reported benefits. Finally, at the experi­
ential level, Santo Daime hymns and rituals provide 
daimistas with an interpretive framework through 
which experiences during Works can be con­
structed, explicated, and integrated into everyday 
life. Although Santo Daime has developed its idio­
syncratic constellations of practice to reflect the val­
ues and aspirations of its membership, many other 
ayahuasca traditions employ analogous customs to 
help adherents navigate the vagaries of psychedelic 
experience (Labate & Cavnar, 2014).
Agency, Spontaneity, and Novel Psychedelic 
Experiences of Intersubjectivity
One of the most striking and ubiquitous sets 
of phenomena associated with the ritualized inges­
tion of ayahuasca involves alterations in the sense of 
control over the stream of consciousness (Shanon, 
2002). Under the influence of psychedelics, indi­
viduals often experience thoughts and visions as 
emanating from external sources (Shanon, 2002; 
Strassman, 2000). In the specific context of Santo 
Daime, spiritual entities are not only “believed- 
in” by daimistas to the extent that they represent
important components of their cosmologies, but 
they are also experienced as tangible, non-human 
others in the ritual setting. In-depth interviews col­
lected by Oda Sheiner (2016) support the notion 
that practitioners relate to the Daime brew as an 
agent— as a participant in and subject of intersub- 
jective encounters— rather than as an inanimate 
object. Describing the subject of these perceived 
relations, participants evoked notions of a being, 
a spirit, plant voices, and a range of proper nouns 
referring to specific entities. Many participants 
identified the specific force who ostensibly animates 
the Daime decoction as ju ram idam , a central figure 
who recurs frequently in Santo Daime hymns and 
doctrine.
Experienced 
relations 
with 
non-physical 
entities under the influence of the Daime brew 
manifest across a range of sensory modalities, 
including visual apparitions, heard voices, or the 
felt presence of an entity (cf. Luhrmann, 2011). 
Oda Sheiner (2016) noted a proclivity among 
interviewees to use verbs that mark volition when 
describing experiences with Daime. Participants 
regularly 
mentioned 
being 
“shown,” 
“told,” 
“instructed,” or having “received” information 
from the brew. This tendency was apparent even 
among participants who professed an overt skep­
ticism toward the notion of Daime as a sentient 
being, separate from oneself. For instance, one 
participant advocated against overly entrenched 
beliefs about beings encountered in the Daime 
by way of describing Daimes ability to “bring 
you out of your belief system, and the more you 
believe strongly in something, the more it will 
bump it out for you.” Still, whether reflecting 
implicit beliefs or an adherence to the conven­
tions of the Santo Daime community, the par­
ticipant later employed locutions that attributed 
awareness and agency to the Daime decoction by 
positioning its own intentions as a steering force 
in the religion’s precarious political and legal via­
bility in the future. Beyond the individual sense of 
agency, therefore, these ethnographic interviews 
highlighted the importance of Daime, figured 
as an agent, in collective decision-making in the 
larger community. When interviewees elaborated 
on the specifics of different rituals or on the rea­
sons that the Santo Daime congregation adopted 
a particular stance, the causal chain could often 
be traced back to an instruction understood to 
be received by a daim ista in a vision. It remains 
an open question whether such alterations in the 
attribution of agency to thoughts and sensations
586
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

reflect an intrinsic property of the psychedelic 
brew, or emerge out of specific interactions with 
the ritual milieu and doctrines of ayahuasca tradi­
tions. Nonetheless, the discourses of Santo Daime, 
as well as those of other codified ayahuasca prac­
tices, normalize and de-stigmatize experiences of 
altered agency relating to the stream of thought. 
Indeed, these interpretive frameworks position 
such experiences as assets for individual and com­
munal growth— and as an experiential fulfillment 
of the sacrament.
The Culture of Psychedelic Science
Medical and scientific studies of psychedelics 
do not exist “outside” of culture, but rather repre­
sent a response to specific contemporary issues and 
preoccupations. Recent research tends to operate 
within the framework of biomedicine, relating psy­
chedelics to other psychopharmacological research 
questions and priorities, in an effort to legitimize 
psychedelic substances to relevant regulating agen­
cies (Anderson, 2012; Doblin, 2016; Pollan, 2015). 
As such, experiments tend to focus on individual 
therapeutic efficacy, safety, mechanism, and repro­
ducibility, even when the underlying interests may 
concern broader social or spiritual implications (cf. 
ongoing studies beginning to explore psychedelics 
as tools for the study of religion: http://csp.org/reli- 
giousleaderstudy). As these laboratory paradigms 
become popularized through mainstream scien­
tific and popular news outlets, psychedelic research 
contributes to social and cultural contexts that in 
turn shape psychedelic experiences through looping 
effects (Kirmayer & Raikhel, 2009).
Proponents of psychedelic therapy have long 
appreciated the importance of appropriately fram­
ing the experience by way of physical setting, social 
support, and personal intention (Johnson, Richards, 
& Griffiths, 2008). A meta-analysis of early tri­
als examining the efficacy of LSD as an adjunct to 
addiction treatment, for example, emphasized the 
supportive presence of a therapist as a crucial fac­
tor in determining which trials led to beneficial 
outcomes (Krebs & Johansen, 2012). Dominant 
therapeutic models of contemporary research on 
psychedelics are based on an individual-centered 
approach in which trained guides orient partici­
pants (many of whom have little or no experience 
with psychedelics) by helping them set their expec­
tations and intentions before the experience and 
subsequently assisting with post-session integration 
(Majic et al., 2015). During the acute psychedelic 
experience, guides tend to adopt a passive role and
encourage participants to become immersed in their 
own experience, while remaining physically present 
and available to intervene when help is needed or 
requested. Participants typically undergo the expe­
rience one at a time, reclining quietly on a couch 
in a comfortable, living-room style setting while 
wearing an eyeshade mask and listening to music 
through headphones. This individualistic, intro­
spective approach stands in stark contrast to many 
traditional and contemporary psychedelic rituals 
in spiritual or religious contexts, such as the Santo 
Daime Works described earlier, which feature a 
more dynamic environment involving coordinated 
group activity and an explicit invocation of shared 
symbols, beliefs, and aspirations.
The peculiarity of psychedelic research contexts 
becomes even more apparent when we turn from 
psychotherapy to more basic scientific work center­
ing on cognitive and neurobiological mechanisms. 
Here, participants (who are typically more seasoned 
users of psychedelics) spend the peak moments of 
their experience in a sterile laboratory environment, 
surrounded by computers, electrical devices, and 
other accoutrements of modern science. In neuro­
imaging experiments, participants often sit strapped 
with scalp electrodes or otherwise lie on their backs, 
unable to move, in the loud bore of an fMRI scan­
ner. These uncomfortable environments likely influ­
ence the psychedelic experience. Whereas one study 
showed that some of the broad phenomenological 
characteristics of the psilocybin experience persist 
in a neuroimaging setting (Carhart-Harris et al.,
2011), another study found that neuroimaging con­
texts increased the likelihood of unpleasant or anx­
ious experiences (Studerus, Gamma, Kometer, & 
Vollenweider, 2012). Other contextual factors may 
also influence outcomes; for example, recent findings 
by Lifshitz and colleagues indicate that body postures 
(typically supine in fMRI neuroimaging and upright 
with methods like EEG) alter resting-state brain activ­
ity (Lifshitz, Thibault, Roth, & Raz, 2017; Thibault, 
Lifshitz, Jones, & Raz, 2014; Thibault, Lifshitz, & 
Raz, 2016). Moreover, the very expectation that one 
is undergoing a neuroimaging experiment can bias 
thought patterns and limit critical judgment— a phe­
nomenon we have termed “neuroenchantment” (Ali, 
Lifshitz, & Raz, 2014). This kind of expectancy effect 
emphasizes that, far from being neutral, modern 
clinical and scientific experimental contexts convey a 
complex set of symbols that have significant cognitive 
and affective impacts on subjects.
While such contextual considerations may 
not make their way into the methods sections of
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
587

cognitive neuroscience papers, they seem to guide, 
albeit often implicitly, the practices and outcomes 
of contemporary psychedelic research. For example, 
in his rich ethnographic work investigating the 
research practices of a prominent European labo­
ratory studying the neuroscience of psychedelics, 
anthropologist Nicolas Langlitz (2010, 2012) docu­
ments how scientists rearrange and redecorate the 
space of the laboratory and experimental stimuli, 
through trial-and-error self-experimentation, to 
prevent participants from undergoing distracting 
negative experiences and hence tarnishing their 
neurocognitive data. Thus, the relevance of context 
and culture extend beyond traditional ritualistic 
uses of psychedelics to suffuse even the most “objec­
tive” contemporary scientific examinations of these 
substances. This points to the need for research that 
approaches these contextual factors not as nuisance 
variables, but as clues to the dynamics of psyche­
delic experience in real-world settings.
Conclusion
In this chapter we explored classical serotonergic 
psychedelics as catalysts of spontaneous thought. 
Emerging from a decades-long, politically charged 
hiatus, the scientific study of psychedelics is begin­
ning to rediscover the potential for these pharmaco­
logical agents to promote creative insight (Frecska 
et al., 2012), evoke mystical experiences (Griffiths 
et al., 2006), and improve clinical outcomes (Majic 
et al., 2015; dos Santos et al., 2016). Moreover, 
neuroscientific studies have made some progress in 
unraveling the brain processes underlying the pro­
found alterations in consciousness associated with 
serotonergic psychedelics. In particular, a recent 
series of neuroimaging studies indicates that psy­
chedelics profoundly reconfigure functional brain 
architecture in a manner that promotes novel con­
nectivity patterns among large-scale cortical networks 
(Carhart-Harris, Leech, et al., 2014; Carhart-Harris, 
Muthukumaraswamy, et al., 2016; Kometer et al., 
2015; Palhano-Fontes et al., 2015). Preliminary 
reports are beginning to unravel how such alterations 
in acute neural function may mold the enduring 
structure of the brain and personality (Bouso et al., 
2015; Lebedev et al., 2016). Thus, the flexibility 
attributed to psychedelic cognition may be reflected 
at the level of neurobiology, providing clues for better 
understanding the mechanisms that underlie the use 
of these substances in creative, spiritual, and thera­
peutic domains (Vollenweider & Kometer, 2010).
Contemporary 
approaches, 
however, 
have 
a long way to go in terms of addressing the
contributions of context, suggestion, and culture 
in co-determining the quality, content, and out­
come of psychedelic experiences. Moving beyond 
psychological and neuroscientific models, we have 
argued that anthropology and other social sciences 
can clarify the nature of psychedelic thought as 
pharmacologically mediated cognition embedded 
in social and cultural contexts of ritual and commu­
nity. Ethnographic fieldwork in religion, healing, 
and ethnobotany point to the importance of per­
sonal preparation as well as environmental factors 
(i.e., set and setting) in shaping psychedelic experi­
ences (Blainey, 2015; Labate & Cavnar, 2014). We 
illustrated the value of this contextual approach by 
summarizing some results from an ethnographic 
study of the use of a psychedelic brew, ayahuasca, 
in the contemporary syncretic religion of Santo 
Daime. Our analysis showed how ritualized prac­
tice constrains the psychedelically unconstrained 
mind to limit the volatility of the ayahuasca experi­
ence and optimize desired personal and communal 
outcomes (Oda Sheiner, 2016).
Traditions of psychedelic practice have long 
recognized that responsible use requires careful 
preparation and attention to context; with the right 
preparation and support, even difficult experiences 
can, at times, contribute to growth and healing 
(Gow, 1996; Naranjo, 1974; Pendell, 2005). Part of 
the value of psychedelics stems directly from their 
ability to reduce habitual constraints on the mind, 
thereby opening a space for new insights and vivid 
experiences of great power. The influence of psy­
chedelic substances on thought provides a rich case 
study for exploring the complex interplay of brain, 
mind, culture, and neurochemistry. Approached 
with care, psychedelics may prove to be allies in illu­
minating the dynamics of spontaneous thought and 
promoting flexibility of mind in health and illness.
References
Ali, S. S., Lifshitz, M., & Raz, A. (2014). Empirical neuro­
enchantment: From reading minds to thinking critically. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 1—4.
Alonso, J. F., Romero, S., Mananas, M. A., & Riba, J. 
(2015). 
Serotonergic psychedelics temporarily modify 
information transfer in humans. International Journal of 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 18(8), 1-9.
Amarel, M., & Cheek, F. E. (1965). Some effects of LSD-25 
on verbal communication. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
70(6), 453-456.
Anderson, B. T. (2012). Ayahuasca as antidepressant? Psychedelics 
and styles of reasoning in psychiatry. Anthropology of 
Consciousness, 23(1), 44—59.
Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R. N. (2014). 
The default network and self-generated thought: Component
588
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316(1), 29—52.
Atkinson, Jane M. (1992). Shamanisms today. Annual Review of 
Anthropology, 21, 307-330.
Barbosa, P. C. R., Giglio, J. S., & Dalgalarrondo, P. (2005). 
Altered states of consciousness and short-term psychological 
after-effects induced by the first time ritual use of ayahuasca 
in an urban context in Brazil. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 
37(2), 193-201.
Barrett, F. S., Bradstreet, M. P., Leoutsakos, J. M. S., Johnson, 
M. W., MacLean, K. A., Jesse, R., & Griffiths, R. R. (2015). 
The challenging experience questionnaire: Characterization 
of acute adverse reactions to psilocybin. Drug & Alcohol 
Dependence, 146, e218.
Barrett, F. S., Johnson, M. W., & Griffiths, R. R. (2015). 
Validation of the revised Mystical Experience Questionnaire 
in experimental sessions with psilocybin. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 29( 11), 1182-1190.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Beaty, R. E., Benedek, M., Silvia, P. J., & Schacter, D. L. (2016). 
Creative cognition and brain network dynamics. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 20(2), 87-95.
Berlin, L., Guthrie, T., Weider, A., Goodell, H., & Wolff, H. G. 
(1955). Studies in human cerebral function: the effects of 
mescaline and lysergic acid on cerebral processes pertinent to 
creative activity. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
122(5), 487-491.
Beyer, S. V. (2 0 1 2). Special Ayahuasca issue introduc­
tion: Toward a multidisciplinary approach to Ayahuasca 
studies. Anthropology of Consciousness, 23(1), 1-5.
Blainey, M. G. (2015). Forbidden therapies: Santo Daime, aya­
huasca, and the prohibition of entheogens in Western soci­
ety. Journal of Religion and Health, 54(1), 287-302.
Bogenschutz, M. P., Forcehimes, A. A., Pommy, J. A., Wilcox, C. 
E., Barbosa, P. C. R., & Strassman, R. J. (2015). Psilocybin- 
assisted treatment for alcohol dependence: A proof-of- con­
cept study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29(3), 289-299.
Boulougouris, V., Glennon, J. C., & Robbins, T. W. (2008). 
Dissociable effects of selective 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C recep­
tor antagonists on serial spatial reversal learning in rats. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 33(8), 2007-2019.
Bouso, J. C., Palhano-Fontes, F., Rodrfguez-Fomells, A., Ribeiro, 
S., Sanches, R., Crippa, J. A. S.,... & Riba, J. (2015). Long­
term use of psychedelic drugs is associated with differences 
in brain structure and personality in humans. European 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 25(4), 483—492.
Brody, H., & Miller, F. G. (2011). Lessons from recent research 
about the placebo effect: From art to science. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 306(23), 2612-2613.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). 
The brain’s default network. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1124(1), 1-38.
Busch, A. K., & Johnson, W. C. (1950). LSD 25 as an aid in 
psychotherapy: Preliminary report of a new drug. Diseases of 
the Nervous System, 11(8), 241-243.
Calabrese, J. D. (2013). A different medicine: Postcolonial healing 
in the Native American Church. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Carhart-Harris, R. (2007). Waves of the unconscious: The neuro­
physiology of dreamlike phenomena and its implications for 
the psychodynamic model of the mind. Neuropsychoanalysis, 
9(2), 183-211.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Bolstridge, M., Rucker, J., Day, C. M., 
Erritzoe, D., Kaelen, M .,... & Taylor, D. (2016). Psilocybin 
with psychological support for treatment-resistant depres­
sion: An open-label feasibility study. The Lancet Psychiatry 
3(7), 619-627.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, J. M., 
Reed, L. J., Colasanti, A., . . .  & Hobden, P. (2 0 1 2). Neural 
correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI 
studies with psilocybin. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 109(6), 2138-2143.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Friston, K. J. (2010). The default-mode, 
ego-functions and free-energy: A neurobiological account of 
Freudian ideas. Brain, 133(4), 1265-1283.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Kaelen, M., Bolstridge, M., Williams, 
T. M., Williams, L. T., Underwood, R., . . . & Nutt, D. 
J. (2016). The paradoxical psychological effects of lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD). Psychological Medicine, 46(7), 
1379-1390.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Kaelen, M., Nutt, D. (2014). How do 
hallucinogens work on the brain? The Psychologist, 27(9), 
662-665.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Kaelen, M., Whalley, M. G., Bolstridge, 
M., Feilding, A., & Nutt, D. J. (2015). LSD enhances sug­
gestibility in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology, 232(4), 
785-794.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T. M., 
Stone, J. M., Evans, J.,.. . & Nutt, D. J. (2013). Functional 
connectivity measures after psilocybin inform a novel 
hypothesis of early psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39(6), 
1343-1351.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan, M., 
Feilding, A., Tagliazucchi, E., . . . & Nutt, D. (2014). The 
entropic brain: A theory of conscious states informed by 
neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 8, 1—2 2.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman, L., 
Kaelen, M., Droog, W., Murphy, K .,... & Leech, R. (2016). 
Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multi­
modal neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 113(17), 4853-4858.
Carhart-Harris, R., & Nutt, D. (2014). Was it a vision or a wak­
ing dream? Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1—3.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Williams, T. M., Sessa, B., Tyacke, R. J., 
Rich, A. S., Feilding, A., & Nutt, D. J. (2011). The admin­
istration of psilocybin to healthy, hallucinogen-experienced 
volunteers in a mock-functional magnetic resonance imag­
ing environment: A preliminary investigation of tolerability. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25(11), 1562—1567.
Chambers, T. 
(2014). Editor’s introduction: 
Psychedelic 
resurgence—research and therapeutic uses, past and present. 
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 46(1), 1—2 .
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & 
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI 
reveals default network and executive system contributions 
to mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Christoff, K., Irving, Z. C., Fox, K. C., Spreng, R. N., & 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R. (2016). Mind-wandering as spon­
taneous thought: a dynamic framework. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17(11), 718-731.
Cohen, S. (1964). The beyond within: The LSD story. New York: 
Atheneum.
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
589

Dawson, A. (2013). Santo Daime: A New World Religion. 
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Cowen, P. (2016). Altered states: Psilocybin for treatment- 
resistant depression. The Lancet Psychiatry, 3(7), 592-593.
Deeley, Q., Oakley, D. A., Toone, B., Giampietro, V., Brammer, 
M. J., Williams, S. C., & Halligan, P. W. (2 0 1 2). Modulating 
the default mode network using hypnosis. International 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 60(2), 206—228.
Dijkstra, F. M., Jacobs, G. E., & Cohen, A. F. (2016). Question- 
based drug development for psilocybin. The Lancet Psychiatry, 
3(9), 806-807.
Dobkin de Rios, M. (1972). Visionary vine: Hallucinogenic heal­
ing in the Peruvian Amazon. San Francisco: Chandler.
Dobkin de Rios, M. (1984). Hallucinogens, cross-cultural perspec­
tives. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Dobkin De Rios, M., & Janiger, O. (2003). LSD, spirituality, 
and the creative process: Based on the groundbreaking research of 
Oscar Janiger, MD. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Doblin, R. (1991). Pahnke’s “Good Friday Experiment”: A long­
term follow-up and methodological critique. The Journal of 
Transpersonal Psychology, 23, 1—28.
Doblin, R. (2016, June). Regulatory challenges involved in devel- 
oping psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy through the FDAJEMA 
process. Talk presented at the Interdisciplinary Conference on 
Psychedelics Research.
Doering-Silveira, E., Grob, C. S., de Rios, M. D., Lopez, E., 
Alonso, L. K., Tacla, C., & Da Silveira, D. X. (2005). Report 
on psychoactive drug use among adolescents using ayahuasca 
within a religious context. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 
3 7 (2), 141-144.
dos Santos, R. G., Osorio, F. L., Crippa, J. A. S., Riba, J., Zuardi,
A. W., & Hallak, J. E. (2016). Antidepressive, anxiolytic, 
and antiaddictive effects of ayahuasca, psilocybin and lyser­
gic acid diethylamide (LSD): A systematic review of clinical 
trials published in the last 25 years. Therapeutic Advances in 
Psychopharmacology, 6(3), 193-213.
Dyck, E. (2006). Prairie psychedelics: Mental health research in 
Saskatchewan, 1951-1967. In J. E. Moran & D. Wright (Eds.), 
Mental health and Canadian Society: Historical perspectives (pp. 
221-244). Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press.
El-Seedi, H. R., De Smet, P. A., Beck, O., Possnert, G., & 
Bruhn, J. G. (2005). Prehistoric peyote use: Alkaloid analy­
sis and radiocarbon dating of archaeological specimens of 
Lophophora from Texas. Journal of Ethnopharmacoloey, 
101(1), 238-242.
Fabregas, J. M., Gonzalez, D., Fondevila, S., Cutchet, M., 
Fernandez, X., Barbosa, P. C. R., Alcazar-Corcoles, M. A., 
Barbanoj, M. J., Riba, J., & Bouso, J. C. (2010) Assessment 
of addiction severity among ritual users of ayahuasca. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence, 111(3), 257-261.
Fadiman, J. (2011). The psychedelic explorer’s guide: Safe, 
therapeutic, and sacred journeys. Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions & Bear.
Family, N., Vinson, D., Vigliocco, G., Kaelen, M., Bolstridge, 
M., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2016). Semantic 
activation in LSD: Evidence from picture naming. Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(10), 1320-1327.
Feeney, K., Labate, B.C. (2014). The expansion of Brazilian 
Ayahuasca religions: Law, culture and locality. In B.C. 
Labate and C. Cavnar (Eds.), Prohibition, religious freedom, 
and human rights: 111 regulating traditional drug use. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.
Fernandez, J. W. (1982). Bwiti: An ethnography of the reli­
gious imagination in Africa. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Finniss, D. G., Kaptchuk, T. J., Miller, F., & Benedetti, F. 
(2010). Biological, clinical, and ethical advances of placebo 
effects. The Lancet, 375(9715), 686-695.
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., 
& Christoff, K. (2015). The wandering brain: Meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. Neuroimage, 111, 
611-621.
Fox, K. C. R., Girn, M., Parro, C. C., & Christoff, K. (2016). 
Functional neuroimaging of psychedelic experience: An 
overview of psychological and neural effects and their rel­
evance to research on creativity, daydreaming, and dreaming. 
arXiv preprint arXiv: 1605.07153.
Frecska, E., More, C. E., Vargha, A., & Luna, L. E. (2 0 1 2). 
Enhancement of creative expression and entoptic phenom­
ena as after-effects of repeated ayahuasca ceremonies. Journal 
of Psychoactive Drugs, 44(3), 191-199.
Gallimore, A. R. (2015). Restructuring consciousness: The 
psychedelic state in light of integrated information theory. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, 346.
Gasser, P. (1994). Psycholytic therapy with MDMA and LSD in 
Switzerland. MAPS Newsletter, 5(3), 3-7.
Gasser, P., Holstein, D., Michel, Y., Doblin, R., Yazar-Klosinski,
B., Passie, T., & Brenneisen, R. (2014). Safety and efficacy 
of lysergic acid diethylamide-assisted psychotherapy for anxi­
ety associated with life-threatening diseases. The Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 202(7), 513.
Gasser, P., Kirchner, K., & Passie, T. (2015). LSD-assisted psy­
chotherapy for anxiety associated with a life-threatening dis­
ease: A qualitative study of acute and sustained subjective 
effect s. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29(1), 57—6 8.
Gewirtz, J. C., Chen, A. C., Terwilliger, R., Duman, R. C., 
& Marek, G. J. (2 0 0 2). Modulation of DOI-induced 
increases in cortical BDNF expression by group II mGlu 
receptors. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 7 3 (2), 
317-326.
Geyer, M. A., & Vollenweider, F. X. (2008). Serotonin research: 
Contributions to understanding psychoses. 
Trends in 
Pharmacological Sciences, 29(9), 445-453.
Goldsmith, N. M. (2010). Psychedelic healing: The promise 
of entheogens for psychotherapy and spiritual development. 
Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions & Bear.
Gow, P. (1996). River people: Shamanism and history in 
Western Amazonia. In N. Thomas & C. Humphrey (Eds.), 
Shamanism, history, and the State (pp. 90—113). Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., Richards, B. 
D., McCann, U., & Jesse, R. (2011). Psilocybin occasioned 
mystical-type experiences: Immediate and persisting dose- 
related effects. Psychopharmacology, 218(4), 649—665.
Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., Johnson, M. W., McCann, U. 
D., & Jesse, R. (2008). Mystical-type experiences occasioned 
by psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal mean­
ing and spiritual significance 14 months later. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 22(6), 621—632.
Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., McCann, U., & Jesse, R. 
(2006). Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiri­
tual significance. Psychopharmacology, 187(3), 268-283.
590
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

Grinker, R. R. (1964). Bootlegged ecstasy. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 187( 10), 768-768.
Grinspoon, L., & Bakalar, J. B. (1979). Psychedelic drugs reconsid­
ered. New York: Basic Books.
Grob, C. (1994). Psychiatric research with hallucinogens: What 
have we learned? Yearbook for Ethnomedicine and the Study of 
Consciousness, 3, 91—112.
Grob, C. S., Danforth, A. L., Chopra, G. S., Hagerty, M., McKay,
C. R., Halberstadt, A. L., Greer, G. R. (2011) Pilot study of 
psilocybin treatment for anxiety in patients with advanced- 
stage cancer. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 71—78.
Guilford, J. P. (1966). Measurement and creativity. Theory Into 
Practice, 5(4), 185-189.
Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, 
C. J., Wedeen, V. J., & Sporns, O. (2008). Mapping the 
structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biology, 
6(7), e 159.
Halberstadt, A. L. (2015). Recent advances in the neuropsycho­
pharmacology of serotonergic hallucinogens. Behavioural 
Brain Research, 277, 99-120.
Halpern, J. H., Sherwood, A. R., Passie, T., Blackwell, K. C., 
& Ruttenber, A. J. (2008). Evidence of health and safety in 
American members of a religion who use a hallucinogenic 
sacrament. Medical Science Monitor, 14(8), SR15-SR22.
Hamilton, J. P., Furman, D. J., Chang, C., Thomason, M. E., 
Dennis, E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2011). Default-mode and 
task-positive network activity in major depressive disor­
der: Implications for adaptive and maladaptive rumination. 
Biological Psychiatry, 70(4), 327-333.
Han, S., Northoff, G., Vogeley, K., Wexler, B. E., Kitayama, S., 
& Varnum, M. E. (2013). A cultural neuroscience approach 
to the biosocial nature of the human brain. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 64, 335-359.
Harman, W. W., McKim, R. H., Mogar, R. E., Fadiman, J., & 
Stolaroff, M. J. (1966). Psychedelic agents in creative prob­
lem solving: A pilot study. Monograph Supplement 2-V19. 
Psychological Reports, 19( 1), 211-227.
Harvey, J. A. (2003). Role of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor in 
learning. Learning & Memory, 10(5), 355—362.
Hasenkamp, W., Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D., Duncan, E., & 
Barsalou, L. W. (2 0 1 2). Mind wandering and attention dur­
ing focused meditation: A fine-grained temporal analysis of 
fluctuating cognitive states. Neuroimage, 59(1), 750-760.
Hendrie, C., & Pickles, A. (2016). Psilocybin: Panacea or pla­
cebo?. The Lancet Psychiatry, 3(9), 805-806.
Hinton, D. E., Howes, D., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2008). Toward a 
medical anthropology of sensations: Definitions and research 
agenda. TransculturalPsychiatry, 45(2), 142—162.
Hinton, D. E., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2017). The flexibility hypothe­
sis of healing. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry, 41(1), 3—34.
Hoffer, A. (1970). Treatment of alcoholism with psychedelic ther­
apy. In B. Aaronson & H. Osmond (Eds.), Psychedelics: The 
uses and implications of psychedelic drugs (pp. 357—366). 
New York: Doubleday
Hood, R. W. (2003). Conceptual and empirical consequences 
of the unity thesis. International Series in the Psychology of 
Religion, 13, 17-54.
Humphrey, D. E., McKay, A. S., Primi, R., & Kaufman, J. C. 
(2014). Self-reported drug use and creativity: (Re) establish­
ing layperson myths. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 
34(2), 179-201.
Huxley, A. (1954). The doors of perception and heaven and hell. 
London: Harper & Brothers.
Huxley, A. (1977). Moksha: Writings on psychedelics and the 
visionary experience (1931—1963). New York: Stonehill.
James, W. (1902). The Varieties of Religious Experience. London: 
Longman.
Jiang, H., White, M. P, Greicius, M. D., Waelde, L. C., & 
Spiegel, D. (2016). Brain activity and functional connec­
tivity associated with hypnosis. Cerebral Cortex, 27(8), 
4083-4093.
Johansen, P. 0., & Krebs, T. S. (2015). Psychedelics not linked 
to mental health problems or suicidal behavior: A population 
study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29(3), 270-279.
Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., & Griffiths, R. R. (2008). 
Human hallucinogen research: Guidelines for safety. Journal 
of Psychopharmacology, 22(6), 603—620.
Johnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M. P., & 
Griffiths, R. R. (2014). Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist 
psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 28(11), 983-992.
Josipovic, Z., Dinstein, I., Weber, J., & Heeger, D. J. (2012). 
Influence of meditation on anti-correlated networks in the 
brain. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 5, 183.
Kaelen, M., Roseman, L., Kahan, J., Santos-Ribeiro, A., Orban, 
C., Lorenz, R., . . . & Wall, M. B. (2016). LSD modulates 
music-induced imagery via changes in parahippocampal 
connectivity. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 26(7), 
1099-1109.
Kashdan, T. B. (2010) Psychological flexibility as a fundamental 
aspect of health. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(7), 865-878.
Kaptchuk, T. J. (2001). The double-blind, randomized, placebo- 
controlled trial: Gold standard or golden calf? Journal of 
Clinical Epidemiology, 54(6), 541-549.
Kaptchuk, T. J., & Miller, F. G. (2015). Placebo effects in medi­
cine. New England Journal of Medicine, 373(1), 8—9.
Kay, P, & Kempton, W. (1984). What is the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis? American Anthropologist, 86(1), 65—79.
King, A. R., Martin, I. L., & Melville, K. A. (1974). 
Reversal learning enhanced by lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD): Concomitant rise in brain 5-hydroxytryptamine lev­
els. British Journal of Pharmacology, 52(3), 419—426.
Kirmayer, 
L. 
J. 
(2015). 
Unpacking the 
placebo
response: Insights from ethnographic studies of healing. In 
A. Raz & C. S. Harris (Eds.) Placebo talks: Modern perspec­
tives on placebos in society (pp. 119—143). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Kirmayer, L. J., & Raikhel, E. (2009). ¥rom Amrita to Substance 
D: Psychopharmacology, political economy, and technolo­
gies of the self. Transcultural Psychiatry, 46(1), 5—15.
Kometer, M., Pokorny, T., Seifritz, E., & Vollenweider, F. X. 
(2015). Psilocybin-induced spiritual experiences and insight- 
fulness are associated with synchronization of neuronal oscil­
lations. Psychopharmacology, 232(19), 3663-3676.
Krebs, T. S., & Johansen, P. 0 . (2 0 1 2). Lysergic acid diethyl­
amide (LSD) for alcoholism: Meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Psychopharmacology, 26(7), 994—1002.
Krippner, S. (1985). Psychedelic drugs and creativity. Journal of 
Psychoactive Drugs, 17(4), 235-246.
Kuypers, K. P. C., Riba, J., de la Fuente Revenga, M., Barker, S., 
Theunissen, E. L., & Ramaekers, J. G. (2016). Ayahuasca 
enhances creative divergent thinking while decreasing con­
ventional convergent thinking. Psychopharmacology, 233(18), 
3395-3403.
Labate, B. C., & Cavnar, C. (Eds.). (2014). Ayahuasca shamanism 
in the Amazon and beyond. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
59i

Landon, M., & Fischer, R. (1970). On similar linguistic struc­
tures in creative performance and psilocybin-induced experi­
ence. Confinia Psychiatrica, 13, 115—138.
Langlitz, N. (2010). The persistence of the subjective in neu­
ropsychopharmacology: Observations of contemporary
hallucinogen research. History of the Human Sciences, 
23(1), 37-57.
Langlitz, N. (2012). Neuropsychedelia: The revival of hallucinogen 
research since the decade of the brain. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Leary, T., Metzner, R., &Alpert, R. (1964/1971). The psychedelic 
experience: A manual based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead. 
London: Academy Editions.
Lebedev, A. V., Kaelen, M., Lovden, M., Nilsson, J., Feilding, A., 
Nutt, D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2016). LSD-induced 
entropic brain activity predicts subsequent personality 
change. Human Brain Mapping, 37(9), 3203-3213.
Lebedev, A. V., Lovden, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt,
D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2015). Finding the self by 
losing the self: Neural correlates of ego-dissolution under psi­
locybin. Human Brain Mapping, 36(8), 3137-3153.
Letheby, C. (2015). The philosophy of psychedelic transforma­
tion. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 2 (9—10), 170—193.
Lifshitz, M., Thibault, R. T., Roth, R. R., & Raz, A. (2017, 
online first). Source Localization of Brain States Associated 
with Canonical Neuroimaging Postures. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience.
Luhrmann, T. M. (2011). Hallucinations and sensory overrides. 
Annual Review of Anthropology, 40, 71—85.
Luke, D. P., & Terhune, D. B. (2013). The induction of synaes- 
thesia with chemical agents: A systematic review. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 1—12.
MacLean, K. A., Johnson, M. W., & Griffiths, R. R. (2011). 
Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen psilocy­
bin lead to increases in the personality domain of openness. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25(11), 1453—1461.
Madsen, J. D., 0yslebo, T., & Hoffart, A. (1996). A follow-up 
study of psycholytic therapy with the aid of LSD. Nordic 
Journal of Psychiatry, 50(6), 487-494.
Majic, T., Schmidt, T. T., & Gallinat, J. (2015). Peak experi­
ences and the afterglow phenomenon: When and how do 
therapeutic effects of hallucinogens depend on psychedelic 
experiences? Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29(3), 241—253.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., 
Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds: 
The default network and stimulus-independent thought. 
Science, 325(5810), 393-395.
Masters, R., & Houston, J. (2000). The varieties of psychedelic 
experience: The classic guide to the effects of LSD on the human 
psyche. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions & Bear.
Mazzoni, G., Venneri, A., McGeown, W. J., & Kirsch, I. (2013). 
Neuroimaging resolution of the altered state hypothesis. 
Cortex, 49(2), 400-410.
McCrae, R. R. (2009) The five-factor model of personality 
traits: Consensus and controversy. In P. J. Corr and G. 
Matthews (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of personal­
ity psychology (pp. 148-161). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
McGeown, W. J., Mazzoni, G., Vannucci, M., & Venneri, A. 
(2015). Structural and functional correlates of hypnotic 
depth and suggestibility. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 
231(2), 151-159.
McGeown, W. J., Mazzoni, G., Venneri, A., & Kirsch, I. (2009). 
Hypnotic induction decreases anterior default mode activity. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 18(4), 848—855.
Mogar, R. (1965). Current status and future trends in psyche­
delic (LSD) research. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 5(2), 
147-166.
Monroe, R. R., & Heath, R. G. (1961). Effects of lysergic acid 
and various derivatives on depth and cortical electrograms. 
Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 3,75.
Moreno, F. A., Wiegand, C. B., Taitano, E. K., & Delgado, P. 
L. (2006). Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of psilocybin in 
9 patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 67(11), 1735-1740.
Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Moran, R. J., 
Brookes, M. J., Williams, T. M., Errtizoe, D .,... & Feilding, 
A. (2013). Broadband cortical desynchronization underlies 
the human psychedelic state. The Journal of Neuroscience, 
33(38), 15171-15183.
Naranjo, C. (1974). The healing journey. New York: Ballantine 
Books.
Nichols, D. E. (2004). Hallucinogens. Pharmacology & 
Therapeutics, 101(2), 131-181.
Nutt, D., King, L. A., Saulsbury, W., & Blakemore, C. (2007). 
Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs of 
potential misuse. The Lancet, 369(9566), 1047-1053.
Oda Sheiner, E. (2016). Culling the spirits: An exploration of 
Santo Daimes adaptation in Canada. In Beatriz C. Labate, 
Clancy Cavnar, & Alex K. Gearin (Eds.), The WorldAyahuasca 
diaspora: Reinventions and controversies (pp. 79—97). Farnham, 
UK: Ashgate.
Osmond, H. (1957). A review of the clinical effects of psychoto­
mimetic agents. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
66,418-434.
Pahnke, W. (1963). Drugs and mysticism: An analysis of the rela­
tionship between psychedelic drugs and the mystical conscious­
ness. PhD dissertation, Harvard University.
Pahnke, W., Kurland, A. A., Unger, S., Savage, C., & Grof, S. 
(1970). The experimental use of psychedelic (LSD) psycho­
therapy. Journal of the American Medical Association, 212(11), 
1856-1863.
Palhano-Fontes, F., Andrade, K. C., Tofoli, L. F., Santos, A. C., 
Crippa, J. A. S., Hallak, J. E .,... & de Araujo, D. B. (2015). 
The psychedelic state induced by ayahuasca modulates the 
activity and connectivity of the default mode network. PloS 
One, 10, eOl 18143.
Pendell, D. (2005). Pharmako gnosis: Plant teachers and the poison 
path. San Franscisco: Mercury House.
Petri, G., Expert, P, Turkheimer, F., Carhart-Harris, R., Nutt, 
D., Hellyer, P. J., & Vaccarino, F. (2014). Homological 
scaffolds of brain functional networks. Journal of The Royal 
Society Interface, 2 2(1 0 1), 1- 1 0.
Pollan, M. (2015, February). The trip treatment. The New Yorker. 
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/02/09/ 
trip-treatment
Qin, P., & Northoff, G. (2011). How is our self related to mid­
line regions and the default-mode network? Neuroimage, 
57(3), 1221-1233.
Raichle, M. E., & Snyder, A. Z. (2007). A default mode of brain 
function: A brief history of an evolving idea. Neuroimage, 
37(4), 1083-1090.
Raikhel, E. (2015). From the brain disease model to ecologies of 
addiction. In L. J. Kirmayer, R. Lemelson, & C. Cummings
592
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

(Eds.), Re-visioning psychiatry: Cultural phenomenology, criti­
cal neuroscience, and global mental health (pp. 3 7 5—3 9 9). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissiere, S. P., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). 
Cultural afFordances: Scaffolding local worlds through 
shared intentionality and regimes of attention. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 7, 1090.
Richards, W. A. (2015). Sacred knowledge: Psychedelics and reli­
gious experiences. New York: Columbia University Press.
Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. (2008). Personality trait change 
in adulthood. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
77(1), 31-35.
Roberts, T. B., & Winkelman, M. J. (2013). Psychedelic 
induced transpersonal experiences, therapies, and their 
implications for transpersonal psychology. In H. L. 
Friedman & G. Hartelius (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell hand­
book of transpersonal psychology (pp. 459—479). Oxford: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Romano, A. G., Quinn, J. L., Li, L., Dave, K. D., Schindler, E. 
A., Aloyo, V. J., & Harvey, J. A. (2010). Intrahippocampal 
LSD accelerates learning and desensitizes the 5-HT2A recep­
tor in the rabbit. Psychopharmacology, 212(3), 441-448.
Roseman, L., Leech, R., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart- 
Harris, R. L. (2014). The effects of psilocybin and MDMA 
on between-network resting state functional connectivity 
in healthy volunteers. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
8, 1- 11.
Ross, S. (2 0 1 2). Serotonergic hallucinogens and emerging tar­
gets for addiction pharmacotherapies. The Psychiatric Clinics 
of North America, 35(2), 357.
Rothstein, E. (2008, May 8). A mind-altering drug altered a cul­
ture as well. New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com
Schultes, R. E. (1969). Hallucinogens of plant origin. Science, 
763(3864), 245-254.
Schultes, R. E. (1972). An overview of hallucinogens in the 
Western Hemisphere. In Furst, P T. (Ed.), Flesh of the 
gods: The ritual use of hallucinogens. New York: Praeger.
Schultes, R. E., Hofmann, A., & Ratsch, C. (2001). Plants of the 
gods: Their sacred, healing, and hallucinogenic powers. Rochester, 
VT: Healing Arts Press.
Schwarz, B. E., Sem-Jacobsen, C. W., & Petersen, M. C. (1956). 
Effects of mescaline, LSD-25, and adrenochrome on depth 
electrograms in man. American Medical Association Archives 
of Neurology & Psychiatry, 75(6), 579-587.
Servick, K. (2014). Outsmarting the placebo effect. Science, 
345(6203), 1446-1447.
Sessa, B. (2005). Can psychedelics have a role in psychiatry once 
again? British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 457-458.
Sessa, B. (2008). Is it time to revisit the role of psychedelic drugs in 
enhancing human creativity? Journal of Psychopharmacology, 
22(8), 821-827.
Sessa, B. (2 0 1 2). Shaping the renaissance of psychedelic research. 
The Lancet, 350(9838), 200-201.
Sewell, R. A., Halpern, J. H., & Pope, H. G. (2006). Response of 
cluster headache to psilocybin and LSD. Neurology, 66(12), 
1920-1922.
Shanon, B. (2 0 0 2). The antipodes of the mind: Charting the 
phenomenology of the ayahuasca experience. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Shim, G., Oh, J. S., Jung, W. H., Jang, J. H., Choi, C. H., Kim,
E .,... & Kwon, J. S. (2010). Altered resting-state connectiv­
ity in subjects at ultra-high risk for psychosis: an fMRI study. 
Behavioral and Brain Functions, 6(1), 1.
Smallwood, J., & Schooler, J. W. (2015). The science of mind 
wandering: Empirically navigating the stream of conscious­
ness. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 487—518.
Speth, J., Speth, C., Kaelen, M., Schloerscheidt, A. M., Feilding, 
A., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2016). Decreased 
mental time travel to the past correlates with default-mode 
network disintegration under lysergic acid diethylamide. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 30(4), 344—353.
Spitzer, M., Thimm, M., Hermle, L., Holzmann, P, Kovar, K. 
A., Heimann, H., . . . Schneider, F. (1996). Increased acti­
vation of indirect semantic associations under psilocybin. 
Biological Psychiatry, 39, 1055-1057.
Stace, W. T. (I960). Mysticism and philosophy. London: 
Macmillan Press.
Steeds, H., Carhart-Harris, R. L., & Stone, J. M. (2015). 
Drug models of schizophrenia. Therapeutic Advances in 
Psychopharmacology, 5(1), 43-58.
Strassman, R. J. (1984). Adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs: 
A review of the literature. The Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease, 172(10), 577-595.
Strassman, R. (2000). DMT: The spirit molecule: A doctors revo­
lutionary research into the biology of near-death and mystical 
experiences. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions/Bear.
Studerus, E., Gamma, A., Kometer, M., & Vollenweider, F. X. 
(2012). Prediction of psilocybin response in healthy volun­
teers. PLoS One, 7(2), e30800.
Tagliazucchi, E., Carhart-Harris, R., Leech, R., Nutt, D., & 
Chialvo, D. R. (2014). Enhanced repertoire of brain dynam­
ical states during the psychedelic experience. Human Brain 
Mapping, 35(11), 5442-5456.
Taussig, M. T. (1987). Shamanism, colonialism, and the wild 
man: A study in terror and healing. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Terhune, D. B., et al. (2016) A placebo-controlled investigation 
of synaesthesia-like experiences under LSD. Neuropsychologia, 
88, 28-34.
Terracciano, A., McCrae, R. R., Brant, L. J., & Costa Jr, P. T. 
(2005). Hierarchical linear modeling analyses of the NEO- 
PI-R scales in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. 
Psychology and Aging, 20(3), 493.
Thibault, R. T., Lifshitz, M., Jones, J. M., & Raz, A. 
(2014). Posture alters human resting-state. Cortex, 58, 
199-205.
Thibault, R. T., Lifshitz, M., & Raz, A. (2016). Body position 
alters human resting-state: Insights from multi-postural mag­
netoencephalography. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 10(3), 
772-780.
Vaidya, V. A., Marek, G. J., Aghajanian, G. K., & Duman, 
R. S. (1997). 5-HT2A receptor-mediated regulation of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor mRNA in the hippocam­
pus and the neocortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 77(8), 
2785-2795.
van den Heuvel, M. P, Kahn, R. S., Goni, J., & Sporns, O. 
(2 0 1 2). High-cost, high-capacity backbone for global brain 
communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 109(28), 11372-11377.
Vollenweider, F. X., & Kometer, M. (2010). The neurobiology 
of psychedelic drugs: Implications for the treatment of mood 
disorders. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 77(9), 642—651.
Vollenweider, F. X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M. F., 
Babler, A., Vogel, H., & Hell, D. (1998). Psilocybin induces 
schizophrenia-like psychosis in humans via a serotonin-2 
agonist action. Neuroreport, .9(17), 3897-3902.
M I C H A E L  L I F S H I T Z ,  ELI O D A  S H E I N E R ,  A N D  L A U R E N C E  J. K I R M A Y E R
593

Wager, T. D., & Atlas, L. Y. (2015). The neuroscience of pla­
cebo effects: connecting context, learning and health. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 16(7), 403—418.
Wallace, A. (1959). Cultural determinants of response to 
hallucinatory experience. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
7(1), 58-69.
Walsh, R. E., & Vaughan, F. E. (1993). Paths beyond ego: The 
transpersonal vision. Los Angeles: Perigee Books.
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Ford, J. M. (2 0 1 2). Default mode net­
work activity and connectivity in psychopathology. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 49—76.
Zinberg, N. E. (1984). Drug, set, and setting: The basis for 
controlled intoxicant use. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Zmigrod, L., Garrison, J. R., Carr, J., & Simons, J. S. (2016). 
The neural mechanisms of hallucinations: A quantita­
tive meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 69, 113-123.
Zou, Q., Wu, C. W., Stein, E. A., Zang, Y, & Yang, Y. 
(2009). Static and dynamic characteristics of cerebral 
blood flow during the resting state. Neuroimage, 48(3), 
515-524.
594
C U L T U R A L  N E U R O P H E N O M E N O L O G Y  OF P S Y C H E D E L I C  T H O U G H T

I N D E X
Note: Tables, figures and notes are indicated by an italic t, /o r n following the page number.
A
AA (attentional agency), 104-105 
AB-AC paradigm, 18 
“Absorption in Daydreams” subscale, 148 
Acem Meditation, 529. See also
meditation/meditation practice 
action theory, 104 
activation baseline, 58 
Activation-Synthesis hypothesis, 457 
The Act of Creation (Koestler), 301 
Adam, James, 300 
aesthetic condition, 332 
aesthetic experiences 
aesthetic triad in, 33cf  
after-effects of, 334 
emotion valuation system in, 330 
internal orientation in, 331-333 
meaning knowledge system in, 331 
passive viewing paradigm in, 332 
sensory-motor system in, 331 
aesthetic judgments
aesthetic emotions and, 331 
distributed structures in, 328-330 
MEG studies and, 333 
neuroaesthetics and, 327 
as object oriented, 332 
of paintings/portraits, 328- 334, 329/  
affective correlates, 73, 209-210 
affective function/functioning, 56, 194,
2 0 7, 211, 509, 513 
affective processing, 252 
affective reactions, 38, 482, 483 
agentive direction, 101 
“aha!” moment, 134- 135, 137, 238, 311—313, 
314fy 3^1, 323-3M 
Alda, A., 35 
Algazi, G., 136 
Alloy, L. B., 225 
alphabets, impact of, 136 
a-2 adrenergic agonists, 339 
alternate uses task (AUT), 286- 288, 344 
Alzheimer’s disease, 152, 345, 4 9 4, 495/  
4 96- 4 9 8, 500, 501, 512 
American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 394 
amygdala
activation of, 48
aesthetic judgments and, 328-329 
connectivity with other brain regions, 174 
in dopaminergic pathways, 342/
human electrophysiology studies on, 
i7ir, 172/
MTL regions and, 578 
in noradrenergic pathways, 338/  
in pathological changes, 500 
recognized objects and, 128 
RSS scores and, 515 
self-generated thought and, 170 
in semantic dementia, 495/  
stereotactically implanted depth 
electrodes (sEEG) and, 256 
analogies, use of, 305-306 
Andreasen, N. C., 148,185 
Andrews-Hanna, J. R.
content regulation hypothesis of, 146 
context regulation hypothesis of, 153 
on daily life thinking, 2 0 7, 209 
on default network, 127, 503 
oniPP content, 104 
on hippocampal indexing theory, 18 
on mind-wandering/daydreaming, 
198- 199^ 2 0 6, 210 
on spontaneous thought, 6, 205 
on task-unrelated thoughts, 182-183 
angular gyrus
in default mode network, 7 4, 74/^ 7 6, 
149-150
in divergent thinking, 278/  
semantic associations and, 78 
in task-unrelated thought, 151f  
Angwin, A. J., 343 
Ansari, D., 279
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) 
activation of, 6 4, 278 
aesthetic judgments and, 328 
in creative thought, 155/  
during divergent thinking, 278/  
emotion/motivation centers and, 48 
in frontoparietal control network, 151/  
in mind-wandering, 153 
in NREM Sleep, 377-378 
pathological changes in, 500 
region-of-interest activation, 344 
in ruminative thought, 513— 515 
salience network and, 363, 541 
self-generated thought and, 380 
in spontaneous thought, 514 
anterior temporal lobe (ATL), 7 4, 74/^ 7 6, 
315, 328, 499
Anthony, S. H., 287 
“anti-flow,” 311. See also flow 
Antrobus, J., 6, 129, 20 2, 2 0 4, 239,
265, 458
anxiety/anxiety disorders
addiction/attachments and, 532 
avoidance-related goals of, 226 
constraints in, 50, 145,157 
cultural beliefs and, 443 
in Darkness Therapy sessions, 568 
daydreaming and, 223 
in EUE/ICE diarists, 556 
flow dynamics and, 311 
in hypnotherapy, 484 
interoceptive input in, 59 
mindfulness practices and, 451, 483 
mind-wandering and, 50, 209 
psychedelics and, 576, 582-583 
in REST tank populations, 566 
rumination and, 511-512 
self-generated thoughts and, 56 
sleep paralysis and, 437, 441- 442, 445-446 
in sleep/relaxation states, 484- 485, 486 
spontaneous thought and, 487 
stimulus reduction and, 562 
stress effects on, 339-340 
task-independent thought and, 103 
thought suppression and, 482 
Archer, B., 302 
Aristotle, 3, 371 
arousal baseline, 58 
art/artists. See visual art/artists 
Aserinsky, E., 126 
Atkinson, E., 473
attainment of goals. See goal attainment 
attentional agency (AA), 104-105 
attentional attenuation
external stimulus inputs and, 252 
neural mechanisms underlying, 253, 254f  
attentional disengagement
cognitive/affective processing and, 252-253 
EEG use/activity in, 249- 250, 253, 255 
evidence for, 250 
future directions in, 255-256 
neural mechanisms underlying, 254^ 
sensory/perceptual processing and, 
250-252
terminology/term usage in, 250 
attentional focus theory, 224
I N D E X
5 95

attentional scope model of rumination, 513 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(ADHD), 29- 30, 145, 263 
auditory imagery 
in daydreams, 195 
in mind-wandering, 205 
in self vs. non-self focus, 425 
in sleep paralysis, 442 
Augustine, C., 387
AUT (alternate uses task), 286- 288, 344 
autobiographical future planning, 276 
autobiographical historicity, 417/  
autobiographical memory. See also 
involuntary memories 
in Alzheimer’s disease, 4 9 6 - 4 9 7  
in children, 360
in dementia syndromes, 493-494 
involuntary memory functions in, 
47^-473
neural basis of, 183-185 
organization of, 475 
periods of rest and, 148 
posterior cingulate cortex in, 497 
research on, 4 6 9, 475 
in semantic dementia, 498 
terminology/classification and, 4 7 0  
autobiographical planning, 153, 197, 205, 
207- 210, 239 
automatic constraints
affective/perceptual biases in, 157 
conceptual space relating to, 4f  
DMN core and, 578 
examples of, 4  
measurement of, 148 
psychedelics and, 576 
relaxing of, 482 
ruminative thoughts and, 145 
spontaneous thought and, 98, 144^ 
unintentional initiation of, 156 
autonoetic consciousness, 16 
autonomous subjectivity, 108 
autopilot, working on, 306 
autoscopy/autoscopic elements, 393, 439, 
4 4 0, 445 
Axelrod, V., 405
ayahuasca, 573, 574, 577, 579- 581, 584- 588. 
See also psychedelic substances/ 
experiences
B
Baird, B., 197, 208- 2 0 9, 219- 22 0, 236, 238, 
242, 253 
Bak, P., 317 
Baker-Sennett, J., 315 
Balota, D. A., 197 
Bar, M., 405 
Barron, E., 252 
Barry, R. J., 58 
Baumeister, R. F., 203 
Beaty, R. E., 6, 279, 280, 288 
Beethoven, L. von, 137 
behavioral variant frontotemporal
dementia (FTD), 4 9 4, 495\f, 500-501
behaviorism, 71,157 
Benedek, M., 6 
Berkowitz, A. L., 279 
Berman, M. G., 148 
Bernhardt, B., 5 
Berntsen, D., 182, 471, 4 74 
Besner, D., 266
^-adrenergic antagonists/blockers/ 
receptors, 338-342 
Beversdorf, D., 6 
Bielenberg, J., 304
binding hypothesis of consciousness, 58 
biological evolution 
creativity and, 116-118 
free will and, 118-119 
generativity theory and, 116,118 
learning theory and, 115— 116 
selectionist theory of, 114-115 
black box, creative process as, 307 
“blind” variants (BV), 118, 286 
blind variation and selective retention 
(BVSR), 117- 120, 117/  286 
Boccia, M., 328-329 
BOLD (blood-oxygen-level-dependent) 
signals, 62, 6 4, 130, 169, 255, 275 
Bortolotti, L., 103 
Braboszcz, C., 251 
Bradbury, R., 138 
Brahe, T., 136 
brain networks
artistic performance and, 279-280 
creative cognition and, 275- 2 79,
281, 290
in creative thinking, 6 
default network and, 363, 364, 480 
dementia syndromes and, 493-496 
in FA meditation, 541, 547 
flow and, 324
functional coupling between, 253,
256, 292
pain and, 6, 521-522 
psychedelic substances/experiences and, 
574> 579
in self-generated thought, 176 
in sleep/dreaming, 412 
brain’s resting state. See also resting state 
functional connectivity (RSFC) 
characterization of, 64 
fluctuation in, 62 
spontaneous thought and, 57 
brain’s spontaneous activity 
different stimuli in, 57-58 
spatial/temporal features of, 61-63 
task-unrelated thoughts and, 56-57 
brainstorming, 3 0 0, 480 
Braun, A. R., 279, 378 
brevity, in exosensory imagery, 425 
Bridge, H., 331 
Broadway, J. M., 221 
brooding, 225, 471, 513- 514. See also 
rumination 
Brookes, K., 315 
Brown, S., 330
Buckner, R. L., 127,182 
Buddhism/Buddhist practice, 7, 137, 3 06, 
371. See also contemplative traditions 
Bulkeley, K., 443 
BV (“blind” variants), 118, 286 
BVSR (blind variation and selective 
retention), 117- 120, 117f  286
c
Calvino, I., 304 
Campbell, D., 117-118 
Cant, J., 329, 334 
Cardena, E., 208, 236 
Carhart-Harris, M., 577, 578 
Carr, N., 136 
Carruthers, P., 88, 93-94 
Cassol, H., 182, 204 
catastrophic interference, 18 
catecholamineric systems, 337 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
gene polymorphisms, 344 
Ceci, S., 315 
Cela-Conde, C. J., 333 
central executive network (CEN), 57, 61, 
6 4, 364, 514
chained involuntary memories, 4 7 0, 4 7 2.
See also involuntary memories 
chance then choice theory, 118-119 
Chandler, R., 137 
Chatterjee, A., 330 
Cheyne, J. A., 438, 4 4 0, 441, 442 
Chi, R. P., 316
Chinese thought. See contemplative 
traditions
cholinergic system, 344-345 
Christian, B. M., 2 02, 2 06 
Christian mysticism. See contemplative 
traditions 
Christoff, K.
on default variability hypothesis, 5 
on hippocampal indexing theory, 18 
on memory consolidation, 220 
on meta-awareness of 
mind-wandering, 405 
on meta-cognitive control, 241 
on mind-wandering, 6 4, 94 
on MTL subsystem, 578 
on network interactions, 516 
on spontaneous thought, 6, 7, 98,
H4/> r45
cingulum-operculum network, 61 
Clancy, S. A., 4 4 0  
Clarke, A. R., 58
classroom settings. See educational 
settings, mind-wandering in 
Clinically Standardized Meditation, 530. 
See also meditation/meditation 
practice
clustered learning, 15/  
cognitive agency (CA), 88, 104- 105,
386, 388
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 241, 
4 48, 526, 582
596
I N D E X

cognitive control networks, 26, 280—281, 
4 9 4, 501-502 
cognitive extension, 67 
cognitive fatigue, 29-30 
cognitive flexibility, 239, 337- 339, 345, 
576-577
Cognitive Intrusions Questionnaire, 148 
cognitive processing
in adaptive thought/behavior, 227 
as automatic/sub-personal, 105 
dissociation and, 315, 386 
fluency and, 312 
frontal activation and, 131 
goal commitments and, 227 
of goal-/emotional-related cues,
223-224
interference effect and, 216 
in lexical-decision making, 218 
in lucid dreams, 397-405 
mind-wandering’s impact on, 252-253 
model/representation of, 99-100 
rumination and, 224 
of situations, 226 
Cole, S. N., 182 
competitive learning, 14,16 
competitive trace theory, 13 
complementary learning systems model, 
18, 459, 462
complexity theory, 317, 323 
component process account
future research directions for, 80 
perceptual processing and, 76-78 
representational content and, 76  
spontaneous representations in, 78-80 
in spontaneous thought, 5, 75-76 
comprehension, spontaneous thought link 
to, 73/
computation theory of mind, 313, 316- 317, 
321, 323
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase) 
gene polymorphisms, 344 
conceptual art, 304 
Conceptual Blockbusting (Adam), 300 
conscious goal-representation, 106 
conscious self-knowledge, 107 
conscious thought
in component process account, 76 
in creative problem solving, 239 
dreams/dreaming and, 41, 388, 395, 4 0 4  
lucidity/lucidity lapses and,
399- 401, 403
mind-wandering as, 101, 216 
in NREM sleep, 103 
philosophy of, 105 
in preschool children, 360 
spontaneity of, 98-99 
unconscious thought v., 217, 220 
consecutive representations, 12,17 
consolidation models, 17 
constrained flexibility, 338 
constraints on thought. See also automatic 
constraints; deliberate constraints 
in creative production, 304
in mind-wandering, 50 
types of mind-wandering and, 6 
constructive mind-wandering, 240-242 
contemplative traditions
antidotes to spontaneous thought in,
535-537
conceptualization of spontaneous 
thought, 529-531
on conducive factors in thoughts,
534-535
on detrimental factors in thoughts,
533-534
on past-oriented thought content, 537 
on thoughts as demons, 532-533 
on thoughts as digression, 531 
on thoughts as obstructions, 532 
on thoughts as phenomena, 531-532 
content of thought/thought content 
constraints governing, 98 
contemplative traditions and, 537 
in daily life, 203
early experience sampling studies of, 196 
goal-related external stimuli in, 217 
influence of personal goals, 20 6 
phenomenal qualities of, 546-547 
prospective bias in 
mind-wandering, 202 
transformation of stimuli into, 57— 58 
content regulation hypothesis, 146 
content variability, role of, 12, 14- 2 0, 15/  
context regulation hypothesis, 153 
continuity hypothesis, 554 
Cooley, C., 301 
Cooney, R. E., 515 
Cox, W. M., 196- 197, 2 0 4 - 2 0 6  
creative cognition
artistic performance and, 279-280 
brain network relevance to, 275-279 
controlled processes in, 287- 288,
290-  
291
executive control and, 275- 2 7 6, 280 
future research directions in, 281 
short-/long-term perspective on,
291-  
294
spontaneous thought and, 280—281,
290-  
291
theoretical accounts of, 285-286 
The Creative Habit (Tharp), 304 
creative idea generation, 155f y 156, 280, 
286- 288, 2 9 0, 483
creative problem-solving, 2 20, 239, 288,
291-  
294, 299, 303, 338, 341, 516. See 
also insight problem-solving (IPS); 
problem solving
creative processes/production 
analysis/synthesis, 302 
being between fields, 306 
being lost, 303-304 
being on autopilot, 306 
as black box, 307 
constraints in, 304 
failing, 303
generation/evaluation of ideas, 300-302
incubation/illumination, 302 
making it new, 304 
making it wrong, 304-305 
metaphor/simile/analogy use, 305-306 
naming/renaming, 305 
play/jamming and, 306 
problem-solving in, 299— 300 
pro to typing/testing, 302-303 
questions/answers, 302 
working half awake, 306— 307 
zooming in/out, 302 
creative thought
brain regions recruited during, 167/  
default/frontoparietal networks in, 
154-156
empirical study of, 286-287 
neural underpinnings of, 155/  
spontaneous processes in, 288-290 
creativity
BVSR theory of, 117-120 
as definition of species, 7 
inspired by Muses, 3 
mind-wandering and, 6 
parameters of, 116-117 
psychedelics in, 580-581 
“selectionist” views of, 6 
sightedness and, 117, 117/  
spontaneous thought and, 6 
theory of, 116 
types of mind-wandering 
and, 238-239
creativity, of neuropsychopharmacology 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and, 
340-341
catecholamineric system in, 337 
cholinergic system in, 344-345 
cocaine withdrawal, 340-341 
cognitive flexibility tasks and,
337—339, 345
D 1/D 2 receptors in, 342-343 
dopaminergic system in, 337- 338, 
342- 346, 343/
future directions for, 346-347 
L-Dopa and, 342-344 
neurotransmitter systems in, 29, 104, 
342, 344, 345, 346 
noradrenergic system in, 337-342 
norepinephrine in, 339- 341, 344 
Parkinson’s disease and, 342-344 
propranolol in, 338-342 
REM sleep and, 341 
serotonergic system in, 346, 346 f 
set-shifting tasks and, 337- 338, 342, 
345-346
signal-to-noise ratio and, 340, 341,
344-345
stress/stressors in, 338- 340, 346-347 
Creativity from Constraints (Stokes), 304 
cross-frequency coupling, 6 if 6 4, 66 
Csicsvari, J., 16
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 138, 3 06, 309, 
323-324
cultural source hypothesis, 443
I N D E X
597

Cupchik, G., 329, 332, 334
current concerns hypothesis/theory, 19,
153, 20 2, 2 0 6, 215, 224-225
D
Daheane, S., 67
daily life functioning, mind-wandering 
and, 207-210 
Dali, Salvador, 137 
D’Argembeau, A., 6, 182, 185, 204 
Darwin (Desmond and Moore), 134 
Darwin, C., 114- 115, 119, 134, 137,138 
“dasein,” concept of, 306 
daydreaming
cognitive utility of, 123-126 
guilty-dysphoric daydreams, 195, 207-  
208, 210, 235-236 
maladaptive/excessive, 222-223 
mind-wandering and, 6 
poor attentional control and, 195, 
207- 208, 235
positive-constructive daydreaming, 195, 
207- 208, 210, 235-236 
questionnaire studies on, 194-196 
rumination and, 225— 226 
structure of, 194
temporal orientation of, 198—2 0ir 
term usage in, 233-234 
“day residue,” 389, 4 2 0, 458. See also 
dreams / dreaming 
De Bono, E., 306 
decision making 
in addiction, 223 
ADHD and, 30, 35, 4 0  
attractor networks and, 19 
cognitive fatigue and, 29 
delay discounting and, 240 
difficulties in, 502 
DMN activation in, 577 
dopamine in, 342 
imagination in, 79 
in lexical-decision tasks, 218 
as mental autonomy, 105 
mind-wandering and, 197, 234, 239,
242, 266
in Santo Daime religion, 586 
self-referencing and, 186 
spontaneous thought in, 482 
“system 2” thinking and, 23 
unconscious thought in, 217 
de-correlated memories, 14- 15, 15/  
decoupling. See attentional disengagement;
perceptual decoupling 
default mega-networks, 127 
default mode network (DMN) 
activation/deactivation of, 25, 26,
289, 523 
in ADHD, 30
aesthetic experiences and, 329- 330, 
332-333
cognitive behavioral training of, 526 
cortical midline neural activity in,
61, 63, 65
development of, 364 
discovery of, 137 
disintegration of, 577-578 
in divergent thinking, 278f  
in dreaming/creative thought, 154-156 
executive control network and, 290 
frequency oscillations and, 255 
frontoparietal network anti-correlation 
with, 580 
hypnosis and, 584 
in mind-wandering, 149— 152 
pain and, 523, 525 
perceptual decoupling of, 77 
phase synchronization within, 253, 254f  
posterior cingulate cortex in, 329, 578 
psychedelics and, 577-579 
representational content of, 76 
in rest intervals, 27,137 
in self-generated thought, 166-168 
semantic/episodic systems and, 77/  
sleep cycle and, 378-379 
spatial distribution of, 7 4, 74^ 
spontaneous activity of, 59 
in tasks/at rest, 75/  
default strategy, in goal-directed 
thought, 26-27 
default variability hypothesis 
content variability in, 14-16 
episodic memories and, 12 
idea/overview of, 5,12 
mental content production in, 11 
pattern completion in, 16-17 
pattern separation in, 12-14 
semantic optimization hypothesis 
and, 17-18 
De Koninck , J., 461 
delay discounting, 187, 2 20, 240 
deliberate constraints 
on attention, 482, 483 
by cognitive control, 4, 575 
conceptual space relating to, 413 
FPCN in, 155-156 
in psychedelic healing, 576 
in spontaneous thought, 144/^ 146, 516 
deliberate rest, discovery of, 137-138 
deliberate thought
cognitive agency and, 104 
external stimuli and, 43 
meaning attribution in, 43-44 
mind-wandering and, 2 06 
prayer and, 42
vs. spontaneous thought, 5, 4 0, 56, 145, 
148, 152- 153,156 
in STI mode, 125 
De Lissnyder, E., 224 
Delorme, A., 251
delusions, 103, 109, 223, 387- 388, 438, 439, 
4 4 7, 451WI, 4 8 4, 485 
dementia syndromes
cognitive control processes in, 501-502 
future research directions in, 502-503 
impaired spontaneous thought in, 502 
large-scale brain networks and, 4 9 4
memory-based construction/simulation 
in, 494- 495, 4 9 7 -499 
mentalizing in, 499— 501 
MTL subsystems in, 49 
4 9 6 - 4 9 7
spontaneous thought and, 493 
Dennett, Daniel, 99
depressive rumination, 5, 6 6, 88, 103- 104, 
225, 517. See also rumination 
De Raedt, R., 224 
Derakshan, N., 224 
Desmond, Adrian, 134 
DeYoung, C. G., 314 
Dietrich, A., 313
diffuse anxiety, 50. See also anxiety/anxiety 
disorders
Dijksterhuis, A., 217, 220 
dilution (diluted connectivity), 13 
“Dimensions of Fantasy: Imagination 
Aspects of Internally-Produced 
Cognitive Processes Production” 
(Singer), 123
direct involuntary memories, 4 7 0  
discounting, meaning and, 42 
discovery of alternation, 318 
disgust induction condition, 217 
Disruption (Dru), 304 
distortion-corrected imaging 
techniques, 76
disunified thinking, 88, 93- 9 4, 94f  
divergent thinking (DT) tasks
brain engagement during, 277- 278, 290 
creativity and, 133 
by default network, 280-281 
dopaminergic system and, 344 
in the FCPN, 156 
goal-directedness of, 291-292 
incubation effects for, 289 
insight processing and, 314 
mindfulness and, 483 
personal agency/autonomy and, 119 
psychedelics and, 580-581 
in REST experiments, 566 
spontaneous thought and, 481 
in structure of intellect model, 286 
working-memory capacity and, 288 
Dixon, J. A., 317, 318, 319 
D’Mello, S., 203, 217 
Dobson, C., 6 
Doghramji, K., 4 4 6, 448 
Domhoff, G. W., 6 
dopaminergic system, 342-344 
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), 
151/  153, 155/  278-279 
dorsal attention network, 61,
6 4, 75/  219
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) 
in attention to pain, 524f  
in brain network research, 27 7, 278/  
in creative idea evaluation, 155f  
in functional connectivity analysis, 280 
goal-directed thinking and, 25-26 
metacognitive awareness and, 153 
Dorsch, F., 88, 93-94
598
I N D E X

dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), 
4 9 4, 495f> 4 99- 500* 524^
Doyle, J., 304
“dreaming consciousness,” 357 
dreams/dreaming. See also lucid 
dreaming; microdreaming 
phenomenology; sleep 
as adaptations/non-adaptations,
365-366
bizarreness/bizarre features in, 5, 127, 
129- 130, 154- 155, 357- 358, 380, 395, 
4 0 0, 4 4 4, 4 4 7, 457 
of children/adolescents, 360-361 
as conscious mental simulation, 387-388 
consistency/continuity in, 359 
content meaning/analyses, 358- 359, 
389- 390, 460/  
correlation with REM, 355 
during daytime napping, 462/  
default network in, 361-364 
dream social networks, 359-360 
electrophysiological stimulations 
and, ljit
external stimuli and, 356 
functional neuroimaging of, 376 
future simulation in, 459-460 
human electrophysiology studies of, ijit 
importance attributed to, 36 
improbable identities in, 127, 129, 358 
as involuntary/uncontrollable, 387 
memory and, 457- 459, 461-463 
naturalistic hypothesis of, 3 
neural basis/underpinnings of, 6, 155\f, 357 
neurological studies on, 364-365 
neurophysiological correlates of, 411 
neurophysiological indicators in, 412 
during overnight sleep, 462/  
personal episodic memories in, 3 60, 362 
pre-sleep suggestion and, 356 
previous day events and, 356 
role of default/frontoparietal networks 
in, 154-156
during-sleep suggestion and, 356 
in spontaneous thought, 4f  
threat simulation hypothesis of, 459 
topic changes in, 358 
transition into, 363-364 
typical/recurrent dreams, 357 
Dresler, M., 4 0 7  
Dru, J.-M., 304 
Duchamp, M., 304 
Dunn, G., 7 
DuPre, E., 7 
Dupret, D., 16
dynamical systems theory (DST),
316- 317, 321
dynamical systems theory of cognition 
(DSTC), 318- 319, 322-323
E
ease
in context of motivation, 48 
experience of, 5, 312
in future research directions, 51-52 
quality of, 4 7, 51-52 
Ebbesen, E. B., 240 
Ebbinghaus, H., 469 
Edison, T., 307
educational settings, mind-wandering in 
inattention over time, 263— 265 
intentional/unintentional types of, 
260-261
massive open online courses, 259-260 
mindfulness training and, 262 
OCD symptoms and, 263 
prevalence of, 260-263 
student motivation and, 262 
studies of, 260
task performance decreases, 265-268 
effect, law of, 115 
Eickhoff, S. B., 330 
Eifring, H., 7, 530 
Ekirch, A. R., 135
electrical brain stimulation, 169, 173- 174, 
173/  5^5
electrocorticography (ECoG), 255-256 
electroencephalogram (EEG) 
methodology
in attentional disengagement, 249-250 
cognitive/affective processing and, 252-253 
future directions in, 255-256 
neural mechanisms in attentional 
attenuation, 250, 254f  
resting state EEG activity, 253, 255 
sensory/perceptual processing and, 
250-252
electrophysiology, 6, 166, 373, 376, 393, 521
elicitation interviews, 413, 448
Eliot, T. S., 557-558
Ellamil, M., 166, 281, 545
emergence notion, 315— 319
emergent model, 125,131
emotional arousal, 102, 218
emotional intensity, 48, 2 0 6, 461, 497
emotional responses, 218— 219
empirical aesthetics, 331
encoding strategy, 61
enduring/transient constraints, 481
Engen, H., 2 0 7, 2 0 9, 237
Engert, V., 209
episodic efficiency hypothesis, 12-13 
episodic memory
in Alzheimer’s disease, 4 9 6 - 4 9 7  
in default variability hypothesis, 20 
in divergent thinking, 281 
DMN’s role in, 26, 7 6, jy f 
dreaming and, 412, 421 
meta-cognition for, 78, 79/  
in neocortex, 14 
pattern completion for, 16 
pattern separation for, 12 
reactivation of, 13 
in self-generated thought, 4 94 
in semantic dementia, 498-499 
semantic memory and, 17 
term usage, 431723
episodic-to-semantic transformation,
17- 18, 20
epistemic agent model (EAM), 103, 105, 
107, 388
epistemic innocence, 103 
Epstein, L. H., 240 
Epstein, R., 115, 116,118 
Erikson, E., 134
error-related negativity (fERN), 252 
Espie, C. A., 389
event-related potentials (ERPs), 147, 147/  
222, 252, 340
evolution. See biological evolution 
executive control
anterior cingulate cortex and, 48 
creative cognition and, 275- 2 7 6, 280 
DMN and, 75/  
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex 
(dACC), 278 
hypothesis of, 250 
meta-awareness in, 235 
mind-wandering and, 64,144 
under non-demanding conditions, 79 
rumination and, 224, 513— 514 
executive control hypothesis, 250 
executive control network (ECN), 6 4, 
275- 2 7 6, 2 9 0, 501-502 
executive failure hypothesis, 19 
exosensory imagery, 425, 426- 42/f 
Experience of Cognitive Intrusion of Pain 
scale, 526
experiential source hypothesis, 443 
Experimental Psychology, 126 
exploration/exploitation trade-off 
default strategy in, 26-27 
fatigue strategy in, 28- 29, 30 
framework of, 24 
goal-directed thinking in, 25-26 
management of, 26 
mind-wandering in, 24— 25 
oscillation strategy in, 27- 28, 30 
exploration phase, 286 
externally guided cognition, 59 
exteroceptive state, 58 
extreme and unusual environments (EUEs) 
astronauts and, 561 
cognitive phenomena in, 556-557 
Desert Fathers and, 559-560 
examples/categorization of, 553- 555, 554f  
Ghost Dance religion, 560, 561/  
isolated, confined environments 
(ICEs), 554
“long eye” episodes in, 556-557 
monasticism and, 558 
religious enlightenment/inspiration 
and, 559
sensed presence phenomenon,
557-558.558/
sensory deprivation and, 662 
spiritual/mystical experiences in, 558-562 
stimulus reduction in, 6 6 2 - 6 6 6  
vision quests and, 560 
Whirling Dervishes and, 558— 559
I N D E X
599

F
Faber, M., 5 
failing, 303
false awakenings, 403, 405, 441. See also 
sleep paralysis experiences 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), 255, 396/  
fatigue strategy, 28- 29, 30 
Favila, S. E., 14
fearful isolated sleep paralysis, 441. See also 
nightmares; sleep paralysis (SP) 
feedback, flow and, 311- 313, 318, 321-322 
Fere, C. S., 222 
Ferraro, L., 6 
Finger, K., 315 
Fioratou, E., 287
first-person perspective (iPP), 9 9, 102—104, 
106, 241
first-person self-report assessments, 147/  
Fiss, H., 461 
Flanders, J. L., 314
flexible constraints, 4 . See also automatic 
constraints; deliberate constraints 
flip-flop thinking, 6, 3 0 0, 302 
flotation tanks, 553, 563, 563/  564/^ 565-  
566, 567/  569
flow
“aha!” moment, 311- 313, 314f, 321, 
323-324 
“anti-flow,” 311
complexity theory and, 317, 323 
computation theory of mind in, 313, 
316- 317, 321, 323
Csikszentmihalyi’s theory of, 310— 311 
discovery of alternation in, 318 
dynamical systems theory of cognition 
(DSTC) in, 318- 319, 322-323 
emergence notion in, 315— 319 
feedback and, 311—313, 318, 321-322 
fluency experience in, 312- 313, 321, 324 
force tracing in, 318-319 
Gestalt framework in, 310, 312- 317, 315\f, 
320,323
hypofrontality in, 313 
implicit learning and, 310, 313, 321-324 
implicit processing in, 321— 322 
insight cascade in, 311- 312, 316, 320-324 
insight problem-solving (IPS) in, 311— 
313, 314fy 316, 318- 320, 323-324 
intuition and, 321-322 
network theory in, 319- 321, 320/  
neuroimaging research on, 316 
“phase transition” in, 318-319 
phenomenon of, 3 06, 309— 310 
S-curve learning in, 314 
search-inference framework in, 313— 314 
self-organizing criticality (SOC) and,
316-  
317, 317/  321 
shifting frame in, 320, 323 
skill-stretching in, 311, 313, 323 
spontaneous self-organization in, 316,
317-  
318, 317/  323
flow channel, 310, 311, 322- 323, 323f  
flow construct, 323f
fluency experience, 312- 313, 321, 324 
fMRI (functional magnetic resonance 
imaging)
across NREM/REM sleep stages, 373 
in aesthetic experiences, 332-333 
aesthetic judgments and, 328 
of default mode network (DMN), 25 
in divergent thinking study, 278, 290 
FA meditation and, 540 
of improvisation, 279/  
inner thoughts assessment in, 195 
for language/executive function tasks in 
ASD, 341
L-Dopa effects and, 344 
for lucid dreaming, 391 
in mind-wandering studies, 52 
of network interactions, 219 
networks studied by, 275 
of perceptual decoupling, 78 f 
of psychedelic effects, 577- 578, 587 
resting-state analyses in, 253 
retrieval-induced facilitation and, 14 
RSFC and, 143
self-generated thought and, 166-168 
of self-reported pain, 523-525 
in spontaneous thought measurement, 
146-147
of STI measures, 130-131 
task-based, 2 76, 27 7, 515 
in transition to mind-wandering/ 
dreaming, 363-364 
focused attention
cooperative role of brain networks 
in, 279
creative cognition and, 275-276 
in FA meditation, 547 
incubation effects and, 289 
involuntary memories and, 471, 4 7 4 
in meditation, 451 
salience network and, 363, 500 
Focused Attention (FA) meditation. See 
also meditation/meditation practice 
brain networks in, 5541f  
breath/body practices in, 530 
cognitive dynamics of, 54cf  
cognitive/neural dynamics during, 
540-542
individual thought episodes 
during, 546f
subjective reports during, 544-545 
force tracing, 318-319 
forgetting of fixating elements, 289 
Foss, M. J., 459 
Foster, B. L., 172 
Foulkes, D., 412 
Fourier transform, 255, 396/
Fox, K. C. R., 6, 18, 130, 241, 405,
406726, 412 
Frankfurt, H., 90 
Franklin, M. S., 2 0 9, 221, 237 
free-association, 293, 4 7 0, 581 
Freedberg, D., 331 
free energy minimization, 109722
free will, biological evolution and, 118-119 
Freire, P, 305
frequency bands/oscillations, 62, 253, 255, 
39i> 393> 396-397> 396/ 579 
Freud, S., 134, 194, 457-458 
Freudian slips/views/tradition, 36, 41, 241,
392, 431722, 537, 577
frontoparietal control network (FPCN) 
activation of, 131 
in attention to pain, 523 
in cognitive control processes, 501 
constraints imposed by, 480 
in dreaming/creative thought, 154-156 
in LREM sleep, 378-379 
in meta-analytic findings, 151f  
in mind-wandering, 152- 154, 516 
in promoting planning, 219 
in psychedelic experiences, 578 
in self-generated thought, 372, 380-381 
frontotemporal dementia, 494, 495/^ 500-501 
The Frustrated Songwriters Handbook 
(Coryat), 301
FTD (behavioral variant frontotemporal 
dementia), 4 9 4, 495\f, 500-501 
Fukuda, K., 437
functional connectivity. See also resting 
state functional connectivity (RSFC) 
aesthetic appreciation and, 333 
of brain regions, 59, 61 
of cortical midline structures, 63 
in dementia, 501, 503 
disintegration/decrease of, 378-379 
in extension of contents into thoughts, 
63/  6 4, 66
during improvisation, 280 
during language/executive functions in 
ASD, 341-342 
with L-dopa, 343 
of the left pCC, 74/  
in lifetime meditation experience, 542 
of medial temporal lobe, 175 
in NREM sleep, 376-377 
during pain, 523- 524, 524fy 526 
resting analysis of, 143, 146, 147/^ 174, 
277* 5H
retrospective assessment of, 148 
in rumination, 513, 515 
whole-brain analysis of, 2 77, 278/  
within DMN/default network, 7 6, 80, 
255, 278- 2 79, 278f  280, 362 
functional images, in memory sources, 423 
functional outcomes, of spontaneous 
thought, 72- 73, 73/  7 6, 80 
Fuseli, H., 4 4 2, 443/  
fusiform face area (FFA), 329 
future-oriented decision-making, 239- 2 4 0, 
242-243
future-oriented episodes, 183, 195, 197, 
202- 2 0 4, 207-211
G
Gallese, V., 331 
Gay, P., 134
600
I N D E X

Gehry, F., 304 
Geiger, J., 558 
geneplore model, 286 
general demand cortex, 26 
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 512 
generativity theory, 116,118 
gentle thoughts/movements, 51 
Gestalt framework, 310, 312- 317, 315f  
320, 323
Giambra, L., 195, 205, 235 
Gilbert, D. T., 222, 237 
Gilhooly, K. J., 287 
Girn, M., 6 
Gladstone, W., 134 
Global Neuronal Workspace Theory 
(GNWT), 67 
Goa, X., 330 
goal attainment
daydreaming and, 223 
facilitating action toward, 221 
facing difficulties/mental contrasting 
for, 227-228
positive/negative emotional charges 
in, 219
spontaneous thought and, 5, 216 
unconscious thought and, 217 
goal-directed thought/thinking 
constraints on, 4f  
default strategy in, 26-27 
as exploitive process, 25 
fatigue strategy in, 28- 29, 30 
mind-wandering and, 89-90 
neural regions supporting, 26 
oscillation strategy in, 27- 28, 30 
varieties of, 91f  
goal processing, 184-185 
goal theory of current concerns, 215, 223 
God, communication with, 36, 37, 41, 42 
Golchert, J., 152 
Gold, S. R., 203 
Goody, J., 136 
Gordon, A. M., 220, 4 44 
gradual exposure (interleaved 
learning), 17— 18 
Grafton, B., 224 
Graiver, I., 137 
Green, A. E., 278, 279 
Grinker, R., 575 
Grol, M., 223-224 
Grom, J. L., 449 
Gross, T., 317 
guidance, concept of, 90 
guided thinking, varieties of, 91f  
Guilford, J. P., 286
guilty-dysphoric daydreams, 195, 207- 208, 
210, 235-236 
Guston, R, 304
H
Hadot, R, 137
half-awake process, 306-307 
Hall, C. S., 458
hallucinations/hallucinatory experiences
age and, 195 
in autoscopy, 393 
autoscopy and, 393 
cognitive activity and, 374 
continuity hypothesis in, 554 
dreams/dreaming and, 357, 387, 406723, 
406224, 457 
in EUEs, 556
human electrophysiology studies on,
171fi 172/
in lucid dreams, 392 
medial temporal lobe and, 170, 578 
meditation and, 484-485 
in microdreams, 419-420 
in narcolepsy, 4 44 
on oneiragogic spectrum, 417 
origin sites for, 169, 173-174 
pseudohallucinations, 109224, 415 
in REST chambers, 563, 565 
sensed presence phenomenon of,
558, 570
sensory deprivation and, 487 
in sleep onset imagery, 415 
SP-associated experiences as, 438, 4 4 0, 
447> 45IWI
stimulus hunger and, 562 
trauma and, 486 
Hancock, R, 265 
Handy, T. C., 6 
Hanna, R., 109222, 388 
Hannway, O., 136 
Hasenkamp, W., 7, 530 
Hauser, T. U., 29-30 
Havelock, E., 136 
Hearne, K., 391 
Hebb, D. O., 15,562 
Hebbian learning network, 14,16 
Heidegger, M., 306 
Helmholtz, H. V., 265 
Herrera-Bennett, A., 5, 6 
Hertel, P. T., 224 
Hesse, J., 317 
Hiebert, E. H., 241
high-level symbolic cognition, 102,105 
hippocampal indexing theory, 13,18 
hippocampus/hippocampal processes 
in aesthetic judgments, 329 
in awareness of arising thoughts, 168/  
cholinergic projection and, 344 
de-correlated memories and, 15 
in default mode network, 7 4, j/\f, 149, 
I5I> 495f
in dreaming/creative thought, 155/  
in episodic memory, 16- 17, 2 0, 6 4, 498 
in functional connectivity, 376-378 
in memory consolidation, 152 
memory processing and, 459- 461, 463-  
4 6 4, 4 9 4, 4 9 6  
memory retrieval and, 480 
mental content emergence from, 19 
MTL structures and, 171f, 172f, 175,
362, 578
noradrenergic pathways and, 338f
in pattern separation, 12- 13, H 
in prospective consolidation 
hypothesis, 19
in self-generated thought, i6y f 170 
in serotonergic pathways, 346f  
history, spontaneous thinking in 
attitudes toward, 137 
biographical accounts, 134 
cultural/societal influences on, 139 
discovery of deliberate rest, 137-138 
outline of, 135
physical spaces and, 136-137 
scientists’ learning from, 138-139 
in work/workplaces, 135— 136 
in writing and cognition, 136 
Hobbes, T., 89 
Hobson, J. A., 127, 401, 457 
Hockey, R., 265 
Hogarth, R., 321-322 
Hold It Against Me (Doyle), 304 
Horikawa, T., 130 
Hori sleep-onset images, 416, 416/’ 
horizontal mental causation, 99,107 
How Designers Think (Lawson), 303 
Huang, C., 182 
Huang, M., 331 
Hufford, D., 443 
Hughes, R., 304 
Hulbert, J. C., 14
human electrophysiology studies, ijit 
human intracranial electrophysiology, 
168- 169,176
hypnagogic/hypnopompic states, 137,
390, 417
hypnosis, 36, 4 48, 485, 4 8 6, 584 
hypnotherapy, 48 4, 485 
hypofrontality, 313
I
idiopathic SP, 436. See also sleep 
paralysis (SP)
I f on a Winters Night a Traveler 
(Calvino), 304 
Iijima, Y., 197
illumination, 5, 126- 127, 279, 302, 
306- 307, 482
imagery disruption, in microdreams, 
428-429
Imaginal Process Inventory (IPI), 147—148, 
194- 196, 207-208 
immediate memory, as memory 
source, 420
immersive spatiotemporal hallucination 
(ISTH) model, 417, 417/  
implicit association test (IAT), 36 
implicit learning, 310, 313, 321-324 
implicit processing, 321— 322 
incubation phase/tasks, 103, 117, 22 0, 238, 
288- 289, 292, 302, 306-307 
independent component analysis (ICA), 
7 4, 280, 344, 580
individuation, of episodes/occurrences, 
101-102
I N D E X
6oi

infraslow-frequency fluctuations, 6 4 - 6 6  
insight, moment of, 288, 320— 321 
insight cascade, 311- 312, 316, 320-324 
insight problem-solving (IPS) 
creative thought and, 286-289 
discontinuity of, 318-319 
in flow process, 311—313, 323-324 
in incremental learning, 314f  
insight problem solving (IPS), 
mindfulness and, 483 
insight problem-solving (IPS) 
mindfulness and, 483 
in network theory, 319— 320 
neurological pattern of, 316 
spontaneous thought and, 138 
inspiration, original sense of, 3 
instability, in exosensory images, 425 
interleaved learning, 17— 18 
International Classification of Sleep 
Disorders, 442
interoceptive stimuli, 58, 6of, 61,102 
intracranial electroencephalography 
(IEEG), 147/  157, 414 
intracranial electrophysiology, 6, 166, 168-  
169, 172,176
intramental vertical causation, 107 
Intrusive Thoughts Questionnaires, 148 
intuition, flow and, 321— 322 
involuntary autobiographical memories, 
182, 4 7 0
involuntary memories 
categories of, 4 70 
chained involuntary memories,
4 7 0, 472
cuing characteristics, 471 
definition/term usage, 4 6 9, 4 7 0  
diary studies of, 4 7 0, 471-473 
in everyday life, 471-472 
free-association task in, 4 7 0 
frequency of, 471 
function/utility of, 473-474 
future research directions in, 474-475 
mental state during, 471 
methods of study, 470-471 
as random mental events, 471-472 
retrieval characteristics of, 475 
skeptical/non-skeptical accounts of, 4 74 
vs. voluntary memories, 472-473 
word-list memory tasks in, 4 6 9 - 4 7 0  
involuntary remembering, 4 7 0, 4 7 2 - 4 7 4  
Irish, M., 7 
Irving, Z. C., 6, 88
isolated, confined environments (ICEs), 
554—555. See also extreme and unusual 
environments (EUEs) 
isolated sleep paralysis, 436. See also sleep 
paralysis (SP)
isomorphism, 373, 381, 412, 414
J
Jackson, J. D., 197 
Jalal, B., 451
James, W., 11, 75, 124, 145, 443
jamming/word jamming, 306
Jampole, E. S., 242
Jauk, E., 6
Jeffries, E., 5
Jenkins, R., 134
Johnson, D. P, 511
Johnson, M. K., 184
Johnstone, S. J., 58
Jouvet, M., 127
Jung, R. E., 6
K
Kales, A., 394 
Kam, J., 6, 251 
Kamitani, Y., 130 
Kane, M. J., 203 
Kant, I., 109722,134 
Kaplan, C. A., 314 
Karpinska, K., 202 
Keen, A., 136 
Kekule, A., 138, 285 
Kemp, M. J., 331 
Kohler, W., 315
Killingsworth, M. A., 222, 237
kinesis, 417-420
Kirmayer, L., 7
Kirschner, A., 253
Kischka, U., 343
“Klartraum” (clear dream), 391
Klinger, E., 6, 153, 196- 197, 202- 2 0 6,
218, 225
Koestler, A., 301 
Kohler, W., 115 
Konopak, B. C., 242 
Kopp, K., 203, 217
Koster, E. H. W., 6, 222- 223, 224> 225 
Kramer, H., 304 
Kucyi, A., 7 
Kupor, D., 5
Kvavilashvili, L., 2 0 2, 4 7 0
L
LaBerge, S., 391 
Lalik, R., 241 
Langlitz, N., 588
La Pathologie des emotions (Fere), 222 
lateral prefrontal cortex (1PFC). See
also dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex 
(dlPFC); rostral lateral PFC (rlPFC) 
activation of, 279/  
in aesthetic encounters, 332 
attentional attenuation of, 253 
cognitive control processes of, 501 
in creative thought, 290 
in divergent thinking, 2 77, 278f, 344 
in dreaming, 155^  365 
in episodic future thought, 184,185 
in functional connectivity, 80 
in goal-directed thinking, 25 
in mind-wandering, 6 4, 152— 153 
pain and, 524f  
in REM sleep, 378, 447 
in rumination, 514, 515
in stimulus-independent thought, 151f  
in task-unrelated thought, 151f  
Laufs, H., 255 
Lavidor, M., 405 
law of effect, 115 
Lawson, B., 303 
learning theory, 115— 116 
Leary, T., 575 
Leibniz, G. W., 385, 387 
Leisure, The Basis of Culture (Pieper), 134 
leisure time, 137 
Levin, R., 442 
Lewis, H. L., 315 
Lifshitz, M., 7, 587 
Lilly, J. C., 565, 566 
Limb, C. L., 279 
Lin, H., 240 
Lindquist, S., 266
lingual gyrus, 6 4, 154, 328- 329, 361- 362,
377, 378, 412, 514 
Liotti, M., 330 
Liu, S., 280, 281 
lived experience, 436, 443, 448 
Locke, John, 23, 25
locus coeruleus (LC) activity, 28, 337, 338f, 
340-341 
Long, S., 241
“long eye” episodes, 556-557 
long-term memory, as memory source, 421 
“looking-glass self” concept, 301 
Loomis, A. L., 373 
Lord, A., 136
lost, experience of being, 303 
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 485, 
574- 575. See also psychedelic 
substances/experiences 
lucid dreaming. See also dreams/dreaming; 
microdreaming phenomenology 
brain-physiologic correlates 
of, 392-395
characterization of, 385-386 
in childhood/early adolescence, 390-  
391, 4 0 0- 4 0 2, 4 0 4
current source density power in, 394f
definitions of, 391-392
dissociation in, 386, 392, 403
EEG power in, 395f
examples of, 395, 397- 398, 401-403
expectations in, 401
future studies on, 4 0 3 - 4 0 6
as half-awake process, 307
history of, 391
hypnagogic/hypnopompic states, 139, 
390, 417
induction through electrical 
stimulation, 395-397 
lucidity lapses, 399- 401, 4 0 4, 4077210 
main scientific findings on, 390— 391 
non-lucid dreaming distinction,
394-395
non-self dream characters in, 4 0 0  
occurrence of, 4 0 0- 4 0 2, 4 0 4  
out-of-body experiences (OBEs) in, 393
602
I N D E X

positive emotional tone of, 391 
realization/’’just knowing” one is 
dreaming, 4 0 2 - 4 0 4  
REM-initiated, 391 
as reportable experiences, 387 
social interactions in, 399-400 
spontaneous cognitive processing in, 
397, 4 0 0, 403-405 
as spontaneous thought, 386-390 
timing/duration of, 402 
transcranial alternating current
stimulation (tACS) in, 395, 396f, 403 
unconscious authorship in, 401, 406723 
wake-initiated lucid dreams (WILDs), 
390-391, 398
Lucidity and Consciousness in Dreams 
scale (LuCiD scale), 392 
lucid REM (LREM) sleep 
activations in, 379, 380 
as controversial, 372 
frequency of, y j\t 
neural correlates of, 378 
Lumsden, J., 202
lysergic acid diethylamide. See LSD 
(lysergic acid diethylamide); 
psychedelic substances/experiences
M
MacDonald, J. S., 252
Mace, J. H., 7, 4 7 0, 471- 4 7^, 473
MacLeod, C., 224
Macrae, C. N., 2 02, 315
Magee, C. A., 58
Maj, M., 182
Majerus, S., 182,183
Malafouris, L., 135
Malus, M., 7
A Mandarin Pretending to be a
Stumblebum {New York Times)., 304 
Mann, T., 285 
Maquet, P., 378 
Mar, R. A., 2 0 7, 209 
Marchetti, I., 6, 225, 486 
Marcusson-Clavertz, D., 208, 236 
Margulies, D., 5 
Mark, G., 135 
Marques-Bonham, S., 448 
Marsh, J. R, 562 
Martin, L. L., 225,510 
Marx, E., 58 
Masicampo, E. J., 203 
Mason, M. F., 63, 208, 210 
massive open online courses (MOOCs), 
259-260
material images, in memory sources, 423 
Matthews, G., 511 
Mause, Lloyd de, 134 
M-autonomy (mental autonomy) 
losing/regaining, 98, 104- 107,108 
meta-awareness and, 103 
McCarley, R., 127, 457 
McCartney, P., 307 
McClelland, J. L., 18
McCleod, C., 315 
McClintock, B., 138— 139 
McCraven V. G., 194, 195, 207,515 
McGuire, P. K., 148 
McLean, J., 266 
McNally, R. J., 4 40 
McNamara, P., 443 
McNaughton, B. L., 18 
McVay, J. C., 202- 203, 209 
medial prefrontal cortex 
in daydreaming, 173 
in default mode network, 7 4, 74^ 151/  
DMN core and, 578 
in dreaming/creative thought, 155/  
in mind-wandering, 183, 215 
pain and, 523, 524f  
in REM/NREM sleep, 372,
378—379> 46i 
role of, 174-175 
rumination and, 513, 514-515 
in self-referential thought, 186-187 
in spontaneous representation, 78 
in stimulus-independent thought, 125,128 
subsystems in, 480 
suppressed deactivation of, 332 
medial temporal lobe (MTL) 
amygdala and, 578 
in dementia syndromes, 4 9 4, 495fi 
496-498
DN/DN subsystems and, 480- 481,
500, 516
in electrophysiological stimulations, ljit 
episodic memories and, 16 
mentalizing and, 499 
in mind-wandering from pain, 524f  
novel association formation and, 18 
in psychedelic experiences, 578 
in self-generated thought, 170,
175- 176, 578
meditation/meditation practice. See 
also Focused Attention (FA) 
meditation; mindfulness meditation; 
open monitoring (meditation); 
Transcendental Meditation 
as complementary health approach, 539 
spontaneous thought and, 542-543 
study participant selection, 547 
medium-term memory, as memory source, 
420-421 
Melcher, J., 315 
Memory Characteristics 
Questionnaire, 197 
memory consolidation
dreams/dreaming and, 41, 390, 4 4 2, 461 
future research directions in, 4 6 4  
learning tasks and, 462/  
neurophysiological evidence of, 460-461 
in NREM sleep, 462 
in resting wakefulness, 7, 4 6 3 -464 
rest/sleep, critical nature of, 389 
rest/sleep, role of, 152, 220 
spontaneous thought and, 6, 386, 481 
studies of, 458
memory/memories. See also
autobiographical memory; episodic 
memory; involuntary memories; 
microdream memory sources; 
semantic memory 
consolidation of, 220 
electrophysiological stimulations 
and, 1711
human electrophysiology studies of, ijit 
incorporation into dreams, 457-459 
memory recall/retrieval. See also 
working memory 
activation of, 184-185 
content variability of, 15,18 
by default network, 2 76, 4 8 0, 4 94 
in dreams/sleep, 379, 459, 461 
electrophysiology and, 169-170 
future-oriented cognition and, 463 
involuntary activation of, 472- 473, 475 
medial temporal lobe and, 175 
midline core and, 496-498 
orthogonalization and, 13 
parietal cortex in, 79/  
pattern completion for, 16, 20 
on retrospective questionnaires, 148 
as self-generated thought, 172 
in spontaneous thought, 75 
mental autonomy (M-autonomy) 
losing/regaining, 98, 104- 107,108 
meta-awareness and, 103 
mental avoidance behavior, 100 
mental content production, 16-17 
mentalizing, 5, 144, 166, 175, 2 76, 4 8 0, 
499-501
mental self-knowledge, epistemology of, 
107-108
“Mentation Rate” subscale, 148 
meta-awareness
assessment in studies, 149, 546 
FA meditation and, 548723 
intentionality in, 236 
lack of, 106
in meditation practice, 540, 542- 543, 547 
Metzinger on, 92, 95724 
mindfulness practices and, 242 
in mind-wandering, 88, 101, 103, 405 
in rumination, 93 
in sleep stages/cycles, 380, 381, 4 0 4  
in spontaneous thought, 292 
in task-unrelated thought, 235 
metacognitive appraisals, of spontaneous 
thought
affective reactions and, 38 
associations/cognitive responses, 40-41 
content importance, 38-41 
correction process in, 41-43 
discounting process in, 42 
dreams/dreaming and, 41 
intuition and, 38-40 
meaning attribution in, 35- 36, 41 
perceived insight and, 37/  
spontaneous/deliberate selection 
processes, 39/
I N D E X  
603

metacognitive awareness
in dreaming/creative thought, 155 
during dreamless sleep, 371 
REM-initiated lucid dreams and,
391, 4 0 0  
rlPFC in, 153
metaphors, use of, 305-306 
Methews, F. N., 242 
Metronome Response Task (MRT), 266 
Metzinger, T., 6, 88, 91- 93, 95n, 10972,
388, 546 
Meurs, T., 220
microdreaming phenomenology 
examples of, 418-419 
fleeting images, 415\f, 417-418 
fully-formed images, 418 
multisensory integration in, 429-430 
percept intensity, 430 
percept localization, 430 
percept timing, 429-430 
phenomeno-centric signaling procedure 
in, 419/
phenomenological descriptions of, 
417-418
qualitative changes, 430 
at sleep onset, 411, 431 
spatiotemporal kinesis in, 419 
microdream memory sources 
analysis of, 420
autosensory imagery, 423- 425, 424/  
autosymbolic imagery, 4 2 0, 423-425 
categories of, 4 2 0 - 4 2 4 
exosensory imagery, 425, 426- 42/f: 
external stimuli and, 425-428 
imagery disruption and, 428-429 
multiple sensory modalities in, 425 
multi-temporal memory associations, 
420- 423, 422/  
off-line model, 423 
phasic vs. tonic stimuli, 425-426 
real-time model, 423 
transformative priming, 423 
microdynamic neurophenomenology 
dream science and, 413-414 
elicitation interviews, 413, 448 
intracranial EEG (iEEG) 
application, 414 
Miles, L. K., 202 
Mills, C., 5, 203, 217 
Mind Excessively Wandering Scale, 147 
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction, 484 
mindfulness meditation 
for chronic pain, 526 
confirmation bias and, 108 
contemplative traditions and, 529-530 
in depressive rumination, 517 
functional neuroimaging and, 167 
mind-wandering and, 268 
in secular/science-oriented settings,
526, 537
stress-based, 484 
training for, 405
mindfulness training, 262, 483, 543 
604 
INDEX
mind-wandering. See also attentional 
disengagement; self-referential 
thought
ADHD and, 29-30 
as brief attentional shift, 47 
chronic/acute pain and, 7 
cognitive utility of, 123-126 
constructive types of, 240-242 
content-based view of, 4 9, 50 
default mode network (DMN) in, 
149-152
default strategy in, 26-27 
definition/term usage, 4 9, 52 
as diversion in attention, 48 
dynamic framework of, 50 
early experience sampling studies 
in, 196
in educational settings, 6 
experience of ease and, 156 
as exploratory process, 24-25 
fatigue strategy in, 28- 29, 30 
goal-pursuits in, 216 
as longer-lasting mental process, 47 
measuring, 234-235 
meditation/mindfulness and, 7 
neural regions supporting, 26 
neuroimaging study of, 544R 
ongoing act of, 49 
onset/termination of, 545-546 
oscillation strategy in, 27- 28, 30 
personal goals and, 202 - 2 0 4 
prospective bias of, 183,197 
reconciling frameworks of, 19 
as spontaneous thought, 4, 515-517 
as task-related, 89 
temporal orientation of, 198- 201^ 
term usage in, 233- 234, 250 
trade-off with goal-directed 
thinking, 25— 26
mind-wandering, phenomenological 
properties of
autobiographical planning, 205,
209-210
daily life functioning and, 207-210 
future directions for, 210-211 
mood state in, 209 
personal goals and, 204 
representational format, 204 
sequence of thoughts as, 2 06 
structure of, 194 
temporal orientation, 204 
unintentionality and, 205, 2 46, 260-261 
visual perspective and, 2 06 
working memory capacity, 209 
mind-wandering, philosophy of 
definitions in, 87-94 
disunified thinking in, 88, 93-94 
the explanadum, 98-101 
goal-directed thought in, 89- 9 4, 95721 
individuation in, 101-102 
mental autonomy in, 104— 107 
mental self-knowledge and, 107-108 
meta-awareness in, 88, 92- 93, 95724
neuroscience of spontaneous thought 
and, 144
stimulus-independent thought 
in, 88-90
task-unrelated thought in, 88-90 
taxonomy for, 102— 104 
unguided-thinking in, 89- 92, 94 
unit of identification (UI) in, 108-109 
veto-control concept in, 91- 93, 95723 
mind-wandering, types of 
creativity and, 238-239 
future-oriented decision-making and, 
239-240
intentionality in, 246 
measurement of, 234-235 
moods in, 237-238 
task performance in, 235-236 
working memory in, 236— 237 
Mind-Wandering Deliberate Scale, 148 
Mind-Wandering Questionnaire, 147 
Mind-Wandering Spontaneous Scale, 148 
Mischel, W., 240 
Mittner, M., 28 
Miyawaki, Y., 130 
Mo, L., 329, 334 
Mocellin, J. S., 557 
Modern Evolutionary Synthesis, 114 
MOOCs (massive open online courses), 
259-260 
mood
spontaneous thoughts and, 73\f, 222 
types of mind-wandering and, 237-238 
Mooneyham, B. W., 221— 222 
Moore, J., 134 
Morewedge, C., 5 
Mosher, J. E., 242 
motivational intensity, 48- 52, 481 
motivational structure, spontaneous 
thought and, 226-227 
Motivational Structure Questionnaire, 226 
Mrazek, M. D., 221
multi-dimensional experience sampling 
(MDES), 72- 73, 72/  80 
Multiple Sleep Latency Test, 415 
multiple trace theory, 17 
multisensory integration, 59- 61, 429 
Munakata, Y., 125,131 
Munar, E., 333 
Murota, M., 333
muscle atonia, 415, 415/  436, 4 4 0, 4 4 7, 450 
Muses, inspiration of, 3 
“mushin,” Buddhist concept of, 306 
mystical experience, 443, 4 4 6, 558, 561,
574> 576, 577> 581- 582, 588
N
naming/renaming exercises, 305 
narcolepsy, 397, 436, 4 4 4, 448 
Nasrudin, M., 157 
National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH), 123
Native American rituals, 584-585 
Navon letter task, 315, 315/

negative affect, 38, 203, 205, 207- 2 0 9, 218, 
223- 224, 227, 435, 510, 514, 516, 526 
neocortex
activation patterns in, 12 
in cholinergic pathways, 345/  
in complementary learning systems, 459 
connections to, 13/  
de-correlated memories in, 15, 20 
default variability and, 17 
in memory disruption, 4 9 6 
in memory reactivation, 4 6 0  
in noradrenergic pathways, 338f  
in pattern separation, 13-14 
in serotonergic system, 346 
Neo-Darwinism, 114 
network theory, in flow, 319—321, 320f  
neural binding patterns, 59 
neural correlates
of autobiographical reasoning, 187 
of consciousness, 413 
dream imagery and, 414 
of lucid REM (LREM) sleep, 378, 393 
of meditation practices, 530, 540,
546/  547
of mind-wandering episodes, 103, 
543-544
of REM/NREM sleep, 373, 376- 378,
39i> 395
of rumination, 509, 514, 516 
of self-generated thought, 166 
in self-referential thought, 183-186 
of self-referential thoughts, 181 
of sleep stages, 6
of spontaneous thought, 525, 545, 547 
neural networks
functional neuroimaging of, 130 
modeling of, 131 
neuronal avalanches in, 317 
in REM sleep, 129 
spontaneous activity across, 62, 74 
STI production in, 125,127 
in STTT, 57, 61-62 
term usage, 61
visual image representation in, 128 
neurocognitive component process 
future directions for, 80 
perceptual processing and, 76-78 
representational content and, 76  
spontaneous representations in, 78-80 
in spontaneous thought, 5, 75-76 
neurodegenerative disorders, 493- 4 9 4,
502- 503. See also dementia syndromes 
“neuroenchantment,” 587 
neuronal globalization, 67 
neuropsychopharmacology of creativity 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and, 
340-341
catecholamineric system in, 337 
cholinergic system in, 344-345 
cocaine withdrawal, 340-341 
cognitive flexibility tasks and,
337—339, 345
D1/D 2 receptors in, 342-343
dopaminergic system in, 337- 338, 
342- 346, 343/
future directions for, 346-347 
L-Dopa and, 342-344 
neurotransmitter systems in, 29, 104, 
342, 344, 345, 346 
noradrenergic system in, 337-342 
norepinephrine in, 339- 341, 344 
Parkinsons disease and, 342-344 
propranolol in, 338-342 
REM sleep and, 341 
serotonergic system in, 346, 346f  
set-shifting tasks and, 337- 338, 342, 
345-346
signal-to-noise ratio and, 340, 341, 
344-345
stress/stressors in, 338- 340, 346-347 
Neurosynth/Neurosynth meta-analysis, 
76, I l f
neutral induction condition, 217 
Newman, M., 305 
New Synthesis, 114 
Nielsen, T. A., 6, 373, 374, 442 
The Nightmare (Fuseli), 4 4 2, 443/  
nightmares, 36, 441- 4 4 2, 4 4 4, 4 4 6, 
450- 451, 485. See also sleep 
paralysis (SP)
night terrors, 4 36. See also sleep 
paralysis (SP)
Nind, L., 182,197 
Noguchi, Y., 333 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 225 
“no-mind,” Buddhist concept of, 306 
noradrenergic system, 337- 342, 338/  
Norman, K. A., 14 
Northoff, G, 5
novel association formation, 18- 19,
57G 580
novelty/novelty generation, 13, 102, 133, 
27 6, 279, 293, 517 
NREM 1 sleep
dreaming/visual imagery and, 379 
neural correlates of, 376-377 
neurophysiological indicators in, 412 
NREM 2 sleep
dream experiences in, 379 
neural correlates of, 377-378 
NREM 3-4 sleep (SWS) 
dream experiences in, 379 
neural correlates of, 378 
NREM sleep
dreaming and, 379, 462 
human memory and, 461 
as mind-wandering, 103 
muscle atonia in, 415 
neural correlates of, 376 
night terrors and, 437 
on the oneiragogic spectrum, 415f  
Pivik on, 412
REM sleep v., 127, 375, 464722 
self-generated cognition and,
373—374> V 4
sleep paralysis (SP) and, 4 4 4, 445
sleep-stage scoring and, 394 
spontaneous cognition and, 463 
Nules, J. A., 241 
Nunn, C., 135 
Nusbaum, E. C., 288
o
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), 5, 
145, 263, 485, 4 8 6, 511- 512, 582-583 
obsessive thought, constraints on, 4f,
144fy 223
O’Callaghan, C., 7 
O’Connor, R. C., 182,197 
Oda Sheiner, E., 7, 585, 586 
Oettingen, G., 221 
O’Neill, J., 16
oneiric activity/spectrum, 411, 415^  416-  
4I7> 417/ 437> 447-448, 450, 45i 
Ong, W., 136
online experience sampling approaches, 
102, 147/  148- 150, 153, 156, 196- 197, 
203, 207
open monitoring (meditation), 102, 241, 
451, 483-484, 530, 539 
operant conditioning, 114, 115, 117-119 
O’Reilly, R. C., 18, 125,131 
Origin of Species (Darwin), 114,137 
orthogonalization, 13,14 
Osborne, A., 300 
oscillation strategy, 27- 28, 30 
out-of-body experiences (OBEs), 393, 439, 
449/ 450
overlapping/non-overlapping features, 
13- 15, 14/i 436, 4 4 4, 463, 574
P
Pace-Schott, E. F., 401 
pain
acute pain, 522, 526-527 
attentional fluctuation of, 521-522 
brain activation during attention 
to, 524^
chronic pain, 521- 522, 525-527 
clinical context of, 525-527 
clinical scales/questionnaires on, 
525-526
neural basis of mind-wandering away 
from, 522-525
Pain Catastrophizing Scale, 526 
Pain Vigilance and Awareness 
Questionnaire, 526 
Pang, A. S.-K., 6
panic attacks/disorder, 50, 445- 4 4 6,
485, 486
parahippocampal place area (PPA), 
328-329
parietal cortex, in memory retrieval, 79f  
parietal lobe, human electrophysiology 
studies, 171^
Parker, A. J., 331 
Parkinson, C., 202 
Parkinson’s disease, 169, 342-344 
Parry, M., 136
I N D E X
605

Parvizi, J., 172 
Pascal, Blaise, 194 
passive mechanisms, 289 
past experiences. See also
autobiographical memory 
mind-wandering and, 138 
recall of, 463 
recovered in therapy, 40 
reliving of, 4 94 
rest and, 185
rumination and, 512-513 
of semantic dementia patients, 498 
past experiences, reviewing, 220 
Patel, P, 202 
pattern completion
diagram for pathways for, 13/  
in episodic memory retrieval, 16 
generated mental content and, 16-17 
a neural level, 16 
pattern separation
diagram for pathways for, 13/  
episodic efficiency hypothesis and, 12 
hippocampo-cortical interactions 
in, 13-14
at neural level, 12-13 
Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Freire), 305 
perceptively derived thought, 56, 65 
perceptual decoupling
cognitive capacity and, 222 
constraint reductions and, 486 
neurocognitive evidence for, 78/  
phenomenological data on, 546 
in spontaneous thought, 7 6 - 7 7  
perceptual isolation, 562. See also sensory 
deprivation
perceptually guided thought, 59 
perceptual processing, reduction in, 76-78 
periods of rest, 144, 146- 149, 147/  152, 154, 
2 0 6, 220
Personal Concerns Inventory, 226 
personal goals, mind-wandering and, 
202- 2 0 4. See also goal attainment; 
goal-directed thought/thinking 
Peterson, J. B., 314 
Petitmengin, C., 413 
PGO model, 127 
phase-power coupling, 62 
“phase transition,” 318-319 
Phillips, D. T., 221 
philosophy of mind, 97 
philosophy of mind-wandering 
definitions in, 87-94 
disunified thinking in, 88, 93-94 
the explanadum, 98-101 
goal-directed thought in, 89- 9 4, 95721 
individuation in, 101— 102 
mental autonomy in, 104-107 
mental self-knowledge and, 107-108 
meta-awareness in, 88, 92- 93, 95724 
neuroscience of spontaneous thought 
and, 144
stimulus-independent thought 
in, 88-90
task-unrelated thought in, 88-90 
taxonomy for, 102— 104 
unguided-thinking in, 89- 92, 94 
unit of identification (UI) in, 108-109 
veto-control concept in, 91- 93, 95723 
physical spaces, creative activity and, 
136-137
Pieper, J., 134,137 
Pinho, A. L., 281 
Pivik, T., 412
Plato/Non-Platonists, 194, 530 
play, curiosity and, 306 
Pleydell-Bouverie, B., 16 
Plimpton, B., 202 
Poerio, G. L., 209 
Poincare, H., 138, 285 
poly-somnography (PSG) signals, 414 
Ponto-geniculo-occipital (PGO) 
input, 127
poor attentional control, 195, 207- 208, 235 
Pope, K. S., 218
positive-constructive daydreaming, 195, 
207- 208, 210, 235- 236. See also 
daydreaming
positron emission tomography (PET), 133, 
146, 174, 185, 330, 344, 373, 376, 377/  
379, 380
posterior insula, 154, 156, 168/  
posteromedial cortex, 169- 170, 172- 174, 
173/ 255
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
445- 4 4 6, 450—451, 482, 485, 511- 51* 
PPA (parahippocampal place area), 
328-329
practical spontaneity, 109722 
pragmatic condition, 332. See also aesthetic 
experiences
prayer, meaning attributed to, 35, 36- 37, 
4 0- 42, 44
predictive processing model, 108,109722 
premature congratulation, 303 
principal components analysis (PCA), 73 
problem solving. See also creative 
problem-solving; insight 
problem-solving (IPS) 
breaks/rest and, 138,152 
creative thought and, 286-289 
during daydreaming, 195, 208, 210 
in design, 299 
discontinuity of, 318-319 
doperminergic system and, 344 
in flow process, 311, 313, 323-324 
in goal-directed thinking, 23, 28 
in governments, 303 
in incremental learning, 314/’ 
mindfulness and, 483 
mind-wandering and, 2 0 9, 239, 266 
network structure and, 320 
noradrenergic system and, 337- 341, 344 
in REST chambers, 566 
on RRS (Rumination Response Scale),
510-511
rumination and, 516
with simulated annealing, 293-294 
spontaneous thought in, 2 20, 291-292 
STI and, 125
trait rumination and, 224 
Vygotsky on, 322
processing priority, 216—218, 223—224, 227 
process-occurrence model, 19 
Prometheus, myth of, 3 
prospective bias, in mind-wandering,
183,197
prospective consolidation hypothesis, 19 
prototyping/testing, 302-303 
proximal learning, 322 
pseudohallucinations, 109774, 415 
psilocybin, 573, 577~579> 582- 584, 587 
psychedelic science, culture of, 586-588 
psychedelic substances/experiences 
cognitive brain function in, 577-580 
creativity and, 580-581 
historical context of, 574-575 
intersubjective encounters in, 586-587 
mystical experiences in, 581-582 
ritual/culture and, 583- 584, 587-588 
Santo Daime religion and, 585-586 
spontaneity/flexibility/constraints in, 
575-576
therapeutic prospects for, 582-583 
“psychohistory,” 134 
psychological disharmony, 479 
psychotic experiences, 119, 223, 357, 4 84, 
4 8 6, 4 87, 574, 576
R
Raichle, M. E., 146 
Random Episodic Silent Thought 
(REST), 148 
Rank, D., 7
rapid eye movements (REM), 126—127, 
129, 130, 355, 4 0 2, 414, 419/  See also 
REM sleep
Rasmussen, A. S., 4 74
reaction times (RTs), 216, 265, 430
reaction time variability (RTV), 27, 30
Readance, J. E., 242
Reagh, Z. M., 13
Reber, A. S., 312, 321
Reber, R., 37
Rechtschaffen, A., 394, 412 
Rees, G., 405
region-of-interest (ROI) activation, 344 
Reidler, J. S., 127,182 
Reilly, J. P., 203 
Reinholtz, N., 208, 210 
relaxation, 289, 334, 390, 4 4 9, 449/  482, 
483- 4 8 7, 563-564 
Relaxation Response, 530. See also 
mindfulness meditation 
religious/mythological texts, meaning 
attributed to, 35-36 
remote associates task (RAT), 337, 339, 
344> 346
Remote Associates Test (RAT), 287 
REM-PGO model, 127
606
I N D E X

REM sleep. See also dreams/dreaming; 
lucid dreaming; lucid REM 
(LREM) sleep; microdreaming 
phenomenology; NREM sleep; 
sleep paralysis (SP); SOREM sleep/ 
episodes
in creative problem solving, 341 
default network activity and, 463 
dreams/dreaming and, 355- 356, 358, 365, 
379, 4II-4I3> 415/  4 6 4- 465^2 
electrophysiological dissociation in,
374-375 
of humans, 135
memory consolidation and, 220 
neural basis/underpinnings of, 6, i$$fy 
i73> 412
neural correlates of, 378 
neuroimaging/polysomnographic 
studies of, 412
vs. relaxed wakefulness, 155-156 
self-generated thought and,
372—373> 376
STI generation in, 129— 130 
visual imagery in, 126— 127 
renaming, process of, 305 
Renfrew, C., 135 
representation, in spontaneous 
thought, 76
resource depletion theory, 263 
response styles theory (RST), 225,
510- 511, 514 
Rest (Pang), 137
rest, discovery of deliberate, 137-138 
rest, periods of, 144, 146- 149, 147/  152,
154, 2 0 6, 220
REST chambers, 562/  563 
resting-state EEG activity, 253 
resting state functional connectivity 
(RSFC), 143, 146, 174, 2 77, 513-515 
Resting State Questionnaire, 148 
“restless mind,” 358 
restricted environmental stimulation
technique/therapy (REST), 562- 568, 
562fi 569/  570724
retrieval-induced facilitation/forgetting, 14 
retrospective questionnaires, 148 
Revonsuo, A., 437, 459 
Robert, G., 441 
Rosen, L., 135
rostral lateral PFC (rlPFC), 151fi 153,
156, 278/
RRS-Brooding (RRS-B), 510 
RRS-Depression Related scores, 515 
RRS-Reflection (RRS-R), 510— 511 
Rubin, N., 332 
Ruby, F. J., 2 0 7, 2 0 9, 237 
rumination
causes/contexts of, 511-512 
constraints on, 4f  
control theories of, 225 
current concerns approach to, 223-224 
definition/measurement of, 510-511 
executive control and, 513— 514
future research directions on, 517 
generalized anxiety disorder and, 512 
as guided, 91
in healthy populations, 511 
impaired attentional disengagement in, 
224-225
memory and, 513
as mind-wandering, 50, 88, 9 0, 93 
negative affect and, 514 
neural basis of, 514
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) 
in, 512
post-traumatic stress disorder in, 512-513 
in psychopathology, 511-512 
response styles theory (RST) in, 225, 
510- 511, 514 
as self-related, 239 
spontaneous thought and, 225- 226, 
5I5-5I7
state rumination, 515 
trait rumination, 514-515 
varieties of, 91f
Rumination-Reflection Questionnaire, 148 
Ruminative Response Scale (RRS), 148, 
510- 512, 514-515 
Rushby, J. A., 58
s
Sackur, J., 209 
Saenger, P., 136 
salience network
in cognitive control processes, 481 
in creative cognition, 277 
in depression/anxiety, 157 
in FA meditation, 541-542 
in frontotemporal dementia, 500-501 
functional connectivity in, 61 
in mind-wandering, 6 4, 541/^ 54872 
pain and, 523, 525 
psychedelic substances and, 578 
in rumination, 514, 516 
in transition to mind-wandering/ 
dreaming, 363 
Samson, D., 135 
Santo Daime religion, 584-588 
scaffolded learning, 322 
Schacter, D. L., 127, 463 
Schlagman, S., 4 7 0  
Schmidgen, H., 265 
Schmidt, R. E., 4 0 0  
Schooler, J.
on insight task performance, 315 
on mind-wandering, 6, 88, 89, 95724, 99 
on mood, 222
on performance/comprehension, 221 
on self-generated thought content,
56,388
on spontaneous thought, 543 
on task-unrelated thoughts, 182 
on working memory capacity, 236 
Schwarz, N., 37 
S-curve learning, 314 
search-inference framework, 313— 314
sEEG (stereotactically implanted depth 
electrodes), 256 
Seelaus, V., 532
selectionist theory, of biological evolution, 
114- 115. See abo biological evolution 
self-catching, 234, 543, 546 
self-caught online thought sampling 
approach, 147/  149 
self-consciousness 
flow and, 309 
phenomenal, 108— 109 
theory of, 98
self-generated cognition, 275, 2 76,
493, 502
self-generated thought. See also task- 
unrelated thoughts (TUTs) 
affective functions and, 56 
electrical brain stimulation in, 174 
functional neuroimaging of, 166- 168 
future research directions in, 176 
human intracranial electrophysiology 
and, 168-169 
initiation of, 6
interior parietal lobule in, 173-174 
medial prefrontal cortex in, 174 
medial temporal lobe (MTL) in, 170, 
175-176
memory-based construction/simulation 
in, 4 9 4 - 4 9 6  
as mundane, 5
as neurophysiological level, 372-373 
posteromedial cortex in, 170, 172-173 
sleep mentation as, 372-373 
temporopolar cortex in, 170, 174-175 
term usage in, 250
time-course of brain regions in, i6Sf 
self-knowledge, theories of, 107-108 
self-/non-self focus, in exosensory 
images, 425
self-organizing criticality (SOC), 316- 317, 
317/  321
self-referential thought 
centrality of, 181-182 
default network in, 183-188 
medial prefrontal cortex in, 183, 186-187 
neural correlates of, 183-186 
possible functions of, 187 
varieties of, 182-183 
self-regulatory executive function 
mode, 511 
Seli, P, 6, 205 
Selimbeyoglu, A., 170 
semantic dementia, 4 9 4, 4 9$/^ 497-501 
semantic knowledge, 5, 11—12, 17, 19—2 0, 
183- 184, 421, 459, 497-498 
semantic memory
aesthetic experiences and, 328
in creative thought, 291
in default network activity, 280
DMN’s role in, 7 6, j j f
episodic memory and, 17, 7 6, 77/
in interleaved learning, 18
in semantic scaffolding hypothesis, 499
I N D E X
607

semantic optimization hypothesis, 17— 18 
semantic scaffolding hypothesis, 499 
sensorimotor functions/networks, 57,
60- 61, 6 7, 75/  154, 156, 174, 357, 365, 
437> 516, 578
sensory deprivation, 7, 485- 4 8 7, 562 
sensory processing, in attentional task, 250 
sensory stimuli, exosensory images and, 
426- 42/^
sequential firing, in clustered learning, 15f  
serial thinking, modes of. See goal-directed 
thought/thinking; mind-wandering 
serotonergic system, 346 
set-shifting, 222, 337- 338, 342, 345-346 
Shackleton, E., 557 
“Shape Expectations” task, 503 
Sharpless, B. A., 441, 4 4 6, 4 4 8, 449 
Shepard, A., 556 
Sherrington, C., 137 
shifting frame, 320, 323 
The Shock of the New (Hughes), 304 
Short Imaginal Process Inventory (SIPI), 
195- 196, 207-208 
short-term memory, as memory 
source, 420 
Shunsen, T., 4 44^
sightedness, creativity and, 117- 118, 117/
signal-to-noise ratio, 341, 344- 345, 541, 543
Silberer, H., 423-425
Silvia, P J., 288
similarity/dissimilarity, 17, 78
similes, use of, 305-306
Simon, H. A., 314
Simonton, D. K., 6
Singer, J. A., 239
Singer, J. L., 25, 123, 194, 2 0 7, 2 0 9, 239 
Singer, T., 237 
skill-stretching, 311, 313, 323 
Skinner, B. F., 114, 115, 120, 285 
“Skinner, Creativity, and the Problem of 
Spontaneous Behavior” (Epstein), 116 
Skov, M., 328- 329, 330, 333 
S-Learning Curve, 314, 314f  
sleep
consolidation-promoting 
neurochemical features, 4 6 4  
functional neuroimaging of, 376 
memory processing during, 461-463 
stages/neurophysiological stages of, 
372-373
subjective multiplicity of, 371-372 
unique properties of, 135 
sleep mentation, as self-generated thought, 
372-373
sleep-onset imagery, 371, 4067210, 414, 415-  
418, 4 2 0, 421/  425, 4 30, 431224 
sleep-onset REM (SOREM), 415, 415/  
sleep paralysis (SP). See also nightmares 
associated conditions in, 4 4 4 - 4 4 6  
awareness during sleep paralysis 
(ASP), 449
breathing practices for, 451 
classification of, 435
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 
for, 448
contemplative practices in, 451 
cultural neurophenomenology of, 
447— 448 
definitions of, 436 
depression/anxiety links, 445 
emotional experience of, 435-436 
4EA cognition and, 437 
future research directions in, 450-451 
muscle atonia, 415, 415f, 436, 4 4 0,
447> 450
narcolepsy vs., 436, 4 4 4, 448 
neural basis of, 444-445 
neurocognitive considerations in, 
4 4 6 - 4 4 7
neurophysiology of, 436 
observational/transformational practices 
in, 450
outcome of SP episodes, 449/  
phenomenology of, 438-444 
precipitating factors in, 4 4 6 
prevalence of, 437 
prevention/treatment of, 448-450 
PTSD and, 445-446 
sleep characteristics of sufferers, 445 
sleep fragmentation/disruption, 445 
sleep paralysis experiences 
body experiences in, 4 4 0 
categories of, 438-439 
cultural grounding in, 442 - 4 4 4 
doubling, 440-441 
emotions in, 441— 442 
false awakenings and, 441 
felt presence/positive felt presence, 435, 
438- 4 4 2, 4 4 6
incubus, 438- 4 4 0, 4 4 2, 444 
intruder, 438- 439, 4 4 2, 4 44 
out-of-body experiences (OBEs) in,
439, 449/  450
representation of, 438^ 443, 443/  
vestibulo-motor mentation, 436, 439-
4 4 0, 444-445
visual/auditory experiences, 442 
sleep stages/cycles
cognitive activity/dreaming across, 374/  
cognitive control and, 380 
default/visual network activation in, 
378-379
electrophysiological correlates of,
374> 375/
functional neuroimaging study 
review, 3 77/  
literature review on, 376 
as meaningfully dissociated, 373 
meta-awareness in, 380 
neural correlates of, 376-378 
neurochemical dissociation of, 374-375 
neurochemical profiles of, 375/  
prefrontal executive deactivation in, 380 
Slocum, J., 557, 557/  
slow cortical potentials (SCPs), 62 
Smallwood, J.
on aware vs. unaware 
mind-wandering, 92 
component process framework of, 5 
on context of mind-wandering 
episodes, 210
context regulation hypothesis of, 153 
on delay discounting, 240 
on future-oriented decision 
making, 240 
on measurement of 
mind-wandering, 543 
mind-wandering definition of, 88, 89 
on mind-wandering frameworks, 19 
on mind-wandering vs. goal-directed 
thought, 9572
on phasic vs tonic modes of LC 
activity, 28
on prospective bias of 
mind-wandering, 197 
on self- vs. other-related 
mind-wandering, 207 
on socio-temporal content of 
mind-wandering, 209 
on spontaneity, 9 9, 388 
on task-unrelated thoughts, 56,
182- 183, 237
on temporal orientation of mind­
wandering, 198^ 2 0 0it 
on working memory capacity, 236 
Smilek, D., 6, 266 
Smith, M., 135 
Smith, R., 220 
Smith, S. M., 74 
Snyder, A. W., 316 
Sober, E., 114- 115,118 
SOC (self-organizing criticality), 316- 317, 
317/  321
Solitude (Zimmerman), 562 
Solomonova, E., 6
somatic images, in memory sources, 423 
somatosensory cortex, 59, 6 4, 151f, 154, 523 
somnambulism episodes, 447 
somnambulism-spectrum arousal, 436 
Song, X., 182, 197, 207 
SOREM sleep/episodes, 415, 415/  
spatial extension, 63- 6 4, 63/  
spatiotemporal binding, 58- 6 0, 6o f 
spatiotemporal continuity, 65-66 
spatiotemporal expansion, 63 
spatiotemporal extension, 56f  57,
61, 65-67
spatiotemporal integration, 56f, 57- 58, 
60- 61, 60/
spatiotemporal theory of task-unrelated 
thought (STTT)
content vs. process models of, 55- 56, 56f  
future psychological investigation 
and, 67-68
spatial extension, 63- 6 4, 63/  
spatiotemporal binding, 58-60 
spatiotemporal integration, 56f  
57- 58, 60-61
theory/features of, 5 6f, 67
608
I N D E X

transformation of contents into 
thought, 61-63 
spontaneous cognition 
attitudes toward, 137 
in dementia, 503 
future planning function of, 495 
future research needs in, 210 
impact of aging on, 511 
involuntary memory functions in, 4 74 
memories in, 461— 463 
memory reactivation in, 461-463 
neurocognitive architectures of, 493 
phenomenological features/contents of, 
193-194
positive affects and, 205 
posterior cingulate cortex in, 497 
prospective bias of mind-wandering 
and, 197
rumination and, 514, 516-517 
in sleep/wakefulness, 463-464 
structured vs. disjointed structure of 
thought in, 206 
trait measures and, 148 
spontaneous memories, 183, 4 6 9- 4 7 0. See 
also involuntary memories 
spontaneous mental stimulations, 16, 17, 
19, 292
spontaneous neurocognitive activity, 
74- 7 6, 80
spontaneous reactivations, 14- 16,18 
spontaneous recollections, 4 7 0. See also 
involuntary memories 
spontaneous representations, 78-80 
spontaneous self-organization, 316,
317- 318, 317/  323
spontaneous subvocal speech, 126, 129,130 
spontaneous thinking in history 
attitudes toward, 137 
biographical accounts, 134 
cultural/societal influences on, 139 
discovery of deliberate rest, 137-138 
outline of, 135
physical spaces and, 136-137 
scientists’ learning from, 138-139 
in work/workplaces, 135— 136 
in writing and cognition, 136 
spontaneous thought
basic properties of, 215-219 
benefits of, 18-19
cognitive processes around, 542-543 
component process framework of, 5 
constraints on, 4f, 419 
content vs. process models of, 145-146 
costs of, 221-226 
creative brain and, 280-281 
defining episodes of, 543-544 
definition/term usage, 4, 50, 250 
vs. deliberate thought, 5, 40,145 
in dementia syndromes, 502 
dynamic model of, 144/" 
dysfunctional forms of, 5 
evolutionary benefits of, 20 
exploration vs. exploitation in, 5
goal attainment and, 5, 227-228 
goal-directed cognition and, 7 
heterogeneity of content in, 72- 73, 73/  
as meaningful mental event, 36-38 
measurement of, 234-235 
metacognitive appraisals of, 5 
motivational structure and, 226-227 
multi-dimensional experience sampling 
in, 72- 73, 72/  
origins of, 3
perceptual decoupling during, 78/  
perceptual processing reduction 
in, 76-78
as phenomenological concept, 98-99 
viewpoints/beliefs and, 7 
spontaneous thought, adaptiveness of 
in consolidation of memories, 220 
in creative problem solving, 220 
in facilitation of goal attainment, 221 
in keeping track of goals, 219 
in promoting planning, 219— 220 
in reduced delay discounting, 220 
in reviewing past experiences, 220 
in shifting between internal/external 
stimuli, 221
spontaneous thought, benefits/risks of.
See also delusions; hallucinations/ 
hallucinatory experiences; psychotic 
experiences
behavioral changes and, 482 
constraints on, 480 
creative/divergent thinking, 481 
DN/DN subsystems in, 480 
hypnotherapy and, 48 4, 485 
learning and, 482
mindfulness/meditation and, 483-487 
motivational intensity and, 481 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), 
485, 486
potential benefits/risks of, 481-487 
PTSD treatment and, 482, 485 
sensory deprivation and, 485-487 
sources of, 479
surfacing of suppressed/repressed 
thoughts, 481- 482, 486 
spontaneous thought, metacognitive 
appraisals of
activity/decision quality and, 38 
affective reactions and, 38 
associations/cognitive 
responses, 40-41 
attitudes and, 40  
content importance, 38-41 
correction process in, 41-43 
counterfactual thoughts and, 38 
discounting process in, 42 
dreams/dreaming, 41 
intuition and, 38-40 
meaning attribution in, 35- 36, 41 
as meaningful mental events, 36-38 
perceived insight and, 37/  
spontaneous/deliberate selection 
processes, 39/
spontaneous thought, neuroscience of. See 
also default mode network (DMN); 
fMRI (functional magnetic resonance 
imaging); resting state functional 
connectivity (RSFC) 
additional brain regions in, 154 
on dreaming and creative thought, 
154-156
evolving definitions in, 144— 146 
as evolving interdisciplinary field, 
143-144
future inquiry into, 156 
measurement approaches in,
146- 149, 147/
role of default network, 149-15 2 
role of frontoparietal control network, 
152-154
spontaneous thought and imagery (STI) 
bizarreness/bizarre features in, 129 
cognitive system and, 124-12 5 
cortical activation in, 129-131 
f(MRI) usage in, 130-131 
future research needs, 130 
memories of recent events and, 124 
neural network modeling of, 131 
sensory perception and, 124 
subvocal speech and, 125- 126, 129-130 
utility of, 124-126
visual imagery and, 126—127, 129— 130 
spontaneous variation, 113- 115, 118, 119, 293 
spontaneous visual imagery, 126- 130. See 
also visual imagery 
spontaneous vocal speech
as dominant part of STI, 125-126 
neural structures/processes and, 128 
vs. spontaneous visual imagery, 126-130 
Spreng, R. N., 6, 7, 127, 219 
Sripada, C., 5 
Stan, D., 5, 7
standard consolidation theory, 17 
Starr, G. G., 332
state rumination, 515. See also rumination 
Stawarczyk, D., 6, 182- 183, 185, 197, 204, 219 
Stephen, D. G., 317, 318, 319 
stimulus-dependent thought, 43, 256 
stimulus-independent thought (SIT) 
cognitive utility and, 123 
contemplative traditions and, 530 
default network activity and, 150, 276 
dreams/dreaming and, 356 
external environment and, 256 
external stimuli and, 43 
frontoparietal control network (FPNC) 
and, 152
in future research directions, 156 
future thoughts and, 148 
meta-analytic findings in, 151f  
as mind-ordering, 51 
mind-wandering and, 87- 91, i88«, 234 
rumination and, 516 
self-generated thought and, 165 
task performance and, 265 
terminology/term usage in, 55, 250, 575
I N D E X  
609

stimulus-unrelatedness, notion of, ioo 
Stokes, P., 304 
Storr, A., 561 
Strand, M., 312, 313
stream of consciousness, 56, 6 6, 145, 233, 
4 2 9, 509, 586
Stroop task/procedure, 208, 216, 218, 221-  
222, 227, 2 6 6, 288 
structure of intellect model, 286 
Stumbrys, T., 4 0 0  
Stuyven, E., 206
subpersonal processes, 105, 106, 388 
subvocal speech. See spontaneous 
subvocal speech 
Suedfeld, P., 7, 557, 558 
sumi-e tradition of painting, 7 
Sustained Attention to Response Task 
(SART), 152, 197, 221, 225, 250,
262, 543
SWS (NREM 3-4 sleep) 
dream experiences in, 379 
neural correlates of, 378 
symbolic representation, 313. See also 
computation theory of mind 
synesthesia/synesthesia-like experience, 575 
system 2 thinking, 23, 285 
Systematic Motivational Counseling, 227
T
Tamaki, M., 130 
Tang, C., 317 
Tanno, Y., 197 
Taoism, 7
task performance, 235- 236, 265-268 
task-positive networks, 26, 579 
task-unrelated images and thoughts 
(TUIT), 266
task-unrelated interference (TRIs), 73/, 217 
task-unrelated thoughts (TUTs). See 
also spatiotemporal theory of task- 
unrelated thought (STTT) 
brain’s spontaneous activity and, 56-57 
mind-wandering and, 88, 217 
neuroimaging correlates of, 151f  
as perceptually guided, 56, 59- 6 0,
63/  64-65
as phenomenological concept, 99-100 
as self-generated, 56, 59- 6 0, 63/  
states of content in, 49 
term usage in, 233- 234, 250 
varieties of, 88
taxonomy, for mind-wandering 
philosophy, 102— 104 
Tchaikovsky, E I., 138 
Teaching Defiance (Newman), 305 
Teasdale, J. D., 2 06 
temporal contiguity, 16,18 
temporal discounting (reduced),
spontaneous thought link to, 73/  
temporal extension. See also 
spatiotemporal extension 
of content, 64- 65, 65/  
microdreams and, 418
6 lO  
IN D E X
temporal orientation, of mind-wandering/ 
daydreaming, 198- 201* 
temporopolar cortex 
in electrophysiological 
stimulations, 172*
in REM/NREM sleep, 155/  377, 378 
in ruminative thought, 514 
in self-generated thought, 170, 174-175 
in thought generation, 176 
Terhune, D. B., 208, 236 
Terrillon, J. C., 448 
Tesser, A., 225 
Thagard, E, 116 
Tharp, T., 304
third-person perspective (3PP), 2 0 6,
241, 473 
Tholey, P., 391
Thompson, E., 6, 388, 441, 4 4 7, 545 
Thomson, D. R., 221, 266 
Thorndike, E. L., 115, 313, 314 
Thorndike Learning Curve, 314f  
thought content/content of thought 
constraints governing, 98 
contemplative traditions and, 537 
in daily life, 203
early experience sampling studies of, 196 
goal-related external stimuli in, 217 
influence of personal goals, 20 6 
phenomenal qualities of, 546-547 
prospective bias in 
mind-wandering, 202 
transformation of stimuli into, 57— 58 
thought flow, 12, 19, 52, 196- 197, 2 0 6, 219, 
221, 224, 226
thought sampling, 52, 149, 154, 234 
thought/thoughts. See also specific types of 
thought
electrophysiological stimulations 
and, 171*
human electrophysiology studies of, 171* 
types of, 4f
virtual nature of, 65-67 
Tisdelle, L., 330 
tonic-phasic model, 414 
Topolinski, S., 312 
Toulouse, E., 138
train of thought, 75, 88, 9 9, 107, 145, 226, 
235, 241
trait questionnaires, 145, 147- 148, 147/^
150,152
trait rumination, 514- 515. See also 
rumination
Transcendental Meditation, 4 8 4, 529, 541 
transcranial direct current stimulation 
(TDCS), 147/
157, 316, 405 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 
78, 79/ 147/ J57> 363 
transient/enduring constraints, 481 
transparent conscious
representations, 109724 
traumatic involuntary memories, 4 7 0. See 
also involuntary memories 
Trier Social Stress Test, 340
tulpamancy, 4 4 6
“tuning out,” 92- 93, 102, 107, 235, 250, 575 
Turkle, S., 135 
Turner’s syndrome, 365
u
unconscious thought, 136, 217, 2 20, 241 
unguided-thinking, mind-wandering as, 
87- 88, 90- 91, 93
unintentional mental behaviors, 100, 
104- 107, 546
unit of identification switching (UI- 
switching), 98, 102,109 
uptake of facilitating cue, 289
V
vacations/down time, 134,137 
Valerian free will, 119 
Valery, P, 119 
Van der Goten, K., 206 
Van der Linden, M., 182 
Van Eeden, F., 391, 399 
Vanhatalo, S., 62
Vartanian, O., 6, 328- 329, 330, 333, 334 
ventral attention network, 61, 
363
vertical mental causation, 107 
Vervaeke, J., 6 
Vessel, E. A., 332
veto-control, in mind-wandering,
9I-93, 95«5
vigilance decrements, 263-265 
visual art/artists
brain activation during generation 
of, 1667/
categories of art and, 329 
emotional responses and, 304 
functional neuroimaging of, 166 
generation/evaluation of, 280-281 
psychedelic substances and, 580 
responses to, 331 
visual imagery
absence of, 361, 418 
auditory imagery v., 195 
in daydreams, 195 
fMRI and, 130 
inner speech and, 204 
lingual gyrus and, 154 
of lucid dreamers, 402 
medial temporal lobe and, 175 
memory deficits and, 4 9 6  
in microdreams, 430 
mind-wandering and, 205, 207 
MSI (multisensory integration) 
and, 429
neural networks and, 131 
in neurological patients, 365 
in NREM 1 sleep, 376 
production of, 128 
in REM sleep, 127 
in REST tank populations, 566 
as self-generated thought, 372, 379 
during sleep, 362, 416 
sleep paralysis and, 438

spontaneous subvocal speech v., 126, 
129,130 
in STI, 129723 
visualization exercises, 241 
visual perception, processes of, 128 
Void, J.M ., 458
voluntary memories, vs. involuntary 
memories, 472- 473. See also 
involuntary memories 
Voss, U., 6, 401, 403 
Vygotsky, L. S., 322
w
Wadley, L., 135
waking cognition, memory in, 463— 4 6 6
waking memory sources, 417f
waking STI, 126— 130
Wald-Walkowitz test, 359
Wallace, A., 584
Wammes, J. D., 6
Wamsley, E., 7
Wang, Q., 197
Wang,T., 329, 334
Wang, X., 207
The Wasteland (Eliot), 557-558
Waterloo Unusual Sleep Experiences 
Questionnaire, 436 
Watkins, E., 224, 225 
Watt, I., 136 
Watts, A. W., 7 
Weinstein, S. M., 224 
Weinstein, Y., 197 
Wells, A., 511
Whirling Dervishes, 558— 559 
Whisman, M. A., 511 
Wieth, M., 138 
Williams, D., 556 
Windt, J. M., 6, 4 0 0, 416, 418, 420 
Wisconsin Cart Sorting Test, 338 
Wisenfeld, K., 317 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 103, 388 
Wollman, M., 129 
Woodworth, R. S., 123,124 
words, emotional responses to, 218 
words, making different, 305 
working memory
mind-wandering and, 209 
spontaneous thought link to, 73/  
types of mind-wandering 
and, 236-237
work/workplaces, studies of, 135-136 
writing, cognition and, 136 
wrong, making things, 304— 305 
Wynn, V., 287
Y
Yamachichi (Shunsen), 443, 4 44f  
Yassa, M. A., 13 
Ye, Q., 197 
Yeo, B. T., 74
Yoga. See contemplative traditions 
Young Man Luther (Erikson), 134
z
Zacks, R., 138 
Zadra, A., 441 
Zedelius, C. M., 6, 543 
Zeiss, A. R., 240 
Zen Buddhism, 7 
Zhang, Y., 197 
Zhiyan, T., 2 0 7, 239 
zone of proximal development (ZPD), 
322- 323, 323/
“zoning out,” 92- 93, 102, 107, 235, 250 
zooming in/out, 302
I N D E X
6 ll

