 
 
THE WORLD CAFE 
 
BY MARK K. SMUTNY 
 
 
The World Café is a way to structure democratic 
conversations around questions that matter. It works in 
groups numbering from twelve to the thousands. World Café 
is an approach to strategic collaboration that engages all 
voices and energizes groups. Most importantly, it is 
democratic. When used as a core element in a strategic 
planning process, it results in system-wide ownership.  
 
A World Café begins with participants gathering in groups of 
four or five around small, round café tables. Tables are 
covered to resemble a French café, frequently with red-
checked tablecloths. Flower vases, a candle, and a cup of 
brightly colored markers adorn the tables. A few sheets of 
large flipchart paper are placed on the tables for people to 
record ideas, doodle, and draw.  
Participants explore “questions that matter.” Questions are 
shaped specifically for the challenges before the group. They 
must be written carefully to stimulate greater thinking, 
release imagination, and create commitment. Asking the right 
question makes a difference in how the group discovers 
knowledge and commits to action. See the chapter on The Art 
of Strategic Questions in my book THRIVE: The Professional 
Facilitator’s Guide to Radically Inclusive Meetings.   
A typical World Café has three rounds of twenty minutes, 
followed by a thirty-minute plenary called the “harvest.” 
Everyone, except the person hosting each table, moves to a 
different group following each round.  The host shares 
highlights from the previous conversations with the newbies 
at his or her table, inviting cross-pollination of ideas and 
insights. As conversations connect, they spark new 
discoveries and expand collective knowledge. After ninety 
minutes of table conversation, participants share their 
insights, learnings, and opportunities for action in a whole 
group harvest.  
I have hosted dozens of World Cafés: at a homeless shelter 
engaging staff, neighbors, and homeless guests regarding 
how to ensure the shelter’s success; with a residents’ 
association developing key public policy strategies; and with 
faith-based groups imagining their future. I am always 
amazed by the energy, imagination, and collective 
intelligence that emerges in the harvest.  
Like all the methods described in this chapter, World Café is 
grounded in the hypothesis that ordinary people have 
amazing wisdom. Every group, organization, coalition, and 
business has the chops and creativity to imagine their future 
through strategic conversation. They can confront the most 
difficult challenges and the most potent issues of our time.   
Six principles guide effective World Cafes. They are outlined 
in the book The World Café: Shaping Our Futures through 
Conversations That Matter by Juanita Brown and David 
Isaacs. The principles described below are adapted from their 
book.  
Set the Context – Attend to why you are bringing people 
together and what you want to achieve. Context includes 
who should attend, what questions will generate the most 
creativity, and how the harvest will be designed.  
 
Create Hospitable Space – Meeting spaces make a difference. 
You want one that feels safe and inviting. When people feel 
comfortable, they think creatively. They listen better. Make 
your invitation warm and welcoming. Create a welcoming 
atmosphere. 
 
Explore Questions that Matter – Craft questions relevant to 
the real-life concerns of the group. Powerful questions attract 
collective energy, insight, wisdom, and action. The most 
powerful questions are open-ended, invite curiosity, and 
emerge from the lives of the people involved.   
 
Encourage Everyone’s Contribution – Central to a World Café 
is welcoming every participant’s contribution. All have ideas 
and thoughts to share. Some prefer, nonetheless, only to 
listen. The World Café method provides a structure for both 
sharing and listening.  
 

Connect Diverse Perspectives – New ideas and discoveries 
develop as participants move between tables and meet new 
people. New perspectives, insights, and recognition emerge. 
 
Listen Together for Patterns and Insights – Listening well 
determines the success of a World Café. By listening and 
paying attention to themes, patterns, and insights, the whole 
group discovers wisdom. People see new connections, 
common themes, and insights.  
 
Share Collective Discoveries – Conversations at one table 
connect with conversations at other tables. The harvest 
makes these connections visible to the whole group. 
Encourage a few minutes of silent reflection on the patterns, 
themes, and deeper questions experienced in the three 
rounds of small group conversations. Then, invite the larger 
group to share common insights and discoveries. Capture the 
harvest by working with notes and a graphic recorder.   
 
The World Café method has been successful at engaging all 
kinds of groups across the world. From women’s health 
collectives in Sub-Saharan Africa seeking improved health 
outcomes for women and children, to Fortune 500 
corporations imagining better ways to improve safety, the 
method is versatile and effective.  
 
For more information about the World Café movement, 
check out the website at http://www.theworldcafe.com and 
order the book, The World Café: Shaping Our Futures through 
Conversations That Matter, by Juanita Brown and David 
Isaacs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Mark Smutny and Civic Reinventions, Inc. (www.civicreinventions.com).  
All rights reserved. For permission to distribute copies of this article in any form, contact: mark.smutny@civicreinventions.com.  
 
 
 
 

