
The Morality of Capitalism
What Your Professors 
Won’t Tell You
Edited by Tom G. Palmer
Students For Liberty & Atlas Network
Jameson Books, Inc.
Ottawa, Illinois
AtlasNetwork.org 
StudentsForLiberty.org

Copyright © 2011 
by Students For Liberty and Atlas Economic Research Foundation
Published for Students For Liberty & Atlas Network by Jameson Books, Inc.
“The Market Economy and the Distribution of Wealth,” by Ludwig Lachmann 
reprinted by permission of the Institute for Humane Studies. “Human Betterment 
through Globalization,” by Vernon Smith reprinted by permission of the 
Foundation for Economic Education.  All other essays published by permission 
of the authors.
Edited by Tom G. Palmer
Cover Design by Jon Meyers
The editor gratefully acknowledges the assistance in preparing this book, not 
only of the authors and copyright holders, but of the members of Students For 
Liberty, most especially Clark Ruper, Brandon Wasicsko, and Ankur Chawla, 
who worked tirelessly to format and prepare the essays for publication. Their 
dedication and zeal for liberty is itself an inspiration.
For information and other requests please write
Students For Liberty
P.O. Box 17321
Arlington, VA 22216
Jameson Books, Inc.
722 Columbus Street
P.O. Box 738
Ottawa, IL 61350
800-426-1357
Jameson Books are distributed to the book trade by Midpoint Trade Books, 
New York
ISBN: 978-0-89803-170-6
Printed in the United States of America
15 14 13 12 11  5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Introduction: The Morality of Capitalism  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
By Tom G. Palmer
The History of a Word  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Free-Market Capitalism vs. Crony Capitalism  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
Section I: The Virtues of Entrepreneurial Capitalism
Interview with an Entrepreneur .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15
Featuring John Mackey (Conducted by Tom G. Palmer)
Liberty and Dignity Explain the Modern World   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
By Deirdre N. McCloskey
Competition and Cooperation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  31
By David Boaz
For-Profi t Medicine and the Compassion Motive   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  37
By Tom G. Palmer
Section II: Voluntary Interaction and Self-Interest
The Paradox of Morality .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  43
By Mao Yushi (Translated by Jude Blanchette)
The Moral Logic of Equality and Inequality in 
Market Society   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  55
By Leonid V. Nikonov
Adam Smith and the Myth of Greed.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  63
By Tom G. Palmer
Ayn Rand and Capitalism: The Moral Revolution  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  69
By David Kelley

Section III: The Production and Distribution of Wealth
The Market Economy and the Distribution of Wealth   .  .  .  .  .  87
By Ludwig Lachmann
Political and Economic Freedoms Together Spawn 
Humanity’s Miracles   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  96
By Temba A. Nolutshungu
Section IV: Globalizing Capitalism
Global Capitalism and Justice  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  103
By June Arunga
Human Betterment through Globalization   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  107
By Vernon Smith
The Culture of Liberty .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  114
By Mario Vargas Llosa
A Little Further Reading for Fun and Profi t (and Better 
School Papers)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  123
Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  126
Index of Proper Names  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  129

1
Introduction: The Morality of Capitalism
By Tom G. Palmer
This book is about the moral justifi cation of what philosopher 
Robert Nozick called “capitalist acts among consenting adults.”1 
It’s about the system of cooperative production and free exchange 
characterized by the predominance of such acts. 
A few words about the title—The Morality of Capitalism—
are in order. The essays in this book are about the morality of 
capitalism; they are not confi ned to abstract moral philosophy, 
but also draw on economics, logic, history, literature, and other 
disciplines. Moreover, they are about the morality of capitalism, 
not merely the morality of free exchange. The term “capitalism” 
refers not just to markets for the exchange of goods and services, 
which have existed since time immemorial, but to the system of 
innovation, wealth creation, and social change that has brought 
to billions of people prosperity that was unimaginable to earlier 
generations of human beings.
Capitalism refers to a legal, social, economic, and cultural 
system that embraces equality of rights and “careers open to tal-
ent” and that energizes decentralized innovation and processes 
of trial and error—what the economist Joseph Schumpeter 
called “creative destruction”—through the voluntary processes of 
market exchange. Capitalist culture celebrates the entrepreneur, 
the scientist, the risk-taker, the innovator, the creator. Although 
derided as materialistic by philosophers (notably Marxists) who 
are themselves adherents of materialism, capitalism is at its core 
a spiritual and cultural enterprise. As the historian Joyce Appleby 
noted in her recent study The Relentless Revolution: A History 
of Capitalism, “Because capitalism is a cultural system and not 
simply an economic one, it cannot be explained by material fac-
tors alone.”2
Capitalism is a system of cultural, spiritual, and ethical values. 
As the economists David Schwab and Elinor Ostrom noted in 
a seminal game-theoretic study of the role of norms and rules 
in maintaining open economies, free markets rest fi rmly on the 

2
norms that constrain us from stealing and that are “trust enhanc-
ing.”3 Far from being an amoral arena for the clash of interests, 
as capitalism is oft en portrayed by those who seek to undermine 
or destroy it, capitalist interaction is highly structured by ethical 
norms and rules. Indeed, capitalism rests on a rejection of the 
ethics of loot and grab, the means by which most wealth enjoyed 
by the wealthy has been acquired in other economic and political 
systems. (In fact, in many countries today, and for much of human 
history, it has been widely understood that those who are rich 
are rich because they took from others, and especially because 
they have access to organized force—in today’s terms, the state. 
Such predatory elites use this force to gain monopolies and to 
confi scate the produce of others through taxes. They feed at the 
state treasury and they benefi t from state-imposed monopolies 
and restrictions on competition. It’s only under conditions of 
capitalism that people commonly become wealthy without be-
ing criminals.)
Consider what the economist and historian Deirdre McCloskey 
calls “The Great Fact”: “Real income per head nowadays exceeds 
that around 1700 or 1800 in, say, Britain and other countries that 
have experienced modern economic growth by such a large factor 
as sixteen, at least.”4 That is unprecedented in all of human history. 
McCloskey’s estimate is, in fact, quite conservative. It doesn’t take 
into eff ect the amazing advances in science and technology that 
have put the cultures of the world at our fi ngertips. 
Capitalism puts human creativity to the service of humanity 
by respecting and encouraging entrepreneurial innovation, that 
elusive factor that explains the diff erence between the way we 
live now and how generation aft er generation aft er generation 
of our ancestors lived prior to the nineteenth century. The in-
novations that have transformed human life for the better are 
not merely scientifi c and technological, but institutional, as well. 
New business fi rms of all kinds voluntarily coordinate the work 
eff orts of enormous numbers of people. New fi nancial markets 
and instruments connect the savings and investment decisions 
of billions of people twenty-four hours a day. New telecommu-
nications networks bring together people from the corners of 
the world. (Today I had conversations with friends in Finland, 

3
China, Morocco, the United States, and Russia, and Facebook 
comments and communications from friends and acquaintances 
in the United States, Canada, Pakistan, Denmark, France, and 
Kyrgyzstan.) New products off er us opportunities for comfort, 
delight, and education unimaginable to previous generations. 
(I am writing this on my Apple MacBook Pro.) Those changes 
have made our societies in countless ways dramatically unlike all 
human societies that have preceded them.
Capitalism is not just about building stuff , in the way that so-
cialist dictators used to exhort their slaves to “Build the Future!” 
Capitalism is about creating value, not merely working hard or 
making sacrifi ces or being busy. Those who fail to understand 
capitalism are quick to support “job creation” programs to create 
work. They have misunderstood the point of work, much less 
the point of capitalism. In a much-quoted story, the economist 
Milton Friedman was shown the construction on a massive new 
canal in Asia. When he noted that it was odd that the workers 
were moving huge amounts of earth and rock with small shovels, 
rather than earth moving equipment, he was told “You don’t 
understand; this is a jobs program.” His response: “Oh, I thought 
you were trying to build a canal. If you’re seeking to create jobs, 
why didn’t you issue them spoons, rather than shovels?” 
The mercantilist and cronyist H. Ross Perot, when running 
for president of the United States in 1992, lamented during the 
presidential debates that Americans were buying computer chips 
from Taiwan and selling the Taiwanese potato chips. It seemed 
that Perot was ashamed that Americans were selling mere potato 
chips; he had bought into Lenin’s view that value is added only 
by industrial production in factories. Economist Michael Boskin 
of Stanford University correctly noted that if you’re talking 
about a dollar’s worth of computer chips, or a dollar’s worth of 
potato chips, you’re talking about a dollar’s worth. Adding value 
by growing potatoes in Idaho or by etching silicon in Taipei is 
adding value. Comparative advantage5 is a key to specialization 
and trade; there is nothing degrading about producing value, as 
a farmer, as a furniture mover (I worked with three movers today 
to move much of my library and I have a very solid sense of how 
much value they added to my life), as a fi nancier, and so on. The 

4
market—not arrogant mercantilist politicians—shows us when 
we are adding value, and without free markets, we cannot know.
Capitalism is not just about people trading butter for eggs in 
local markets, which has gone on for millennia. It’s about adding 
value through the mobilization of human energy and ingenuity 
on a scale never seen before in human history, to create wealth 
for common people that would have dazzled and astonished the 
richest and most powerful kings, sultans, and emperors of the 
past. It’s about the erosion of long-entrenched systems of power, 
domination, and privilege, and the opening of “careers to talent.” 
It’s about the replacement of force by persuasion.6 It’s about the 
replacement of envy by accomplishment.7 It’s about what has 
made my life possible, and yours. 
(The only thing that the kings and sultans and emperors had 
that ordinary people today don’t have was power over other people 
and the ability to command them. They had vast palaces built 
by slaves or fi nanced by taxes, but no indoor heating or cooling; 
slaves and servants, but no washing machines or dishwashers; 
armies of couriers, but no cell phones or Wi-Fi; court doctors 
and magi, but no anesthetic to ease their agony or antibiotics 
to cure infections; they were powerful, but they were miserably 
poor by our standards.)
The History of a Word
Free markets, understood as systems of free exchange among 
persons with well-defi ned, legally secure, and transferable rights 
in scarce resources, are a necessary condition for the wealth of 
the modern world. But as economic historians, most notably 
Deirdre McCloskey, have convincingly shown, they are not suf-
fi cient. Something else is needed: an ethics of free exchange and 
of wealth production through innovation. 
A few words about the use of the term “capitalism” are in order. 
The social historian Fernand Braudel traced the term “capital” to 
the period spanning the twelft h and thirteenth centuries, when it 
referred to “funds, stock of merchandise, sum of money, or money 
carrying interest.”8 Of the many uses of the term “capitalist” that 
Braudel catalogued, he noted dryly, “The word is never . . . used 

5
in a friendly sense.”9 The word “Capitalism” emerged as a term, 
generally of abuse, in the nineteenth century, e.g., when the French 
socialist Louis Blanc defi ned the term as “the appropriation of 
capital by some to the exclusion of others.”10 Karl Marx used 
the term “capitalist mode of production,” and it was his ardent 
follower Werner Sombart who popularized the term “capital-
ism” in his infl uential 1912 book Der Moderne Kapitalismus. 
(Marx’s collaborator, Friedrich Engels, considered Sombart the 
only thinker in Germany who really understood Marx; Sombart 
later became a cheerleader for another form of anti-capitalism, 
National Socialism, i.e., Nazism.) 
In their attack on the “capitalists” and the “capitalist mode of 
production,” Marx and Engels noted that “the bourgeoisie” (his 
term for the “class” who owned “the means of production”) had 
radically changed the world: 
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, 
has created more massive and more colossal productive forces 
than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of 
Nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry 
to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, elec-
tric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, 
canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the 
ground—what earlier century had even a presentiment that 
such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?11
Marx and Engels marveled at not only technological innova-
tion, but at “whole populations conjured out of the ground,” 
which is a striking way to describe falling death rates, rising living 
standards, and increasing life spans. Despite such accomplish-
ments, of course, Marx and Engels called for the destruction of 
the “capitalist mode of production,” or, to be more precise, they 
thought that it would destroy itself and usher in a new system 
that would be so wonderful that it was not necessary—indeed, 
it was even off ensively unscientifi c—to off er even the slightest 
hint as to how it might work.12
More importantly, Marx and Engels grounded their critique 
of capitalism (a critique that, despite the failure of all communist 

6
orders to fulfi ll their promises, remains extraordinarily infl uential 
among intellectuals around the world) on a mass of confusion 
over what they meant by the term “bourgeoisie,” which they 
connected to the “capitalist mode of production.” On the one 
hand, they use the term to mean owners of “capital” who organize 
productive enterprises, but on the other they use it to refer to 
those who live off  of the state and its power, as Marx did in one 
of his most interesting essays on politics:
[T]he material interest of the French bourgeoisie is most inti-
mately imbricated [Note: a term for “overlapping”] precisely 
with the maintenance of that extensive and highly ramified 
state machine. It is that machine which provides its surplus 
population with jobs, and makes up through state salaries for 
what it cannot pocket in the form of profits, interest, rents, 
and fees. Its political interest equally compelled it daily to 
increase the repression, and therefore to increase the resources 
and the personnel of the state power.13
So on the one hand, Marx identifi ed the “bourgeoisie” with the 
entrepreneurs who gave “a cosmopolitan character to production 
and consumption in every country,” who made “national one-
sidedness and narrow-mindedness” “more and more impossible,” 
who created “a world literature,” who brought about “the rapid 
improvement of all instruments of production” and “immensely 
facilitated the means of communication,” and who overcame 
“the barbarians’ obstinate hatred of foreigners” by the “cheap 
prices of commodities” they off ered.14 On the other, he used 
“bourgeoisie” to refer to those who live off  of “public credit” 
(i.e., government debt):
The whole of the modern money market, the whole of the 
banking business, is most intimately interwoven with public 
credit. A part of their business capital is necessarily put out 
at interest in short-term public funds. Their deposits, the 
capital put at their disposal by merchants and industrialists 
and distributed by them among the same people, flow in 
part from the dividends of holders of government bonds.15

7
Marx saw the “bourgeoisie” as intimately involved in and ben-
efi ting from the struggle to control the machinery of the state:
All political upheavals perfected this machine instead of 
smashing it. The parties that strove in turn for mastery re-
garded possession of this immense state edifice as the main 
booty for the victory.16
In the words of the historian Shirley Gruner, “Marx felt he 
had got a grip on reality when he found the ‘bourgeoisie’ but in 
fact he had merely got hold of a very slippery term.”17 In some 
texts Marx used the term to refer to those innovative entrepre-
neurs who organize productive enterprises and invest in wealth 
creation, and in others he used it to refer to those who cluster 
around the state, who live off  of taxation, who lobby to prohibit 
competition and restrict the freedom to trade; in brief, to those 
who invest, not in creating wealth, but in securing the power to 
redistribute or destroy the wealth of others, and to keep markets 
closed, the poor in their place, and society under their thumbs.
Because of the infl uence of Marx and his follower Sombart, the 
term “capitalism” came into general use. It’s worth remembering 
that the term was popularized by people who not only confused 
productive entrepreneurship and market exchange with living off  
of taxes taken from others, but who advocated the abolition of 
property, markets, money, prices, the division of labor, and the 
entire edifi ce of liberalism: individual rights, religious freedom, 
freedom of speech, equality before the law, and constitutionally 
limited democratic government. 
Not uncommonly, like many terms of abuse, “capitalism” was 
taken up by some of those intellectual advocates of free markets 
against whom the term was wielded. As a result of its history, those 
who adopted the term “capitalism” for what they advocated, or 
even simply as a neutral term for social scientifi c discussion, were 
disadvantaged by the facts that (1) the term was used equivocally 
(to refer to both free market entrepreneurship and to living off  
taxes and government power and patronage), and (2) that it was 
almost always used in a distinctly negative manner. 
Some suggest abandoning the term altogether, because it is so 

8
fraught with confl icting meanings and ideological overtones.18 
That’s tempting, but there remains a problem. Merely allowing 
people to trade freely and to be guided by profi ts and losses, 
while certainly necessary for economic progress, is not suffi  cient 
for the creation of the modern world. Modern markets both 
emerged from and fuel a whirlwind of institutional, technologi-
cal, cultural, artistic, and social innovation that transcends the 
model of people exchanging eggs for butter. Modern free-market 
capitalism innovates, not at a glacial pace over millennia, but 
faster and faster—precisely what both the socialists (notably 
Marx) and their allies, the anti-market conservatives, found so 
terrifying about the modern world. In his Capitalism, Socialism, 
and Democracy, Joseph Schumpeter criticized those for whom 
“the problem that is usually being visualized is how capitalism 
administers existing structures, whereas the relevant problem is 
how it creates and destroys them.”19 
Modern free markets are not merely places of exchange, as were 
the market fairs of old. They are characterized by waves of “creative 
destruction”; what was new ten years ago is already old, superseded 
by improved versions, by new devices, institutional arrangements, 
technologies, and ways of interacting that were unimagined by 
anyone. That is what distinguishes modern free markets from 
the markets of old. The best available term to distinguish the 
free-market relations that have made the modern world from 
those markets that preceded it, in my opinion, is “capitalism.” 
Capitalism isn’t a form of disorder, though. It’s a form of spon-
taneous order, which emerges from a process. (Some writers refer 
to such orders as “emergent orders.”) The predictable constancy 
of the rule of law and security of rights make possible such in-
novation. As David Boaz noted in The Futurist, 
People have always had trouble seeing the order in an ap-
parently chaotic market. Even as the price system constantly 
moves resources toward their best use, on the surface the 
market seems the very opposite of order—businesses fail-
ing, jobs being lost, people prospering at an uneven pace, 
investments revealed to have been wasted. The fast-paced 
Innovation Age will seem even more chaotic, with huge 

9
businesses rising and falling more rapidly than ever, and fewer 
people having long-term jobs. But the increased efficiency 
of transportation, communications, and capital markets will 
in fact mean even more order than the market could achieve 
in the industrial age. The point is to avoid using coercive 
government to “smooth out the excesses” or “channel” the 
market toward someone’s desired result.20
Free-Market Capitalism vs. Crony Capitalism
In order to avoid the confusion caused by equivocal use of the 
term “capitalism” by socialist intellectuals, “free-market capital-
ism” should be clearly distinguished from “crony capitalism,” 
from the system that has mired so many nations in corruption 
and backwardness. In many countries, if someone is rich, there is 
a very good chance that he (rarely she) holds political power or 
is a close relative, friend, or supporter—in a word, a “crony”—of 
those who do hold power, and that that person’s wealth came, 
not from being a producer of valued goods, but from enjoying 
the privileges that the state can confer on some at the expense of 
others. Sadly, “crony capitalism” is a term that can with increasing 
accuracy also be applied to the economy of the United States, 
a country in which failed fi rms are routinely “bailed out” with 
money taken from taxpayers, in which the national capital is little 
more than a gigantic pulsating hive of “rent-seeking” lobbyists, 
bureaucrats, politicians, consultants, and hacks, and in which 
appointed offi  cials of the Treasury Department and the central 
bank (the Federal Reserve System) take it on themselves to reward 
some fi rms and harm others. Such corrupt cronyism shouldn’t be 
confused with “free-market capitalism,” which refers to a system 
of production and exchange that is based on the rule of law, on 
equality of rights for all, on the freedom to choose, on the freedom 
to trade, on the freedom to innovate, on the guiding discipline 
of profi ts and losses, and on the right to enjoy the fruits of one’s 
labors, of one’s savings, of one’s investments, without fearing 
confi scation or restriction from those who have invested, not in 
production of wealth, but in political power.
The waves of change that free-market capitalism creates are 

10
oft en resented by entrenched elites. As they see the world, mi-
norities become uppity and the lower classes no longer know 
their place. More shocking, from their perspective, is that under 
free-market capitalism women assert their own worth. Status is 
undermined. People create relationships based on choice and 
consent, rather than birth or status.21 The conservative hatred of 
free-market capitalism, which was very neatly summarized and 
incorporated by Marx into his writings, refl ects anger at such 
change and oft en anger at the loss of privilege. Leo Melamed (the 
Chairman Emeritus of the CME Group [formerly the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange] whose own life story of escaping from 
the Gestapo and the KGB and going on to revolutionize world 
fi nance is a story of courage and vision), drew on his experience 
when he said that “in Chicago’s fi nancial markets it is not what 
you are—your personal pedigree, your family origin, your physi-
cal infi rmities, your gender—but your ability to determine what 
the customer wants and where the market is headed. Little else 
matters.”22 Embracing free-market capitalism means embracing 
the freedom to change, to innovate, to invent. It means accom-
modating change and respecting the freedom of others to do as 
they please with what is theirs. It means making place for new 
technologies, new scientifi c theories, new forms of art, and new 
identities and new relationships. It means embracing the freedom 
to create wealth, which is the only means to the elimination of 
poverty. (Wealth has causes, but poverty does not; poverty is 
what results if wealth production does not take place, whereas 
wealth is not what results if poverty production does not take 
place.)23 It means celebrating human liberation and realizing 
human potential.
The authors whose essays are presented here come from a 
variety of countries and cultures and from a variety of callings 
and intellectual disciplines. Each off ers an appreciation of how 
free-market exchanges are rooted in morality and reinforce moral 
behavior. The selection includes a mix of essays, some quite short, 
some longer, some quite accessible, some more academic. It in-
cludes two essays that have not previously appeared in English and 
were translated from Chinese and Russian for this collection. It 
includes contributions by two Nobel Prize winners, one a novelist 

11
and one an economist, and an interview with a successful entrepre-
neur who is an outspoken proponent of what he calls “conscious 
capitalism.” The essays don’t provide all of the arguments for 
free-market capitalism, but they do provide an introduction to 
a very rich literature. (A small sample of that literature is listed 
in the brief bibliography at the end of the book.)
Why does this book only contain vigorous defenses of 
free-market capitalism? Because there are hundreds—actu-
ally, thousands—of books on the market purporting to off er 
“balanced” discussions that in fact are fi lled with nothing but 
indictments of wealth creation, of entrepreneurship, of innova-
tion, of the profi t-and-loss system, and of free-market capitalism 
generally. In the course of my own career, I have read hundreds 
of books that attacked free-market capitalism; I’ve thought 
about the arguments and wrestled with them. In contrast, it is 
unusual to fi nd critics of free-market capitalism who have read 
more than one author who dared to off er a defense of free-market 
capitalism. The one author who is most commonly cited, at 
least in the modern Anglo-Saxon intellectual world, is Robert 
Nozick, and even then it becomes clear that only one chapter 
of one book was read, the one in which he off ered a challenging 
hypothetical thought experiment to test enemies of free-market 
capitalism. Most socialists think it suffi  cient to read one essay 
and rebut one thought experiment.24 Aft er reading and rebutting 
one argument, if those who condemn free-market capitalism even 
think it worthwhile to continue the critique, they usually rely on 
one or another misstatement or garbled version of what Milton 
Friedman or Ayn Rand or F. A. Hayek or Adam Smith believed, 
off ered without citation. 
To take one recent prominent example, Harvard professor 
Michael Sandel off ered a rebuttal to the case for free-market 
capitalism in his recent book Justice: What’s the Right Thing to 
Do?; besides Nozick, he cited Friedman and Hayek, but made it 
clear that he had not read them. He quoted Friedman asking, “Are 
we entitled to use coercion to prevent him [someone who won’t 
save for retirement] from doing what he chooses to do?”25 But he 
failed to note that in the very next paragraph Friedman actually 
off ered reasons for such coercion26 and stated that “The weight of 

12
this argument clearly depends on fact.”27 (Friedman was invoking 
the classical liberal principle of the “presumption of liberty,”28 not 
making a categorical statement about rights, as Sandel incorrectly 
claims.) Sandel also states that “In The Constitution of Liberty 
(1960), the Austrian-born economist-philosopher Friedrich A. 
Hayek (1899-1992) argued that ‘any attempt to bring about greater 
economic equality was bound to be coercive and destructive of 
a free society’ ”—a claim that Hayek does not, in fact, make; he 
does argue that “progressive income taxation” (in which the rates 
of tax increase with income) is incompatible with the rule of law, 
for “unlike proportionality, progression provides no principle 
which tells us what the relative burden of diff erent persons ought 
to be,”29 but that is not the same as arguing that any attempt to 
bring about greater economic equality (say, by eliminating special 
subsidies and privileges for the rich) was bound to be coercive. 
(Both Sandel’s erroneous claim and his description show that 
Sandel didn’t even bother to consult Hayek’s book; one wonders 
whether he would have described Adam Smith’s An Inquiry into 
the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations as a book about 
how pins are manufactured.) 
Serious people should do better. I strongly encourage you, the 
reader of this essay and this book, to do better. Read the best 
criticisms of free-market capitalism. Read Marx. Read Sombart. 
Read Rawls. Read Sandel. Understand them. Be open to being 
convinced by them. Think about them. I’ve read more arguments 
against free-market capitalism than most enemies of free-market 
capitalism have read, and I think I could usually make their case 
better than they can, because I know it better. What’s off ered 
here is the other side of the debate, the side that is rarely even 
acknowledged to exist. 
So, go ahead, take a chance. Wrestle with the arguments of-
fered by the essays in this book. Think about them. Then make 
up your own mind.
—Tom G. Palmer
Washington, D.C.

Section I
The Virtues of 
Entrepreneurial Capitalism


15
Interview with an Entrepreneur
Featuring John Mackey
Conducted by Tom G. Palmer
In this interview, business entrepreneur and Whole Foods Co-
Founder and Co-CEO John Mackey explains his philosophy of 
“conscious capitalism” and shares his thoughts on human nature 
and motivation, the nature of business, and the distinction between 
fr ee-market capitalism and “crony capitalism.”
John Mackey co-founded Whole Foods Market in 1980. He has 
been a leader in promoting healthy eating, ethical treatment of 
animals, and positive community involvement by businesses. He is 
a trustee of the Conscious Capitalism Institute.
Palmer: John, you’re something of a rarity in the business world: 
an entrepreneur who’s unashamed to defend the morality of 
capitalism. You’re also known for saying that self-interest isn’t 
enough for capitalism. What do you mean by that?
Mackey: Resting everything on self-interest is relying on a very 
incomplete theory of human nature. It reminds me of college 
debates with people who tried to argue that everything you do 
logically has to come from self-interest or you wouldn’t do it. 
That position is irrefutable, and ultimately nonsense, since even 
if you did things that weren’t in your self-interest, they would 
still say that it was in your self-interest or you wouldn’t do it. So 
it’s a circular argument.
Palmer: In what way do you think that other motivations beyond 
self-interest are important for capitalism?
Mackey: I just don’t like the question, because people have dif-
ferent defi nitions of self-interest and you end up talking past 
each other frequently when you talk about this subject, which 

16
is why I was mentioning the sophomoric type of discussion you 
have in college about everything being self-interest. What I’m 
suggesting is that human beings are complex and we have many 
motivations, of which self-interest is one, but hardly the only one. 
We’re motivated by many things that we care about, that include, 
but are not limited to, our self-interest. I think that in some ways 
the libertarian movement—possibly due to the combined infl u-
ence of Ayn Rand and many economists—has gotten to a kind 
of ideological dead end that I don’t think does justice to business 
or capitalism or human nature. 
If you think about it, the time in our lives when we’re probably 
the most self-interested is when we’re young and emotionally im-
mature. Most children and adolescents are highly self-involved 
or narcissistic. They’re acting from their self-interest, as they 
perceive it. As we mature and we grow, we become more capable 
of empathy and compassion and love and a fuller range of human 
emotions. People do things for lots of reasons. A false dichotomy 
is oft en set up between self-interest, or selfi shness, and altruism. 
To me it is a false dichotomy, because we’re obviously both. We 
are self-interested, but we’re not just self-interested. We also care 
about other people. We usually care a great deal about the well-
being of our families. We usually care about our communities 
and the larger society that we live in. We can also care about the 
well-being of animals and our larger environment. We have ide-
als that motivate us to try to make the world a better place. By 
a strict defi nition, they would seem to contradict self-interest, 
unless you get back into the circular argument that everything 
you care about and want to do is self-interest. 
So I don’t think self-interest is enough. I don’t think calling 
every act self-interested is a good theory of human nature. I think 
that capitalism and business should fully refl ect the complexity of 
human nature. I also think it does great damage to the “brands” of 
business and capitalism, because it allows the enemies of capitalism 
and business to portray them as selfi sh and greedy and exploitative. 
That really bothers me, Tom, because capitalism and business are 
the greatest forces for good in the world. It’s been that way for at 
least the last three hundred years . . . and they don’t get suffi  cient 
credit for the amazing value that they have created.

17
Palmer: What, besides pursuing self-interest, or profi t, does a 
business do? 
Mackey: Putting it generally, successful businesses create value. 
The beautiful thing about capitalism is that it’s ultimately based on 
voluntary exchange for mutual benefi t. Take a business like Whole 
Foods Market, for example: we create value for our customers 
through the goods and services we provide for them. They don’t 
have to trade with us; they do it because they want to, because 
they think it’s in their interest to do so. So we’re creating value 
for them. We create value for the people that work for us: our 
team members. None of them are slaves. They are all voluntarily 
working because they feel like it’s a job they want to do; the pay 
is satisfactory; they derive many benefi ts from working at Whole 
Foods, psychic as well as monetary. So we’re creating value for 
them. We’re creating value for our investors, because, well, our 
market cap’s over $10 billion dollars and we started at nothing! 
So we’ve created over $10 billion dollars’ worth of value for our 
investors over the past thirty-plus years. None of our stockholders 
are forced to own our stock. They all do so voluntarily because 
they believe we’re creating value for them. We’re creating value 
for our suppliers, who trade with our business. I’ve watched them 
over the years, watched their businesses grow, watched them 
fl ourish—and that’s all proceeded voluntarily. They help make 
Whole Foods better and we help make them better. 
Palmer: You label your philosophy “conscious capitalism.” What 
do you mean by that?
Mackey: We use that term to distinguish it from all those other 
labels that generate a lot of confusion when they’re all lumped 
together, like “corporate social responsibility,” or Bill Gates’s 
“creative capitalism,” or “sustainable capitalism.” We have a very 
clear defi nition of conscious capitalism, based on four principles. 
The fi rst principle is that business has the potential to have 
a higher purpose that may include making money, but is not 
restricted to it. So every business has the potential for a higher 
purpose. And if you think about it, all the other professions in 

18
our society are motivated by purpose, beyond a narrow interpreta-
tion of purpose as restricted to maximizing profi ts. Doctors are 
some of the highest paid people in our society and yet doctors 
have a purpose—to heal people—and that’s the professional 
ethics taught in medical school. That’s not to say that there are 
no greedy doctors out there, but at least many of the doctors 
I’ve known do genuinely care about their patients and try to 
heal them when they’re sick. Teachers try to educate people and 
architects design buildings and lawyers—once you’ve taken all 
the lawyer jokes out of the equation—are attempting to promote 
justice and fairness in our society. Every profession has a purpose 
beyond maximizing profi ts and so does business. Whole Foods is 
a grocer, so we’re selling high-quality natural and organic foods 
for people and helping them to live healthier and longer lives. 
Palmer: And the second principle?
Mackey: The second principle of conscious capitalism is the 
stakeholder principle, which I alluded to earlier, which is that you 
should think about the diff erent stakeholders for which a business 
creates value and who can impact a business. You should think 
about the complexity of your business in the attempt to create 
value for all of these interdependent stakeholders—customers, 
employees, suppliers, investors, and communities. 
The third principle is that a business needs leaders who are 
highly ethical and who put the purpose of the business fi rst. 
They attempt to serve that purpose and they attempt to follow 
the stakeholder principle. So they have to walk the talk of the 
business.
And the fourth principle of conscious capitalism is that you 
have to create a culture that supports purpose, stakeholders, and 
leadership, so that it all fi ts together. 
Palmer: Do those principles motivate you personally when you 
get up in the morning? Do you say, “I’m going to make another 
dollar” or “I’m going to be true to my core principles”?

19
Mackey: I guess I’m a little bit odd in this respect, because I 
haven’t taken any salary from Whole Foods for almost fi ve years 
now. Or bonuses. The stock options, which I would be entitled to, 
are given to The Whole Planet Foundation to make micro-credit 
loans to poor people around the world. I’m highly motivated by 
the purpose of Whole Foods, rather than by how much money I 
could potentially extract from the business in terms of compensa-
tion. I believe that I personally have more than enough wealth 
from the stock that I still own in the company.
Palmer: And, once again, how do you defi ne that purpose?
Mackey: The purpose of Whole Foods is . . . well, if we had more 
time, we could talk at some length about the higher purpose of 
Whole Foods. I gave a talk to our Leadership Group about two 
weeks ago. What I can say in about a minute is that our com-
pany is organized around seven core values. Our fi rst core value 
is to satisfy and delight our customers. Our second core value 
is team member happiness and excellence. (This is all on our 
website, by the way, so we make it quite public.) Our third core 
value is creating wealth through profi ts and growth. The fourth 
core value is being good citizens in the communities where we 
do business. The fi ft h core value is to try to do our business with 
environmental integrity. The sixth core value is that we view our 
suppliers as partners and we try to engage in win-win relation-
ships with them. And seventh we wish to educate all of our 
stakeholders about healthy lifestyle and healthy eating. So our 
higher purposes are a direct extension of those core values. Some 
of these include: trying to heal America; our nation’s fat and sick 
and we eat terrible diets and we die of heart disease and cancer 
and diabetes. Those are lifestyle diseases—those are largely avoid-
able or reversible diseases, so that’s one of our higher purposes. 
We have a higher purpose about our agricultural system, to try 
to make it a more sustainable agricultural system that also has a 
high degree of productivity. 
The third higher purpose is connected to our Whole Planet 
Foundation, working with Grameen Trust and other micro-credit 
organizations [Editor’s Note: Grameen Bank and Grameen Trust 

20
promote microfi nance in poor countries, especially for women, 
as a path to development.] to try to help end poverty across the 
planet. We’re now in 34 countries—it will be 56 in two years—
and that’s having a positive impact on hundreds of thousands 
of people already. Our fourth higher purpose is the spread of 
conscious capitalism. 
Palmer: You’ve talked about the purposes of a business, so . . . 
why have profi ts? Isn’t a business a profi t-maximizing enterprise? 
Couldn’t you do all of this without having any profi ts? Couldn’t 
you just make enough money to cover your costs?
Mackey: One answer is that you wouldn’t be very eff ective, be-
cause if you’re only making enough money to cover your costs, 
then your impact’s going to be very limited. Whole Foods has 
a much greater impact today than we had thirty, or twenty, or 
fi ft een, or ten years ago. Because we’ve been highly profi table, 
because we’ve been able to grow and to realize our purposes 
more and more, we’ve been able to reach and help millions of 
people instead of just a few thousand people. So I think profi t 
is essential in order to better fulfi ll your purpose. Also, creating 
profi ts provides the capital that our world needs to innovate 
and progress—no profi ts, then no progress. They are completely 
interdependent.
Palmer: But if the profi ts are going into the pockets of your 
shareholders, then is it fulfi lling the mission as much as it could?
Mackey: Of course most of our profi ts don’t go into the pockets 
of our shareholders. Only the relatively small percentage that we 
pay out in dividends does. Ninety-plus percent of the money we 
have made has been reinvested in the business for growth. Strictly 
speaking, if we paid out one hundred percent of our profi ts as 
dividends then that would be true, but I don’t know of any busi-
ness that does that other than a REIT, a Real Estate Investment 
Trust. Everybody else reinvests for growth. Moreover, profi t for 
shareholders induces them to invest in the business in the fi rst 
place, without which you’d have no capital at all to realize your 

21
higher purposes. The ability to increase the capital value of a 
fi rm means you’re able to create value, and a good measure of 
that is your share price. That’s what I meant when I said that we 
had created over $10 billion dollars’ worth of value over the past 
thirty-plus years. 
Palmer: People sometimes say that free markets create inequality. 
What do you think of that claim?
Mackey: I don’t think it is true. Extreme poverty has been the 
normal human condition for most people throughout all of his-
tory. Human beings were all equally poor and lived fairly short 
lives. Two hundred years ago 85 percent of the people alive on 
the planet earth lived on less than a dollar a day in today’s dol-
lars—85 percent! That fi gure’s down to only 20 percent now 
and by the end of this century it should be virtually zero. So it’s a 
rising tide. The world is becoming richer. People are moving out 
of poverty. Humanity really is advancing. Our culture is advanc-
ing. Our intelligence is advancing. We are on an upward spiral, 
if we manage not to destroy ourselves, which is of course a risk, 
because people can be warlike at times, too. And that, by the way, 
is one of the reasons we should work to promote business and 
enterprise and wealth creation, as a healthier outlet for energy 
than militarism, political confl ict, and wealth destruction. But 
that’s another big topic.
So does that increase inequality? I suppose it’s not so much that 
capitalism creates inequality, as it helps people to become more 
prosperous, and inevitably that means that not everybody is going 
to rise at the same rate, but everybody ultimately rises over time. 
We’ve seen that happen, particularly in the past twenty years as 
we’ve seen literally hundreds of millions of people lift ed out of 
poverty in China and India as they have embraced more capital-
ism. The reality is that some people are simply escaping poverty 
and becoming prosperous sooner than other people are. Now that’s 
not causing poverty—it is ending poverty. It’s not causing inequal-
ity in the way most people think of the term. There’s always been 
inequality in any type of social organization throughout history. 
Even communism, which purported to produce a society of equal 

22
ownership of wealth, was highly stratifi ed and had elites who had 
special privileges. So I don’t see that inequality should be blamed 
on capitalism. Capitalism enables people to escape from poverty 
and become more prosperous and wealthy and that is very good. 
That’s the issue that we should focus on. 
The big gap in the world is between those countries that have 
adopted free-market capitalism, and became rich, and those that 
haven’t, and stayed poor. The problem is not that some became 
rich, but that others stayed poor. And that doesn’t have to be!
Palmer: You’ve distinguished free-market capitalism from other 
systems in which people also make profi ts and have businesses, 
but which are oft en characterized as “crony capitalism.” What’s 
the diff erence between your moral vision and what exists in a lot 
of countries around the world?
Mackey: You’ve got to have the rule of law. People have to 
have rules that apply equally to everyone, and those have to be 
enforced by a justice system that has that goal in the forefront 
of their consciousness. We need an equal application of the law 
to everyone as the primary goal—no special privileges to some 
and not to others. So what’s happening in a lot of societies, and 
what I think is happening more and more in America, is you’ve 
got special favors given to the people who have political connec-
tions. It’s wrong. It’s bad. To the degree that any society suff ers 
from crony capitalism, or what my friend Michael Strong calls 
“crapitalism,” you are not in a free-market society any longer and 
you’re not optimizing prosperity; you’re unnecessarily keeping 
many, many people less prosperous than they would be if you 
had a truly free-market order with the rule of law supporting it.
Palmer: Let’s turn to the country you live in, the United States. 
Do you think that there’s any cronyism in the U.S.? 
Mackey: Let me give my favorite current example. Well, I’ve got 
two. One is that we now have well over a thousand waivers that 
have already been granted by the Obama Administration for 
their rules and regulations that were passed under Obamacare. 

23
That’s a form of crony capitalism. The rules are not being applied 
equally to everyone. And that means that the power to give a 
waiver also means the power to deny one. And you can deny it 
to those who aren’t making the proper donations to the political 
party in power or who you just, for whatever reason, you don’t 
favor. You have an arbitrary law that you can selectively apply to 
some and not to others. 
Second, I see crony capitalism right now in all of these subsi-
dies that are going into “green technology,” for example. They’re 
subsidizing some businesses and, ultimately, since the government 
doesn’t have any money on its own, it’s taking it from taxpayers 
and redistributing it to people who are politically favored. I see 
what’s happening with General Electric now, in terms of the 
kind of taxes they’re paying, with all the special exemptions and 
deductions that get written into the tax laws. And since they’re 
so heavily into these alternative energy technologies, or some of 
them, they’re getting to a point where they do not have to pay 
taxes on most of their income, just because they’re politically 
connected. So it off ends me. I think it’s a very bad thing.
Palmer: Would you call it immoral?
Mackey: Yes, I would. Immoral . . . well, I call it immoral. But 
then you get to the point of having to defi ne what that means. 
It certainly violates my ethics and my sense of right and wrong. 
Whether that violates other people’s ethics or not, it’s hard to 
say. I certainly don’t like it. I’m opposed to it. It’s not compatible 
with my idea of how society should be governed. That sort of 
thing shouldn’t happen in a society that has a strong rule of law. 
Palmer: Who do you see as the main gainers from the free-market 
capitalism that you embrace?
Mackey: Everyone! Everyone in society is a benefi ciary. It is what 
has lift ed much of humanity out of poverty. It’s what made this 
country wealthy. We were dirt poor. America was a land of op-
portunity, but it was not a wealthy country. Even though America 
surely hasn’t been perfect, it’s enjoyed one of the freest markets 

24
in the world for a couple of hundred years, and as a result we’ve 
grown from very poor to a prosperous, authentically rich country. 
Palmer: In her book Bourgeois Dignity, Deirdre McCloskey 
argued that it was a change in the way that people thought 
about business and entrepreneurial innovation that made pos-
sible prosperity for the common person. Do you think that we 
can recapture that respect for wealth-creating businesses again?
Mackey: I think we can, because I saw what happened when 
Ronald Reagan got elected. America was in decline in the 1970s—
there’s no doubt about it; look at where our infl ation was, where 
interest rates were, where GDP was heading, the frequency of 
recessions, we were suff ering from “stagfl ation” that revealed the 
deep fl aws of Keynesian philosophy, and then we had a leader who 
came in and cut taxes and freed up a lot of industries through 
deregulation and America experienced a renaissance, a rebirth, 
and that pretty much carried us for the past twenty-fi ve years or 
more. We had basically an upward spiral of growth and progress. 
Unfortunately, more recently we’ve gone backwards again, at least 
a couple of steps backwards. First, under . . . well, I could blame 
every one of these presidents and politicians, and Reagan wasn’t 
perfect by any means either, but most recently Bush really accel-
erated that retreat and now Obama’s taking it to extraordinary 
lengths far beyond what any other president has ever done before. 
But, you know, I’m an entrepreneur, and so I’m an optimist. 
I do think it’s possible to reverse that trend. I don’t think we’re 
yet in an irreversible decline, but I do think we’re going to have 
to make some serious changes fairly soon. We’re going bankrupt, 
for one thing. Unless we’re willing to take that seriously and deal 
with it without raising taxes and choking off  the enterprise of 
America, unless we’re willing to deal with that, then I see decline 
as inevitable. But I’m still hopeful right now!
Palmer: Do you think that capitalism creates conformity or 
does it create space for diversity? I’m thinking about people who 
like kosher food or halal food or religious or cultural or sexual 
minorities . . . 

25
Mackey: You’ve almost answered the question just by being able 
to list those things. Capitalism is ultimately people cooperating 
together to create value for other people, as well as for themselves. 
That’s what capitalism is. There’s of course an element of self-
interest in it, as well. The key is being able to create value through 
cooperation and doing so for both yourself and for others. And 
that creates diversity of productive eff ort, because human beings 
are very diverse in their wants and desires. Capitalism, cooper-
ating in the market, aims to satisfy those wants and desires. So 
that creates tremendous space for individuality. If you live in 
an authoritarian society some special interest group, whether a 
religious hierarchy or university intellectuals or some group of 
fanatics who think that they know what’s best for everyone, can 
force their values on everyone else. They get to dictate to others. 
In a capitalistic society you have far more space for individual-
ity. There’s space for billions of fl owers to grow and fl ourish in a 
capitalistic society, simply because human fl ourishing is ultimately 
the goal or end of capitalism, its greatest creation. 
Palmer: What’s your vision of a just, enterprising, prosperous 
future? 
Mackey: What I’d like to see happen is fi rst that the defenders 
of capitalism start to understand that the strategy they’ve been 
using has really played into the hands of their opponents. They’ve 
conceded the moral high ground and they’ve allowed the enemies 
of capitalism to paint it as an exploitative, greedy, selfi sh system 
that creates inequality, exploits workers, defrauds consumers, and 
is wrecking the environment while eroding communities. The 
defenders don’t know how to respond to that because they’ve al-
ready conceded major ground to the critics of capitalism. Instead, 
they need to shift  away from their obsession with self-interest 
and begin to see the value that capitalism creates, not merely 
for investors—although, of course, it does that, but the value it 
creates for all of the people who trade with business: it creates 
value for customers; it creates value for workers; it creates value 
for suppliers; it creates value for the society as a whole; it creates 
value for governments. I mean, where would our government be 

26
without a strong business sector that creates jobs and income 
and wealth that they can then tax? Not that I’m always thrilled 
with that, mind you. 
Capitalism is a source of value. It’s the most amazing vehicle 
for social cooperation that has ever existed. And that’s the story 
we need to tell. We need to change the narrative. From an ethi-
cal standpoint, we need to change the narrative of capitalism, to 
show that it’s about creating shared value, not for the few, but for 
everyone. If people could see that the way I see it, people would 
love capitalism in the way I love it. 
Palmer: Thank you for your time.
Mackey: It’s my pleasure, Tom.

27
Liberty and Dignity Explain the Modern World
By Deirdre N. McCloskey
In this essay, the economic historian and social critic Deirdre 
McCloskey argues that the growth of modern capitalism and the 
world it made possible cannot be adequately explained by “mate-
rial factors,” as generations of historians have sought to do. It was a 
change in how people thought about business, exchange, innovation, 
and profi t that created modern capitalism and liberated women, gay 
people, religious dissenters, and the previously downtrodden masses 
whose lives were brutal, painful, and short before the invention and 
commercialization of modern agriculture, medicine, electricity, and 
the other accessories of modern capitalist life.
Deirdre N. McCloskey is a professor of economics, history, English, 
and communication at the University of Illinois at Chicago. She 
is the author of thirteen books on economics, economic history, 
statistics, rhetoric, and literature, as well as a memoir, Crossing. 
She was co-editor of the Journal of Economic History and has 
published extensively in academic journals. Her latest book, just 
out, is Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the 
Modern World.
A change in how people honored markets and innovation caused 
the Industrial Revolution, and then the modern world. The old 
conventional wisdom, by contrast, has no place for attitudes about 
trade and innovation, and no place for liberal thought. The old 
materialist story says that the Industrial Revolution came from 
material causes, from investment or theft , from higher saving rates 
or from imperialism. You’ve heard it: “Europe is rich because of 
its empires”; “The United States was built on the backs of slaves”; 
“China is getting rich because of trade.”
But what if the Industrial Revolution was sparked instead by 
changes in the way people thought, and especially by how they 
thought about each other? Suppose steam engines and computers 

28
came from a new honor for innovators—not from piling brick 
on brick, or dead African on dead African?
Economists and historians are starting to realize that it took 
much, much more than theft  or capital accumulation to ignite 
the Industrial Revolution—it took a big shift  in how Westerners 
thought about commerce and innovation. People had to start 
liking “creative destruction,” the new idea that replaces the old. 
It’s like music. A new band gets a new idea in rock music, and 
replaces the old if enough people freely adopt the new. If the old 
music is thought to be worse, it is “destroyed” by the creativity. 
In the same way, electric lights “destroyed” kerosene lamps, and 
computers “destroyed” typewriters. To our good.
The correct history goes like this: Until the Dutch around 
1600 or the English around 1700 changed their thinking, you 
got honor in only two ways, by being a soldier or being a priest, 
in the castle or in the church. People who merely bought and sold 
things for a living, or innovated, were scorned as sinful cheaters. 
A jailer in the 1200s rejected a rich man’s pleas for mercy: “Come, 
Master Arnaud Teisseire, you have wallowed in such opulence! 
How could you be without sin?”
In 1800 the average income per person per day all over the 
planet was, in present-day money, anything from $1 to $5. Call 
it an average of $3 a day. Imagine living in present-day Rio or 
Athens or Johannesburg on $3 a day. (Some people do even 
now.) That’s three-fourths of a cappuccino at Starbucks. It was 
and is appalling. 
Then something changed, in Holland and then in England. 
The revolutions and reformations of Europe, 1517 to 1789, gave 
voice to ordinary people outside the bishops and aristocrats. 
Europeans and then others came to admire entrepreneurs like 
Ben Franklin and Andrew Carnegie and Bill Gates. The middle 
class started to be viewed as good, and started to be allowed to 
do good, and to do well. People signed on to a Middle-Class 
Deal that has characterized now-wealthy places such as Britain 
or Sweden or Hong Kong ever since: “Let me innovate and make 
piles and piles of money in the short run out of innovation, and 
in the long run I’ll make you rich.” 
And that’s what happened. Starting in the 1700s with Franklin’s 

29
lightning rod and Watt’s steam engine, and going nuts in the 
1800s, and nuttier still in the 2000s, the West, which for centu-
ries had lagged behind China and Islam, became astoundingly 
innovative. 
Give the middle class dignity and liberty for the fi rst time in 
human history and here’s what you get: the steam engine, the 
automatic textile loom, the assembly line, the symphony orches-
tra, the railway, the corporation, abolitionism, the steam printing 
press, cheap paper, wide literacy, cheap steel, cheap plate glass, the 
modern university, the modern newspaper, clean water, reinforced 
concrete, the women’s movement, the electric light, the elevator, 
the automobile, petroleum, vacations in Yellowstone, plastics, 
half a million new English-language books a year, hybrid corn, 
penicillin, the airplane, clean urban air, civil rights, open-heart 
surgery, and the computer.
The result was that uniquely in history the ordinary people, 
and especially the very poor, were made much, much better 
off —remember the Middle-Class Deal. The poorest fi ve percent 
of Americans are now about as well off  in air-conditioning and 
automobiles as the richest fi ve percent of Indians. 
Now we’re seeing the same shift  play out in China and India, 
40 percent of the world’s population. The big economic story 
of our times is not the Great Recession of 2007-09—unpleasant 
though it was. The big story is that the Chinese in 1978 and then 
the Indians in 1991 adopted liberal ideas in their economies, and 
welcomed creative destruction. Now their goods and services per 
person are quadrupling in every generation. 
By now, in the numerous places that have adopted middle-
class liberty and dignity, the average person makes and consumes 
over $100 a day. Remember: two centuries ago it was $3 a day, 
in the same prices. And that doesn’t take account of the great 
improvement in the quality of many things, from electric lights to 
antibiotics. Young people in Japan and Norway and Italy are even 
in conservatively measured terms around thirty times better off  
in material circumstances than their great-great-great-great-great 
grandparents. All the other leaps into the modern world—more 
democracy, the liberation of women, improved life expectancy, 
greater education, spiritual growth, artistic explosion—are fi rmly 

30
attached to the Great Fact of modern history, the increase by 
2,900 percent in food and education and travel. 
It is so big, so unprecedented, the Great Fact, that it’s impos-
sible to see it as coming out of routine causes such as trade or 
exploitation or investment or imperialism. That’s what economists 
are good at explaining: routine. Yet all the routines had occurred 
on a big scale in China and the Ottoman Empire, in Rome and 
South Asia. Slavery was common in the Middle East, trade was 
large in India, investment in Chinese canals and Roman roads 
was immense. Yet no Great Fact happened. Something must be 
deeply wrong with explanations of the usual economic sort. 
In other words, depending exclusively on economic material-
ism to explain the modern world, whether left -wing historical 
materialism or right-wing economics, is mistaken. Ideas of human 
dignity and liberty did the trick. As the economic historian Joel 
Mokyr puts it, “economic change in all periods depends, more 
than most economists think, on what people believe.” The gi-
gantic material changes were the outcome, not the cause. It was 
ideas, or “rhetoric,” that caused our enrichment, and with it our 
modern liberties. 

31
Competition and Cooperation 
By David Boaz
In this essay, think tank executive and pundit David Boaz shows 
the relationship between competition and cooperation, which are 
oft en presented as stark alternatives: a society is organized accord-
ing to one principle or the other. To the contrary, as Boaz explains, 
in capitalist economic orders people compete in order to cooperate 
with others.
David Boaz is the executive vice president of the Cato Institute 
and an advisor to Students For Liberty. He is the author of 
Libertarianism: A Primer and editor of fi ft een other books, includ-
ing The Libertarian Reader: Classic and Contemporary Writings 
from Lao Tzu to Milton Friedman. He has written for newspapers 
such as the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, and the 
Washington Post, is a fr equent commentator on television and 
radio, and blogs regularly for Cato@Liberty, The Guardian, The 
Australian, and the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Defenders of the market process oft en stress the benefi ts of com-
petition. The competitive process allows for constant testing, 
experimenting, and adapting in response to changing situations. 
It keeps businesses constantly on their toes to serve consumers. 
Both analytically and empirically, we can see that competitive 
systems produce better results than centralized or monopoly 
systems. That’s why, in books, newspaper articles, and television 
appearances, advocates of free markets stress the importance of the 
competitive marketplace and oppose restrictions on competition.
But too many people listen to the praise for competition and 
hear words like hostile, cutthroat, or dog-eat-dog. They wonder 
whether cooperation wouldn’t be better than such an antagonistic 
posture toward the world. Billionaire investor George Soros, for 
instance, writes in the Atlantic Monthly, “Too much competition 
and too little cooperation can cause intolerable inequities and 
instability.” He goes on to say that his “main point . . . is that 

32
cooperation is as much a part of the system as competition, and 
the slogan ‘survival of the fi ttest’ distorts this fact.”
Now it should be noted that the phrase “survival of the fi ttest” is 
rarely used by advocates of freedom and free markets. It was coined 
to describe the process of biological evolution and to refer to the 
survival of the traits that were best suited to the environment; it 
may well be applicable to the competition of enterprises in the 
market, but it certainly is never intended to imply the survival 
of only the fi ttest individuals in a capitalist system. It is not the 
friends but the enemies of the market process who use the term 
“survival of the fi ttest” to describe economic competition.
What needs to be made clear is that those who say that hu-
man beings “are made for cooperation, not competition” fail to 
recognize that the market is cooperation. Indeed, as discussed 
below, it is people competing to cooperate.
Individualism and Community
Similarly, opponents of classical liberalism have been quick to ac-
cuse liberals of favoring “atomistic” individualism, in which each 
person is an island unto himself, out only for his own profi t with 
no regard for the needs or wants of others. E. J. Dionne, Jr., of 
the Washington Post has written that modern libertarians believe 
that “individuals come into the world as fully formed adults who 
should be held responsible for their actions from the moment of 
their birth.” Columnist Charles Krauthammer wrote in a review 
of Charles Murray’s What It Means to Be a Libertarian that until 
Murray came along the libertarian vision was “a race of rugged 
individualists each living in a mountaintop cabin with a barbed 
wire fence and a ‘No Trespassing’ sign outside.” How he neglected 
to include “each armed to the teeth” I can’t imagine.
Of course, nobody actually believes in the sort of “atomistic 
individualism” that professors and pundits like to deride. We do 
live together and work in groups. How one could be an atomistic 
individual in our complex modern society is not clear: would that 
mean eating only what you grow, wearing what you make, living 
in a house you build for yourself, restricting yourself to natural 
medicines you extract from plants? Some critics of capitalism or 

33
advocates of “back to nature”—like the Unabomber, or Al Gore 
if he really meant what he wrote in Earth in the Balance—might 
endorse such a plan. But few libertarians would want to move to 
a desert island and renounce the benefi ts of what Adam Smith 
called the Great Society, the complex and productive society made 
possible by social interaction. One would think, therefore, that 
sensible journalists would stop, look at the words they typed, and 
think to themselves, “I must have misrepresented this position. I 
should go back and read the libertarian writers again.”
In our time this canard—about isolation and atomism—has 
been very damaging to advocates of the market process. We ought 
to make it clear that we agree with George Soros that “coopera-
tion is as much a part of the system as competition.” In fact, we 
consider cooperation so essential to human fl ourishing that we 
don’t just want to talk about it; we want to create social institu-
tions that make it possible. That is what property rights, limited 
government, and the rule of law are all about.
In a free society individuals enjoy natural, imprescriptible rights 
and must live up to their general obligation to respect the rights 
of other individuals. Our other obligations are those we choose 
to assume by contract. It is not just coincidental that a society 
based on the rights of life, liberty, and property also produces 
social peace and material well-being. As John Locke, David 
Hume, and other classical-liberal philosophers demonstrate, we 
need a system of rights to produce social cooperation, without 
which people can achieve very little. Hume wrote in his Treatise 
of Human Nature that the circumstances confronting humans are 
(1) our self-interestedness, (2) our necessarily limited generosity 
toward others, and (3) the scarcity of resources available to fulfi ll 
our needs. Because of those circumstances, it is necessary for us 
to cooperate with others and to have rules of justice—especially 
regarding property and exchange—to defi ne how we can do so. 
Those rules establish who has the right to decide how to use a 
particular piece of property. In the absence of well-defi ned prop-
erty rights, we would face constant confl ict over that issue. It is 
our agreement on property rights that allows us to undertake the 
complex social tasks of cooperation and coordination by which 
we achieve our purposes.

34
It would be nice if love could accomplish that task, without 
all the emphasis on self-interest and individual rights, and many 
opponents of liberalism have off ered an appealing vision of soci-
ety based on universal benevolence. But as Adam Smith pointed 
out, “in civilized society [man] stands at all times in need of the 
cooperation and assistance of great multitudes,” yet in his whole 
life he could never befriend a small fraction of the number of 
people whose cooperation he needs. If we depended entirely on 
benevolence to produce cooperation, we simply couldn’t under-
take complex tasks. Reliance on other people’s self-interest, in a 
system of well-defi ned property rights and free exchange, is the 
only way to organize a society more complicated than a small 
village.
Civil Society
We want to associate with others to achieve instrumental 
ends—producing more food, exchanging goods, developing 
new technology—but also because we feel a deep human need 
for connectedness, for love and friendship and community. The 
associations we form with others make up what we call civil society. 
Those associations can take an amazing variety of forms—families, 
churches, schools, clubs, fraternal societies, condominium associa-
tions, neighborhood groups, and the myriad forms of commercial 
society, such as partnerships, corporations, labor unions, and 
trade associations. All of these associations serve human needs 
in diff erent ways. Civil society may be broadly defi ned as all the 
natural and voluntary associations in society.
Some analysts distinguish between commercial and nonprofi t 
organizations, arguing that businesses are part of the market, not 
of civil society; but I follow the tradition that the real distinc-
tion is between associations that are coercive—the state—and 
those that are natural or voluntary—everything else. Whether a 
particular association is established to make a profi t or to achieve 
some other purpose, the key characteristic is that our participation 
in it is voluntarily chosen.
With all the contemporary confusion about civil society and 
“national purpose,” we should remember F. A. Hayek’s point 

35
that the associations within civil society are created to achieve 
a particular purpose, but civil society as a whole has no single 
purpose; it is the undesigned, spontaneously emerging result of 
all those purposive associations.
The Market as Cooperation
The market is an essential element of civil society. The market 
arises from two facts: that human beings can accomplish more 
in cooperation with others than individually and that we can 
recognize this. If we were a species for whom cooperation was 
not more productive than isolated work, or if we were unable 
to discern the benefi ts of cooperation, then we would remain 
isolated and atomistic. But worse than that, as Ludwig von Mises 
explained, “Each man would have been forced to view all other 
men as his enemies; his craving for the satisfaction of his own 
appetites would have brought him into an implacable confl ict 
with all his neighbors.” Without the possibility of mutual benefi t 
from cooperation and the division of labor, neither feelings of 
sympathy and friendship nor the market order itself could arise.
Throughout the market system individuals and fi rms compete 
to cooperate better. General Motors and Toyota compete to co-
operate with me in achieving my goal of transportation. AT&T 
and MCI compete to cooperate with me in achieving my goal 
of communication with others. Indeed, they compete so aggres-
sively for my business that I have cooperated with yet another 
communications fi rm that provides me with peace of mind via 
an answering machine.
Critics of markets oft en complain that capitalism encourages 
and rewards self-interest. In fact, people are self-interested under 
any political system. Markets channel their self-interest in socially 
benefi cent directions. In a free market, people achieve their own 
purposes by fi nding out what others want and trying to off er it. 
That may mean several people working together to build a fi shing 
net or a road. In a more complex economy, it means seeking one’s 
own profi t by off ering goods or services that satisfy the needs or 
desires of others. Workers and entrepreneurs who best satisfy 
those needs will be rewarded; those who don’t will soon fi nd out 

36
and be encouraged to copy their more successful competitors or 
try a new approach.
All the diff erent economic organizations we see in a market 
are experiments to fi nd better ways of cooperating to achieve 
mutual purposes. A system of property rights, the rule of law, 
and minimal government allow maximum scope for people to 
experiment with new forms of cooperation. The development of 
the corporation allowed larger economic tasks to be undertaken 
than individuals or partnerships could achieve. Organizations 
such as condominium associations, mutual funds, insurance 
companies, banks, worker-owned cooperatives, and more are at-
tempts to solve particular economic problems by new forms of 
association. Some of these forms are discovered to be ineffi  cient; 
many of the corporate conglomerates in the 1960s, for instance, 
proved to be unmanageable, and shareholders lost money. The 
rapid feedback of the market process provides incentives for 
successful forms of organization to be copied and unsuccessful 
forms to be discouraged.
Cooperation is as much a part of capitalism as competition. 
Both are essential elements of the simple system of natural liberty, 
and most of us spend far more of our time cooperating with part-
ners, coworkers, suppliers, and customers than we do competing.
Life would indeed be nasty, brutish, and short if it were solitary. 
Fortunately for all of us, in capitalist society it isn’t.

37
For-Profit Medicine and the Compassion Motive 
By Tom G. Palmer
In this essay the editor of this volume off ers a personal meditation 
based on his experience of treatment for pain. It is not off ered as a gen-
eral doctrine, nor is it a contribution to social science. It’s an attempt to 
clarify the relationship between business enterprise and compassion.
For-profi t medicine must be a terrible and immoral thing. Aft er 
all, I hear it attacked as such all the time. Indeed, as I write this 
I’m listening to a bitter attack on private hospitals over the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. When doctors, nurses, and 
hospital administrators care only about their income, compassion 
is replaced by cold-hearted selfi shness, many people say. But I just 
got a new view of the issue when I found myself having to visit 
two hospitals—one for-profi t, the other nonprofi t—for relief 
from a painful and crippling condition.
I recently suff ered from a ruptured disk in my spine that 
caused kinds of pain that I had never imagined possible. I visited 
a specialist at a local for-profi t hospital, and he arranged for me to 
get an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan within an hour 
at a nearby for-profi t radiology clinic. Then he arranged for me 
to have an epidural injection to reduce the infl ammation of the 
nerves coming into the spinal column, which were the source 
of the pains. I was in such agony that I could barely move at all. 
The for-profi t pain clinic at the for-profi t hospital I visited was 
staff ed by doctors and nurses who showed me extraordinary 
kindness and treated me with gentleness. Aft er the nurse had 
made sure that I understood the procedure and that I could 
understand all the directions, the doctor who administered the 
epidural injection introduced herself, explained every step, and 
then proceeded with both notable professionalism and evident 
concern for my well-being.
Fast forward a few weeks. My condition, although still painful 
and debilitating, was greatly improved. My doctor recommended 

38
another epidural injection to advance me even more toward a 
normal state. Unfortunately, the for-profi t pain clinic was booked 
up completely for three weeks. I didn’t want to wait that long and 
called some other hospitals in the area. A very well-known and 
highly regarded nonprofi t hospital could fi t me in in two days. I 
gladly made an appointment.
When I got to the nonprofi t hospital, I spoke fi rst with some 
helpful retired ladies and gentlemen who were wearing neat 
volunteer uniforms. They were clearly benevolent people, as 
one might expect in a nonprofi t hospital. Then I hobbled with 
my cane to the pain clinic, where I signed in with the desk. A 
nurse came out and announced my name and aft er I identifi ed 
myself, sat down next to me in the lobby. The interview took 
place while I was surrounded with strangers. Thankfully, there 
were no embarrassing questions. I noticed that the other nurses 
were actually ordering patients about in the imperative voice. 
One nurse told a lady who was clearly in pain to sit in another 
chair and aft er the patient said she was more comfortable where 
she was, the nurse pointed to the other chair and said, “No. Sit!” 
When that same nurse approached me, I think that my look told 
her that I had no intention of being treated like an enrollee in 
obedience school. Wordlessly, she pointed at the examination 
room, which I entered.
The administering doctor walked in. No introduction. No 
name. No hand to shake. He looked at my fi le, muttered to 
himself, and told me to sit on the bed, pull down my pants, and 
hoist my shirt. I told him that the procedure had been done 
before while I was lying on my side, and that that position was 
more comfortable, since sitting was quite painful. He said that 
he preferred it with me sitting. I responded that I preferred to lie 
on my side. He said that sitting allowed better access, which was 
at least a reason that appealed to my interests as well as his, so 
I acquiesced. Then, unlike the doctor in the for-profi t hospital, 
he slammed in the needle and injected the medication with such 
surprising and agonizing force that it caused me to let loose a real 
yell, quite unlike my previous experience. Then he removed the 
needle, made a note in his fi le, and disappeared. The nurse handed 
me a sheet of paper and pointed the way out. I paid and left .

39
Profi t and Compassion
That’s too small a set of experiences on the basis of which to 
compare for-profi t and nonprofi t medicine. But it may suggest 
something about the profi t motive and its relation to compas-
sion. It’s not that for-profi t hospitals alone attract the kindly 
and compassionate, since the elderly volunteers in the nonprofi t 
hospital were surely kindly and compassionate. But I can’t help 
thinking that the doctors and nurses who worked in a for-profi t 
pain clinic in a for-profi t hospital had some incentive to exercise 
their compassion at work. Aft er all, if I need additional treat-
ment or if I fi nd myself asked for a recommendation, I’m going 
to think of the for-profi t hospital. But I will neither go back to, 
nor recommend, the nonprofi t hospital, and I think I know why: 
the doctors and nurses there had no reason to want me to. And 
now I also understand why the nonprofi t hospital could fi t me 
in so quickly. I doubt they had many repeat customers.
The experience does not suggest that profi ts are a necessary 
or even suffi  cient condition for compassion, benevolence, or 
courtesy. I work at a nonprofi t organization, which is dependent 
on the continued support of a wide base of donors. If I were to 
fail to fulfi ll my fi duciary obligations to them, they would stop 
supporting my work. It so happens that I and my colleagues work 
there because we share the same concerns as the donors, so the 
arrangement works out harmoniously. But when the donors, the 
employees, and the “clients” (whether people in pain or journal-
ists and educators in need of information and insight) don’t all 
share the same values or goals, as in the nonprofi t hospital, the 
profi t motive acts powerfully to bring those goals into harmony.
Profi ts earned in the context of well-defi ned and enforced legal 
rights (as distinguished from the profi ts that accrue to being a 
brilliant thief ) may provide the foundation not of coldness, but 
of compassion. The search for profi t requires that the doctor 
consider the interests of the patient by putting himself or herself 
into the patient’s position, to imagine the suff ering of others, to 
have compassion. In a free-market economy, the profi t motive 
may be but another name for the compassion motive.


Section II
Voluntary Interaction 
and Self-Interest


43
The Paradox of Morality 
By Mao Yushi
(Translated by Jude Blanchette)
In this essay, the Chinese economist and intellectual and so-
cial entrepreneur Mao Yushi (茅于轼) explains the role that 
markets play in bringing about concord and cooperation. He 
reveals the beneﬁ ts of the search for low prices and proﬁ ts 
by those engaging in exchange by contrasting such “self-
interested” behavior with the fantasies advanced by critics of 
capitalism. He draws his examples from both China’s literary 
heritage and from his experiences (and those of millions of 
other Chinese people) during China’s disastrous experiment 
in abolishing capitalism. 
Mao Yushi is founder and chairman of the Unirule Institute, 
based in Beijing, China. He is the author of several books and 
many scholarly and popular articles, has taught economics 
at a number of universities, established some of the very ﬁ rst 
non-state charities and independent self-help organizations 
in China, and is well known as a courageous champion of 
liberty. In the 1950s he was punished through forced labor, 
exile, “re-education,” and near starvation for saying, “If we 
have nowhere to buy pork, then pork prices should rise,” and 
“If Chairman Mao wants to meet a scientist, who should visit 
whom?” And in 2011, just before this book went to press, 
at the age of 82, he wrote a public essay that was published 
in Caixin online called “Returning Mao Zedong to Human 
Form” (把毛泽东还原成人). That essay earned him nu-
merous death threats and a greater reputation as a voice of 
honesty and justice. Mao Yushi is one of the great libertarian 
ﬁ gures in the contemporary world and has worked tirelessly 
to bring libertarian ideas and the experience of freedom to 
the people of China and the wider world.

44
Confl ict of Interest in The Land of Gentlemen 
Between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Chinese au-
thor Li Ruzhen wrote a novel titled Flowers in the Mirror. The 
book describes a person named Tang Ao who, owing to a career 
setback, follows his brother-in-law overseas. During the voyage, 
he visits many diff erent countries that contain fantastic and exotic 
sights and sounds. The fi rst country they visit is “The Land of 
Gentlemen.” 
All of the inhabitants of The Land of Gentlemen intentionally 
suff er so that they may ensure the benefi t of others. The eleventh 
chapter of the novel describes a bailiff  (Li Ruzhen here intention-
ally uses the Chinese character as it was understood in Ancient 
China, where bailiff s had special privileges and oft en bullied the 
common people) who encountered the following situation while 
buying goods:
The bailiff, after examining a handful of goods, says to the 
seller, “Friend, you have such high quality goods, yet your 
price is so low. How can I be at ease while taking advantage 
of you? If you don’t raise the price, then you will stop us from 
doing any further trade.” 
The seller responded: “Coming to my shop is a favor to 
me. It has been a saying that the seller asks a price up to the 
sky, and the buyer responds to it by going down to earth. 
My price is up to the sky, but you still want me to raise it. 
It’s hard for me to agree. It’s better to visit another store to 
buy goods.”
The bailiff , aft er hearing the response of the seller, responded: 
“You have given a low price to such high-quality goods. Won’t 
this mean a loss for you? We should act without deception and 
with equanimity. Can it not be said that all of us have an abacus 
built into us?” Aft er quarrelling for some time, the seller contin-
ued to insist that the price not be raised, while the bailiff , in a 
fi t of anger, purchased only half of the goods he had originally 
intended to purchase. Just as he was about to take his leave, the 
seller blocked his way. At this point, along came two old men who, 

45
aft er assessing the situation, settled the transaction by ordering 
the bailiff  to take 80 percent of the goods and leave. 
The book next describes another transaction in which the buyer 
thinks the asking price for the goods is too low as the quality is 
high, while the seller insists that the goods lack freshness and 
should be considered ordinary. In the end, the buyer chooses from 
the worst of the seller’s goods, causing the crowd nearby to accuse 
him of unfairness, so the buyer takes half from the high-quality 
pile and half from the low-quality pile. In a third transaction, both 
parties begin to quarrel while assessing the weight and quality 
of silver. The party paying with silver sternly says that his silver 
is of poor quality and inadequate weight, while the party being 
paid states that the silver is of superior quality and weight. As the 
payer has already taken leave, the party being paid fi nds himself 
obligated to give what silver he thinks is extra to a beggar visiting 
from a foreign land. 
There are two points raised in the novel that are worth explor-
ing further. 
The fi rst is that when both parties decide to give up their share 
of the profi ts or insist that their share of the profi ts is too high, 
an argument ensues. In the arguments we encounter in real life, 
most stem from us pursuing our own interests. As a result, we 
oft en make the mistake of assuming that if we were to always side 
with the other party, such disputes wouldn’t occur. But in The 
Land of Gentlemen, we can see that taking the interests of others 
as the basis of our decisions also leads to confl ict, and as a result, 
we still must search for the logical foundation of a harmonious 
and coordinated society. 
Going a step further in our investigation, we recognize that in 
business deals in the real world both parties to a transaction seek 
their own gain, and through negotiations over terms (including 
price and quality) both sides can reach agreement. By contrast, 
in The Land of Gentlemen, such agreement is impossible. In 
the novel, the author must enlist an old man and a beggar and 
even resorts to compulsion to resolve the confl ict.30 Here we 
encounter a profound and important truth: negotiations in 
which both parties are seeking their personal gain can reach 
equilibrium, whereas if both parties are looking towards the 

46
interests of the other party, they will never reach a consensus. 
What’s more, this would create a society always at odds with 
itself. This fact goes strongly against the expectations of most. 
Because The Land of Gentleman is unable to realize a balance 
in the relations between its inhabitants, it eventually turns into 
the Land of the Inconsiderate and Coarse. Because The Land of 
Gentlemen is geared towards looking aft er the interest of others, 
it is a breeding ground for vile characters. When the Gentlemen 
fail to conclude an exchange, the Inconsiderate and Coarse are 
able to gain advantage by leveraging the fact that Gentlemen seek 
profi t by subverting their own interests. If things were to continue 
in that way, the Gentlemen would likely die out and be replaced 
by the Inconsiderate and Coarse.
From the above point we can see that humans can only co-
operate when they seek their own interests. That is the secure 
foundation on which humanity is able to strive for an ideal world. 
If humankind were to directly and exclusively seek the benefi t of 
others, no ideals could be realized. 
Of course, using reality as our starting point, in order to re-
duce confl ict, we must all pay attention to our fellow man and 
fi nd ways to restrain our own selfi sh desires. But if attention to 
the interests of others were to become the goal of all behavior, it 
would generate the same confl ict as Li Ruzhen described in The 
Land of Gentlemen. There are perhaps those who say the more 
comical elements of life in The Land of Gentlemen could not 
occur in the real world, but as the book gradually makes evident, 
events in the real world and those in The Land of Gentlemen 
have similar causes. To put it another way, both the real world 
and The Land of Gentlemen lack clarity regarding the principle 
of the pursuit of self-interest. 
What are the motives of the inhabitants of the Land of 
Gentlemen? We must fi rst ask, “Why do humans want to ex-
change?” Whether it is primitive barter exchange or modern 
society’s exchange of goods for currency, the motive behind 
exchange is to improve one’s situation, to make one’s life more 
convenient and more comfortable. Without that motivation, why 
would individuals choose exchange over toiling on their own? All 
of the material enjoyments we receive, from needles and thread to 

47
refrigerators and color TVs, are only available through exchange. 
If people did not exchange, each individual would only be able 
to plant grains and cotton in the countryside, to use mud bricks 
to build houses, and struggle to wrest from the soil all the goods 
one needs to exist. In such a way one might be able to eke out a 
living as our ancestors did for tens of thousands of years. But we 
would certainly not enjoy any of the benefi ts off ered by today’s 
modern civilization.
The people in The Land of Gentlemen already have a state and 
a market, which shows that they’ve already abandoned economic 
self-suffi  ciency and have instead chosen to follow the road of 
exchange in order to improve their material circumstances. That 
being the case, why is it that they refuse to think of their own in-
terests when engaging in economic exchanges? Of course, if from 
the start the point of exchange is to lessen one’s own advantage and 
promote the advantage of others, “gentlemanly” behavior might, 
perhaps, occur. However, as anyone knows who participates in an 
exchange, or who has experience with exchange, both parties to 
an exchange participate for their own benefi t, while those who 
act contrary to their own self-interest during the course of an 
exchange suff er from an incoherence of motives.
Is It Feasible to Establish a Society Based On Mutual 
Benefi t Without Price Negotiations? 
During the period in which the life and deeds of Lei Feng31 were 
being promoted in China, one could oft en see on television 
the image of one of Lei Feng’s committed and kind emulators 
repairing pots and pans for an assembly of people. One would 
then notice a long line forming in front of him, with each per-
son holding worn-out utensils in need of repair. The intended 
message of these images was to encourage others to emulate that 
kind-hearted follower of Lei Feng, and to focus the public on his 
example. Notice that if it weren’t for the long line of people, the 
propaganda would have no power to persuade. We should also 
take note that those who queued to have their pots and pans 
repaired were not there to learn from Lei Feng; to the contrary, 
they were there to seek their own gain at the expense of others. 

48
While such propaganda may teach some to do good deeds for 
others, at the same time it is teaching even more how to benefi t 
personally from the work of others. In the past, it was thought 
that propaganda calling on the people to work in the service of 
others without repayment could improve social morals. Yet that 
is most certainly a great misunderstanding, for those who will 
learn how to seek some type of personal advantage will greatly 
outnumber those who learn how to work in the service of others.
From the perspective of economic gains, a universal obliga-
tion to serve others is wasteful. Those attracted to the off er of 
free repair services are quite likely carrying damaged items that 
are not really worth repairing, perhaps even items taken directly 
from the trash. But because the price of fi xing those items is now 
zero, the scarce time devoted to repairing them will increase, as 
will the scarce materials used for their repair. As the burden to 
fi x these items rests on the shoulders of others, the only cost to 
the average person seeking a free repair is the time it takes to 
queue. From the vantage point of society as a whole, all of the 
time, eff ort, and materials used to repair those damaged items 
will yield some barely usable pots and pans. If the time and ma-
terials were instead used on more productive activities, it would 
certainly create more value for society. From the perspective of 
economic effi  ciency and overall wellbeing, such obligatory and 
uncompensated repair work almost certainly does more harm 
than good.
What’s more, if yet another kind-hearted student of Lei Feng 
were to off er to take the place in the queue of one of the people 
holding pots waiting for free repair services, thus freeing that poor 
person from the tedium of queuing, the line for those waiting to 
have his or her items fi xed would become even longer. That would 
indeed be an absurd sight, with one group standing in line so that 
an additional group doesn’t have to. Such a system of obligation 
presupposes a group willing to be served as a precondition. Such 
an ethic of service cannot be universal. Obviously those who boast 
about the superiority of such a system of mutual service without 
prices have not thought this through.
The obligation to repair the goods of others has an additional 
unanticipated result. If those who were formerly engaged in the 

49
repair trade are crowded out by the students of Lei Feng, they 
will lose their jobs and suff er hardship.
In no way do I oppose the study of Lei Feng, as he helped 
those in need, which for society is a positive, even a necessary, 
activity. However, the requirement that the service of others be 
obligatory creates incoherence and disorder and distorts the 
voluntary spirit of Lei Feng.
In our society there are those who are quite cynical, and who 
detest a society that, in their estimation, elevates money above 
all else. They think that those with money are insuff erable and 
that the rich view themselves above the rest of society, while the 
poor suff er for the sake of humanity. They believe that money 
warps the normal relations between mankind. As a result, they 
desire to create a society based on mutual service, free from talk of 
money and prices. That would be a society where peasants plant 
food without thought of reward; where workers weave cloth for 
all, also without reward; where barbers cut hair for free; etc. Is 
such an ideal society practical? 
For an answer, we need to turn to the economic theory of 
resource allocation, which requires a digression of some length. 
To make it easier, we could start with a thought experiment. 
Consider a barber. Currently, men get their hair cut every three 
to four weeks, but if haircuts were free, they might go to the 
barber every week. Charging money for hair cuts better utilizes 
the labor of the barber. In the market, the price of the barber’s 
services determines the share of society’s labor devoted to that 
profession. If the state keeps the price of a haircut low, then the 
number of those seeking haircuts will increase, and accordingly 
the number of barbers will also need to increase and other jobs 
must be reduced if the total labor force is held constant. What’s 
true of barbers is true of other professions.
In many of China’s rural areas, the off ering of free services is 
quite common. If someone wants to build a new house, their 
relatives and friends all come to help with the construction. That 
usually happens without payment, save for a large meal served 
to all those who helped. The next time one of the benefi ciary’s 
friends builds a new house, the one who benefi ted the fi rst time 
off ers free labor as a form of repayment. Repairmen oft en fi x 

50
electrical appliances without charging, expecting only a gift  
during the Chinese New Year holiday as compensation. Such non-
monetary exchanges cannot accurately measure the value of the 
services off ered. Consequently, the value of labor is not effi  ciently 
developed, and the division of labor in society is not encouraged. 
Money and prices play an important role in the development of 
society. No one should hope to replace emotions such as love and 
friendship with money. It does not follow, though, that love and 
friendship can replace money. We cannot do away with money just 
because we fear that it will erode the bonds of human emotion. 
In fact, prices expressed in money are the only method available 
for determining how to allocate resources to their most highly 
valued uses. If we maintain both monetary prices and our highest 
emotions and values, we can still hope to build a society that is 
both effi  cient and humane.
The Balance of Self-Interests 
Suppose that A and B need to divide two apples before they can 
eat them. A makes the fi rst move and grabs the bigger of the 
two. B bitterly asks A, “How could you be so selfi sh?” to which 
A retorts, “If it were you to have grabbed fi rst, which one would 
you have chosen?” B responds, “I would have grabbed the smaller 
apple.” Laughing, A responds, “If that is the case, then the way I 
selected is perfectly in line with your wishes.”
In that scenario, A took advantage of B, as B was following the 
principle of “placing the interest of others above oneself,” while 
A was not. If only one segment of society follows that principle 
while others do not, the former is assured to suff er losses, while 
the latter will profi t. If that continues unchecked, it is bound 
to lead to confl ict. Clearly, if only some of the people put the 
interests of others before themselves, then in the end this system 
will merely generate confl ict and disorder.
If both A and B look to the interest of the other party, then the 
above mentioned apple problem would be impossible to resolve. 
As both would look to eat the smaller one, a new problem would 
arise, just as we saw in The Land of Gentlemen. What is true of 
A and B would be true of everyone. If all of society, save for one 

51
person, followed the principle of explicitly benefi ting others, the 
entire society would serve at this person’s pleasure; such a system 
would be possible, logically speaking. But if that person were in 
turn to become a practitioner of the above-mentioned principle 
of serving others, then the society would cease to exist as a society, 
that is, as a system of cooperation. The principle of serving others 
is generally feasible only under the condition that looking aft er 
the interests of the whole society could be delegated to others. 
But from the perspective of the entire globe, that would be impos-
sible unless the responsibility for looking aft er the interests of the 
planet’s population could be delegated to the moon.
The reason for that incoherence is because from the vantage 
point of society as a whole, there is no diff erence between “others” 
and “oneself.” Of course, to a specifi c John or Jane Doe, “oneself ” 
is “oneself,” while “others” are “others,” and the former shouldn’t 
be confused with the latter. However, from a societal perspective, 
every person is at the same time “oneself ” and an “other.” When 
the principle of “serve others before serving oneself ” is applied to 
Person A, Person A must fi rst contemplate the gains and losses 
of others. Yet when the same principle is adopted by Person B, 
Person A becomes the person whose interest is placed as primary. 
To members of the same society, the question of whether they 
should think of others fi rst, or others should think of them fi rst 
leads directly to confusion and contradiction. Therefore, the 
principle of selfl essness in this context is logically incoherent 
and contradictory, and therefore could not serve the function 
of solving the many problems that arise in human relationships. 
That, of course, is not to say that the spirit animating them is 
never worthy of being commended, or that such other-regarding 
behavior is not commendable, but rather that it could not provide 
the universal basis by which members of society look to secure 
their mutual interest.
Those who lived through the Cultural Revolution will remem-
ber that when the slogan “Struggle Against Selfi shness, Criticize 
Revisionism” (dousi pixiu) echoed through the country, the 
numbers of conspirators and careerists were at their peak. At that 
time, most of China’s common people (laobaixing) could actually 
believe that “Struggle Against Selfi shness, Criticize Revisionism” 

52
could become a societal norm, and as a result they did their 
utmost to follow its strictures. At the same time, opportunists 
used the slogan as a means to take advantage of others. They 
used the campaign against exploitation as an excuse to raid the 
homes of others and place the property of others in their own 
pockets. They called on others to strike down selfi shness, and for 
the sake of the revolution to admit that they were traitors, spies, 
or counter-revolutionaries and thus have a stroke added to their 
record of demerits. Without a thought, such opportunists would 
place others in a position where the lives of those others were at 
stake, all in an eff ort to secure for themselves an offi  cial govern-
ment position. Thus far, we’ve analyzed the theoretical problems 
with the principle of “serve others before oneself,” but the history 
of the Cultural Revolution further proves the contradiction of 
that principle when it is put into practice.
The Cultural Revolution has faded into memory, but we should 
remember that at that time all slogans were subjected to criticism 
and scrutiny. That is no longer the case, for the question of what 
principle is best when dealing with problems in society has, it 
seems, been exempted from scrutiny. We still oft en use the old 
propaganda to call on the people to resolve disputes, and even 
when cases are heard in court, those out-of-date methods still 
hold considerable infl uence.
Those readers who are adept at thought experiments will no 
doubt have additional questions to ask about the above-mentioned 
problem of how best to allocate the apples between the two in-
dividuals. If we agree that “serve others before oneself ” cannot 
as a rule solve the problem of how best to distribute two apples, 
does it follow that there is no better way to do so? Recall that 
there is one small apple and one large apple, and there are only 
two individuals participating in the allocation. Could it be that 
even the legendary Chinese immortals would fi nd themselves 
unable to devise a suitable solution?
In an exchange society, the above-mentioned conundrum is 
indeed soluble. The two individuals can fi rst consult with one 
another in order to resolve the dilemma. For example, suppose 
that A selects the bigger apple, with the understanding that B is 
entitled to take home the bigger apple when they next meet; or 

53
if in return for A taking the bigger apple, B receives some form 
of compensation. A payment would help to resolve the diffi  culty. 
In an economy utilizing money, there would certainly be parties 
willing to use the latter method. Starting with an off er of a small 
amount in compensation (say, one cent), the amount could 
gradually be increased until the other party was willing to accept 
the smaller apple, plus compensation. If the initial sum is quite 
small, we can assume that both parties would prefer to take the 
larger apple and to pay a small amount of compensation. As the 
compensation increases it would reach a point where one of the 
two parties would accept the smaller apple plus the compensation. 
We can say with certainty that if both parties rationally evaluate 
the problem, they will fi nd a method to solve the dispute. And 
this is a way to resolve peacefully the confl icting interests of 
both parties.
Thirty years aft er China’s Reform and Opening, the question 
of wealth and poverty has been raised yet again, with animosity 
towards the rich growing with each day. During the period when 
class struggle was emphasized, at the start of each mass movement, 
the suff ering of the past was contrasted to the happiness of the 
present. The previous society was denounced, and previous ex-
ploitation was used as a seed to mobilize the hatred of the people. 
When the Cultural Revolution began in 1966 (a movement to 
sweep away the evils of the old class system), in many areas the 
descendants of the landowning class were buried alive, even 
though most of the landowners themselves were already dead. 
No one was spared: neither the old nor the young, nor even the 
women and children. People said, just as there is no love without 
cause, so there is no hatred without reason. Where did this spirit 
of enmity towards the children of the landowning class come 
from? It came from the fervent belief that those descendants of 
the landed class had relied upon exploitation to create their place 
in the world. Today, the gap between the rich and the poor has 
become more evident. And while there are admittedly those who 
have used illegal methods to gain wealth, in any society a gap 
between the rich and the poor is an unavoidable phenomenon. 
Even in developed countries where illegal channels are strictly 
limited, a gap between the rich and the poor commonly exists.

54
The logic behind the resentment of the rich is fl awed. If one 
were resentful of the rich because one had not yet become rich, 
then the best strategy one could adopt would be fi rst to overthrow 
the rich, and then wait until such a time that one had oneself 
become wealthy, aft er which one would advocate the protection 
of the rights of the wealthy. For a certain group of individuals, 
this indeed would be the most rational way forward. But for 
society as a whole, there is no way to coordinate this process so 
that all of the members of society could become wealthy at the 
same pace. Some will become wealthy before others; if we wait 
for all to become wealthy at the same rate, none will ever achieve 
wealth. The opposition to the rich is without justifi cation, for 
the poor will only have a chance to become rich if the rights that 
allow anyone—and everyone—to gain wealth are guaranteed; if 
the fruits of one’s labor are not infringed upon; and if the right 
of property is respected. A society in which more and more 
individuals attain wealth and agree that “to get rich is glorious” 
is, in fact, something that can be built.
The Chinese scholar Li Ming once wrote that dividing people 
into two groups, “rich” and “poor,” is the wrong way to distin-
guish between the two. Rather, it should be those with rights and 
those without rights. What he meant was that in modern society, 
the question of rich and poor is really a question of rights. The 
rich have gotten that way because they have rights, while the 
poor don’t. What he meant by rights must be human rights, not 
privileges. It cannot be the case that all citizens can have access 
to privilege. Only a small minority can have access to privileges. 
If we want to resolve the question of the rich and the poor, we 
should fi rst establish equal human rights for all. Li Ming’s analysis 
is profound and thorough.

55
The Moral Logic of Equality and Inequality 
in Market Society 
By Leonid V. Nikonov
In this essay, Russian philosopher Leonid Nikonov subjects the 
idea of “equality” in exchange to critical scrutiny and fi nds that 
most anti-capitalistic criticisms that rest on claims about equality, 
whether of initial endowment, values, or outcomes, are incoherent.
Leonid Nikonov is a Lecturer in Philosophy at Altai State 
University in Barnaul, in the Russian Federation, where he teaches 
courses on social philosophy, ontology, theory of knowledge, and the 
philosophy of religion. He is currently working on a book on “Moral 
Measurements of Liberalism” and has published in a number of 
Russian academic publications. In 2010 he established and be-
came director of the Center for the Philosophy of Freedom, which 
organizes conferences, debate tournaments, and other programs in 
Russia and Kazakhstan. He became further involved in such work 
aft er he won fi rst place in the 2007 essay contest (in Russian) on 
“Global Capitalism and Human Freedom,” a competition like that 
being sponsored in 2011 by Students For Liberty, and attended the 
summer school on fr eedom in Alushta, Ukraine. (The program was 
then organized as Cato.ru, and is now InLiberty.ru.) In 2011 he 
was invited to join the Mont Pelerin Society, which was founded 
in 1947 by 39 scholars to revive classical liberal thought, as their 
youngest member.
Markets don’t necessarily generate equal outcomes, nor do they 
require equal endowments. That’s not just a regrettable cost of 
having a market, though. Inequality is not merely a normal out-
come of market exchange. It’s a precondition of exchange, without 
which exchange would lack sense. To expect market exchanges, 
and thus societies in which wealth is allocated through the mar-
ket, to result in equality is absurd. Equal basic rights, including 
equal freedom to exchange, are necessary for free markets, but 

56
free markets should not be expected to generate equal outcomes, 
nor do they rely on equality of conditions other than legal rights.
The ideal of equal exchange can refer to equality of initial 
endowments or to equality of outcomes. If the former sense is 
meant, only parties that are equal in every relevant sense could 
engage in equal exchange; any diff erential would unequalize the 
exchange, which is why some reject as inherently unequal (and 
thus unfair) labor contracts between employers and employees. 
In the latter sense, it could mean that equal values are exchanged, 
or that the outcomes of the exchange are equal in value. For ex-
ample, if the same amount of goods of the same quality were to 
move from one party to the other, the exchange would satisfy the 
conditions of equality. Imagine a surrealistic scene in which two 
humanoids, totally like each other (i.e., devoid of personal diff er-
ences relevantly constitutive of inequality), pass quite identical 
things between themselves. Setting aside any aesthetic revulsion 
we might feel at such an unnatural picture, common sense by 
itself should suggest that the very idea of equal exchange rests on 
a profound contradiction. Such an exchange changes nothing; it 
would not improve the position of either party, meaning neither 
party would have any reason to make it. (Karl Marx insisted that 
exchanges in the market were based on exchanges of equal values, 
which generated a nonsensical and incoherent economic theory.) 
Grounding market exchange on the principle of equality deprives 
exchange of its fundamental reason, which is to make the parties 
to exchange better off . The economics of exchange rests on a 
recognition of the unequal valuation of goods or services by the 
exchanging parties.
Considered ethically, however, the idea of equality may none-
theless be appealing for some. A common trait of many moral 
judgments is that they are formulated in purely deontic modality, 
that is, in the logic of duties alone. They are concerned only with 
what should be done, regardless of the logic of economics, or of 
what merely exists, or even of what will exist because of what (it 
may be asserted) must be done. According to Immanuel Kant, for 
example, a duty demands its realization, regardless of the results, 
consequences and even possibilities to do what must be done. To 
say that you must is to say that you can. Therefore even if such 

57
equality in exchange is economically absurd, it may still be (and 
is) upheld as a moral ideal.
Equality as a moral issue is a quite complicated matter. We can 
distinguish between those perspectives for which the achievement 
of equality is the dominant concern and those for which it is not; 
accordingly, the former are known as egalitarian perspectives and 
the latter as nonegalitarian perspectives. Nonegalitarians neither 
necessarily assert the undesirability of equality, nor need they as-
sert the desirability of inequality; they merely reject the exclusive 
egalitarian focus on equality as a goal, to the exclusion of other 
goals, and especially the focus on assuring equality of material 
wealth. Classical liberal (or libertarian) nonegalitarians do assert 
the importance of a certain kind of equality, namely, equality of 
basic rights, which they hold to be inconsistent with equality of 
outcomes, so they could be considered egalitarians of a diff erent 
sort. (Equality of rights is at the foundation of much of the experi-
ence of law, property, and toleration that people in modern and 
free societies take for granted.) Nonegalitarian libertarians and 
classical liberals defend their view as the purest or most consistent 
or most sustainable form of equality, but advocates of equality of 
wealth “distribution” generally claim that such libertarian equal-
ity is merely formal, equality in words, but not in deeds. (In that 
they have a point, in that legal equality is very much about what 
people think and how they act, rather than about describable 
states of the world or static distributions of assets. Whether such 
an approach to equality is merely formal, rather than substantive, 
depends on how one views the importance of legal procedures 
and standards of behavior.) 
It’s hardly unusual for diffi  cult philosophical questions to be 
actively discussed before they are clearly formulated or properly 
posed. Philosophers of the East and the West propounded ethical 
doctrines for thousands of years before there was much systematic 
analysis of judgments regarding duty and performative logic. 
Such work was begun in earnest by David Hume and followed 
by Immanuel Kant and later by positivist philosophers such as 
George Moore, Alfred Ayer, Richard Hare and others; the inves-
tigation of performative and deontic logic is ongoing. Although 
the dispute between egalitarian and nonegalitarian stances is not 

58
limited merely to consideration of the proper logical relationship 
between equality and morality, understanding the relationship 
between equality and morality would be a worthy contribution to 
the ongoing and intense debate about whether forced redistribu-
tion of unequal wealth generated by market exchange is morally 
required or morally forbidden. (That is quite a separate issue 
from whether resources stolen from rightful owners, whether by 
rulers of states or by “free lance” criminals, should be returned to 
those who were despoiled.)
Let’s consider the problem of the morality of equality through 
a simple question: why is equality, either of initial endowments 
or of outcomes, morally superior to inequality (or vice versa)? An 
honest attempt to arrive at an ethical resolution of the dispute 
requires that such a direct question should be addressed to both 
egalitarians and nonegalitarians.
The range of possible answers is limited. One might fi rst try 
to establish that certain numerical proportions (of equality or 
inequality) are better than any others. For example, the ratio of 
X to Y is morally superior if the values of the variables are equal 
and morally inferior if not, i.e., if the ratio of “1:1” is superior to 
that of “1:2” (and, a fortiori, superior to “1:10”). In spite of what 
might seem like the evident clarity of such a position, however, 
the question of moral features is not so easily resolved. Values are 
not derived from statements of mathematical proportion, which 
are by themselves ethically neutral. It’s quite arbitrary to assert the 
superiority of one mathematical ratio over another, rather like the 
curious practice of the Pythagoreans, who classifi ed numbers as 
male, female, amicable, perfect, defi cient, and so on.
Rather than directing attention to equality of either initial en-
dowments or the outcomes of exchanges, it might make more sense 
to focus attention on the equality or inequality of one’s personal 
moral status as the basis for evaluation of the relations (includ-
ing exchanges) among persons. Thus: no person has a morally 
superior (or inferior) status to any other person or, alternatively, 
some people are morally superior (or inferior) to others. On such 
a foundation one might deduce the desirability or undesirabil-
ity of insisting on equal initial endowments or outcomes. Both 
perspectives might converge on forced redistribution, either to 

59
eliminate or to establish inequality, and in both cases the central 
argument would be the moral status of the parties, regardless 
of the unbridgeable conceptual abyss between the very idea of 
moral status and the actual situations with which people deal.
So formulated, the central question would be about the rela-
tionship between human moral status, on the one hand, and the 
amount, quality, or value of goods to which a person has access, on 
the other. So we might follow up by asking why two equally mor-
ally signifi cant persons must drink only the same amount, quality, 
or value of coff ee in the morning? Or whether the charitable man 
and his stingy neighbor, both of equal moral standing (or are 
they?), should or should not own equally fl ourishing orchards 
producing equally valuable crops? Equal moral status seems not 
to have any obvious signifi cance for equality of endowments, or 
of consumption, or of holdings. Consider the relationship of 
two chess players, both of whom are equally morally signifi cant. 
Does their equal moral signifi cance require that they must have 
the same skills, or that every game must end in a draw? Or does it 
require that they play by the same rules, which fact would entail 
no normative prescription that their games would have to end in 
draws. There is no direct connection between equal moral status 
and either initial endowments or particular outcomes. 
If we focus on behavior and rules, rather than on endowments 
or outcomes, we fi nd that states of aff airs are judged by human 
behavior, by choices, and (in cases of criminality, especially) by 
intentions. How much money is in one person’s pocket and 
whether that amount is greater or less than the sum in his or 
her neighbor’s pocket is not itself a morally signifi cant element 
in human life. What matters is how it got there. Both a tycoon 
and a taxi driver can be judged as just or unjust, depending on 
the compatibility of their actions with universal moral standards, 
such as whether they respect the rules of justice and the moral 
agency inherent in both themselves and in others. Praise and 
blame are not merited by wealth or poverty per se, but by the 
actions people take. Diff erent positions off er diff erent opportu-
nities for good and bad behavior, for virtue and vice, for justice 
and injustice, but those standards govern human behavior, not 
endowments or outcomes. The equal application of standards 

60
is the moral realization of morally equal status, on the basis of 
which we may morally judge behavior. Moral equality means that 
a crime is a crime, regardless of whether committed by a taxi driver 
or a tycoon, and an honest trade resulting in profi t is an honest 
trade, regardless of whether undertaken by two taxi drivers, by 
two tycoons, or by a tycoon and a taxi driver.
Let’s return to the consideration of the relationship of wealth 
and equality. Wealth holdings can be the results of either just 
behavior or of coercion. Free market exchanges can result in either 
greater inequality or greater equality, and state interventions and 
redistributions can also result in either greater inequality or greater 
equality. There is nothing inherently equal or unequal about ei-
ther kind of interaction. An entrepreneur can create wealth and 
thus have more than another person, even if the wealth creation 
benefi ted that other person, as well. Exchanges in free markets 
may also result in greater equality, through generating widespread 
prosperity and through eroding the unjust privileges of the power-
ful that were inherited from previous systems. A robber can steal 
from someone and then have more than the victim, resulting in 
greater inequality, or the same as the victim, resulting in greater 
equality. Similarly, interventions by the organized coercive power 
of the state may result in enormous inequalities of wealth, either 
through overriding choices made by market participants (through 
protectionism, subsidies, and “rent-seeking”) or merely through 
the exercise of brutal force and violence, as certainly happened 
in countries under communist rule. (Being offi  cially dedicated to 
equality is not the same as actually producing equality, as bitter 
experience over decades showed.)
Whether a legal and economic system produces greater or 
lesser approximations to equality of income, for example, is an 
empirical matter, not a conceptual one. The Economic Freedom 
of the World Report (www.freetheworld.com) measures degrees 
of economic freedom and then compares the indices to a variety 
of indicators of economic well being (longevity, literacy, degree 
of corruption, per capita income, etc.). The data show not only 
that residents of countries with the freest economies are much 
wealthier than those with less economic freedom, but also that 
inequality of income (specifi cally, the share of national income 

61
earned by the poorest 10% of the population) is not a feature of 
diff erent policies, whereas the amount of income they earn is. 
Considering the countries of the world by quartiles (each with 
25% of the world’s countries) the average share of national income 
going to the poorest 10% of the population in the least-free quar-
tile (including such countries as Zimbabwe, Myanmar, and Syria) 
in 2008 (the last year for which data are available) was 2.47%; 
in the next (third most-free) quartile, 2.19%; in the next (second 
most-free) quartile, 2.27%; and in the freest quartile, 2.58%. The 
variation is hardly signifi cant. That is to say, such inequality 
seems to be immune to being aff ected by the rules of economic 
policies. On the other hand, the amount of income the poorest 
10% receive varies enormously, precisely because that variable is 
certainly not immune to economic policies. Being among the 
poorest 10% in the least-free countries means an average annual 
income of $910 per year, while being among the poorest 10% in 
the most-free market economies means an average annual income 
of $8,474. For those who are poor, it seems far better to be poor 
in Switzerland than in Syria.
Whether you and I have equal initial endowments before free 
exchanges or equal holdings aft er free exchanges is not, by itself, 
a moral problem. On the other hand, refusing to treat morally 
equal persons equally and to apply equal rules to them, all in 
the attempt to generate more equal outcomes (not, it seems, a 
generally successful enterprise, as such outcomes are not so easily 
manipulated), certainly is a moral problem. That is a violation of 
moral equality that matters.
The biggest scandal in the world regarding inequality of 
wealth is not the inequality between the wealthy and the poor 
in economically free societies, but that huge gap between the 
wealth of people in economically free societies and the wealth 
of people in economically unfree societies. That gap between 
wealth and poverty is quite certainly a matter that can be solved 
by changing the rules, i.e., by changing economic policies. Freeing 
the people of economically unfree societies will create enormous 
amounts of wealth that would do more to narrow the gap between 
the world’s wealthy and the world’s poor than any other policy 
imaginable. Moreover, it would do so as a positive consequence 

62
of the realization of justice, by eliminating the unequal treatment 
of people in countries misruled through cronyism, statism, milita-
rism, socialism, corruption, and brute force. Economic freedom, 
that is, equal standards of justice and equal respect for the rights 
of all to produce and to exchange, is the right standard of justice 
for moral beings. 

63
Adam Smith and the Myth of Greed
By Tom G. Palmer
In this essay, the author lays to rest the myth of a naïve Adam Smith 
who believed that merely relying on “self interest” would create pros-
perity. Those who cite Smith to that eff ect have not, it seems, ever 
read more than a few quotations fr om his works and are unaware 
of the great emphasis he put on the role of institutions and on the 
harmful eff ects of self-interested behavior when channeled through 
the coercive institutions of the state. The rule of law, property, 
contract, and exchange channel self-interest into mutual benefi t, 
whereas lawlessness and disrespect for property give self-interest an 
altogether diff erent and profoundly harmful outlet.
One frequently hears it said that Adam Smith believed that if 
people were only to act selfi shly, all would go well in the world, 
that “Greed makes the world go round.” Smith, of course, did 
not believe that relying exclusively on selfi sh motivations would 
make the world a better place, nor did he promote or encourage 
selfi sh behavior. His extensive discussion in The Theory of Moral 
Sentiments of the role of the “impartial spectator” should put 
such misinterpretations to rest. Smith was not an advocate of 
selfi shness, but he was also not naïve enough to think that selfl ess 
devotion to the welfare of others (or professing such devotion) 
would make the world better, either. As Steven Holmes noted in 
his corrective essay “The Secret History of Self-Interest,”32 Smith 
knew very well the destructive eff ects of many “disinterested” 
passions, such as envy, malice, revenge, zealotry, and the like. The 
selfl ess zealots of the Spanish Inquisition did what they did in the 
hope that in the last moment of agony the dying heretics might 
repent and receive God’s grace. That was known as the doctrine 
of salvifi c justifi cation. Humbert de Romans, in his instruction 
to inquisitors, insisted that they justify to the congregation the 
punishments to be imposed on heretics, for “We beg God, and 
we beg you, that you should beg him together with me, that from 

64
the gift  of his grace he should make it that those to be punished 
bear so patiently the punishments that we propose to impose 
upon them (in the demand of justice, nevertheless with grief ), 
that it might redound to their salvation. Because of this we impose 
such a punishment.”33 In Smith’s view, such selfl ess devotion to 
the welfare of others was not obviously morally superior to the 
allegedly selfi sh merchants seeking to enrich themselves by selling 
ale and salted fi sh to thirsty and hungry customers.
Smith is hardly a general endorser of selfi sh behavior, for 
whether such motivations lead “as if by an invisible hand” to the 
promotion of the general good depends very much on the context 
of the actions, and particularly on the institutional setting.
Sometimes the self-centered desire to be liked by others can 
indeed lead one to adopt a moral perspective, by causing us to 
think about how we appear to others. In the kind of small-scale 
interpersonal settings typically described in The Theory of Moral 
Sentiments, such motivation may redound to the general benefi t, 
for the “desire to become ourselves the objects of the like agree-
able sentiments, and to be as amiable and as admirable as those 
whom we love and admire the most” requires us to “become the 
impartial spectators of our own character and conduct.”34 Even 
apparently excessive self-interest, when in the right institutional 
setting, can be to the benefi t of others, such as in the story Smith 
tells of the poor man’s son whose ambition causes him to work 
tirelessly to accumulate wealth, only to fi nd aft er a lifetime of 
hard work that he is no happier than the simple beggar sunning 
himself on the side of the road; the ambitiously excessive pursuit 
of self-interest on the part of the poor man’s son benefi ted the 
rest of humanity by leading him to produce and accumulate the 
wealth that made the very existence of many others possible, 
for “the earth by these labours of mankind has been obliged to 
redouble her natural fertility, and to maintain a greater multitude 
of inhabitants.”35
In the larger context of political economy described in many 
passages of An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations, specifi cally those involving interaction with the institu-
tions of the state, the pursuit of self-interest is not so likely to have 
positive eff ects. The self-interest of merchants, for example, leads 

65
them to lobby the state to create cartels, protectionism, and even 
war: “to expect, indeed, that the freedom of trade should ever be 
entirely restored in Great Britain, is as absurd as to expect that an 
Oceana or Utopia should ever be established in it. Not only the 
prejudices of the publick, but what is much more unconquerable, 
the private interests of many individuals, irresistibly oppose it.”36 
The trifl ing gains of merchants from monopolies are purchased 
at the expense of horrifi c burdens to the public in the case of 
empires and wars:
[I]n the system of laws which has been established for the 
management of our American and West Indian colonies, the 
interest of the home-consumer has been sacrificed to that 
of the producer with a more extravagant profusion than in 
all our other commercial regulations. A great empire has 
been established for the sole purpose of raising up a nation 
of customers who should be obliged to buy from the shops 
of our different producers, all the goods with which these 
could supply them. For the sake of that little enhancement 
of price which this monopoly might afford our producers, 
the home-consumers have been burdened with the whole 
expense of maintaining and defending that empire. For this 
purpose, and for this purpose only, in the two last wars, 
more than two hundred millions have been spent, and a 
new debt of more than a hundred and seventy millions has 
been contracted over and above all that had been expended 
for the same purpose in former wars. The interest of this 
debt alone is not only greater than the whole extraordinary 
profit, which, it ever could be pretended, was made by the 
monopoly of the colony trade, but than the whole value of 
that trade or than that whole value of the goods, which at 
an average have been annually exported to the colonies.37
So Smith’s views on whether, in the words of Gordon Gecko, 
the fi ctional character from Oliver Stone’s fi lm Wall Street, “Greed 
is good” is decidedly “sometimes yes, and sometimes no” (assum-
ing that all self-interested behavior is “greed”). The diff erence is 
in the institutional setting. 

66
What about the common view that markets promote selfi sh 
behavior, that the psychological attitude engendered by exchange 
encourages selfi shness? I know of no good reason to think that 
markets promote selfi shness or greed, in the sense that market 
interaction increases the quantum of greediness or the propensity 
of people to be selfi sh, over what is observed in societies governed 
by states that suppress or discourage or interfere in or disrupt 
markets. In fact, markets make it possible for the most altruistic, as 
well as the most selfi sh, to advance their purposes in peace. Those 
who dedicate their lives to helping others use markets to advance 
their purposes, no less than those whose goal is to increase their 
store of wealth. Some of the latter even accumulate wealth for the 
purpose of increasing their ability to help others. George Soros 
and Bill Gates are examples of the latter; they earn huge amounts 
of money, at least partly in order to increase their ability to help 
others through their vast charitable activities. The creation of 
wealth in the pursuit of profi ts enables them to be generous.
A philanthropist or saint wants to use the wealth available to 
her to feed, clothe, and comfort the greatest number of people. 
Markets allow her to fi nd the lowest prices for blankets, for food, 
and for medicines to care for those who need her assistance. 
Markets allow the creation of wealth that can be used to help the 
unfortunate and facilitate the charitable to maximize their ability to 
help others. Markets make possible the charity of the charitable.
A common mistake is to identify the purposes of people ex-
clusively with their “self-interest,” which is then in turn confused 
with “selfi shness.” The purposes of people in the market are indeed 
purposes of selves, but as selves with purposes we are also con-
cerned about the interests and well being of others—our family 
members, our friends, our neighbors, and even total strangers 
whom we will never meet. Indeed, markets help to condition 
people to consider the needs of others, including total strangers.
Philip Wicksteed off ered a nuanced treatment of motivations 
in market exchanges. Rather than using “selfi shness” to describe 
the motivations for engaging in market exchanges (one might 
go to the market to buy food for the poor, for example), he 
coined the term “non-tuism.”38 We might sell our products to 
gain money to be able to help out our friends, or even distant 

67
strangers, but when we haggle for the lowest or highest price, we 
rarely do so out of a concern for the well being of the party with 
whom we’re bargaining. If we do, we are making an exchange and 
a gift , which somewhat complicates the nature of the exchange. 
Those who deliberately pay more than they need to are rarely 
good businesspeople and, as H.B. Acton noted in his book The 
Morals of the Markets,39 running a business at a loss is in general 
a very foolish, even stupid, way to be philanthropic.
To those who praise involvement in politics over involvement 
in industry and commerce, it is worth remembering that the 
former can do a great deal of harm and rarely does much good. 
Voltaire, writing before Smith, saw the diff erence clearly. In his 
essay “On Trade” from his Letters Concerning the English Nation 
(written by Voltaire in English, in which he was quite fl uent, 
and then rewritten by him in French and published as Lettres 
Philosophiques) he noted that,
In France the Title of Marquis is given gratis to any one who 
will accept of it; and whosoever arrives at Paris from the 
midst of the most remote Provinces with Money in his Purse, 
and a Name terminating in ac or ille, may strut about, and 
cry, Such a Man as I! A Man of my Rank and Figure! And 
may look down upon a Trader with sovereign Contempt; 
whilst the Trader on the other Side, by thus often hearing his 
Profession treated so disdainfully, is Fool enough to blush at 
it. However, I cannot say which is most useful to a Nation; a 
Lord, powder’d in the tip of the Mode, who knows exactly at 
what a Clock the King rises and goes to bed; and who gives 
himself Airs of Grandeur and State, at the same Time that he 
is acting the Slave in the Anti-chamber of a prime Minister; 
or a Merchant, who enriches his Country, dispatches Orders 
from his Compting-House to Surat and Grand Cairo, and 
contributes to the felicity of the world.40
Merchants and capitalists need not blush when our contempo-
rary politicians and intellectuals look down their noses at them, 
and strut about declaiming this and decrying that, all the while 
demanding that the merchants, capitalists, workers, investors, 

68
craft smen, farmers, inventors, and other productive producers 
create the wealth that the politicians confi scate and the anti-
capitalistic intellectuals resent but greedily consume.
Markets do not depend on or presuppose people being selfi sh, 
any more than politics does. Nor do market exchanges encour-
age more selfi sh behavior or motivation. But unlike politics, free 
exchange among willing participants does generate wealth and 
peace, which are conditions under which generosity, friendship, 
and love fl ourish. There is something to be said for that, as Adam 
Smith well understood. 

69
Ayn Rand and Capitalism: The Moral Revolution
By David Kelley
In this essay, the Objectivist philosopher David Kelley proposes a 
“fourth revolution” to complete the foundations of the modern world 
and to secure the gains made possible by capitalism.
David Kelley is executive director of The Atlas Society, which 
promotes the development and dissemination of the philosophy of 
Objectivism. Kelley is the author of The Evidence of the Senses, 
The Art of Reasoning (one of the most widely used textbooks on 
logic in the United States), A Life of One’s Own: Individual Rights 
and the Welfare State, and other books. He taught philosophy at 
Vassar College and Brandeis University and has published widely 
in the popular press, including such publications as Harper’s, The 
Sciences, Reason, Harvard Business Review, and Barron’s. 
This essay is reprinted by permission of the author fr om The New 
Individualist, spring 2009.
“We have it in our power to begin the world over again.”
—Thomas Paine, Common Sense, 1792.
The crisis in fi nancial markets has set off  a predictable torrent of 
anti-capitalist sentiment. Despite the fact that government regu-
lations were a major cause of the crisis, anti-capitalists and their 
enablers in the media have blamed the market and called for new 
restraints. The government has already exerted an unprecedented 
degree of intervention in fi nancial markets, and it now seems clear 
that new economic controls will expand far beyond Wall Street.
Regulation of production and trade is one of the two basic 
things that government does in our mixed economy. The other 
is redistribution—transferring income and wealth from one set 
of hands to another. In this realm, too, anti-capitalists have seized 
the moment to call for new entitlements such as guaranteed health 
care, along with new tax burdens on the wealthy. The economic 

70
crisis, along with the election of Barack Obama, has revealed a 
huge pent-up demand for redistribution. Where does that demand 
come from? To answer that question in fundamental terms, we 
need to look back at the origins of capitalism and look more 
closely at the arguments for redistribution.
The capitalist system came of age in the century from 1750 
to 1850 as a result of three revolutions. The fi rst was a political 
revolution: the triumph of liberalism, particularly the doctrine of 
natural rights, and the view that government should be limited 
in its function to the protection of individual rights, including 
property rights. The second revolution was the birth of eco-
nomic understanding, exemplified by Adam Smith’s Wealth of 
Nations. Smith demonstrated that when individuals are left  free 
to pursue their own economic interests, the result is not chaos 
but a spontaneous order, a market system in which the actions 
of individuals are coordinated and more wealth is produced than 
would be the case if government managed the economy. The third 
revolution was, of course, the Industrial Revolution. Technological 
innovation provided a lever that vastly multiplied man’s powers 
of production. The eff ect was not only to raise standards of living 
for everyone, but to off er the alert and enterprising individual 
the prospect of earning a fortune unimaginable in earlier times.
The political revolution, the triumph of the doctrine of in-
dividual rights, was accompanied by a spirit of moral idealism. 
It was the liberation of man from tyranny, the recognition that 
every individual, whatever his station in society, is an end in 
himself. But the economic revolution was couched in morally 
ambiguous terms: as an economic system, capitalism was widely 
regarded as having been conceived in sin. The desire for wealth 
fell under the shadow of the Christian injunction against selfi sh-
ness and avarice. The early students of spontaneous order were 
conscious that they were asserting a moral paradox—the paradox, 
as Bernard Mandeville put it, that private vices could produce 
public benefi ts.
The critics of the market have always capitalized on these 
doubts about its morality. The socialist movement was sustained 
by allegations that capitalism breeds selfi shness, exploitation, 
alienation, injustice. In milder forms, this same belief produced 

71
the welfare state, which redistributes income through govern-
ment programs in the name of “social justice.” Capitalism has 
never escaped the moral ambiguity in which it was conceived. It 
is valued for the prosperity it brings; it is valued as a necessary 
precondition for political and intellectual freedom. But few of its 
defenders are prepared to assert that the mode of life central to 
capitalism—the pursuit of self-interest through production and 
trade—is morally honorable, much less noble or ideal.
There is no mystery about where the moral antipathy toward 
the market comes from. It arises from the ethics of altruism, which 
is deeply rooted in Western culture, as indeed in most cultures. 
By the standards of altruism, the pursuit of self-interest is at best 
a neutral act, outside the realm of morality, and at worst a sin. It 
is true that success in the market is achieved by voluntary trade, 
and thus by satisfying the needs of others. But it is also true that 
those who do succeed are motivated by personal gain, and ethics 
is as much concerned with motives as with results.
In everyday speech, the term “altruism” is oft en taken to mean 
nothing more than kindness or common courtesy. But its real 
meaning, historically and philosophically, is self-sacrifi ce. For the 
socialists who coined the term, it meant the complete submer-
sion of the self in a larger social whole. As Ayn Rand put it, “The 
basic principle of altruism is that man has no right to exist for 
his own sake, that service to others is the only justifi cation of his 
existence, and that self-sacrifi ce is his highest moral duty, virtue, 
and value.” Altruism in this strict sense is the basis for the various 
concepts of “social justice” that are used to defend government 
programs for redistributing wealth. Those programs represent 
the compulsory sacrifi ce of the people taxed to support them. 
They represent the use of individuals as collective resources, to be 
used as means to the ends of others. And that is the fundamental 
reason why they should be opposed on moral grounds by anyone 
who defends capitalism.
Demands for Social Justice
Demands for social justice take two diff erent forms, which I 
will call welfarism and egalitarianism. According to welfarism, 

72
individuals have a right to certain necessities of life, including 
minimum levels of food, shelter, clothing, medical care, educa-
tion, and so on. It is the responsibility of society to ensure that 
all members have access to these necessities. But a laissez-faire 
capitalist system does not guarantee them to everyone. Thus, argue 
the welfarists, capitalism fails to satisfy its moral responsibility 
and so must be modifi ed through state action to provide such 
goods to people who cannot obtain them by their own eff orts.
According to egalitarianism, the wealth produced by a society 
must be distributed fairly. It is unjust for some people to earn 
fi ft een, or fi ft y, or a hundred times as much income as others. But 
laissez-faire capitalism permits and encourages these disparities 
in income and wealth, and is therefore unjust. The hallmark of 
egalitarianism is the use of statistics on the distribution of income. 
In 2007, for example, the top 20 percent of United States house-
holds on the income scale earned 50 percent of total income, 
whereas the bottom 20 percent earned only 3.4 percent. The 
goal of egalitarianism is to reduce this diff erence; any change in 
the direction of greater equality is regarded as a gain in equity.
The diff erence in these two conceptions of social justice is the 
diff erence between absolute and relative levels of well-being. The 
welfarist demands that people have access to a certain minimum 
standard of living. As long as this fl oor or “safety net” exists, 
it does not matter how much wealth anyone else has, or how 
great the disparities are between rich and poor. So welfarists are 
primarily interested in programs that benefi t people who are 
below a certain level of poverty, or who are sick, out of work, or 
deprived in some other way. Egalitarians, on the other hand, are 
concerned with relative well-being. Egalitarians have oft en said 
that of two societies, they prefer the one in which wealth is more 
evenly distributed, even if its overall standard of living is lower. 
Thus, egalitarians tend to favor government measures such as 
progressive taxation, which aim to redistribute wealth across the 
entire income scale, not merely at the bottom. They also tend 
to support the nationalization of goods such as education and 
medicine, taking them off  the market entirely and making them 
available to everyone more or less equally.
Let us consider these two concepts of social justice in turn.

73
Welfarism: The Unchosen Obligation
The fundamental premise of welfarism is that people have rights to 
goods such as food, shelter, and medical care. They are entitled to 
these things. On this assumption, someone who receives benefi ts 
from a government program is merely getting what is due him, in 
the same way that a buyer who receives the good he has paid for is 
merely getting his due. When the state dispenses welfare benefi ts, 
it is merely protecting rights, just as it is when it protects a buyer 
against fraud. In neither case is there any necessity for gratitude.
The concept of welfare rights, or positive rights as they are 
oft en called, is modeled on the traditional liberal rights of life, 
liberty, and property. But there is a well-known diff erence. The 
traditional rights are rights to act without interference from oth-
ers. The right to life is a right to act with the aim of preserving 
oneself. It is not a right to be immune from death by natural 
causes, even an untimely death. The right to property is the right 
to buy and sell freely, and to appropriate unowned goods from 
nature. It is the right to seek property, but not a right to a dowry 
from nature, or from the state; it is not a guarantee that one will 
succeed in acquiring anything. Accordingly, these rights impose 
on other people only the negative obligation not to interfere, 
not to restrain one forcibly from acting as he chooses. If I imag-
ine myself removed from society—living on a desert island, for 
example—my rights would be perfectly secure. I might not live 
long, and certainly would not live well, but I would live in perfect 
freedom from murder, theft , and assault.
By contrast, welfare rights are conceived as rights to possess 
and enjoy certain goods, regardless of one’s actions; they are rights 
to have the goods provided by others if one cannot earn them 
oneself. Accordingly, welfare rights impose positive obligations 
on others. If I have a right to food, someone has an obligation 
to grow it. If I cannot pay for it, someone has an obligation to 
buy it for me. Welfarists sometimes argue that the obligation is 
imposed on society as a whole, not on any specifi c individual. But 
society is not an entity, much less a moral agent, over and above 
its individual members, so any such obligation falls upon us as 
individuals. Insofar as welfare rights are implemented through 

74
government programs, for example, the obligation is distributed 
over all taxpayers.
From an ethical standpoint, then, the essence of welfarism is 
the premise that the need of one individual is a claim on other 
individuals. The claim may run only as far as the town or the na-
tion. It may not embrace all of humanity. But in all versions of the 
doctrine, the claim does not depend on your personal relationship 
to the claimant, or your choice to help, or your evaluation of him 
as worthy of your help. It is an unchosen obligation arising from 
the sheer fact of his need.
But we must carry the analysis one step further. If I am living 
alone on a desert island, then of course I have no welfare rights, 
since there is no one else around to provide the goods. For the 
same reason, if I live in a primitive society where medicine is 
unknown, then I have no right to medical care. The content of 
welfare rights is relative to the level of economic wealth and pro-
ductive capacity in a given society. Correspondingly, the obligation 
of individuals to satisfy the needs of others is dependent on their 
ability to do so. I cannot be blamed as an individual for failing 
to provide others with something I cannot produce for myself.
Suppose I can produce it and simply choose not to? Suppose 
I am capable of earning a much larger income than I do, the 
taxes on which would support a person who will otherwise go 
hungry. Am I obliged to work harder, to earn more, for the sake 
of that person? I do not know any philosopher of welfare who 
would say that I am. The moral claim imposed on me by another 
person’s need is contingent not only on my ability but also on 
my willingness to produce.
And this tells us something important about the ethical focus 
of welfarism. It does not assert an obligation to pursue the satis-
faction of human needs, much less the obligation to succeed in 
doing so. The obligation, rather, is conditional: those who do 
succeed in creating wealth may do so only on condition that 
others are allowed to share the wealth. The goal is not so much 
to benefi t the needy as to bind the able. The implicit assump-
tion is that a person’s ability and initiative are social assets, which 
may be exercised only on condition that they are aimed at the 
service of others.

75
Egalitarianism: “Fair” Distribution
If we turn to egalitarianism, we fi nd that we arrive at the same 
principle by a diff erent logical route. The ethical framework of 
the egalitarian is defi ned by the concept of justice rather than 
rights. If we look at society as a whole, we see that income, wealth, 
and power are distributed in a certain way among individuals 
and groups. The basic question is: is the existing distribution 
fair? If not, then it must be corrected by government programs 
of redistribution. A pure market economy, of course, does not 
produce equality among individuals. But few egalitarians have 
claimed that strict equality of outcome is required by justice. The 
most common position is that there is a presumption in favor of 
equal outcomes, and that any departure from equality must be 
justifi ed by its benefi ts to society as a whole. Thus, the English 
writer R. H. Tawney wrote that “inequality of circumstance is 
regarded as reasonable, in so far as it is a necessary condition of 
securing the services which the community requires.” John Rawls’s 
famous “Diff erence Principle”—that inequalities are permitted 
as long as they serve the interests of the least advantaged persons 
in society—is only the most recent example of this approach. 
In other words, egalitarians recognize that strict leveling would 
have a disastrous eff ect on production. They admit that not 
everyone contributes equally to the wealth of a society. To some 
extent, therefore, people must be rewarded in accordance with 
their productive ability, as an incentive to put forth their best 
eff orts. But any such diff erences must be limited to those which 
are necessary for the public good.
What is the philosophical basis of this principle? Egalitarians 
oft en argue that it follows logically from the basic principle of 
justice: that people are to be treated diff erently only if they dif-
fer in some morally relevant way. If we are going to apply this 
fundamental principle to the distribution of income, however, 
we must fi rst assume that society literally engages in an act of 
distributing income. This assumption is plainly false. In a market 
economy, incomes are determined by the choices of millions of 
individuals—consumers, investors, entrepreneurs, and workers. 
These choices are coordinated by the laws of supply and demand, 

76
and it is no accident that a successful entrepreneur, say, earns 
much more than a day laborer. But this is not the result of any 
conscious intention on the part of society. In 2007 the most 
highly paid entertainer in the United States was Oprah Winfrey, 
who earned some $260 million. This was not because “society” 
decided she was worth that much, but because millions of fans 
decided that her show was worth watching. Even in a socialist 
economy, as we now know, economic outcomes are not under the 
control of government planners. Even here there is a spontaneous 
order, albeit a corrupt one, in which outcomes are determined by 
bureaucratic infi ghting, black markets, and so forth.
Despite the absence of any literal act of distribution, egalitarians 
oft en argue that society is responsible for ensuring that the statis-
tical distribution of income meets certain standards of fairness. 
Why? Because the production of wealth is a cooperative, social 
process. More wealth is created in a society characterized by trade 
and the division of labor than in a society of self-suffi  cient produc-
ers. The division of labor means that many people contribute to 
the fi nal product; and trade means that an even wider circle of 
people share responsibility for the wealth that is obtained by the 
producers. Production is so transformed by these relationships, 
say the egalitarians, that the group as a whole must be considered 
the real unit of production and the real source of wealth. At least 
it is the source of the diff erence in wealth that exists between a 
cooperative and a non-cooperative society. Therefore society 
must ensure that the fruits of cooperation are fairly distributed 
among all participants.
But this argument is valid only if we regard economic wealth as 
an anonymous social product in which it is impossible to isolate 
individual contributions. Only in that case will it be necessary 
to devise aft er-the-fact principles of distributive justice for al-
locating shares of the product. But this assumption, once again, 
is plainly wrong. The so-called social product is actually a vast 
array of individual goods and services available on the market. It 
is certainly possible to know which good or service any individual 
has helped to produce. And when the product is produced by a 
group of individuals, as in a fi rm, it is possible to identify who 
did what. Aft er all, an employer does not hire workers by whim. 

77
A worker is hired because of the anticipated diff erence his ef-
forts will make to the fi nal product. This fact is acknowledged 
by the egalitarians themselves when they allow that inequalities 
are acceptable if they are an incentive for the more productive to 
increase the total wealth of a society. To ensure that the incentives 
are going to the right people, as Robert Nozick has observed, 
even the egalitarian must assume that we can identify the role of 
individual contributions. In short, there is no basis for applying 
the concept of justice to the statistical distributions of income or 
wealth across an entire economy. We must abandon the picture 
of a large pie that is being divided up by a benevolent parent who 
wishes to be fair to all the children at the table.
Once we abandon this picture, what becomes of the principle 
espoused by Tawney, Rawls, and others: the principle that in-
equalities are acceptable only if they serve the interests of all? If 
this cannot be grounded in justice, then it must be regarded as 
a matter of the obligations we bear to each other as individuals. 
When we consider it in this light, we can see that it is the same 
principle we identifi ed as the basis of welfare rights. The principle 
is that the productive may enjoy the fruits of their eff orts only 
on condition that their eff orts benefi t others as well. There is no 
obligation to produce, to create, to earn an income. But if you 
do, the needs of others arise as a constraint on your actions. Your 
ability, your initiative, your intelligence, your dedication to your 
goals, and all the other qualities that make success possible, are 
personal assets that put you under an obligation to those with 
less ability, initiative, intelligence, or dedication.
In other words, every form of social justice rests on the assump-
tion that individual ability is a social asset. The assumption is not 
merely that the individual may not use his talents to trample on 
the rights of the less able. Nor does the assumption say merely 
that kindness or generosity are virtues. It says that the individual 
must regard himself, in part at least, as a means to the good of 
others. And here we come to the crux of the matter. In respect-
ing the rights of other people, I recognize that they are ends in 
themselves, that I may not treat them merely as means to my 
satisfaction, in the way that I treat inanimate objects. Why then 
is it not equally moral to regard myself as an end? Why should 

78
I not refuse, out of respect for my own dignity as a moral being, 
to regard myself as a means in the service of others?
Toward an Individualist Ethics
Ayn Rand’s case for capitalism rests on an individualist ethics 
that recognizes the moral right to pursue one’s self-interest and 
rejects altruism at the root.
Altruists argue that life presents us with a basic choice: we must 
either sacrifi ce others to ourselves, or sacrifi ce ourselves to others. 
The latter is the altruist course of action, and the assumption is 
that the only alternative is life as a predator. But this is a false 
alternative, according to Rand. Life does not require sacrifi ces in 
either direction. The interests of rational people do not confl ict, 
and the pursuit of our genuine self-interest requires that we deal 
with others by means of peaceful, voluntary exchange.
To see why, let us ask how we decide what is in our self-interest. 
An interest is a value that we seek to obtain: wealth, pleasure, 
security, love, self-esteem, or some other good. Rand’s ethical 
philosophy is based on the insight that the fundamental value, 
the summum bonum, is life. It is the existence of living organisms, 
their need to maintain themselves through constant action to 
satisfy their needs that gives rise to the entire phenomenon of 
values. A world without life would be a world of facts but not 
values, a world in which no state could be said to be better or 
worse than any other. Thus the fundamental standard of value, 
by reference to which a person must judge what is in his interest, 
is his life: not mere survival from one moment to another, but 
the full satisfaction of his needs through the ongoing exercise of 
his faculties.
Man’s primary faculty, his primary means of survival, is his 
capacity for reason. It is reason that allows us to live by produc-
tion, and thus to rise above the precarious level of hunting and 
gathering. Reason is the basis of language, which makes it possible 
for us to cooperate and transmit knowledge. Reason is the basis 
of social institutions governed by abstract rules. The purpose of 
ethics is to provide standards for living in accordance with reason, 
in the service of our lives.

79
To live by reason we must accept independence as a virtue. 
Reason is a faculty of the individual. No matter how much we 
learn from others, the act of thought takes place in the individual 
mind. It must be initiated by each of us by our own choice and 
directed by our own mental eff ort. Rationality therefore requires 
that we accept responsibility for directing and sustaining our 
own lives.
To live by reason, we must also accept productiveness as a 
virtue. Production is the act of creating value. Human beings 
cannot live secure and fulfi lling lives by fi nding what they need 
in nature, as other animals do. Nor can they live as parasites on 
others. “If some men attempt to survive by means of brute force 
or fraud,” argues Rand, “by looting, robbing, cheating or enslaving 
the men who produce, it still remains true that their survival is 
made possible only by their victims, only by the men who choose 
to think and to produce the goods which they, the looters, are 
seizing. Such looters are parasites incapable of survival, who exist 
by destroying those who are capable, those who are pursuing a 
course of action proper to man.”
The egoist is usually pictured as someone who will do anything 
to get what he wants—someone who will lie, steal, and seek to 
dominate others in order to satisfy his desires. Like most people, 
Rand would regard this mode of life as immoral. But her reason 
is not that it harms others. Her reason is that it harms the self. 
Subjective desire is not the test for whether something is in our 
interest, and deceit, theft , and power are not the means for achiev-
ing happiness or a successful life. The virtues I’ve mentioned are 
objective standards. They are rooted in man’s nature, and thus 
apply to all human beings. But their purpose is to enable each 
person to “achieve, maintain, fulfi ll, and enjoy that ultimate 
value, that end in itself, which is his own life.” Thus the purpose 
of ethics is to tell us how to achieve our real interests, not how 
to sacrifi ce them.
The Trader Principle
How then should we deal with others? Rand’s social ethics rests 
on two basic principles: a principle of rights and a principle of 

80
justice. The principle of rights says that we must deal with others 
peaceably, by voluntary exchange, without initiating the use of 
force against them. It is only in this way that we can live inde-
pendently, on the basis of our own productive eff orts; the person 
who attempts to live by controlling others is a parasite. Within an 
organized society, moreover, we must respect the rights of others 
if we wish our own rights to be respected. And it is only in this 
way that we can obtain the many benefi ts that come from social 
interaction: the benefi ts of economic and intellectual exchange, 
as well as the values of more intimate personal relationships. The 
source of these benefi ts is the rationality, the productiveness, the 
individuality of the other person, and these things require freedom 
to fl ourish. If I live by force, I attack the root of the values I seek.
The principle of justice is what Rand calls the trader prin-
ciple: living by trade, off ering value for value, neither seeking 
nor granting the unearned. An honorable person does not off er 
his needs as a claim on others; he off ers value as the basis of any 
relationship. Nor does he accept an unchosen obligation to serve 
the needs of others. No one who values his own life can accept an 
open-ended responsibility to be his brother’s keeper. Nor would 
an independent person wish to be kept—not by a master, and not 
by the Department of Health and Human Services. The principle 
of trade, Rand observes, is the only basis on which humans can 
deal with each other as independent equals.
The Objectivist ethics, in short, treats the individual as an 
end in himself in the full meaning of that term. The implication 
is that capitalism is the only just and moral system. A capitalist 
society is based on the recognition and protection of individual 
rights. In a capitalist society, men are free to pursue their own 
ends, by the exercise of their own minds. As in any society, men 
are constrained by the laws of nature. Food, shelter, clothing, 
books, and medicine do not grow on trees; they must be pro-
duced. And as in any society, men also are constrained by the 
limitations of their own nature, the extent of their individual 
ability. But the only social constraint that capitalism imposes is 
the requirement that those who wish the services of others must 
off er value in return. No one may use the state to expropriate 
what others have produced.

81
Economic outcomes in the market—the distribution of income 
and wealth—depend on the voluntary actions and interactions of 
all the participants. The concept of justice applies not to the out-
come but to the process of economic activity. A person’s income 
is just if it is won through voluntary exchange, as a reward for 
value off ered, as judged by those to whom it is off ered. Economists 
have long known that there is no such thing as a just price for 
a good, apart from the judgments of market participants about 
the value of the good to them. The same is true for the price of 
human productive services. This is not to say that I must measure 
my worth by my income, but only that if I wish to live by trade 
with others, I cannot demand that they accept my terms at the 
sacrifi ce of their own self-interest.
Benevolence as a Chosen Value
What about someone who is poor, disabled, or otherwise unable 
to support himself? This is a valid question to ask, as long as it is 
not the fi rst question we ask about a social system. It is a legacy of 
altruism to think that the primary standard by which to evaluate 
a society is the way it treats its least productive members. “Blessed 
are the poor in spirit,” said Jesus; “blessed are the meek.” But 
there is no ground in justice for holding the poor or the meek 
in any special esteem or regarding their needs as primary. If we 
had to choose between a collectivist society in which no one is 
free but no one is hungry, and an individualist society in which 
everyone is free but a few people starve, I would argue that the 
second society, the free one, is the moral choice. No one can 
claim a right to make others serve him involuntarily, even if his 
own life depends on it.
But this is not the choice we face. In fact, the poor are much 
better off  under capitalism than under socialism, or even the 
welfare state. As a matter of historical fact, the societies in which 
no one is free, like the former Soviet Union, are societies in which 
large numbers of people go hungry.
Those who are capable of working at all have a vital inter-
est in economic and technological growth, which occur most 
rapidly in a market order. The investment of capital and the use 

82
of machinery make it possible to employ people who otherwise 
could not produce enough to support themselves. Computers 
and communications equipment, for example, have now made it 
possible for severely disabled people to work from their homes.
As for those who simply cannot work, free societies have always 
provided numerous forms of private aid and philanthropy outside 
the market: charitable organizations, benevolent societies, and 
the like. In this regard, let us be clear that there is no contradic-
tion between egoism and charity. In light of the many benefi ts 
we receive from dealing with others, it is natural to regard our 
fellow humans in a spirit of general benevolence, to sympathize 
with their misfortunes, and to give aid when it does not require 
a sacrifi ce of our own interests. But there are major diff erences 
between an egoist and an altruist conception of charity.
For an altruist, generosity to others is an ethical primary, and it 
should be carried to the point of sacrifi ce, on the principle “give 
until it hurts.” It is a moral duty to give, regardless of any other 
values one has, and the recipient has a right to it. For an egoist, 
generosity is one among many means of pursuing our values, 
including the value that we place on the well-being of others. 
It should be done in the context of one’s other values, on the 
principle “give when it helps.” It is not a duty, nor do the recipi-
ents have a right to it. An altruist tends to regard generosity as 
an expiation of guilt, on the assumption that there is something 
sinful or suspicious about being able, successful, productive, or 
wealthy. An egoist regards those same traits as virtues and sees 
generosity as an expression of pride in them.
The Fourth Revolution
I said at the outset that capitalism was the result of three revolu-
tions, each of them a radical break with the past. The political 
revolution established the primacy of individual rights and the 
principle that government is man’s servant, not his master. The 
economic revolution brought an understanding of markets. The 
Industrial Revolution radically expanded the application of intel-
ligence to the process of production. But mankind never broke 
with its ethical past. The ethical principle that individual ability 

83
is a social asset is incompatible with a free society. If freedom 
is to survive and fl ourish, we need a fourth revolution, a moral 
revolution, that establishes the moral right of the individual to 
live for himself.


Section III
The Production and 
Distribution of Wealth


87
The Market Economy and the Distribution 
of Wealth 
By Ludwig Lachmann
In this essay, the distinguished economist Ludwig Lachmann exam-
ines the “social justice” critiques of fr ee-market capitalism and reveals 
their incoherence. He explains the diff erence between “ownership” and 
“wealth” and shows how respect for property (ownership) is compat-
ible with massive redistribution of wealth through the market. This 
essay is important for understanding the dynamic nature of social 
and economic relations in capitalist orders. 
Ludwig Lachmann (1906–1990) received his Ph.D. at the 
University of Berlin. He left  Germany in 1933 for England, where 
he continued his research at the London School of Economics. 
Lachmann made substantial contributions to the theory of capital, 
economic growth, and the methodological foundations of economics 
and sociology. He was the author of such books as Capital and Its 
Structure; The Legacy of Max Weber; Macro-Economic Thinking 
and the Market Economy; Capital, Expectations, and the Market 
Process; and The Market as an Economic Process. 
This essay is a slightly abridged version of the original, which 
fi rst appeared in 1956.
Who can now doubt that, as Professor Mises pointed out thirty 
years ago, every intervention by a political authority entails a 
further intervention to prevent the inevitable economic repercus-
sions of the fi rst step from taking place? Who will deny that a 
command economy requires an atmosphere of infl ation to oper-
ate at all, and who today does not know the baneful eff ects of 
“controlled infl ation”? Even though some economists have now 
invented the eulogistic term “secular infl ation” in order to describe 
the permanent infl ation we all know so well, it is unlikely that 
anyone is deceived. It did not really require the recent German 
example to demonstrate to us that a market economy will create 

88
order out of “administratively controlled” chaos even in the most 
unfavorable circumstances. A form of economic organization 
based on voluntary cooperation and the universal exchange of 
knowledge is necessarily superior to any hierarchical structure, 
even if in the latter a rational test for the qualifi cations of those 
who give the word of command could exist. Those who are able 
to learn from reason and experience knew it before, and those 
who are not are unlikely to learn it even now.
Confronted with this situation, the opponents of the market 
economy have shift ed their ground; they now oppose it on 
“social” rather than economic grounds. They accuse it of being 
unjust rather than ineffi  cient. They now dwell on the “distort-
ing eff ects” of the ownership of wealth and contend that “the 
plebiscite of the market is swayed by plural voting.” They show 
that the distribution of wealth aff ects production and income 
distribution since the owners of wealth not merely receive an 
“unfair share” of the social income, but will also infl uence the 
composition of the social product: luxuries are too many and 
necessities too few. Moreover, since these owners do most of the 
saving, they also determine the rate of capital accumulation and 
thus of economic progress.
Some of these opponents would not altogether deny that there 
is a sense in which the distribution of wealth is the cumulative 
result of the play of economic forces, but would hold that this 
accumulation operates in such a fashion as to make the present 
a slave of the past, a bygone and arbitrary factor in the present. 
Today’s income distribution is shaped by today’s distribution of 
wealth, and even though today’s wealth was partly accumulated 
yesterday, it was accumulated by processes refl ecting the infl uence 
of the distribution of wealth on the day before yesterday. In the 
main this argument of the opponents of the market economy 
is based on the institution of “inheritance” to which, even in a 
progressive society, we are told, a majority of the owners owe 
their wealth.
This argument appears to be widely accepted today, even by 
many who are genuinely in favor of economic freedom. Such 
people have come to believe that a “redistribution of wealth,” for 
instance through death duties, would have socially desirable, but 

89
no unfavorable, economic results. On the contrary, since such 
measures would help to free the present from the “dead hand” of 
the past they would also help to adjust present incomes to present 
needs. The distribution of wealth is a datum of the market, and 
by changing data we can change results without interfering with 
the market mechanism! It follows that only when accompanied 
by a policy designed continually to redistribute existing wealth, 
would the market process have “socially tolerable” results.
This view, as we said, is today held by many, even by some econ-
omists who understand the superiority of the market economy 
over the command economy and the frustrations of interven-
tionism, but dislike what they regard as the social consequences 
of the market economy. They are prepared to accept the market 
economy only where its operation is accompanied by such a 
policy of redistribution.
The present paper is devoted to a criticism of the basis of 
this view.
In the fi rst place, the whole argument rests logically on verbal 
confusion arising from the ambiguous meaning of the term “da-
tum.” In common usage as well as in most sciences, for instance 
in statistics, the word “datum” means something that is, at a 
moment of time, “given” to us as observers of the scene. In this 
sense it is, of course, a truism that the mode of the distribution 
of wealth is a datum at any given moment of time, simply in the 
trivial sense that it happens to exist and no other mode does. But 
in the equilibrium theories that, for better or worse, have come 
to mean so much for present-day economic thought and have 
so largely shaped its content, the word “datum” has acquired a 
second and very diff erent meaning: Here a datum means a neces-
sary condition of equilibrium, an independent variable, and “the 
data” collectively mean the total sum of necessary and suffi  cient 
conditions from which, once we know them all, we without 
further ado can deduce equilibrium price and quantity. In this 
second sense the distribution of wealth would thus, together 
with the other data, be a determinant though not the only 
determinant, of the prices and quantities of the various services 
and products bought and sold.
It will, however, be our main task in the paper to show that 

90
the distribution of wealth is not a “datum” in this second sense. 
Far from being an “independent variable” of the market process, 
it is, on the contrary, continuously subject to modifi cation by 
the market forces. Needless to say, this is not to deny that at any 
moment it is among the forces that shape the path of the market 
process in the immediate future, but it is to deny that the mode of 
distribution as such can have any permanent infl uence. Though 
wealth is always distributed in some defi nite way, the mode of 
this distribution is ever-changing.
Only if the mode of distribution remained the same in pe-
riod aft er period, while individual pieces of wealth were being 
transferred by inheritance, could such a constant mode be said 
to be a permanent economic force. In reality this is not so. The 
distribution of wealth is being shaped by the forces of the market 
as an object, not an agent, and whatever its mode may be today 
will soon have become an irrelevant bygone.
The distribution of wealth, therefore, has no place among 
the data of equilibrium. What is, however, of great economic 
and social interest is not the mode of distribution of wealth at a 
moment of time, but its mode of change over time. Such change, 
we shall see, fi nds its true place among the events that happen on 
that problematical “path” which may, but rarely in reality does, 
lead to equilibrium. It is a typically “dynamic” phenomenon. 
It is a curious fact that at a time when so much is heard of the 
need for the pursuit and promotion of dynamic studies it should 
arouse so little interest.
Ownership is a legal concept that refers to concrete material 
objects. Wealth is an economic concept that refers to scarce re-
sources. All valuable resources are, or refl ect, or embody, material 
objects, but not all material objects are resources: derelict houses 
and heaps of scrap are obvious examples, as are any objects that 
their owners would gladly give away if they could fi nd somebody 
willing to remove them. Moreover, what is a resource today may 
cease to be one tomorrow, while what is a valueless object today 
may become valuable tomorrow. The resource status of material 
objects is therefore always problematical and depends to some 
extent on foresight. An object constitutes wealth only if it is 
a source of an income stream. The value of the object to the 

91
owner, actual or potential, refl ects at any moment its expected 
income-yielding capacity. This, in its turn, will depend on the 
uses to which the object can be turned. The mere ownership of 
objects, therefore, does not necessarily confer wealth; it is their 
successful use that confers it. Not ownership but use of resources 
is the source of income and wealth. An ice-cream factory in New 
York may mean wealth to its owner; the same ice-cream factory 
in Greenland would scarcely be a resource.
In a world of unexpected change, the maintenance of wealth 
is always problematical; and in the long run it may be said to be 
impossible. In order to be able to maintain a given amount of 
wealth, which could be transferred by inheritance from one gen-
eration to the next, a family would have to own such resources as 
will yield a permanent net income stream, i.e., a stream of surplus 
of output value over the cost of factor services complementary 
to the resources owned. It seems that this would be possible only 
either in a stationary world, a world in which today is as yesterday 
and tomorrow like today, and in which thus, day aft er day, and 
year aft er year, the same income will accrue to the same owners 
or their heirs; or if all resource owners had perfect foresight. 
Since both cases are remote from reality we can safely ignore 
them. What, then, in reality happens to wealth in a world of 
unexpected change?
All wealth consists of capital assets that, in one way or another, 
embody or at least ultimately refl ect the material resources of pro-
duction, the sources of valuable output. All output is produced by 
human labor with the help of combinations of such resources. For 
this purpose, resources have to be used in certain combinations; 
complementarity is of the essence of resource use. The modes of 
this complementarity are in no way “given” to the entrepreneurs 
who make, initiate, and carry out production plans. There is in 
reality no such thing as a production function. On the contrary, 
the task of the entrepreneur consists precisely in fi nding, in a world 
of perpetual change, which combination of resources will yield, in 
the conditions of today, a maximum surplus of output over input 
value, and in guessing which will do so in the probable conditions 
of tomorrow, when output values, cost of complementary input, 
and technology all will have changed.

92
If all capital resources were infi nitely versatile, the entrepreneur-
ial problem would consist in no more than following the changes 
of external conditions by turning combinations of resources to a 
succession of uses made profi table by these changes. As it is, re-
sources have, as a rule, a limited range of versatility; each is specifi c 
to a number of uses.41 Hence, the need for adjustment to change 
will oft en entail the need for a change in the composition of the 
resource group, for “capital regrouping.” But each change in the 
mode of complementarity will aff ect the value of the component 
resources by giving rise to capital gains and losses. Entrepreneurs 
will make higher bids for the services of those resources for which 
they have found more profi table uses, and lower bids for those 
which have to be turned to less profi table uses. In the limiting 
case where no (present or potential future) use can be found for a 
resource that has so far formed part of a profi table combination, 
this resource will lose its resource character altogether. But even in 
less drastic cases, capital gains and losses made on durable assets 
are an inevitable concomitant of a world of unexpected change.
The market process is thus seen to be a leveling process. In a 
market economy a process of redistribution of wealth is taking 
place all the time before which those outwardly similar processes 
that modern politicians are in the habit of instituting, pale into 
comparative insignifi cance, if for no other reason than that the 
market gives wealth to those who can hold it, while politicians 
give it to their constituents who, as a rule, cannot.
This process of redistribution of wealth is not prompted by 
a concatenation of hazards. Those who participate in it are not 
playing a game of chance, but a game of skill. This process, like 
all real dynamic processes, refl ects the transmission of knowledge 
from mind to mind. It is possible only because some people have 
knowledge that others have not yet acquired, because knowledge 
of change and its implications spread gradually and unevenly 
throughout society.
In this process he is successful who understands earlier than 
anyone else that a certain resource, which today can be produced 
when it is new, or bought, when it is an existing resource, at a 
certain price A, will tomorrow form part of a productive combina-
tion as a result of which it will be worth A’. Such capital gains or 

93
losses prompted by the chance of, or need for, turning resources 
from one use to another, superior or inferior to the fi rst, form the 
economic substance of what wealth means in a changing world, 
and are the chief vehicle of the process of redistribution.
In this process it is most unlikely that the same man will 
continue to be right in his guesses about possible new uses for 
existing or potential resources time aft er time, unless he is really 
superior. And in the latter case his heirs are unlikely to show similar 
success—unless they are superior, too. In a world of unexpected 
change, capital losses are ultimately as inevitable as are capital gains. 
Competition between capital owners and the specifi c nature of 
durable resources, even though it be “multiple specifi city,” entail 
that gains are followed by losses as losses are followed by gains.
These economic facts have certain social consequences. As the 
critics of the market economy nowadays prefer to take their stand 
on “social” grounds, it may be not inappropriate here to elucidate 
the true social results of the market process. We have already spo-
ken of it as a leveling process. More aptly, we may now describe 
these results as an instance of what Pareto called “the circulation 
of elites.” Wealth is unlikely to stay for long in the same hands. It 
passes from hand to hand as unforeseen change confers value, now 
on this, now on that specifi c resource, engendering capital gains 
and losses. The owners of wealth, we might say with Schumpeter, 
are like the guests at a hotel or the passengers in a train: they are 
always there but are never for long the same people.
In a market economy, we have seen, all wealth is of a problemati-
cal nature. The more durable assets are and the more specifi c, the 
more restricted the range of uses to which they may be turned, 
the more clearly the problem becomes visible. But in a society 
with little fi xed capital in which most accumulated wealth took 
the form of stocks of commodities, mainly agricultural and per-
ishable, carried for periods of various lengths, a society in which 
durable consumer goods, except perhaps for houses and furniture, 
hardly existed, the problem was not so clearly visible. Such was, 
by and large, the society in which the classical economists were 
living and from which they naturally borrowed many traits. In 
the conditions of their time, therefore, the classical economists 
were justifi ed, up to a point, in regarding all capital as virtually 

94
homogeneous and perfectly versatile, contrasting it with land, 
the only specifi c and irreproducible resource. But in our time 
there is little or no justifi cation for such a dichotomy. The more 
fi xed capital there is, and the more durable it is, the greater the 
probability that such capital resources will, before they wear out, 
have to be used for purposes other than those for which they were 
originally designed. This means practically that in a modern mar-
ket economy there can be no such thing as a source of permanent 
income. Durability and limited versatility make it impossible.
The main fact we have stressed in this paper, the redistribu-
tion of wealth caused by the forces of the market in a world 
of unexpected change, is a fact of common observation. Why, 
then, is it constantly being ignored? We could understand why 
the politicians choose to ignore it: aft er all, the large majority of 
their constituents are unlikely to be directly aff ected by it, and, as 
is amply shown in the case of infl ation, would scarcely be able to 
understand it if they were. But why should economists choose to 
ignore it? That the mode of the distribution of wealth is a result 
of the operation of economic forces is the kind of proposition 
that, one would think, would appeal to them. Why, then, do so 
many economists continue to regard the distribution of wealth 
as a “datum” in the second sense mentioned above? We submit 
that the reason has to be sought in an excessive preoccupation 
with equilibrium problems.
We saw before that the successive modes of the distribution of 
wealth belong to the world of disequilibrium. Capital gains and 
losses arise in the main because durable resources have to be used 
in ways for which they were not planned, and because some men 
understand better and earlier than other men what the changing 
needs and resources of a world in motion imply. Equilibrium 
means consistency of plans, but the redistribution of wealth by 
the market is typically a result of inconsistent action. To those 
trained to think in equilibrium terms it is perhaps only natural 
that such processes as we have described should appear to be 
not quite “respectable.” For them the “real” economic forces are 
those that tend to establish and maintain equilibrium. Forces only 
operating in disequilibrium are thus regarded as not really very 
interesting and are therefore all too oft en ignored.

95
We are not saying, of course, that the modern economist, so 
learned in the grammar of equilibrium, so ignorant of the facts of 
the market, is unable or unready to cope with economic change; 
that would be absurd. We are saying that he is well-equipped 
only to deal with types of change that happen to conform to a 
fairly rigid pattern. 

96
Political and Economic Freedoms Together 
Spawn Humanity’s Miracles 
By Temba A. Nolutshungu 
In this essay, the South Afr ican economist Temba A. Nolutshungu 
draws fr om his country’s recent history to distinguish majority rule 
(which was won aft er decades of struggle against minority monopo-
lization of power) fr om fr eedom, and shows the liberating potential 
of economic fr eedom.
Temba A. Nolutshungu is a director of the Free Market Foundation 
in South Afr ica. He teaches at economic empowerment programs 
throughout the country and is a fr equent contributor to the South 
Afr ican press. He was a commissioner of the Zimbabwe Papers, a 
set of policy proposals for Zimbabwean recovery aft er the disaster of 
Mugabe’s policies and submitted to Zimbabwean Prime Minister 
Morgan Tsvangirai. Nolutshungu was prominent during his youth 
in South Afr ica’s Black Consciousness Movement.
In July 1794, Maximilien Robespierre, revolutionary republican, 
radical democrat and driving force behind the Reign of Terror 
in revolutionary France, during which some 40,000 French men 
and women died on the guillotine as “enemies of the nation,” 
was put to death by his political opponents. Moments before his 
death, he addressed the mob that used to adulate him but now 
was baying for his blood, with the following words: “I gave you 
freedom; now you want bread as well.” And with that ended the 
Reign of Terror.
The moral we can draw from this is that while there may be 
a link between political freedom and economic well-being, they 
are not the same thing.
Economic well-being is a consequence of freedom. In South 
Africa, with a formally recorded unemployment rate of 25.2 percent 
(a fi gure which does not include those who have given up looking 
for work), the disjuncture between political freedom and economic 

97
well-being refl ects a potentially cataclysmic state of aff airs—a dan-
ger exacerbated by successive political administrations repeatedly 
promising all sorts of benefi ts to their constituencies.
To deal with the challenges that face us, we have to clear away 
certain misconceptions.
Job creation is not a role of the state. For jobs to be sustainable, 
they have to be created by the private sector. Government-
generated jobs are at the taxpayers’ expense and amount to 
subsidized employment. Being unsustainable, they have no posi-
tive economic consequence. The private sector is the main creator 
of wealth, and the state sector a consumer.
Money is merely a medium of exchange for goods and services 
and should therefore relate to and refl ect productivity. When I 
visited post-communist Russia and Czechoslovakia in 1991, the 
joke doing the rounds was that the workers pretended to work 
and the government pretended to pay them. Thus, in my opinion, 
when we talk about meaningful job creation we should focus 
solely on the private sector.
This begs the question as to which policies should apply to 
private enterprises. Which ones will enhance their productivity 
and which retard it? What should be done?
Let’s examine the principles that underlie the simplest of ex-
changes between two parties. Simple transactions can serve as an 
example and a microcosm of the bigger economy. They should 
inform policymakers as to which policies are most compatible 
with human nature, because the human factor is pivotal in the 
economic context. Start far back in time with a hypothetical cave-
man who is skilled at hunting but inexpert at making a weapon 
for hunting. Our caveman meets a skilled weapon maker and 
agrees to exchange part of his quarry for a weapon. Both men 
come away from the transaction feeling they have profi ted by 
getting in return something of greater value to them than what 
they gave away. Sooner or later, the weapon maker fi nds that if 
he specializes in weapon making, instead of going hunting, he 
can barter the weapons for fur, meat, ivory and so on. He is in 
business. He prospers and all his customers prosper because they 
are now using more effi  cient hunting weapons.
What is important to note about this scenario is that there 

98
is no force or fraud involved. No third-party involvement. No 
party that prescribes the rules of conducting business. The rules 
that the transacting parties uphold come about spontaneously. 
They comply as though with a natural order. This is what the 
late economist Friedrich Hayek referred to as the spontaneous 
order, and part of this order is that private property is recipro-
cally respected.
From this simple example, one can extrapolate that in the 
modern day economy, in a country where the government re-
frains from interfering in the economic arena, there will be high 
economic growth and concomitant socio-economic benefi ts. In 
other words, if a government promotes the economic freedom of 
producers and consumers and allows them to engage in transac-
tions that do not entail force or fraud, the country, and its people, 
will prosper. This is a sure way to reduce unemployment, improve 
education, and create better health care.
These fundamental principles apply to all economies, regardless 
of the cultural context within which each has taken shape. The 
persistent “work ethic” myth warrants critical attention. This 
view implicitly reinforces national or ethnic group stereotypes 
in terms of having or lacking a work ethic, the logical extension 
of which is that the poor are poor because they lack a work ethic 
and the rich are more successful because they do have one—a very 
dangerous view to uphold, especially when it coincides with race.
Before the Berlin Wall came crashing down in 1989, West 
Germany was the second biggest economy in the world while East 
Germany was an economic disaster zone. These were the same 
people, same culture, and the same families in some cases before 
they were divided aft er World War II. A similar judgment can 
be made with regard to the two Koreas: the South an economic 
giant and the North an economic abyss that continues to absorb 
foreign aid. Again, same people, same culture. And what of the 
contrast between Mainland China and Hong Kong, before 1992 
when Deng Xiaoping ushered in radical free market reforms aft er 
announcing that it was glorious to be rich and that it didn’t mat-
ter if the cat was black or white so long as it caught mice? Yet 
again, same people, same culture, and the same telltale economic 

99
discrepancies. The diff erence was caused, every time, by the degree 
of freedom allowed to the economic actors.
Since 1992, thanks to the most radical free market reforms 
seen in recent years, China now looms large as the third big-
gest economy in the world. And sadly, in contrast, in the words 
of Bertel Schmitt, “the United States picked up that socialist 
economic playbook that Deng Xiaoping was smart enough to 
throw away.”
The legislative and institutional framework within which 
economic activity takes place, and, in particular, the degree of 
regulation to which an economy is subjected, is the determinant of 
how wealthy a country and its inhabitants can be. In other words 
the degree to which governments allow individuals to exercise 
economic freedom will determine their economic outcome.
These words in 1986 by Professor Walter Williams, author 
of the thought-provoking book South Afr ica’s War Against 
Capitalism, sum it all up: “ . . . the solution to South Africa’s 
problems is not special programs, it’s not affi  rmative action, it’s 
not handouts, and it’s not welfare. It is freedom. Because if you 
look around the world and you look for rich people, diverse 
people who have the ability to get along fairly well, you are also 
looking at a society where there are relatively large amounts of 
individual freedom.”


Section IV
Globalizing Capitalism


103
Global Capitalism and Justice
By June Arunga
In this essay, June Arunga calls for fr ee-market capitalism in Afr ica 
and confr onts those who oppose allowing Afr icans to engage in the 
world economy through fr eedom of trade. Her view is systematically 
supportive of fr ee trade, as she criticizes those who support designated 
“trade zones” that off er special privileges (and sometimes violations 
of the property rights of local people) to foreign investors or privi-
leged local elites and deny others fr eedom to trade or invest on an 
equal basis. She calls for respect for the property rights of Afr ican 
people and for fr ee-market capitalism undistorted by privileges and 
monopoly powers. 
June Arunga is a businesswoman and fi lm producer fr om Kenya. 
She is the founder and CEO of Open Quest Media LLC and has 
worked with several telecom ventures in Afr ica. She made two BBC 
documentaries about Afr ica, The Devil’s Footpath, which docu-
ments her six-week, 5,000-mile trek fr om Cairo to Cape Town, 
and Who’s to Blame?, which features a debate/dialogue between 
Arunga and former Ghanaian president Jerry Rawlings. She writes 
for Afr icanLiberty.org and co-authored The Cell Phone Revolution 
in Kenya. Arunga received her law degree fr om the University of 
Buckingham in the United Kingdom.
My experience is that the great bulk—maybe 90 percent—of 
disagreements stem from lack of information on one side or the 
other. That’s especially important when people move from one 
cultural space to another. We are seeing a great surge of trade in 
Africa, among Africans, aft er a long period of isolation from each 
other due to protectionism, nationalism, and misunderstanding. 
I think we should celebrate that growth of trade. Some fear the 
increase of trade; I think that they need more information. 
Globalization is happening and I think we should welcome it. 
It has created transfers of skills, access to technology from around 
the world, and much more. However, many have been kept out. 

104
The question is why? I met the Swedish economist Johan Norberg, 
author of the eye-opening book In Defense of Global Capitalism, 
in 2002, and I was struck by how he dealt with information. He 
did not simply dismiss the opponents of free trade. Rather, he 
listened to them, considered their viewpoints, and verifi ed their 
information. His interest in factual information is what initially 
led him to embrace capitalism. 
I was also struck by how he took the perspective of the people 
most aff ected: the poor. Norberg has traveled the world asking 
questions. He doesn’t tell people what they ought to think. He asks 
them what they think. By asking the poor who have been given 
opportunities to engage in trade—either as traders or merchants 
or as employees of enterprises involved in international trade—he 
revealed the facts that the offi  cial pontifi cators missed. Did that 
job at a new factory make your life better or worse? Did your fi rst 
cell phone make your life better or worse? Has your income gone 
up or down? How do you travel: by foot, by bicycle, by motorbike, 
by car? Do you prefer to ride a motorbike or to walk? Norberg 
insists on looking at the facts on the ground. He asks the people 
involved what they think and whether free trade has improved 
their lives. He wants to hear individual perspectives.
We should ask what our governments are doing to us, not just 
for us. Our own governments are hurting us: they steal from us, 
they stop us from trading, and they keep the poor down. Local 
investors are not allowed to compete because of the lack of the 
rule of law in low-income countries. Maybe that’s why they’re 
low-income countries—because the people are not respected by 
their own governments. 
Many governments of poor countries are focused on attracting 
“foreign investors,” but they don’t let their own people into the 
market. Opening up the market and competition to local people 
is not on their agendas. Local people have the insight, the under-
standing, and the “local knowledge.” But our own governments 
in Africa keep their own people out of the market in favor of 
foreign or local special interest groups. 
For example, heavy restrictions that stifl e local competition in 
services, such as banking and water provision, ignore the abilities 
of our own people to use their local knowledge of technology, 

105
preferences, and infrastructure. It’s not true “globalization” to give 
special favors to “foreign investors” when the locals are swept away 
and not allowed to compete. If the “special economic zones” that 
governments set up to attract “foreign investors” are a good idea, 
why can’t the bulk of our people benefi t from them? Why are 
they considered special zones of privilege, rather than a part of 
the freedom of trade for everyone? Freedom of trade should be 
about free competition to serve the people, not special privileges 
for local elites who don’t want competition, or foreign investors 
who get special audiences with ministers.
It’s not “free trade” when international companies can get spe-
cial favors from governments and it’s not “free trade” when local 
fi rms are blocked by their own government from the market. Free 
trade requires the rule of law for all and freedom for all to engage 
in the most natural of actions: voluntary exchange.
Our prosperity as Africans won’t come from foreign aid or 
easy money. We’ve had plenty of that in Africa, but it hasn’t had 
a positive impact on the lives of the poor. That kind of “aid” 
spawns corruption and undermines the rule of law. It comes tied 
to purchasing services from specifi c people in the countries that 
are sending the aid. That’s distortive of trade relations. But worst 
of all, “aid” disconnects governments from their own people, 
because the people who are paying the bills are not in Africa, but 
in Paris, Washington, or Brussels.
Trade can be distorted and made unfree by local elites who 
get the minister’s ear through, well, you know how. Trade can be 
distorted by granting monopoly rights to the exclusion of both 
local and foreign competitors. Furthermore, trade is distorted 
and made unfree when foreign elites get monopoly rights from 
local governments through tied-aid deals in collusion with their 
own governments: deals that exclude both local and foreign 
competitors since the deal is fi xed. All of these regulations restrict 
our markets and our freedom. We are left  purchasing goods and 
services that may not be of the highest quality or the best price, 
because we don’t have freedom of choice. That lack of freedom 
keeps us down and perpetuates poverty.
We aren’t just robbed of lower prices and better quality, though. 
We are robbed of the opportunity to innovate, to make use of 

106
our minds, to improve our situations through our own energy 
and intellect. In the long run, that is the greater crime against 
us. Protectionism and privilege perpetuate not only economic 
bankruptcy, but stagnation of intellect, courage, character, will, 
determination, and faith in ourselves.
What we need is information. We need to talk to people on 
the ground. We need to check the same facts. In most cases, 
they’re not secrets, but few even bother to look. The evidence 
is overwhelming that free-market capitalism, freedom of trade, 
and equal rights under the rule of law create prosperity for the 
masses of people. 
What we need is free-market capitalism that creates the space 
for us to realize our potential. The Peruvian economist Hernando 
de Soto, in his book The Mystery of Capital, shows how poor 
people can convert “dead capital” into “living capital” to improve 
their lives. Lack of capital is not inevitable. We in Africa have so 
much capital, but most of it cannot be put to use to improve our 
lives. It’s “dead.” We need to improve our property rights to make 
our abundant capital the “living capital” that generates life. We 
need property, that is, we need our rights to be respected. We 
need equality before the law. We need free-market capitalism. 

107
Human Betterment through Globalization 
By Vernon Smith
In this essay, economist and Nobel Laureate Vernon Smith traces the 
growth of human wealth through the spread of markets and explains 
why global capitalism generates human betterment.
Vernon Smith is professor of economics at Chapman University 
in California and a pioneer in the emerging fi eld of “experimental 
economics.” His research has focused on commodity and capital mar-
kets, the emergence of asset bubbles, business cycles, fi nance, natural 
resource economics, and the growth of market institutions. In 2002 
he shared the Nobel Prize in Economics for “having established 
laboratory experiments as a tool in empirical economic analysis, 
especially in the study of alternative market mechanisms.” He 
has published widely in academic journals of economics, game 
theory, and risk, and is the author of  Papers in Experimental 
Economics  and  Bargaining and Market Behavior: Essays in 
Experimental Economics. Smith is also world renowned as a teacher 
and has developed programs to utilize experimental economics not 
only to generate new insights into economic processes, but also to 
teach the principles of economics.
This essay is excerpted fr om a speech delivered at “Evenings at 
FEE42” in September 2005.
My message today is an optimistic one. It is about exchange and 
markets, which allow us to engage in task and knowledge spe-
cialization. It is this specialization that is the secret of all wealth 
creation and the only source of sustainable human betterment. 
This is the essence of globalization.
The challenge is that we all function simultaneously in two 
overlapping worlds of exchange. First, we live in a world of per-
sonal, social exchange based on reciprocity and shared norms 
in small groups, families, and communities. The phrase “I owe 
you one” is a human universal across many languages in which 
people voluntarily acknowledge indebtedness for a favor. From 

108
primitive times, personal exchange allowed specialization of tasks 
(hunting, gathering, and tool making) and laid the basis for 
enhanced productivity and welfare. This division of labor made 
it possible for early men to migrate all over the world. Thus, 
specialization started globalization long before the emergence 
of formal markets.
Second, we live in a world of impersonal market exchange where 
communication and cooperation gradually developed through 
long-distance trade between strangers. In acts of personal exchange 
we usually intend to do good for others. In the marketplace this 
perception is oft en lost as each of us tends to focus on our own 
personal gain. However, our controlled laboratory experiments 
demonstrate that the same individuals who go out of their way to 
cooperate in personal exchange strive to maximize their own gain 
in a larger market. Without intending to do so, in their market 
transactions they also maximize the joint benefi t received by the 
group. Why? Because of property rights. In personal exchange 
the governing rules emerge by voluntary consent of the parties. In 
impersonal market exchange, the governing rules—such as prop-
erty rights, which prohibit taking without giving in return—are 
encoded in the institutional framework. Hence the two worlds 
of exchange function in a similar way: you have to give in order 
to receive.
The Foundation of Prosperity
Commodity and service markets, which are the foundation of 
wealth creation, determine the extent of specialization. In orga-
nized markets, producers experience relatively predictable costs of 
production, and consumers rely on a relatively predictable supply 
of valued goods. These constantly repeated market activities are 
incredibly effi  cient, even in very complex market relationships 
with multiple commodities being traded.
We have also discovered through our market experiments that 
people generally deny that any kind of model can predict their 
fi nal trading prices and the volume of goods they will buy and 
sell. In fact, market effi  ciency does not require a large number of 
participants, complete information, economic understanding, or 

109
any particular sophistication. Aft er all, people were trading in 
markets long before there existed any economists to study the 
market process. All you have to know is when you are making 
more money or less money and whether you have a chance to 
modify your actions.
The hallmark of commodity and service markets is diversity—
a diversity of tastes, human skills, knowledge, natural resources, 
soil, and climate. But diversity without freedom to exchange 
implies poverty. No human being, even if abundantly endowed 
with a single skill or a single resource, can prosper without trade. 
Through free markets we depend on others whom we do not 
know, recognize, or even understand. Without markets we would 
indeed be poor, miserable, brutish, and ignorant.
Markets require consensual enforcement of the rules of social 
interaction and economic exchange. No one has said it better 
than David Hume over 250 years ago—there are just three laws 
of nature: the right of possession, transference by consent, and 
the performance of promises. These are the ultimate foundations 
of order that make possible markets and prosperity.
Hume’s laws of nature derive from the ancient commandments: 
thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s posses-
sions, and thou shalt not bear false witness. The “stealing” game 
consumes wealth and discourages its reproduction. Coveting the 
property of others invites a coercive state to redistribute wealth, 
thus endangering incentives to produce tomorrow’s harvest. 
Bearing false witness undermines community, management cred-
ibility, investor trust, long-term profi tability, and the personal 
exchanges that are most humanizing.
Only Markets Deliver the Goods
Economic development is linked with free economic and political 
systems nurtured by the rule of law and private property rights. 
Strong centrally planned regimes, wherever attempted, have failed 
to deliver the goods. There are, however, plenty of examples of 
both big and small countries (from China to New Zealand and 
Ireland) where governments have removed at least some barriers 
to economic freedom. These countries have witnessed remarkable 

110
economic growth by simply letting people pursue their own 
economic betterment.
China has moved considerably in the direction of economic 
freedom. Just over a year ago China revised its constitution to 
allow people to own, buy, and sell private property. Why? One 
of the problems the Chinese government encountered was that 
people were buying and selling property even though those 
transactions were not recognized by the government. This invited 
local offi  cials to collect from those who were breaking the law by 
trading. By recognizing property rights, the central government 
is trying to undercut the source of power that supports local 
bureaucratic corruption, which is very hard to centrally monitor 
and control. This constitutional change, as I see it, is a practical 
means to limit rampant government corruption and political 
interference with economic development.
Though this change has not resulted from any political pre-
disposition for liberty, it may very well pave the way toward a 
freer society. The immediate benefi ts are already there: 276 of the 
Fortune 500 companies are currently investing in a huge R&D 
park near Beijing, based on very favorable 50-year lease terms 
from the Chinese government.
The case of Ireland illustrates the principle that you don’t 
have to be a big country to grow wealthy through liberalizing 
government economic policy. In the past, Ireland was a major 
exporter of people. This worked to the advantage of the United 
States and Great Britain, who received many bright Irish immi-
grants fl eeing the stultifying life of their homeland. Only two 
decades ago Ireland was mired in third-world poverty, but has 
now surpassed its former colonial master in income per capita, 
becoming a committed European player. According to World 
Bank statistics, Ireland’s growth rate of Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) jumped from 3.2 percent in the 1980s to 7.8 percent in 
the 1990s. Ireland recently was the eighth highest in GDP per 
capita in the world, while the United Kingdom was fi ft eenth. By 
fostering direct foreign investment (including venture capital) and 
promoting fi nancial services and information technology, Ireland 
has experienced a formidable brain-drain reversal—young people 
are coming back home.

111
These young people are returning because of new opportuni-
ties made possible by expansion of economic freedom in their 
homeland. They are examples of “can-do” knowledge-based 
entrepreneurs who are creating wealth and human betterment 
not only for their native country, but also for the United States 
and all other countries around the world. These people’s stories 
demonstrate how bad government policies can be changed to 
create new economic opportunities that can dramatically reverse 
a country’s brain drain.
We Have Nothing to Fear
An essential part of the process of change, growth, and eco-
nomic betterment is to allow yesterday’s jobs to follow the path 
of yesterday’s technology. Preventing domestic companies from 
outsourcing will not stop their foreign competitors from doing so. 
Through outsourcing, foreign competitors will be able to lower 
their costs, use the savings to lower prices and upgrade technol-
ogy, and thus gain a big advantage in the market.
One of the best-known examples of outsourcing was the New 
England textile industry’s move to the South aft er World War II 
in response to lower wages in the Southern states. (As was to be 
expected, this raised wages in the South, and the industry eventu-
ally had to move on to lower-cost sources in Asia.)
But the jobs did not vanish in New England. The textile busi-
ness was replaced by high-tech industries: electronic information 
and biotechnology. This resulted in huge net gains to New 
England even though it lost what had once been an important 
industry. In 1965 Warren Buff ett gained control of Berkshire-
Hathaway, one of those fading textile makers in Massachusetts. 
He used the company’s large but declining cash fl ow as a launch 
pad for reinvesting the money in a host of undervalued business 
ventures. They became famously successful, and 40 years later 
Buff ett’s company has a market capitalization of $113 billion. 
The same transition is occurring today with K-Mart and Sears 
Roebuck. Nothing is forever: as old businesses decline, their 
resources are diverted to new ones.
The National Bureau of Economic Research has just reported 

112
a new study of domestic and foreign investment by U.S. multina-
tional corporations. The study demonstrated that for every dollar 
invested in a foreign country, they invest three and a half dollars 
in the United States. This proves that there is a complementary 
relationship between foreign and domestic investment: when one 
increases, the other increases as well. McKinsey and Company 
estimates that for every dollar U.S. companies outsource to India, 
$1.14 accrues to the benefi t of the United States. About half of 
this benefi t is returned to investors and customers and most of 
the remainder is spent on new jobs that have been created. By 
contrast, in Germany every Euro invested abroad only generates 
an 80 percent benefi t to the domestic economy, mainly because 
the reemployment rate of displaced German workers is so much 
lower due to the vast number of government regulations.
I believe that as long as the United States remains number one 
on the world innovation index, we have nothing to fear from out-
sourcing and much to fear if our politicians succeed in opposing 
it. According to the Institute for International Economics, more 
than one hundred and fi ft een thousand higher-paying computer 
soft ware jobs were created in 1999–2003, while seventy thousand 
jobs were eliminated due to outsourcing. Similarly in the service 
sector twelve million new jobs were being created while ten mil-
lion old jobs were being replaced. This phenomenon of rapid 
technological change and the replacement of old jobs with new 
ones is what economic development is all about.
By outsourcing to foreign countries, American businesses 
save money that enables them to invest in new technologies and 
new jobs in order to remain competitive in the world market. 
Unfortunately, we cannot enjoy the benefi ts without incurring 
the pain of transition. Change is certainly painful. It is painful for 
those who lose their jobs and must seek new careers. It is painful 
for those who risk investment in new technologies and lose. But 
the benefi ts captured by winners generate great new wealth for 
the economy as a whole. These benefi ts, in turn, are consolidated 
across the market through the discovery process and competitive 
learning experience.
Globalization is not new. It is a modern word describing 
an ancient human movement, a word for mankind’s search for 

113
betterment through exchange and the worldwide expansion of 
specialization. It is a peaceful word. In the wise pronouncement 
of the great French economist Frederic Bastiat, if goods don’t 
cross borders, soldiers will.

114
The Culture of Liberty 
By Mario Vargas Llosa
In this essay, the novelist and Nobel Laureate in Literature Mario 
Vargas Llosa dispels fears of global capitalism contaminating or 
eroding cultures and argues that notions of “collective identity” 
are dehumanizing and that identity springs fr om the “capacity of 
human beings to resist these infl uences and counter them with fr ee 
acts of their own invention.”
Mario Vargas Llosa is a world-renowned novelist and public 
intellectual. In 2010 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature 
“for his cartography of structures of power and his trenchant images 
of the individual’s resistance, revolt, and defeat.” He is the author 
of such works of fi ction as The Feast of the Goat, The War of the 
End of the World, Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter, The Bad Girl, 
The Real Life of Alejandro Mayta, and many others. 
This essay is reprinted by permission of the author fr om the 
January 1, 2001, issue of Foreign Policy.
The most eff ective attacks against globalization are usually not 
those related to economics. Instead, they are social, ethical, and, 
above all, cultural. These arguments surfaced amid the tumult 
of Seattle in 1999 and have resonated more recently in Davos, 
Bangkok, and Prague. They say this:
The disappearance of national borders and the establishment 
of a world interconnected by markets will deal a deathblow to 
regional and national cultures and to the traditions, customs, 
myths, and mores that determine each country or region’s 
cultural identity. Since most of the world is incapable of 
resisting the invasion of cultural products from developed 
countries—or, more to the point, from the superpower, the 
United States—that inevitably trails the great transnational 
corporations, North American culture will ultimately impose 
itself, standardizing the world and annihilating its rich flora 

115
of diverse cultures. In this manner, all other peoples, and not 
just the small and weak ones, will lose their identity, their 
soul, and will become no more than twenty-first-century 
colonies—zombies or caricatures modeled after the cultural 
norms of a new imperialism that, in addition to ruling over 
the planet with its capital, military might, and scientific 
knowledge, will impose on others its language and its ways 
of thinking, believing, enjoying, and dreaming.
This nightmare or negative utopia of a world that, thanks to 
globalization, is losing its linguistic and cultural diversity and 
is being culturally appropriated by the United States, is not the 
exclusive domain of left -wing politicians nostalgic for Marx, Mao, 
or Che Guevara. This delirium of persecution—spurred by hatred 
and rancor toward the North American giant—is also apparent 
in developed countries and nations of high culture and is shared 
among political sectors of the left , center, and right.
The most notorious case is that of France, where we see frequent 
government campaigns in defense of a French “cultural identity” 
supposedly threatened by globalization. A vast array of intellectu-
als and politicians is alarmed by the possibility that the soil that 
produced Montaigne, Descartes, Racine, and Baudelaire—and a 
country that was long the arbiter of fashion in clothing, thought, 
art, dining, and in all domains of the spirit—can be invaded by 
McDonald’s, Pizza Hut, Kentucky Fried Chicken, rock, rap, 
Hollywood movies, blue jeans, sneakers, and T-shirts. This fear 
has resulted, for instance, in massive French subsidies for the local 
fi lm industry and demands for quotas requiring theaters to show 
a certain number of national fi lms and limit the importation 
of movies from the United States. This fear is also the reason 
why municipalities issued severe directives penalizing with high 
fi nes any publicity announcements that littered with Anglicisms 
the language of Molière. (Although, judging by the view of a 
pedestrian on the streets of Paris, the directives were not quite 
respected.) This is the reason why José Bové, the farmer-cum-
crusader against la malbouff e (lousy food), has become no less 
than a popular hero in France. And with his recent sentencing 
to three months in prison, his popularity has likely increased.

116
Even though I believe this cultural argument against global-
ization is unacceptable, we should recognize that deep within it 
lies an unquestionable truth. This century, the world in which 
we will live will be less picturesque and imbued with less local 
color than the one we left  behind. The festivals, attire, customs, 
ceremonies, rites, and beliefs that in the past gave humanity its 
folkloric and ethnological variety are progressively disappearing 
or confi ning themselves to minority sectors, while the bulk of 
society abandons them and adopts others more suited to the 
reality of our time. All countries of the earth experience this 
process, some more quickly than others, but it is not due to 
globalization. Rather, it is due to modernization, of which the 
former is eff ect, not cause. It is possible to lament, certainly, that 
this process occurs, and to feel nostalgia for the eclipse of the past 
ways of life that, particularly from our comfortable vantage point 
of the present, seem full of amusement, originality, and color. 
But this process is unavoidable. Totalitarian regimes in countries 
like Cuba or North Korea, fearful that any opening will destroy 
them, close themselves off  and issue all types of prohibitions and 
censures against modernity. But even they are unable to impede 
modernity’s slow infi ltration and its gradual undermining of their 
so-called cultural identity. In theory, perhaps, a country could 
keep this identity, but only if—like certain remote tribes in Africa 
or the Amazon—it decides to live in total isolation, cutting off  
all exchange with other nations and practicing self-suffi  ciency. A 
cultural identity preserved in this form would take that society 
back to prehistoric standards of living.
It is true that modernization makes many forms of traditional 
life disappear. But at the same time, it opens opportunities and 
constitutes an important step forward for a society as a whole. 
That is why, when given the option to choose freely, peoples, 
sometimes counter to what their leaders or intellectual tradi-
tionalists would like, opt for modernization without the slightest 
ambiguity.
The allegations against globalization and in favor of cultural 
identity reveal a static conception of culture that has no historical 
basis. Which cultures have ever remained identical and unchanged 
over time? To fi nd them we must search among the small and 

117
primitive magical-religious communities that live in caves, worship 
thunder and beasts, and, due to their primitivism, are increasingly 
vulnerable to exploitation and extermination. All other cultures, 
in particular those that have the right to be called modern and 
alive, have evolved to the point that they are but a remote refl ec-
tion of what they were just two or three generations before. This 
evolution is easily apparent in countries like France, Spain, and 
England, where the changes over the last half century have been 
so spectacular and profound that a Marcel Proust, a Federico 
García Lorca, or a Virginia Woolf would hardly recognize today 
the societies in which they were born— the societies their works 
helped so much to renew.
The notion of “cultural identity” is dangerous. From a social 
point of view, it represents merely a doubtful, artifi cial concept, 
but from a political perspective it threatens humanity’s most pre-
cious achievement: freedom. I do not deny that people who speak 
the same language, were born and live in the same territory, face 
the same problems, and practice the same religions and customs 
have common characteristics. But that collective denominator 
can never fully defi ne each one of them, and it only abolishes 
or relegates to a disdainful secondary plane the sum of unique 
attributes and traits that diff erentiates one member of the group 
from the others. The concept of identity, when not employed 
on an exclusively individual scale, is inherently reductionist and 
dehumanizing, a collectivist and ideological abstraction of all 
that is original and creative in the human being, of all that has 
not been imposed by inheritance, geography, or social pressure. 
Rather, true identity springs from the capacity of human beings 
to resist these infl uences and counter them with free acts of their 
own invention.
The notion of “collective identity” is an ideological fi ction 
and the foundation of nationalism. For many ethnologists and 
anthropologists, collective identity does not represent the truth 
even among the most archaic communities. Common practices 
and customs may be crucial to the defense of a group, but the 
margin of initiative and creativity among its members to emanci-
pate themselves from the group is invariably large, and individual 
diff erences prevail over collective traits when individuals are 

118
examined on their own terms, and not as mere peripheral elements 
of collectivity. Globalization extends radically to all citizens of 
this planet the possibility to construct their individual cultural 
identities through voluntary action, according to their preferences 
and intimate motivations. Now, citizens are not always obligated, 
as in the past and in many places in the present, to respect an 
identity that traps them in a concentration camp from which there 
is no escape—the identity that is imposed on them through the 
language, nation, church, and customs of the place where they 
were born. In this sense, globalization must be welcomed because 
it notably expands the horizons of individual liberty.
One Continent’s Two Histories
Perhaps Latin America is the best example of the artifi ce and 
absurdity of trying to establish collective identities. What might 
be Latin America’s cultural identity? What would be included in 
a coherent collection of beliefs, customs, traditions, practices, and 
mythologies that endows this region with a singular personality, 
unique and nontransferable? Our history has been forged in 
intellectual polemics—some ferocious— seeking to answer this 
question. The most celebrated was the one that, beginning in the 
early twentieth century, pitted Hispanists against indigenists and 
reverberated across the continent.
For Hispanists like José de la Riva Agüero, Victor Andrés 
Belaúnde, and Francisco García Calderón—Latin America was 
born when, thanks to the Discovery and the Conquest, it 
joined with the Spanish and Portuguese languages and, adopting 
Christianity, came to form part of Western civilization. Hispanists 
did not belittle pre-Hispanic cultures, but considered that these 
constituted but a layer—and not the primary one—of the social 
and historical reality that only completed its nature and personal-
ity thanks to the vivifying infl uence of the West.
Indigenists, on the other hand, rejected with moral indig-
nation the alleged benefi ts that Europeans brought to Latin 
America. For them, our identity fi nds its roots and its soul in 
pre-Hispanic cultures and civilizations, whose development and 
modernization were brutally stunted by violence and subjected 

119
to censure, repression, and marginalization not only during 
the three colonial centuries but also later, aft er the advent of 
republicanism. According to indigenist thinkers, the authentic 
“American expression” (to use the title of a book by José Lezama 
Lima) resides in all the cultural manifestations—from the native 
languages to the beliefs, rites, arts, and popular mores—that 
resisted Western cultural oppression and endured to our days. A 
distinguished historian of this vein, the Peruvian Luis E. Valcárcel, 
even affi  rmed that the churches, convents, and other monuments 
of colonial architecture should be burned since they represented 
the “Anti-Peru.” They were impostors, a negation of the pristine 
American identity that could only be of exclusively indigenous 
roots. And one of Latin America’s most original novelists, José 
María Arguedas, narrated, in stories of great delicacy and vibrant 
moral protest, the epic of the survival of the Quechua culture 
in the Andean world, despite the suff ocating and distortionary 
presence of the West.
Hispanicism and indigenism produced excellent historical 
essays and highly creative works of fi ction, but, judged from 
our current perspective, both doctrines seem equally sectarian, 
reductionist, and false. Neither is capable of fi tting the expansive 
diversity of Latin America into its ideological straitjacket, and 
both smack of racism. Who would dare claim in our day that 
only what is “Hispanic” or “Indian” legitimately represents Latin 
America? Nevertheless, eff orts to forge and isolate our distinct 
“cultural identity” continue today with a political and intellectual 
zeal deserving of worthier causes. Seeking to impose a cultural 
identity on a people is equivalent to locking them in a prison and 
denying them the most precious of liberties—that of choosing 
what, how, and who they want to be. Latin America has not one 
but many cultural identities; no one of them can claim more 
legitimacy or purity than the others. 
Of course, Latin America embodies the pre-Hispanic world 
and its cultures, which, in Mexico, Guatemala, and the Andean 
countries, still exert so much social force. But Latin America is also 
a vast swarm of Spanish and Portuguese speakers with a tradition 
of fi ve centuries behind them whose presence and actions have 
been decisive in giving the continent its current features. And is 

120
not Latin America also something of Africa, which arrived on our 
shores together with Europe? Has not the African presence indel-
ibly marked our skin, our music, our idiosyncrasies, our society? 
The cultural, ethnic, and social ingredients that make up Latin 
America link us to almost all the regions and cultures of the world. 
We have so many cultural identities that it is like not having one 
at all. This reality is, contrary to what nationalists believe, our 
greatest treasure. It is also an excellent credential that enables us 
to feel like full-fl edged citizens in our globalized world.
Local Voices, Global Reach
The fear of Americanization of the planet is more ideological 
paranoia than reality. There is no doubt, of course, that with 
globalization, English has become the general language of our 
time, as was Latin in the Middle Ages. And it will continue its 
ascent, since it is an indispensable instrument for international 
transactions and communication. But does this mean that English 
necessarily develops at the expense of the other great languages? 
Absolutely not. In fact, the opposite is true. The vanishing of 
borders and an increasingly interdependent world have created 
incentives for new generations to learn and assimilate to other 
cultures, not merely as a hobby but also out of necessity, since 
the ability to speak several languages and navigate comfortably 
in diff erent cultures has become crucial for professional success. 
Consider the case of Spanish. Half a century ago, Spanish speakers 
were an inward-looking community; we projected ourselves in 
only very limited ways beyond our traditional linguistic confi nes. 
Today, Spanish is dynamic and thriving, gaining beachheads or 
even vast landholdings on all fi ve continents. The fact that there 
are some twenty-fi ve to thirty million Spanish speakers in the 
United States today explains why the two recent U.S. presidential 
candidates, Texas Governor George W. Bush and Vice President 
Al Gore, campaigned not only in English but also in Spanish.
How many millions of young men and women around the 
globe have responded to the challenges of globalization by learn-
ing Japanese, German, Mandarin, Cantonese, Russian, or French? 
Fortunately, this tendency will only increase in the coming years. 

121
That is why the best defense of our own cultures and languages 
is to promote them vigorously throughout this new world, not 
to persist in the naïve pretense of vaccinating them against the 
menace of English. Those who propose such remedies speak much 
about culture, but they tend to be ignorant people who mask their 
true vocation: nationalism. And if there is anything at odds with 
the universalist propensities of culture, it is the parochial, exclu-
sionary, and confused vision that nationalist perspectives try to 
impose on cultural life. The most admirable lesson that cultures 
teach us is that they need not be protected by bureaucrats or 
commissars, or confi ned behind iron bars, or isolated by customs 
services in order to remain alive and exuberant; to the contrary, 
such eff orts would only wither or even trivialize culture. Cultures 
must live freely, constantly jousting with diff erent cultures. This 
renovates and renews them, allowing them to evolve and adapt to 
the continuous fl ow of life. In antiquity, Latin did not kill Greek; 
to the contrary, the artistic originality and intellectual depth of 
Hellenic culture permeated Roman civilization and, through it, 
the poems of Homer and the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle 
reached the entire world. Globalization will not make local cul-
tures disappear; in a framework of worldwide openness, all that 
is valuable and worthy of survival in local cultures will fi nd fertile 
ground in which to bloom.
This is happening in Europe, everywhere. Especially notewor-
thy is Spain, where regional cultures are reemerging with special 
vigor. During the dictatorship of General Francisco Franco, 
regional cultures were repressed and condemned to a clandes-
tine existence. But with the return of democracy, Spain’s rich 
cultural diversity was unleashed and allowed to develop freely. 
In the country’s regime of autonomies, local cultures have had an 
extraordinary boom, particularly in Catalonia, Galicia, and the 
Basque country, but also in the rest of Spain. Of course, we must 
not confuse this regional cultural rebirth, which is positive and 
enriching, with the phenomenon of nationalism, which poses 
serious threats to the culture of liberty.
In his celebrated 1948 essay “Notes Towards the Defi nition of 
Culture,” T.S. Eliot predicted that in the future, humanity would 
experience a renaissance of local and regional cultures. At the time, 

122
his prophecy seemed quite daring. However, globalization will 
likely make it a reality in the twenty-fi rst century, and we must be 
happy about this. A rebirth of small, local cultures will give back 
to humanity that rich multiplicity of behavior and expressions that 
the nation-state annihilated in order to create so-called national 
cultural identities toward the end of the eighteenth, and particu-
larly in the nineteenth, century. (This fact is easily forgotten, or 
we attempt to forget it because of its grave moral connotations.) 
National cultures were oft en forged in blood and fi re, prohibit-
ing the teaching or publication of vernacular languages or the 
practice of religions and customs that dissented from those the 
nation-state considered ideal. In this way, in many countries of 
the world, the nation-state forcibly imposed a dominant culture 
upon local ones that were repressed and abolished from offi  cial life. 
But, contrary to the warnings of those who fear globalization, it 
is not easy to completely erase cultures—however small they may 
be—if behind them is a rich tradition and people who practice 
them, even if in secret. And today, thanks to the weakening of the 
nation-state, we are seeing forgotten, marginalized, and silenced 
local cultures reemerging and displaying dynamic signs of life in 
the great concert of this globalized planet.

123
A Little Further Reading for Fun and Profit 
(and Better School Papers)
The literature on the morality of capitalism is vast. Most of it is 
rubbish. Here are a few readable books that you should fi nd helpful 
in understanding the issues surrounding capitalism. The list could 
be a lot longer, but many other books and essays are already cited 
in the essays in The Morality of Capitalism, including the works 
of Smith, Mises, Hayek, Rand, McCloskey, and other defenders of 
fr ee-market capitalism. So don’t be afr aid to track down endnoted 
items in the essays in this book. That said, the books listed below 
alphabetically by name of author or editor should provide some 
useful mental exercise.
—Tom G. Palmer
The Morals of Markets and Related Essays, by H. B. Acton 
(Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1993). The British philosopher H. 
B. Acton wrote clearly and sensibly about profi t, competition, 
individualism and collectivism, planning, and many other topics. 
Morals and Markets: An Evolutionary Account of the Modern 
World, by Daniel Friedman (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2008). The author off ers insights into the parallel evolution of 
markets and morality and makes some controversial suggestions 
for improving both.
The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism, by F. A. Hayek 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988). Hayek received the 
Nobel Prize in economic science, but was no “mere economist.” 
This short book—his last—draws together many of his research 
interests to present a sweeping case for free-market capitalism.
The Ethics of Redistribution, by Bertrand de Jouvenel (Indianapolis: 
Liberty Fund, 1990). This very short book is based on lectures 
given at Cambridge University by the famous French political 

124
scientist. The chapters are short and concise and examine the 
ethical foundations and implications of attempts to redistribute 
income to achieve greater income equality. 
Discovery and the Capitalist Process, by Israel Kirzner (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1985). An “Austrian” economist 
examines capitalism, interventionism, and socialism through the 
lens of entrepreneurship, and has a lot of interesting things to say 
about alertness, innovation, incentives, and profi ts.
The Ethics of the Market, by John Meadowcraft  (New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005). A very short overview of issues raised 
by a variety of enemies of free-market capitalism.
The Origins of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution of 
Cooperation, by Matt Ridley (New York: Viking, 1997). Ridley 
is a zoologist and professional science writer who has applied 
his intellect to understanding human behavior through the lens 
of evolutionary biology. His insights into virtue, property, and 
trade are helpful and fun to read.
The Economics of Rights, Co-operation, and Welfare, by Robert 
Sugden (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005). The author off ers 
a very accessible look at the morality of property and exchange 
through the lens of game theory. The mathematics is very basic 
(really) and helps us to understand the great insights of the phi-
losopher David Hume. 
Moral Markets: The Critical Role of Values in the Economy, ed. 
by Paul J. Zak (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008). 
The essays in this book explore many topics about the morality 
of markets and present advanced scientifi c insights from game 
theory, biology, psychology, and other disciplines.

125
Dr. Tom G. Palmer is executive vice president for international 
programs at the Atlas Network and oversees the work of teams 
working around the world to advance the principles of classical lib-
eralism. Dr. Palmer is a senior fellow of the Cato Institute, where 
he was formerly vice president for international programs and di-
rector of the Center for the Promotion of Human Rights. Palmer 
was an H. B. Earhart Fellow at Hertford College, Oxford 
University, and a vice president of the Institute for Humane 
Studies at George Mason University. He is a member of the board 
of advisors of Students For Liberty. He has published reviews 
and articles on politics and morality in scholarly journals such 
as the Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy, Ethics, Critical 
Review, and Constitutional Political Economy, as well as in pub-
lications such as  Slate, the  Wall Street Journal, the  New York 
Times, Die Welt, Al Hayat, Caixing, the Washington Post, and The 
Spectator of London. He received his B.A. in liberal arts from St. 
Johns College in Annapolis, Maryland; his M.A. in philosophy 
from The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.; and 
his doctorate in politics from Oxford University. His scholarship 
has been published in books from Princeton University Press, 
Cambridge University Press, Routledge, and other academic 
publishers and he is the author of Realizing Freedom: Libertarian 
Theory, History, and Practice, published in 2009.

126
Notes
Introduction: The Morality of Capitalism
1 
Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (New York: Basic Books, 1974), p. 163.
2 
Joyce Appleby, The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism (New York: 
W. W. Norton and Co., 2010), pp. 25-26.
3 
David Schwab and Elinor Ostrom, “The Vital Role of Norms and Rules 
in Maintaining Open Public and Private Economies,” in Moral Markets: 
The Critical Role of Values in the Economy, ed. by Paul J. Zak (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2008), pp. 204-27.
4 
Deirdre McCloskey, Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the 
Modern World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), p. 48.
5 
For a simple arithmetic explanation of the principle of comparative advantage, 
see tomgpalmer.com/wpcontent/uploads/papers/The%20Economics%20of
%20Comparative%20Advantage.doc.
6 
For a remarkable account of the general decline of the experience of force 
in human aff airs, see James L. Payne, A History of Force (Sandpoint, Idaho: 
Lytton Publishing, 2004).
7 
Envy as an impulse harmful to social cooperation and inimical to free-market 
capitalism has been studied by many thinkers. A recent and interesting ap-
proach that draws on the Indian classic epic The Mahabharata can be found 
in Gurcharan Das, The Diffi  culty of Being Good: On the Subtle Art of Dharma 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), esp. pp. 1-32.
8 
Fernand Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century: The 
Wheels of Commerce (New York: Harper & Row, 1982), p. 232.
9 
Ibid., p. 236.
10 Louis Blanc, Organisation du Travail (Paris: Bureau de la Societé de 
l’Industrie Fraternelle, 1847), cited in Braudel, Civilization and Capitalism, 
15th–18th Century: The Wheels of Commerce, op. cit., p. 237.
11 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, in 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Volume 6 (1976: Progress 
Publishers, Moscow), p. 489.
12 For a devastating seminal critique of Marx’s economic theories, see Eugen 
von Böhm-Bawerk, Karl Marx and the Close of His System (1896; New 
York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1949). A better translation of Böhm-Bawerk’s 
title would be, “On the Conclusion of the Marxian System.” Böhm-Bawerk 
refers in his title to the publication of the third volume of Capital, which 
“concluded” the Marxian system. It should be noted that Böhm-Bawerk’s 
criticism is altogether an internal critique, and does not rest in any way on the 
results of the “marginal revolution” in economic science that took place in 
1870. See also the essay by Ludwig von Mises, “Economic Calculation in the 
Socialist Commonwealth,” in F. A. Hayek, ed., Collectivist Economic Planning 
(London: George Routledge & Sons, 1935) on the inability of collectivism to 
solve the problem of economic calculation.
13 Karl Marx, “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte,” in David 
Fernbach, ed., Karl Marx: Surveys fr om Exile: Political Writings, Volume II 
(New York: Vintage Books, 1974), p. 186. I describe the contradictions and 
confusions of Marxian economic and social analysis in “Classical Liberalism, 
Marxism, and the Confl ict of Classes: The Classical Liberal Theory of Class 
Confl ict,” in Realizing Freedom: Libertarian Theory, History, and Practice 
(Washington: Cato Institute, 2009), pp. 255-75.

127
14 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, p. 488.
15 Karl Marx, “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte,” p. 222.
16 Karl Marx, “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte,” p. 238.
17 Shirley M. Gruner, Economic Materialism and Social Moralism (The Hague: 
Mouton, 1973), pp. 189–190.
18 See, for example, Sheldon Richman, “Is Capitalism Something Good?” www.
thefreemanonline.org/columns/tgif/is-capitalism-something-good/.
19 Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (London: 
Routledge, 2006), p. 84.
20 David Boaz, “Creating a Framework for Utopia,” The Futurist, December 24, 
1996, www.cato.org/pub_display.php?pub_id=5976.
21 The legal historian Henry Sumner Maine famously described “the movement 
of the progressive societies” from inherited relations, based on family mem-
bership to personal liberty and civil society as “a movement from Status to 
Contract.” Henry Sumner Maine, Ancient Law (Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers, 2003), p. 170.
22 Leo Melamed, “Reminiscences of a Refugee,” in For Crying Out Loud: From 
Open Outcry to the Electronic Screen (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
2009), p. 136.
23 I address the issue of poverty and free-market capitalism more system-
atically in “Classical Liberalism, Poverty, and Morality,” in Poverty and 
Morality: Religious and Secular Perspectives, William A. Galston and Peter H. 
Hoff enberg, eds. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 83-114.
24 This is an especially common attitude among philosophers, perhaps the sad-
dest of whom was the late G. A. Cohen, who devoted much of his intellectual 
career to attempting, but failing, to refute Nozick’s one thought experiment. 
Citations to Cohen’s articles and a demonstration of the failure of his critique 
can be found in “G. A. Cohen on Self-Ownership, Property, and Equality,” in 
Realizing Freedom, pp. 139-54.
25 Quoted in Michael Sandel, Justice: What’s the Right Thing to Do? (New York: 
Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2009), p. 61.
26 Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1962), p. 188: “A possible justifi cation on liberal principles for com-
pulsory purchase of annuities is that the improvident will not suff er the 
consequences of their own action but will impose costs on others. We shall 
not, it is said, be willing to see the indigent aged suff er in dire poverty. We 
shall assist them by private and public charity. Hence the man who does not 
provide for his old age will become a public charge. Compelling him to buy 
an annuity is justifi ed not for his own good but for the good of the rest of us.”
27 Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1962), p. 188.
28 For an explanation, see Anthony de Jasay, “Liberalism, Loose or Strict,” 
Independent Review, v. IX, n. 3, Winter 2005, pp. 427-432.
29 F. A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1960), p. 313.
The Paradox of Morality
30 Luckily the beggar was an outsider, for if he were from the Land of 
Gentlemen, the dispute would have continued indefi nitely.
31 Lei Feng (December 18, 1940–August 15, 1962) was a soldier in the People’s 
Liberation Army who became a national hero aft er his death in 1962 in a 
traffi  c accident. A national campaign to “Learn from Comrade Lei Feng” 
began in 1963; it called on the Chinese people to emulate his devotion to the 
Chinese Communist Party and to socialism.

128
Adam Smith and the Myth of Greed
32 “The Secret History of Self-Interest,” in Stephen Holmes, Passions and 
Constraints: On the Theory of Liberal Democracy (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1995).
33 Quoted in Christine Caldwell Ames, Righteous Persecution: Inquisition, 
Dominicans, and Christianity in the Middle Ages (Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2008), p. 44.
34 Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, ed. D.D. Raphael and A.L. 
Macfi e, vol. I of the Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence of 
Adam Smith (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1982). Chapter: a chap ii: Of the 
love of Praise, and of that of Praise–worthiness; and of the dread of Blame, 
and of that of Blame–worthiness; Accessed from http://oll.libertyfund.org/
title/192/200125 on 2011-05-30.
35 Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, ed. D.D. Raphael and A.L. 
Macfi e, vol. I of the Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence of 
Adam Smith (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1982). Chapter: b chap. i b: Of the 
beauty which the appearance of Utility bestows upon all the productions of art, 
and of the extensive infl uence of this species of Beauty; Accessed from http://
oll.libertyfund.org/title/192/200137 on 2011-05-30.
36 Adam Smith, An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 
Vol. 1 ed. R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, vol. II of the Glasgow Edition 
of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith (Indianapolis: Liberty 
Fund: 1981). Chapter: [IV.ii] CHAPTER II: Of Restraints upon the 
Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at 
Home. Accessed from http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/220/217458/2313890 
on 2010-08-23.
37 Smith, An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. 
1 ed. R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, vol. II of the Glasgow Edition of the 
Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund: 
1981). Chapter: [IV.viii] CHAPTER VIII: Conclusion of the Mercantile 
System. Accessed from http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/200/217484/2316261 
on 2010-08-23.
38 “The specifi c characteristic of an economic relation is not its “egoism,” but its 
“non-tuism.” Philip H. Wicksteed, The Commonsense of Political Economy, 
including a Study of the Human Basis of Economic Law (London: Macmillan, 
1910). Chapter: CHAPTER V: BUSINESS AND THE ECONOMIC 
NEXUS. Accessed from http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1415/38938/104356 
on 2010-08-23.
39 H.B. Acton, The Morals of Markets and Related Essays, ed. by David Gordon 
and Jeremy Shearmur (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1993).
40 Voltaire, Letters Concerning the English Nation, ed. Nicholas Cronk (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1999), p. 43.
The Market Economy and the Distribution of Wealth
41 The argument presented in what follows owes a good deal to ideas fi rst set 
forth by Professor Mises in “Das festangelegte Kapital,” in Grundprobleme der 
Nationalökonomie, pp. 201-14. [English trans. in Epistemological Problems of 
Economics (New York: D. Van Nostrand, 1960), pp. 217-31].
Human Betterment Through Globalization
42 The Foundation for Economic Education. www.fee.org.

129
Index of Proper Names
(Chinese names are listed by family name)
Acton, H. B., 67, 123
Appleby, Joyce, 1
Ayer, Alfred, 57
Bastiat, Frederic, 113
Baudelaire, Charles, 115
Belaúnde, Víctor Andrés, 118
Blanc, Louis, 5
Boaz, David, 8, 31
Boskin, Michael, 3
Bové, José, 115
Braudel, Fernand, 4
Buff ett, Warren, 111
Bush, George W., 24, 120
Calderón, Francisco Garcia, 118
Carnegie, Andrew, 28
Deng, Xiaoping, 98–99
Descartes, Rene, 115
Dionne, E. J., 32
Engels, Friedrich, 5
Franklin, Benjamin, 28
Friedman, Milton, 3, 11–12, 31
García Lorca, Federico, 117
Gates, Bill, 17, 28, 66
Gore, Al, 33, 120
Guevara, Ernesto “Che,” 115
Gruner, Shirley, 7
Hare, Richard, 57
Hayek, F.A., 11–12, 34, 98, 123
Holmes, Stephen, 63
Hume, David, 33, 57, 109, 124
Jesus, 81
Kant, Immanuel, 56–57
Krauthammer, Charles, 32
Lei, Feng, 47–49
Li, Ming, 54
Li, Ruzhen, 44–46
Locke, John, 33
Mandeville, Bernard, 70
Montaigne, Michel de, 115
Mao, Zedong (Chairman), 43, 115
Marx, Karl, 5–8, 10, 12, 56, 115
McCloskey, Deirdre, 2, 4, 24, 27, 123
Melamed, Leo, 10
Mises, Ludwig von, 35, 87, 123
Molière (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin), 115
Mokyr, Joel, 30
Moore, George, 57
Mugabe, Robert, 96
Murray, Charles, 32
Norberg, Johan, 104
Nozick, Robert, 1, 11, 77
Obama, Barack, 24, 70
Ostrom, Elinor, 1
Paine, Thomas, 69
Pareto, Vilfreto, 93
Perot, H. Ross, 3
Proust, Marcel, 117
Racine, Jean, 115
Rand, Ayn, 11, 16, 69, 71, 78–80, 123
Rawlings, Jerry, 103
Rawls, John, 12, 75, 77
Reagan, Ronald, 24
Riva Agüero, José de la, 118
Robespierre, Maximilien, 96
Romans, Humbert de, 63
Sandel, Michael, 11–12
Schmitt, Bertel, 99
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1, 8, 93
Schwab, David, 1
Smith, Adam, 11, 12, 33, 34, 63–68, 
70, 123
Sombart, Werner, 5, 7, 12
Soros, George, 31, 33, 66
Soto, Hernando de, 106
Stone, Oliver, 65
Tawney, R. H., 75, 77
Tsvangirai, Morgan, 96
Voltaire (François-Marie Arouet), 67
Wicksteed, Philip, 66
Williams, Walter, 99
Winfrey, Oprah, 76
Woolf, Virginia, 117

Cato On Campus is a resource created for students by the 
Cato Institute, one of the nation’s leading public policy research 
foundations. If you’re passionate about liberty, Cato On Campus is 
your one-stop shop for personal and academic needs.
INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY •  FREE MARKETS •  LIMITED GOVERNMENT •  PEACE
www.CatoOnCampus.org


7KH$WODV1HWZRUNKDVLQLWLDWHGDZRUOGZLGHPRUDOFDPSDLJQIRUIUHH
HQWHUSULVHVWDUWLQJZLWKKRQHVWGHEDWHVDERXWPRUDOLW\DQGFDSLWDOLVP
LQRYHUDGR]HQODQJXDJHV$WODVKDVSDUWQHUHGZLWKWKH-RKQ7HPSOHWRQ
)RXQGDWLRQ¶V³%LJ4XHVWLRQV´SURJUDPWRSURPRWHVHULRXVGLVFXVVLRQ
DQGGHEDWHDERXWWKHPRUDOLW\RIWKHIUHHPDUNHWDQGKDVSDUWQHUHG
ZLWK6WXGHQWV)RU/LEHUW\WREULQJ\RX7KH0RUDOLW\RI&DSLWDOLVPD
FROOHFWLRQRIHVVD\VHGLWHGE\$WODVH[HFXWLYHYLFHSUHVLGHQW'U7RP
*3DOPHU$WODVLVDOVRVSRQVRULQJERRNVHVVD\FRQWHVWVDQG)UHHGRP
6FKRROVRQWKHPRUDOLW\RIFDSLWDOLVPLQRYHUDGR]HQRWKHUODQJXDJHV
ZLWKWKHJHQHURXVVXSSRUWRIWKH6PLWK)DPLO\)RXQGDWLRQWKH-RKQ
7HPSOHWRQ)RXQGDWLRQDQGRWKHUVSRQVRUV
7KH$WODV1HWZRUNFRQVLVWVRIRYHULQGHSHQGHQWIUHHPDUNHW
WKLQNWDQNVDQGRUJDQL]DWLRQVWKDWDUHEDVHGLQWKH86DQGLQ
PRUHWKDQFRXQWULHV
$WODVRUJDQL]HVWUDLQLQJSURJUDPVUHJLRQDOFRQIHUHQFHVDQGPDQ\
RWKHUSURJUDPVWRLGHQWLI\DQGHPSRZHULQVWLWXWLRQVDQG
LQWHOOHFWXDOHQWUHSUHQHXUVZKREHOLHYHLQOLEHUW\
,I\RX¶GOLNHWREHFRPHLQYROYHGYLVLW$WODV1HWZRUNRUJDQG
FKHFNRXWRXUZRUOGZLGHGLUHFWRU\RXU³7KLQN7DQN7RRONLW´DQG
RWKHURQOLQHWRROV
<RXUVXSSRUWFDQXQORFNWKHSRWHQWLDORIIUHHPDUNHWFDSLWDOLVPWRHQULFK
WKHZRUOGSURPRWHSHDFHDQGOLEHUDWHWKHFUHDWLYHSRZHUVRIWKHKXPDQ
PLQG7RVSRQVRUDWKLQNWDQNRUSURJUDPYLVLW$WODV1HWZRUNRUJGRQDWH
/6WUHHW1::DVKLQJWRQ'&
$WODV1HWZRUNRUJ
)UHH0DUNHWV1HHGD0RUDO'HIHQVH<RXUV

(PSRZHU)UHHGRP&KDPSLRQV
6SRQVRUWKH$WODV1HWZRUN
%HFRPHDQ$WODVSDUWQHUWRGD\DQGKHOSXVWUDLQDQGHPSRZHUWKHQH[W
JHQHUDWLRQRIOHDGHUVZKRZLOOSURWHFWDQGH[WHQGIUHHGRP/LEHUW\LVWRR
SUHFLRXVWROHWLWZLWKHURUGLH,WQHHGVRXUKHOS,WQHHGV\RXUKHOS
$QD<HUUR
,QVWLWXFLRQ)XWXUR
6SDLQ
$WODV1HWZRUNRUJ'RQDWH
+HQULTXHV9LROD
&HQWHUIRU0R]DPELFDQ
	,QWHUQDWLRQDO6WXGLHV
0R]DPELTXH
'DQ*UHHQEHUJ
$GYDQFH$UNDQVDV
,QVWLWXWH
8QLWHG6WDWHV
$OL6DOPDQ
$OWHUQDWH6ROXWLRQV
,QVWLWXWH
3DNLVWDQ
1DWDOLD7ROHGR
)XQGDFLRQ(FXDGRU/LEUH
(FXDGRU
7RP&ORXJKHUW\
$GDP6PLWK,QVWLWXWH
(QJODQG

The Pierre F. and Enid Goodrich Foundation
The Pierre F. and Enid Goodrich Foundation (formerly Thirty 
Five Twenty, Inc.) is one of the philanthropic creations of Pierre F. 
Goodrich. Goodrich’s major philanthropic interest was to create 
a lasting institutional legacy which would continue his lifelong 
promotion of the study of a society of free and responsible in-
dividuals. To this end Goodrich created Liberty Fund, Inc., in 
1960, and endowed it with both fi nancial assets and the guidance 
of the Liberty Fund Basic Memorandum. In 1996 Enid Goodrich 
made a further contribution to Liberty Fund, Inc.
The institutions and ideals of a free society that interested 
Goodrich were the rule of law; a market economy characterized 
by secure and transferable property rights; limited, constitutional 
government; political federalism; individual, personal responsibil-
ity over the conduct of one’s life; and the duty of the individual 
to pursue a lifelong education into the nature of man, and his 
possibilities and imperfections.
Liberty Fund extends its educational activities, without cost 
to the public, through the following resources:

Online Library of Liberty 
(oll.libertyfund.org)
This award-winning web site provides over 1,000 titles about 
individual liberty, limited government, and the free market. In 
addition to the classic books on liberty, there are educational aids 
and guides to help readers understand the texts.
Library of Economics and Liberty 
(econlib.org)
This web site is dedicated to advancing the study of economics, 
markets, and liberty. It off ers a unique combination of resources 
for students, teachers, researchers, and anyone interested in eco-
nomics, including blogs and podcasts.
Liberty Fund, Inc.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, IN 46250.1684
Tel 317.842.0880
Toll Free 1.800.866.3520
Fax 317.577.9067
www.libertyfund.org

Students For Liberty
A Free Academy, A Free Society
Students For Liberty is a network of pro-liberty students all 
over the world. We work to educate 
our fellow students on the ideas of individual, economic, and 
academic freedom.
Students For Liberty can help you with:
◆ Leadership training
◆ Tips on how to start a student group
◆ Finding speakers to host on campus
◆ Obtaining free books for a reading club
◆ Student Conferences
www.StudentsForLiberty.org

Students For Liberty Conferences
Do you want to:
◆ Learn about the philosophy of liberty?
◆ Meet fellow students and leaders of liberty?
◆ Receive training on how to best advance liberty?
Then join us for the
2011 Fall Regional Conferences
◆ Boston, MA
◆ New York City, NY
◆ Philadelphia, PA
◆ Winston-Salem, NC
◆ Chicago, IL
◆ Austin, TX
◆ Phoenix, AZ
◆ Pittsburgh, PA
◆ Los Angeles, CA
◆ San Francisco, CA
2012 International
Students For Liberty Conference
The world’s largest gathering of pro-liberty students
February 17-19, 2012, in Washington DC.
www.PoliticalConferences.org

Additional Resources for Liberty
The Foundation 
for Economic Education
– www.FEE.org –
– www.TheFreemanOnline.org –
The Cato Institute
– www.Cato.org –
– www.CatoOnCampus.org –
The Institute 
for Humane Studies 
– www.TheIHS.org –
The Foundation 
for Individual Rights in Education
– www.TheFire.org –
The Charles G. Koch 
Charitable Foundation
– www.CGKFoundation.org –

fr ee enterprise
F
or Sir John Templeton, wealth creation was no accident 
of history, whether for the nations of the West or for 
the billions of people struggling for basic necessities 
in the developing world. Human societies could experience 
general prosperity, he believed, only when they recognized 
and established broad principles of freedom, competition, 
and personal responsibility. For him, individual freedom 
was the indispensable foundation of economic, social, and 
spiritual progress.
As one of the most successful investors of modern times, Sir 
John understood the enormous contribution that free markets 
and entrepreneurship could make to material improvement. As 
a student of classical liberalism, from Adam Smith to Milton 
Friedman, he also saw that, without economic freedom, indi-
vidual freedom was fragile and vulnerable. The Foundation 
honors this profound vision by supporting a range of programs 
intended to liberate the initiative of individuals and nations 
and to establish the necessary conditions for the success of 
profi t-making enterprise.
www.templeton.org/ff e

“We need to change the narrative of capitalism, to show that it’s about creating 
shared value, not for the few, but for everyone. If people could see that the 
way I see it, people would love capitalism the way I love it.”
—John Mackey, CEO of Whole Foods Market
You Can Help Tell Young Americans About
The Morality of Capitalism
Capitalism today is “the greatest story never told” on far too many college 
campuses, in high schools, in the press, and by politicians seeking your votes 
by promising a bureaucratic administrative state will solve all the social and 
economic problems of “the economy”—problems that are almost always 
caused by politicians and bureaucrats.
Please consider giving copies of this book to students, teachers, the news 
media, local political, business and labor associations, and to your activist 
friends all across America! Knowledge is power in political debate. This book 
will give you that power.
Special Bulk Copy Discount Schedule
1 book 
$8.95 
25 books $95.00 
500 books $1,250.00
5 books $25.00 
50 books $175.00 
1000 books $2,000.00
10 books $45.00 
100 books $325.00
All prices include postage and handling.
Jameson Books, Inc 
 
ORDER TOLL FREE
P.O. Box 738 
 
 
800-426-1357
Ottawa, IL 61350
Please send me ______ copies of The Morality of Capitalism.  
I have enclosed my check for $___________, or please charge my credit card:
  ☐ Visa 
 
☐ MasterCard
Card Number: _________________________________ Exp Date: _______
Signature: _____________________________________________________
Name: ________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________________________________
City: _________________________ State: _______ Zip code: ___________
Illinois residents please add 6.5% sales tax. Please allow two weeks for delivery.

