Isaac Wilhelm
Abstract
I propose the ‘Propositional Account’ of effective quantum field theories. According
to the Propositional Account, each effective quantum field theory expresses proposi-
tions about various physical items: fields, interactions, and more.
In addition, two
effective quantum field theories are physically equivalent just in case they express the
same propositions. As I explain, the Propositional Account is scientifically naturalistic,
since it invokes terms and principles from the empirical science of linguistics. And the
Propositional Account avoids problems faced by other accounts of the physical contents
of effective theories.
1
Introduction
What do effective quantum field theories say about the physical world? And when are
two effective quantum field theories physically equivalent? What, in other words, are the
physical contents of effective theories, and when are two such theories physically the same?
In this paper, I present an account of effective quantum field theories—call it the ‘Propo-
sitional Account’—which answers these questions. As will become clear, there is much to like
about the Propositional Account. It embodies a naturalistic approach to physical content,
since it draws on the empirical science of linguistics. And it does not face problems that arise
for other accounts of the contents of physical theories.
1
 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 
DOI: 10.1017/psa.2023.117
This is a manuscript accepted for publication in Philosophy of Science.  
This version may be subject to change during the production process. 
 
The Propositional Account of
 
Effective Theories
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In Section 2, I present the principle of the Propositional Account which describes ef-
fective theories’ physical contents. In Section 3, I present the principle of the Propositional
Account which describes when one effective theory is physically equivalent to another. Fi-
nally, in Section 4, I discuss some problems that alternative accounts of physical content and
physical equivalence—based on priviledged mappings—face.
2
Physical Content
In this section, I formulate the principle which describes the physical contents of effective
theories. To start, I summarize how effective theories work. Then I present and explicate
the principle.
Following standard practice, I focus on effective theories formulated using a Lagrangian
density. For example, take the Lagrangian density below, which is associated with a standard
version of quantum electrodynamics.
LQED “ ψpi{B ´ mqψ ´ 1
4pFµνq2 ´ eψγµψAµ
In this expression, Einstein summation convention is being employed, the γµ are Dirac ma-
trices which describe the structure of general relativistic spacetime, ψ is a bispinor field over
the four-vectors of general relativity, ψ “ ψ:γ0 is the Dirac adjoint, {B “ γµBµ is basically
a Lorentz invariant derivative operator, the couplings m and e are the mass and charge of
an electron, respectively, and Fµν “ BµAν ´ BνAµ—where Aµ is the electromagnetic vector
potential—is the electromagnetic field tensor.
There are at least two significant roles that Lagrangian densities play in effective theo-
ries. The first role is simple: when plugged into the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations,
a given Lagrangian density generates the equations of motion for various fields. For exam-
ple, the Euler-Lagrange equations for LQED can be used to derive equations of motion for
2
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the bispinor-valued field ψ and the electromagnetic vector potential Aµ. These equations
describe how the values of those fields, at various regions of spacetime, constrain the values
of those fields at other regions of spacetime.
The second role, that Lagrangian densities play, is more complicated. Through an in-
tricate series of formal transformations, mathematical approximations, and so on, a given
Lagrangian density can be used to calculate the transition amplitudes—that is, the probabil-
ities of finding certain sorts of scattered particles in certain solid angles—which experiments
can test. So Lagrangian densities encode empirically testable predictions.
Those derivations, though quite involved, are worth briefly summarizing; for they con-
tribute to the contents which, according to the Propositional Account described below, ef-
fective theories have.1 So very roughly put, one standard method for calculating transition
amplitudes goes like this. To start, write the S-matrix—the basic operator which encodes
transition amplitudes—as a time-ordered infinite series whose terms are integrals of various
functions of quantized versions of the fields which appear in the Lagrangian density at issue;
this is called ‘Dyson’s expansion’ of the S-matrix. Wick’s theorem is used to compute the
vacuum expectation values which Dyson’s expansion contains. The result is a series of ex-
pressions, the integrals of which correspond to terms in Dyson’s expansion; these expressions
can be conveniently summarized, and identified, using Feynman diagrams. Next, calculate
those integrals: the results of those calculations are the S-matrix elements. Finally, use those
S-matrix elements to compute transition amplitudes between incoming states and outgoing
states.
An extremely important complication: many of the integrals, mentioned above, diverge;
and so cannot be used to compute empirically testable transition amplitudes. To make those
integrals convergent, various couplings and fields in the original Lagrangian densities—the
1For a summary of S-matrix theory, see (Lancaster & Blundell, 2014, pp. 166-167); a more thorough
introduction is in (Eden et al., 1966, pp. 182-278). For informal descriptions of time-ordering, see (Lancaster
& Blundell, 2014, p. 156; Peskin & Schroeder, 1995, p. 31; p. 85); a rigorous definition of time-ordering is
provided in (Negele & Orland, 1998, pp. 49-50). Accessible overviews of Wick’s theorem can be found in
(Lancaster & Blundell, 2014, pp. 171-174; Peskin & Schroeder, 1995, pp. 88-90). And a thorough discussion
of the basic features of incoming and outgoing states is provided in (Taylor, 1972, pp. 25-34).
3
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ones used to compute S-matrix elements—must be modified; this complicated procedure is
often called ‘regularization and renormalization’. The resulting Lagrangian densities, and
the resulting expressions for various empirical quantities, describe physical phenomena up
to specific energy scales only.
That is why the quantum field theories, corresponding to
these Lagrangian densities, are called ‘effective’: they are only effective theories—they only
accurately describe the physics—up to certain energies. Renormalization group equations
relate these Lagrangian densities.
For example, given energy level Λ, there is a modified version of the Lagrangian density
LQED—denote it ‘LQED,Λ’—which features a modified bispinor field ψΛ, a modified electro-
magnetic vector potential Aµ,Λ, and modified coupling constants mΛ and eΛ. This Lagrangian
density can be expressed as follows.
LQED,Λ “ ψΛpi{B ´ mΛqψΛ ´ 1
4pFµν,Λq2 ´ eΛψΛγµψΛAµ,Λ
The fields ψΛ and Aµ,Λ, and the couplings mΛ and eΛ, are determined by regularization and
renormalization.
So to summarize, Lagrangian densities play two significant roles in effective theories.
First, when substituted into Euler-Lagrange equations, Lagrangian densities yield equations
of motion for various fields; call this the ‘constraint role’. Second, when used to generate
integrals in expansions of S-matrix elements, and then subjected to regularization and renor-
malization, Lagrangian densities yield expressions for transition amplitudes between various
states; call this the ‘transition role’.
A terminological aside: following standard practice, I often refer to any given La-
grangian density, at an energy level, as an effective theory. Strictly speaking, the effective
theory is a combination of (i) the Lagrangian density, and (ii) a host of other assump-
tions which facilitate that density’s use in the constraint role and in the transition role. So
throughout what follows, read “the effective theory LΛ” as shorthand for “the effective theory
consisting of a series of postulates which describe how LΛ plays the constraint role and the
4
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

transition role.”
With all that as background, here is the first principle about the physical contents of
effective theories.
Physical Content
For each energy level Λ and each effective theory LΛ at that energy level, the physical
propositions expressed by LΛ are about physical fields, physical interactions, physical
particles, physical transition amplitudes, and so on, at Λ. The mathematical terms for
fields, couplings, and so on, which LΛ features, refer to physically real fields, coupling
interactions, and so on, in the world; likewise for many terms in quantities that LΛ—in
its constraint role and transition role—is used to compute.
In other words, LΛ—insofar as it plays the constraint role and the transition role—expresses
physical propositions like “This field interacts in thus-and-so way with this other field,” “The
probability of finding this sort of particle in this cross section is such-and-such,” and so
on. These physical propositions only invoke items—fields and interactions, for instance—to
which symbols in LΛ, and symbols in calculations based on LΛ, refer. And the invoked items
concern the specific energy level Λ in various important ways. So these fields, interactions,
particles, and so on, are not fundamental. Nevertheless, they still exist.
Another terminological aside: for each energy level Λ and each effective theory LΛ at
that energy level, I often describe various fields, interactions, and so on—which figure in the
propositions that LΛ expresses—as being ‘at’ Λ. This is just a convenient way of describing
the specific fields, interactions, and so on, to which a given effective theory is committed. It
should not be understood as implying that the propositions, which LΛ expresses, are true
or false ‘relative to energy levels’. Nor should it be understood as implying that existence
is somehow ‘level-relative’, that the entities described by those propositions exist relative to
some energy levels but not others. Expressions of the form “Thus-and-so field at such-and-
5
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

such energy level” are simply shorthand for more complicated expressions about the physical
facts, connected to energies, which the corresponding Lagrangian densities express.
To illustrate Physical Content, consider a particular energy level Λ and the correspond-
ing Lagrangian density LQED,Λ. The coupling constants, which quantify the strengths of var-
ious physical interactions, are mΛ and eΛ. The fields are ψΛ and Aµ,Λ. The Euler-Lagrange
equations for LQED,Λ describe how those coupling constants, and those fields, relate to each
other when no measurements occur.2 So for instance, those equations imply propositions
like “Thus-and-so state of the bispinor field ψΛ constrains the state of the vector field Aµ,Λ in
such-and-such ways.” Regularization and renormalization techniques contribute to describing
how mΛ, eΛ, ψΛ, and Aµ,Λ, relate to each other when the system in question is measured. So
for instance, the corresponding calculations imply propositions like “Thus-and-so incoming
state is this-and-that likely to produce such-and-such outgoing state.”
Physical Content is a somewhat schematic account of the physical contents of effective
theories. Completely filling in that schema is, of course, far beyond the scope of this paper:
there is nowhere near enough space to specify, for every single effective theory LΛ, the exact
collection of physical propositions which LΛ expresses. Nevertheless, Physical Content still
provides an informative account of what many such propositions are.
Just consider the
propositions, described above, which effective theory LQED,Λ expresses.3
Note that according to Physical Content, the sorts of physical facts described by a
true effective theory LΛ are akin to the sorts of physical facts that non-fundamental special
sciences describe. For instance, take evolutionary biology. Rabbits and wolves interact with
one another in accord, roughly, with the Lotka-Volterra equations. These equations, and
the interactions they describe, concern phenomena at a particular energy level: the level
2For present purposes, set the measurement problem aside. I assume that the measurement problem can
be solved by adopting some interpretation or other: for instance, consider a version of the Everett interpre-
tation which (i) takes the mathematical time evolution operator—in the interaction picture—to represent a
physically real operator that evolves in accord with an interaction Hamiltonian, and (ii) takes the Born rule
to be a law describing the centered chances of various indexical propositions obtaining (Wilhelm, 2022).
3For an account of the physical structures to which effective theories may refer, see (Williams, 2019, p.
220). For discussion of such structures in the case of classical mechanics in particular, see (North, 2009). For
discussion of how to compare the structures of mathematical objects more generally, see (Wilhelm, 2021).
6
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

corresponding to medium-sized dry goods. So to put it roughly: rabbits and wolves interact
at this level. They do not interact at other energy levels. The physical facts about their
interactions concern phenomena at this particular energy level only.
Similarly for effective theories. A true effective theory LΛ expresses facts like “The
probability of the field transitioning from this state to that state is such-and-such.” These
facts concern objects and phenomena—in particular, physical field states and transition
probabilities—at the particular energy level Λ. Other physical facts expressed by LΛ concern
particles at that energy level, and how they interact. So LΛ expresses physically real fields,
physically real interactions, and so on, all at the specific energy level Λ.
3
Physical Equivalence
In this section, I present the second principle of the Propositional Account. This prin-
ciple describes physical equivalence among effective theories. After presenting this principle,
I defend it—and Physical Content—against objections.
And I argue for these principles
by invoking a methodological criterion which accounts of physical content should generally
satisfy.
The physical equivalence principle is as follows; note that it implicitly invokes Physical
Content.
Physical Equivalence
For each energy level Λ, and for all effective theories L1,Λ and L2,Λ at that energy level,
L1,Λ is physically equivalent to L2,Λ if and only if L1,Λ and L2,Λ express exactly the
same physical propositions.
In other words, effective theories are equivalent just in case the physical propositions they
express—as given by Physical Content—are the same.
7
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Physical Content and Physical Equivalence jointly form what I have been calling the
‘Propositional Account’ of effective theories. Physical Content specifies those theories’ phys-
ical contents. Physical Equivalence uses those contents to state the conditions under which
one effective theory is physically equivalent to another.
The Propositional Account implies that effective theories are extremely fine-grained.
In particular, according to the Propositional Account, many empirically equivalent effective
theories are physically inequivalent. For many effective theories make the same experimental
predictions, and yet posit radically different fields, interactions, and so on. Effective theories
formulated using canonical quantization, for instance, are physically different from effective
theories formulated using path integrals, even if these two classes of theories make the same
empirical predictions: while the former theories posit fields associating physical operator
quantities with spacetime points, the latter theories posit fields associating physical scalar
quantities with spacetime points instead.
Similarly, an effective theory with one set of renormalized constants, and one renormal-
ized Lagrangian density, is physically different from an effective theory with a different set of
renormalized constants and a different renormalized Lagrangian density. The empirical pre-
dictions of these theories may well be the same, of course. But these theories are physically
different, because they posit different kinds of physical interactions – which is embodied in
the different renormalized contants and densities.
It would be a mistake, however, to think that all this is some sort of problem for
the Propositional Account.
For all this is, basically, just a specific instance of the more
general phenomenon of the underdetermination of theory by evidence. Underdetermination
is extremely common in science generally, and in physics specifically. The fineness of grain,
among effective theories, is just another case of this.
So the Propositional Account has an important lesson to teach: the physical contents
of effective theories are more fine-grained than realists, or anti-realists, have appreciated.
And it is a feature of the Propositional Account, not a bug, that it draws such fine-grained
8
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

distinctions. For many effective theories, despite generating the same empirical predictions,
clearly posit different physical fields, interactions, and more. In many cases, those posits
cannot be defined in terms of each other. So the effective theories really are distinct.
Relatedly, one might object that the Propositional Approach contradicts intuitively
plausible claims about physical equivalence among effective theories. By way of illustration,
take the claim that Feynman’s theory of quantum electrodynamics is physically equivalent
to Schwinger’s theory of quantum electrodynamics.4 This claim seems true: after all, this
claim is what Dyson seems to have famously shown (1949).5 And yet, one might object, the
Propositional Account contradicts this. For some mathematical terms used in Feynman’s
theory are, one might claim, different from the mathematical terms used in Schwinger’s
theory. So plausibly, Physical Content implies that the propositions expressed by Feynman’s
theory posit physical items which are not posited by the propositions which Schwinger’s
theory expresses. Therefore, according to Physical Equivalence, Feynman’s theory is not
physically equivalent to Schwinger’s theory.
There are two different problems with this objection. First, it is wrong to claim that the
mathematical terms used in Feynman’s theory are different from the mathematical terms used
in Schwinger’s theory. As Dyson showed, the basic posits of both theories can be formulated
using the same mathematical terms (1949, pp. 491-492). The key difference between the two
theories concerns the specific Hamiltonian operator from which they calculate various phys-
ical quantities, such as radiative corrections to the equations of motion of a single electron
in an external field: whereas Feynman’s theory focuses on a ‘mixed representation’ opera-
tor HFpx0q, Schwinger’s theory focuses on the effective external potential energy operator
HTpx0q. The two operators are related, however, by the following equation:
HFpx0q “ Sp8qHTpx0q
4For early presentations of important features of these theories, see (Feynman, 1948; Schwinger, 1948;
Tomonaga, 1948).
5The formalism for effective theories in this paper – which focuses on Lagrangian densities – can be
adapted to fit Dyson’s formalism – which focuses on Hamiltonian operators.
9
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

where Sp8q is, roughly put, an operator which transforms a state of the system in the infinite
past – for instance, a converging stream of particles – into the same state in the infinite future
– for instance, after the particles have interacted. Both Feynman’s theory and Schwinger’s
theory use Sp8q elsewhere in their calculations. So both theories are committed to each of the
mathematical operators HTpx0q and HFpx0q representing physically real energy densities. Of
course, the different operators facilitate different sorts of calculations.6 But that is irrelevant,
for the purposes of evaluating the Propositional Approach. Since both theories are committed
to physical correlates of the operators HFpx0q and HTpx0q, and to the physical properties
which those physical correlates have, Physical Content implies that both theories express
the same propositions. And so contrary to what the objection claims, Physical Equivalence
implies that Feynman’s theory is physically equivalent to Schwinger’s theory.
Second, the objection makes incorrect claims about what Dyson showed. Dyson never
explicitly argues that Feynman’s theory and Schwinger’s theory are ‘physically equivalent’.
That phrase does not appear anywhere in Dyson’s seminal paper. Instead, Dyson simply
argues that Feynman’s theory and Schwinger’s theory are equivalent. The precise nature,
of the equivalence demonstrated, is left open. Of course, according to one interpretation of
Dyson’s results, Feynman’s theory is physically equivalent to Schwinger’s theory. But this
interpretation seems anachronistic: physical equivalence concerns physical interpretation of
the sort which was famously eschewed by many physicists who originally formulated quantum
electrodynamics, Feynman included. It is not anachronistic, however, to interpret Dyson as
showing that Feynman’s theory is empirically equivalent, or calculationally equivalent, to
Schwinger’s theory.
Besides, empirical equivalence—or calculational equivalence—is clearly closer to what
Dyson actually demonstrated. For what Dyson showed, in rough outline, is that the rules at
the basis of Feynman’s radiation theory can be derived from what is basically Schwinger’s the-
ory (Dyson, 1949, pp. 492-493). That sort of demonstration is much more like a demonstra-
6The infinite series expansion of HT px0q features unboundedly many nested commutators. That is what
makes calculations, based on Schwinger’s theory, so difficult.
10
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

tion of empirical equivalence, or calculational equivalence, than a demonstration of physical
equivalence.
So this objection does not succeed. The Propositional Approach is perfectly compatible
with the view that Feynman’s theory is physically equivalent to Schwinger’s theory. And in
addition, it is wrong to read the notion of equivalence, in Dyson’s paper, as this objection
does: the equivalence at issue is more empirical or calculational, and less physical.
Here is another, extremely attractive feature of the Propositional Approach. As will
become clear, the Propositional Approach satisfies the following methodological criterion for
accounts of the contents of physical theories.
Content Naturalism Criterion
Philosophical accounts of content should generally be formulated using the theoretical
terms, and basic guiding principles, of our best science of content: namely, the natu-
ralistic science of linguistics.
For example, here are some theoretical terms which practically all standard linguistic theories
invoke: reference, denotation, expression, satisfaction, and propositions (Chomsky, 1995, p.
24). And here is a guiding principle which the vast majority of linguistic theories posit: mean-
ing is compositional, in that the meaning of a syntactically complex expression is determined
by the meanings of its constituent expressions and their grammatical relations (Akmajian et
al., 2001, p. 246). So the Content Naturalism Criterion says, roughly put, that philosophical
accounts of content should (i) use terms like reference, denotation, expression, satisfaction,
and propositions, and (ii) adhere to principles like the compositionality of meaning. For those
are the basic tools of standard, empirically adequate linguistic theories.
The motivating idea behind the Content Naturalism Criterion is as follows. Linguis-
tics is a natural, empirical science of content (Schutze, 2016). In particular, linguistics is
the special science of the meanings which written inscriptions, spoken utterances, and so on,
11
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

have.7 So in order to be naturalistically respectable, philosophical accounts of content should
generally defer to linguistics. Those accounts should be formulated using the terms, and prin-
ciples, which linguists use: reference, denotation, expression, satisfaction, propositions, com-
positionality, and so on. Any philosophical account which does otherwise is non-naturalist.
Such an account would eschew our best current approach to how written inscriptions, spo-
ken utterances, and so on, meaningfully describe the world. Hence the Content Naturalism
Criterion: philosophical accounts of content for any language whatsoever—including the lan-
guages in which effective theories are expressed—should be formulated using the theoretical
terms which the natural, empirical science of linguistics provides.8
The Propositional Account is quite attractive, because it satisfies the Content Natural-
ism Criterion. For the Propositional Account is formulated in terms of reference, expression,
propositions, and other standard posits of empirically adequate theories of contemporary lin-
guistics. So the Propositional Account is naturalistic in the way that the Content Naturalism
Criterion requires. And that is a very significant point in favor of the Propositional Account.
The Content Naturalism Criterion deserves more discussion than it has received. Many
accounts of contents, for physical theories in particular, rely exclusively on terms and prin-
ciples drawn from mathematical physics. Now, there is nothing problematic about relying,
in part, on terms and principles like that: physical theories are generally formulated using
mathematics, and so it makes sense for accounts of those theories’ contents to invoke mathe-
matics as well. But relying entirely on those sorts of terms and principles—and in particular,
failing to use standard linguistic tools like reference, propositions, and so on—is problemati-
cally non-naturalist. Linguistics is an empirical science like any other. It is our best science
of content. So all philosophical accounts of content whatsoever, including accounts of the
contents of even the most complex physical theories to date, should draw from contempo-
7Linguistics is, of course, also a science of syntax, grammar, morphological change, and so on. The Content
Naturalism Criterion is compatible with that.
8One might object that the language of physics is different, somehow, from the languages on which linguists
focus. But that is wrong. Physics is conducted using the sorts of formal and natural vocabulary studied by
linguists.
12
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

rary linguistics. All philosophical accounts of content, that is, should satisfy the Content
Naturalism Criterion. So the Content Naturalism Criterion articulates a methodology which
philosophical accounts of content, including philosophical accounts of the contents of physical
theories, should follow.
Correspondingly, think of the Propositional Account as suggesting a shift in the ap-
proach, which philosophers take, to questions about the contents of physical theories. Tradi-
tionally, philosophers have approached those questions by using tools, and techniques, drawn
solely from the physical sciences. The Propositional Account suggests approaching those
questions using tools and techniques drawn from linguistics as well. For again, linguistics
is the science of content: so to be naturalistically respectable, accounts of the contents of
physical theories should rely on the tools and techniques developed in linguistics.
4
Privileged Mappings
In this section, I discuss some alternative accounts of physical equivalence.
These
accounts use notions drawn from category theory (Weatherall, 2016), formal logic (Barrett,
2018), model theory (Dewar, 2022), and more. After presenting these accounts, I raise three
problems for them.
Though these accounts differ in various ways, they share a common core. Basically,
they all endorse something roughly along the following lines.
Privileged Mappings
Theory T1 is physically equivalent to theory T2 if and only if T1 and T2 are related by
certain privileged mappings.
In other words, theories are physically equivalent just in case certain sorts of mappings relate
them.
13
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Here is the first problem for Privileged Mappings: it does not satisfy the Content Nat-
uralism Criterion. For Privileged Mappings is not formulated in terms of theoretical tools
like reference, expression, propositions, and other standard posits of empirically adequate
theories of linguistics. Instead, standard formulations of Privileged Mappings invoke theoret-
ical tools like isomorphisms and map-based representations.9 So most versions of Privileged
Mappings, in the literature, do not draw from linguistics much at all. And so Privileged
Mappings does not adhere to the naturalistic methodology which the Content Naturalism
Criterion articulates.
Here is another way to put the point. Privileged Mappings, like all accounts of content
and equivalence, should draw from the tools developed by those working on our best theo-
ries of meaning. Those tools come from the science—the empirical, naturalistic science—of
linguistics. This fact, though often overlooked, is extremely important: linguistics is an em-
pirical science like any other, and so philosophical accounts which are relevantly related to
linguistics—accounts of content and equivalence, for instance—should draw heavily from it.
To do otherwise, when formulating accounts of content and equivalence, is to eschew our best
science of what content, and equivalence of content, ultimately are. So Privileged Mappings
is scientifically non-naturalist. And that is a problem.
Now for the second problem: for effective theories in particular, there are no fully pre-
cise definitions of the mappings that Privileged Mappings invokes. In the physical theories
on which the philosophical literature focuses—like classical mechanics, or general relativity—
privileged mappings can be rigorously defined: those definitions invoke preservation of struc-
ture, commutativity with various operations, and more. But in the case of effective theories,
no such clean, pristine definitions are available. For any proposed rigorous definition of the
relevant mappings, from one effective theory to another, must be mathematically compatible
9The same point applies to an account of content due to Wallace (2022). One of my main concerns,
about Wallace’s account, is that it fails to satisfy the Content Naturalism Criterion: for it eschews standard
linguistic tools, like reference and denotation, in favor of non-standard tools like map-based representations
(2022, p. 6). Wallace’s account may also fail to be compositional; though that will ultimately depend on
details of the account that have yet to be filled in.
14
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

with the formal techniques that physicists use to extract empirical predictions from effec-
tive theories. And many of those formal techniques are not mathematically well-defined: the
Feynman path integral, for instance, invokes an ill-defined measure over all trajectories. So no
rigorously defined mappings can be formally compatible with the mathematically unsound—
though obviously, physically sound—techniques that physicists actually use. Therefore, in
the case of effective theories, the ‘certain privileged mappings’ in Privileged Mappings cannot
be defined in the ways that many philosophers have tried.
Here is the third problem: Privileged Mappings does not respect the fact that the
same mathematical structure can be used to represent physically distinct situations. To see
why, suppose that the ‘certain privileged mappings’, in Privileged Mappings, are taken to
be isomorphisms of algebras, or diffeomorphisms of manifolds, or something like that. Then
Privileged Mappings implies that the relevant theories, corresponding to those algebras or
those manifolds, are physically equivalent. But that is implausible. One and the same math-
ematical algebra, for instance, can be used to represent many different physical systems.10
Just as the grammatical structures of two natural languages could be isomorphic, and yet
the corresponding words in those languages could still have different meanings, the formal
structures of two scientific theories could be isomorphic, and yet the corresponding terms in
those theories could have different meanings as well.
5
Conclusion
There is much to like about the Propositional Account. It provides an account of the
physical contents of effective theories. It provides an account of the conditions under which
effective theories are physically equivalent. It embodies a naturalistic approach to content.
And it avoids problems that alternative accounts face. The Propositional Account is worth
taking seriously.
10Versions of this point are discussed in (Belot, 2013; Teitel, 2021).
15
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Acknowledgements
[removed for anonymous review]
16
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Akmajian, A., Demers, R. A., Farmer, A. K., & Harnish, R. M. (2001). Linguistics. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barrett, T. W. (2018). What Do Symmetries Tell Us about Structure? Philosophy of Science,
85, 617–639.
Belot, G. (2013). Symmetry and Equivalence. In R. Batterman (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Physics (pp. 318–339). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1995). Language and Nature. Mind, 104, 1–61.
Dewar, N. (2022). Structure and Equivalence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Dyson, F. J. (1949). The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger, and Feynman. Phys-
ical Review, 75(3), 486–502.
Eden, R. J., & Landshoff, P. V., Olive, D. I., Polkinghorne, J. C. (1966). The Analytic
S-Matrix. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Feynman, R. P. (1948). Relativistic Cut-Off for Quantum Electrodynamics. Physical Review,
74(10), 1430–1438.
Lancaster, T., & Blundell, S. J. (2014). Quantum Field Theory for the Gifted Amateur. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Negele, J. W., & Orland, H. (1998). Quantum Many-Particle Systems.
New York, NY:
Westview Press.
North, J. (2009). The “Structure” of Physics: A Case Study. The Journal of Philosophy,
106(2), 57–88.
Peskin, M. E., & Schroeder, D. V. (1995). An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. Read-
ing, MA: Perseus Books.
Schutze, C. T. (2016). The empirical basis of linguistics. Berlin: Language Science Press.
Schwinger, J. (1948). Quantum Electrodynamics. I. A Covariant Formulation. Physical
Review, 74(10), 1439–1461.
Taylor, R. J. (1972). Scattering Theory. New York, NY: Wiley.
17
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Teitel, T. (2021). What theoretical equivalence could not be. Philosophical Studies, 178,
4119–4149.
Tomonaga, S. (1948). On a Relativistically Invariant Formulation of the Quantum Theory
of Wave Fields. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 1(2), 27–42.
Wallace, D. (2022). Stating structural realism. Philosophical Perspectives, 1(2), 1–34.
Weatherall, J. O. (2016). Are Newtonian Gravitation and Geometrized Newtonian Gravita-
tion Theoretically Equivalent? Erkenntnis, 81, 1073–1091.
Wilhelm, I. (2022).
Centering the Everett Interpretation.
The Philosophical Quarterly,
72(4), 1019–1039.
Wilhelm, I. (2021). Comparing the structures of mathematical objects. Synthese, 199, 6357–
6369.
Williams, P. (2019). Scientific Realism Made Effective. The British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science, 70, 209–237.
18
https://doi.org/10.1017/psa.2023.117 Published online by Cambridge University Press

