See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/45637845
The representation of naive knowledge about physics
Article  in  Studies in Multidisciplinarity · December 2005
DOI: 10.1016/S1571-0831(04)80030-3 · Source: OAI
CITATIONS
17
READS
258
3 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Numerosity View project
Visual Preference View project
Marco Bertamini
University of Liverpool
243 PUBLICATIONS   2,957 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Heiko Hecht
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz
239 PUBLICATIONS   3,312 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Marco Bertamini on 17 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Bertamini, M., Spooner A., & Hecht, H. (2004). The representation of naive knowledge about 
physics. In G. Malcolm (Ed.) Multidisciplinary Approaches to Visual Representations and 
Interpretations. Elsevier. ISBN: 0-444-51463-5 
 
 
 
 
The representation of naïve knowledge about physics 
 
 
M. Bertaminia, A. Spoonera and H. Hechtb 
 
aDepartment of Psychology, University of Liverpool, Eleanor Rathbone Building, Liverpool 
L69 7ZA, United Kingdom* 
 
bMan-Vehicle Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, 
Building 37-219, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA 
 
 
Human beings rely on visual information to learn about the environment around them, 
construct representations of the world, and control their actions. By and large, humans are 
remarkably accurate when it comes to complex motor actions such as catching a baseball or 
hitting a target. In fact, the perceptual skills underlying such actions are not easily understood 
as they are far superior to any visual information processing capability of artificial systems 
constructed to date. In stark contrast to our excellent perception-action abilities, there are 
conditions under which humans make striking judgment errors that are at odds with the visual 
information experienced.. We will describe some examples of such errors in a large 
proportion of the population suggesting that knowledge of the physical world is represented 
poorly in the cognitive domain. We will discuss some explanations for this phenomenon, and 
explore the implications for a scientific study of visual representations and interpretations. 
 
1. A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO NAÏVE PHYSICS 
 
 
Naïve physics is the name given to the field of study into our common-sense beliefs 
about classical mechanics, as relevant to our actions. Naive beliefs are often found to be at 
odds with reality. For instance, when asked where to drop a ball to hit a target on the floor 
while moving in an airplane or on a conveyor belt (Kaiser, Proffitt, Whelan & Hecht, 1992; 
Krist, Fieberg & Wilkening, 1993; McCloskey, Washburn & Felch, 1983), many adults state 
that they should release the ball right above the target. This belief immediately turns out to be 
mistaken when actually doing the task. Even children quickly adjust once they see that they 
overshoot. However, the mistaken "straight-down belief" remains in place. Similarly, when a 
marble's motion upon exiting a C-shaped tube lying on a tabletop has to be predicted, many 
adults mistakenly predict a curved exit path. The same people, upon observing curved paths in 
manipulated video animations, immediately notice that straight paths look much more natural. 
 
In essence, naive physics can only be understood if we conceive of the representation of 
elementary laws of physics in a modular way. Three representational subsystems represent 
                                     
* The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the ESRC, Grant #R000223564 to MB. 

knowledge with little or no cross-talk. Action representations are accurate to the extent 
needed and as a function of how costly it is to correct an action. Perceptual representations are 
often but not always superior to cognitive representations. And the latter - strangely - fare 
worst. To better understand the evidence for this modular view, we describe from a historical 
perspective intuitive physics findings in general and then focus on the new field of intuitive 
optics. 
 
The first appearance of the term "naïve physics" is believed to be in a book by Lipmann 
and Bogen in 1923, referring to the interaction with the physical world in everyday tasks. The 
idea to empirically investigate beliefs and concepts about the physical world was picked up 
and explored by the Gestalt school of psychology (we can include in this the classic work 
with chimpanzees by  Köhler, 1921). An exploration of naïve mechanics was carried out in 
the 1950's by Bozzi, but this work was not published in major journals (see Bozzi, 1990, 
Pittenger & Runeson, 1990, and for more historical notes see Smith & Casati, 1994). The 
term "naïve physics" has also been used in the field of artificial intelligence (for a manifesto 
see Hayes, 1979). A technique known as "knowledge engineering", based on introspection, is 
employed to formulate descriptions of world-knowledge in the language of formal logic (see 
Davis 1990 for a good example, particularly Chapter 7). Such research aims to provide a 
foundation of knowledge for use in robotics (Hayes, 1979).  
 
Within the cognitive sciences, the field of naïve physics studies the common-sense 
beliefs that people hold about the way the world works (as defined by Proffitt, 1999, in the 
MIT encyclopaedia of cognitive sciences, see also McCloskey, 1983, who calls it "intuitive 
physics"). 
 
Although in theory naïve physics may be explored for all natural phenomena, particular 
attention has been given to classical mechanics (Bozzi, 1990; Proffitt, 1999; Shanon, 1976). It 
is probably non-controversial that classical mechanics does offer the most relevant examples, 
because the importance of other aspects of physics, such as quantum mechanics, can only be 
appreciated in the small scale of subatomic physics or large scale of astrophysics. Neither of 
these domains are easily accessible to people's everyday experience of a world of middle-
scaled objects (i.e., from a few millimetres to a few kilometres) (on this see also Gibson, 
1979). Because of the amount of experience that human beings have with the physical 
phenomena in the environment described by classical mechanics, it is intriguing that in many 
instances people hold beliefs that are not just underdeveloped but systematically wrong. For 
example, people can aim projectiles accurately (e.g., throwing a ball) but have difficulty 
drawing the shape of path that projectiles take (Caramazza, McCloskey, & Green, 1981; 
Clement, 1982; Kaiser, Jonides, & Alexander, 1986; Kaiser, Proffitt, & McCloskey, 1985; 
Krist, Fieberg, & Wilkening, 1993; McCloskey, Washburn, & Felch, 1983). Furthermore, 
physical expertise does not always improve naïve understanding. For example, about 40% of 
adults predict the orientation of a liquid surface in a tilted but stable glass to be more than 5 
degrees away from horizontal (McAfee & Proffitt, 1991). Expert liquid handlers, such as the 
professional barstaff at the Oktoberfest, exhibited even larger errors (Hecht & Proffitt, 1995).  
 
Mistaken beliefs are not only present when abstract questions are asked out of context, 
but also extend to cognitive, perceptual, and developmental aspects of knowledge. For 
example, it is physically true that a pendulum will take the same amount of time to swing 
through its arc, however wide the arc (deviations are small for all practical purposes). 
However, Bozzi found that people will only perceptually accept certain speeds that appear 
"natural" to them, and for long arcs pendulums appear unnaturally fast (Pittenger & Runeson, 
1990). Galileo himself only came to believe in the isochronism principle (fixed period) after 
empirical observations and never failed in his writings to point out how this was true even 

though it was counterintuitive (Bozzi, 1990). For projectiles, evidence that perceptual 
knowledge of natural motion is better  than abstract knowledge is for instance in Kaiser, 
Proffitt, and Anderson (1985) but see Hecht and Bertamini (2000) for a case in which 
perceptual judgment about projectiles is incorrect. 
 
With respect to the mistaken beliefs about mechanics two lines of explanation have 
been developed. On the one hand our intuitions may evolve slowly, and our naïve beliefs may 
not have progressed beyond the level of Aristotelian physics, unable to follow the advances of 
modern physics (Bozzi, 1990; Caramazza, McCloskey & Green, 1981; McCloskey, 
Washburn, & Felch, 1983; Shanon, 1976). The alternative explanation is that naïve physics 
reflects capacity limitations in people's reasoning process (Kaiser,  Proffitt & Anderson, 1985; 
Proffitt & Gilden, 1989). It is suggested that people even when people know all relevant 
dimensions or properties in isolation, they fail to integrate them when forming representations 
of complex events. These incomplete representations are then applied to novel situations, in 
which the outcome is therefore inaccurately predicted. It has also been demonstrated that 
representations of events can incorporate too many properties: People appear to believe that 
the accelerating properties of a thrower's arm will remain in the ball after it has been thrown, 
and therefore continue to accelerate (Hecht & Bertamini, 2000). 
 
What is common to all of these examples is the fact that experience of extremely 
familiar events, such as the motion of a thrown ball, does not always lead to correct 
knowledge (either abstract or implicit) about the underlying principles (Hecht & Bertamini, 
2000). Furthermore, and surprisingly, some of these mistaken beliefs are strengthened rather 
than weakened by experience (e.g., Hecht & Proffitt, 1995). 
 
In the rest of this paper we shall do two things. Firstly, we shall briefly outline new 
results from our laboratory that extend the field into what we call naïve optics. Secondly, we 
shall discuss the need for the field of naïve physics to systematically explore the differences 
between the following three levels of representations: Naïve beliefs - accessible through 
introspection; Perceptual knowledge - tested by inspecting people's ability to recognise 
deviations from the laws of physics in simple physical phenomena; Action knowledge - tested 
by looking at what people can and cannot do. We propose that a comparison of these three 
levels is essential to understanding the structure of visual representations. For example, the 
existence of conflicting representations within the individual may reflect a modular system of 
representations, with far-reaching impact in the study of any system, human or artificial. 
Neurophysiological evidence already suggests that parallel systems do exit in humans to 
control visual recognition and to guide visually controlled action (Milner & Goodale, 1995). 
 
As was pointed out earlier, the field of naïve physics has previously focussed on 
mechanics. This is reasonable since so much of what is relevant for human behaviour depends 
on the laws of mechanics, from walking to trying to hit a prey with a projectile. However, 
recent work has expanded the field to cover some aspects of physical optics (Croucher, 
Bertamini & Hecht, 2002; Bertamini, Spooner & Hecht, 2002). Although it is true that light as 
such is never directly the object of our experience (Gibson, 1979), a large amount of human 
behaviour depends indirectly on the laws of optics. For instance, what is made visible by a 
mirror depends on the laws of reflection, because it depends on the way light travels and 
bounces in the environment before reaching our eyes. Therefore knowledge about mirrors 
may be derived from an understanding of the laws of optics (and vice versa) (Croucher, 
Bertamini & Hecht, 2002). In the next section we will summarize a set of naïve optics 
findings. As will become clear, in common with naïve mechanics our representations of 
reflections are surprisingly inaccurate given our wealth of experience. 
 

2. NAÏVE OPTICS FINDINGS 
 
 
Surprisingly few common-sense beliefs about light and optics have been studied 
although there is indication of blatant errors. For instance, many children and even adults 
believe that the eyes emit rays or objects. This extromission belief was prevalent in ancient 
Greek philosophy (Cottrell & Winer, 1994; Winer & Cottrell, 1996; Winer, Cottrell, 
Karefilaki & Chronister, 1996). In this section we will summarise new findings in a related 
area, the intuitive understanding of mirror reflections (Croucher, Bertamini & Hecht, 2002). 
In summary, many participants made significant errors when asked to indicate where an 
observer would be able to see a target in a mirror. 
 
In a set of experiments, participants were presented with a diagram of a room on paper 
(see Figure 1a), and were asked to mark where on the paper a character (Jane) would first see 
her reflection in a mirror. The correct answer in Figure 1a was that Jane would have to be 
level with the near-edge of the mirror. However, participants tended to predict that Jane 
would see her reflection when she was still some distance to the side of the mirror. This 
consistent error remained when participants were asked to position themselves so that they 
could just see their own reflection in a pretend (non-reflective) mirror (see Figure 1b). People 
tend to believe that they would see themselves in mirrors before they actually would 
(Croucher, Bertamini, & Hecht, 2002). This finding is intriguing, since people have a wealth 
of experience walking over to mirrors to view their reflections. Furthermore, we found that 
this error extended to predictions regarding when another object becomes visible in a mirror. 
This was true whether the object was stationary while the observer moved or vice versa. 
 
Croucher Bertamini and Hecht (2002) considered four possible explanations of this 
consistent error. (a) Egocentric mirror rotation hypothesis: Observers may have failed to take 
the orientation of the mirror surface into account and they may have treated the mirror as a 
surface (approximately) orthogonal to their line of sight. (b) Capture hypothesis: Mirrors may 
be conceived as pictures which capture images for further inspection, so that the location of 
the observer is irrelevant. (c) Boundary extension hypothesis: People may perceive (and 
remember) a larger amount of the virtual space than is actually visible in mirrors. There is 
evidence that something similar happens for photographs, and this phenomenon is known as 
"boundary extension" (Intraub, 1997; Intraub & Bodamer, 1993). (d) Left-right reversal 
hypothesis: People have some understanding that there is some left-right reversal in mirrors, 
and may extrapolate from this incomplete representation to expect complete reversal of the 
imagined visual space around a vertical axis, thus misplacing objects in the mirror reflection 
(Gregory, 1997). People would then predict an observer's reflection to appear from the left as 
the observer approaches from the right, and in turn this may lead to an overestimation of what 
is visible from the side (Bertamini, Spooner & Hecht., 2002). 
 
There is some evidence to support all four of these hypotheses, and experiments are 
under way to test them more directly. The actual outcome may be a combination of all of 
them (Bertamini, Spooner & Hecht, 2002). We expect that the complex pattern of results will 
be explained only by a careful examination of the three levels of representations mentioned 
earlier: naïve beliefs, perceptual knowledge and action knowledge with relation to mirrors. 

a) 
 
b) 
 
Figure 1. The two tasks used in Croucher, Bertamini Hecht (2002). a) An example of an item 
from a paper-and-pencil task, including a grey line showing the correct answer, and an arrow 
showing the mean response. b) Photographs of the room used in the pretend task. In the 
second image the person is standing at the average distance chosen by the participants (70cm 
away horizontally from the mirror edge). 
Jane walks through the door and across the room, please mark
the point at which she can first see herself in the mirror
Jane
Mean distance from the mirror edge: -35mm
Mirror

That important differences must exist is already suggested by the fact that the large prediction 
errors (naïve beliefs) that we have documented do not seem to lead to a lack of usefulness of 
mirrors in controlling actions such as shaving or driving a car (action knowledge). Moreover, 
the studies underway in our laboratory also test whether these mistakes extend to perceptual 
knowledge. In other words, whether people would be able to select a correct mirror reflection 
as the most "natural" reflection (Bertamini, Spooner & Hecht, 2002). 
 
3. TYPES OF TASKS AND TYPES OF REPRESENTATION 
 
 
We have seen that there are accepted definitions of naïve physics, but it is also fair to 
say that the question of what knowledge about the world we display in our beliefs, 
perceptions, and action is a broad one, and much overlap exists with other areas. In this paper 
we have briefly summarised some findings, and in particular we have reported recent 
developments that go beyond classical mechanics (Croucher, Bertamini & Hecht, 2002). In 
this section we reflect on the importance of the study of visual representations and 
interpretations as they are revealed by all three main types of tasks used in the naïve physics 
literature: Open questions as well as some paper-and-pencil tasks test explicit (naïve) 
knowledge and beliefs; Judgments about what looks "natural" test what we have called 
perceptual knowledge; Setting specific tasks that need to be carried out by visually controlled 
actions tests what we have called action knowledge. Empirical evidence has demonstrated that 
conflicting beliefs can co-exist in the individual across these three levels of representation. 
 
Research in cognitive neuroscience has led to what is known as a theory of two visual 
systems (for a well documented synthesis see Milner & Goodale, 1995, another recent review 
is in Creem & Proffitt, 2001). Milner and Goodale suggest that one system is mainly involved 
in the processes of recognition and identification (they call it the "what" system). Another 
system is responsible for mapping the location of objects, and is involved in the visual control 
and guidance of motor behaviour (the "how" system) (see also the distinction between 
pragmatic and semantic representations in Jeannerod, 1997). Work on the issue of the two 
visual systems with normal participants has already shown that it is often a subtle change in 
the task that can change the nature of the outcome completely. For instance, when judging the 
inclinations of hills people make large mistakes. A 5 degree hill appears to be about 20 degree 
to the average observer (Proffitt, Bhalla, Gossweiler & Midgett, 1995). People make these 
mistakes any time they rely on a stored representation of the scene (for instance after a delay). 
However, people are accurate when they use an immediate motor response, such as when they 
use their hand to match the inclination of the slope, while still looking at the slope (Bhalla & 
Proffitt, 1999). 
 
In the present context we are suggesting that this new way of understanding apparent 
incompatibilities in knowledge can help us explain what is quite so surprising in naïve 
physics. People can be systematically wrong about laws of mechanics (and optics) to which 
they have been exposed throughout their lives, and even presenting observers with physically 
possible and impossible events does not always allow them to amend their judgment and 
recognise the correct event (e.g., Bertamini, Spooner & Hecht, 2002 Hecht & Bertamini, 
2000; Pittenger & Runeson, 1990; Proffitt, 1999). However, the existence of systematically 
wrong beliefs about the physical world does not get in the way of people interacting 
successfully with it. Climbing slopes, carrying glasses full of beer, throwing balls, and 
shaving using a mirror are extremely complicated tasks for a machine but are almost trivial 
for human beings, although the machine may know the mechanical rules but the human does 
not. The work we have reviewed in naïve physics has demonstrated a clear distinction 

between what we know and what we can do. While people are bad at drawing or recognising 
correct trajectories, they appear to use another system to guide the ball to the basket. 
Conversely, extensive training as a structural engineer will not raise your chances of getting 
all your beer across a busy pub. Likewise, observers who grossly misjudge the location of a 
mirror image when asked to make a prediction are likely to use their car’s rear view mirror 
successfully. Knowledge about basic laws of physics, it is starting to appear, is only useful if 
represented at the correct level for the task at hand. Moreover, it appears that the action 
system experiences the strictest validations whilst the cognitive system, and to a smaller 
degree the perception system, are less curtailed by reality. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bertamini, M., Spooner, A. and Hecht, H. 2002, Predicting reflections and judging the 
correctness of reflections in mirrors, Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Bhalla, M., and Proffitt, D. R. 1999, Visual-motor recalibration in geographical slant 
perception, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 25, 
1076-1096. 
Bozzi, P. 1990, Fisica ingenua. Milano: Garzanti. 
Caramazza, A., McCloskey, M., and Green, B. 1981, Naïve beliefs in "sophisticated" 
subjects: Misconceptions about trajectories of objects, Cognition, 9, 117-123.  
Clement, J. 1982, Student's preconceptions in introductory mechanics, American Journal of 
Physics, 50, 66-71. 
Cottrell, J.E., and Winer, G.A. 1994, Development in the understanding of perception: The 
decline of extramission perception beliefs, Developmental Psychology, 30, 218-228. 
Creem, S. H., and Proffitt, D. R. 2001, Defining the cortical visual systems: "What", "Where", 
and "How", Acta Psychologica, 107, 43-68. 
Croucher, C. J., Bertamini, M., and Hecht, H. 2002, Naive optics: Understanding the 
geometry of mirror reflections, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & 
Performance, 28, 546-562. 
Davis, E. 1990, Representations of Commonsense Knowledge, San Mateo: Morgan 
Kaufmann. 
Gibson, J.J. 1979, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
Gregory, R. 1997, Mirrors in Mind, London: Penguin. 
Hayes, P.J. 1979, The Naïve Physics Manifest, in D. Michie (ed.), Expert Systems in the 
Micro-Electronic Age, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 242-70.  
Hecht, H., and Bertamini, M. 2000, Understanding projectile acceleration, Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance. 26, 73-746. 
Hecht, H., and Proffitt, D.R. 1995, The price of expertise: effects of experience on the water-
level task, Psychological Science, 6, 90-95. 
Intraub, H. 1997, The representation of visual scenes, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 217–
222. 
Intraub, H., and Bodamer, J.L. 1993, Boundary extension: Fundamental aspect of pictorial 
representation or encoding artifact? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 19, 1387–1397. 
Jeannerod, M. 1997, The cognitive neuroscience of action, Oxford: Blackwell. 
Kaiser, M. K., Jonides, J., and Alexander, J. 1986, Intuitive reasoning about abstract and 
familiar physics problems, Memory and Cognition, 14, 308-312. 

Kaiser, M., Proffitt, D. R., and Anderson, K. 1985, Judgements of natural and anomalous 
trajectories in the presence and absence of motion, Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, memory and cognition., 11, 795-803. 
Kaiser, M. K., Proffitt, D. R., and McCloskey, M. 1985, The development of beliefs about 
falling objects, Perception and Psychophysics, 38, 533-539. 
Kaiser, M.K., Proffitt, D.R., Whelan, S.M. & Hecht, H. (1992). The influence of animation on 
dynamical judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 18, 669-690. 
Köhler, W. 1921, Intelligenzprüfungen an Anthropoiden, Abhandlungen der Preussischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, English translation: The Mentality of Apes, London: Kegan 
Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1927.  
Krist, H., Fieberg, E. L., and Wilkening, F. 1993, Intuitive physics in action and judgment: 
The development of knowledge about projectile motion, Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 952-966. 
Lipmann, O. and Bogen, H. 1923, Naive Physik. Arbeiten aus dem Institut für angewandte 
Psychologie in Berlin. Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth. 
McAfee, E.A., and Proffitt, D.R. 1991, Understanding the surface orientation of liquids, 
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 669-690. 
McCloskey, M. 1983, Intuitive Physics, Scientific American, 248, 114-122. 
McCloskey, M., Washburn, A., and Felch, L. 1983, Intuitive physics: The straight-down 
belief and its origin, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 9, 636-649. 
Milner, A.D., and Goodale, M.A. 1995, The visual brain in action, Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Pittenger, J. B., and Runeson, S. 1990, Paolo Bozzi's studies of event perception: a historical 
note, ISEP newsletter, 4, 10-12. 
Proffitt, D.R. 1999, Naive physics, In R. Wilson and F. Keil (Eds.), The MIT encyclopedia of 
the cognitive sciences., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Proffitt, D.R., and Gilden, D.L. 1989, Understanding natural dynamics, Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance. 15, 384-393. 
Proffitt, D.R., Bhalla, M., Gossweiler, R. and Midgett, J. 1995, Perceiving geographical slant, 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 409-428. 
Shanon, B. 1976, Aristotelianism, newtonianism and the physics of the layman Perception, 5, 
241-243. 
Smith, B., and Casati, R. 1994, Naïve physics, Philosophical Psychology, 7, 227-247. 
Winer, G.A., and Cottrell, J.E. 1996, Effects of drawing on directional representations of the 
process of vision, Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 704-714.   
Winer, G.A., Cottrell, J.E., Karefilaki, K.D., and Chronister, M. 1996, Conditions affecting 
beliefs about visual perception among children and adults, Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 61, 93-115. 
View publication stats
View publication stats

