6
The Gnostic Machine
Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa
Technologiae
Bogna Konior
Nothing which implies contradiction falls under the omnipotence of God.
St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, 1273
Loyal engineers must evaluate what biology has accomplished, and not reduce their judgment
to mocking its Creator, who aside from life gave us also death, and gifted us more sufferings
than pleasures. Their judgment should illuminate him as he was. And he was, above all else,
far from omnipotent.1
Lem, Summa Technologiae, 1964
6.1 Introduction: evolving technology
Stanisław Lem’s first-contact novel Solaris (1961) is the Polish writer’s most cel-
ebrated and enduring legacy. It features an ocean planet that conjures up
life with no apparent purpose, at best perversely reflecting human wounds
and desires. Unintelligible, alien, and therefore not easily communicable, the
ocean in Solaris could be an archetype of inhuman intelligence: indifferent,
foreign, and creative in its distorted reflection of humanity. A quick Google
search reveals that multiple artificial intelligence (AI) companies christened
theirproductsafterLem’snovel.Solaris couldbeaprototypeforcomputational
cognition design that is not human-centred: ‘that inscrutable alien might be
wise or cruel or unconcerned’, not an all-seeing God but rather ‘a nebular and
numinous totality . . . [a] big alien brain’ (Bratton, 2020, p. 97).
Summa Technologiae (1964a), Lem’s abstruse, 600-page-long theoretical work is
less known, though it contains the rationale for his whole oeuvre. Titled after
Summa Theologica (written 1265–1273, published 1485) by St. Thomas Aquinas,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

90
Europe
Lem’s philosophical tour de force might make one reread Solaris, and its de-
scriptions of inhuman intelligence, as a theological—at least, metaphysical—
problem. Indeed, many of Lem’s novels trace the limits of knowledge in an
indifferent cosmos. Overviewing the most cutting-edge scientific discourses
of the times, Summa is a work of futurology composed of eight chapters,
each of which reframes theological questions as technological problems. The
first chapter presents Lem’s views on the purpose of futurology, and subse-
quent chapters discuss similarities between technological and biological evo-
lution; SETI; the possibility of computational intelligence; whether humans
could be technologically omnipotent; whether humans could create artificial
worlds and virtual cosmoses enclosed in themselves; machine knowledge; and
whether humans could, akin to gods, engineer new lifeforms.
Though this chapter cannot investigate the matter in exhaustive detail, I ex-
plore how—given Lem’s skilful portrayal of fictional alien intelligences—the
idea of AI appears in Summa. Lem is one of only a few writers from beyond the
anglophone scene who made it into the popular global canon of science fic-
tion. Recent monographs on his work in English (Gajewska, 2021), new widely
reviewed English translations distributed by MIT Press and published together
with essays by media scholars such as Katherine Hayles, and multiple events
held globally to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of his birthday, prove
that there is a rise of interest in his work. This happens alongside a general rise
of interest in technological narratives beyond western Europe and the US.
Questions have appeared, for example, about what ‘non-western AI’ might
be, but when ‘non-western perspectives’ are brought up, they can sometimes
be essentialized as ‘better’ or even inherently more moral for AI design—they
are argued to be more ‘pluralistic’, ‘metaphysically inclusive’, ‘relational’, or
‘ethical’ than the ‘western scientific ones’ (Goffi, 2021; Hui and Amaro, 2020;
Vickers and Allado-McDowell, 2020). Various local belief systems can appear as
exoticized‘others’tobedeployedintheethicalredesigningof‘WesternAI’into
a seemingly more relational, harmonious, and pacified technology (Williams
and Shipley, 2021). Given its ambivalent position with regards to the ‘West’—
whether Poland is ‘east’ or ‘west’ has been hotly debated for at least a couple
centuries (Czaplin´ski, 2016)—we find no proximate salvation discourse pro-
jected onto Eastern Europe. It is not perceived as foreign ‘enough’ to serve as a
usefulfoilagainstwhichmainstreamAmericantechnologydiscoursecaneval-
uate its ‘ethical failings’. In fact, Summa sets out not to take an ethical perspective
and instead takes a disinterested, detached look at technology’s role in human
evolution.
Rather than taking an ‘AI ethics’ or ‘area studies’ approach to Lem’s work, I
prefertoseehimasaformidabletechnologytheoristwhoseworkisinlinewith
contemporary media theory and can enrich its canon. Though some attention
is devoted to Central and Eastern European media and technology studies,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
91
it is mostly within the areas of news media, communications, and political
economy (Demeter, 2020; Downey and Mihelj, 2012). We are yet to see seri-
ous attempts at media theory—or philosophy—in the tradition of Haraway
(1991), Hayles (1999) or McLuhan (1964) to come from this region; that is, an
inquiry into how technological mediation revises certain fundamental axioms
of humanism. Lem’s interest lies precisely in that, to the extent that he even
discards human-centred ethics as a relevant perspective. Summa cannot be used
to redeem perceived sins of ‘Western AI’, but it does contribute hypotheses on
the very nature of technology and how it mediates human knowledge and
evolution.
Before diving deeper into Summa, I first sketch the context: Lem’s novels,
his life under the Soviet regime, his Catholic intellectual scene in Kraków,
and the debates around cybernetics in the USSR. In contrast to Promethean
ideals of both American and Soviet science fiction of the time, Lem was in-
terested in the Great Silence, in miscommunication and failure. He remained
devoted to science and engineering as existential tasks, not as an idealist but as
a metaphysician, and with an understanding that humans operate from a po-
sition of partial knowledge. This he believed true not only because humans are
constrained by ideologies—such as Soviet communism and its restrictions on
scienceandarts—butalsoontologically,bytheinherentincommunicabilityof
the cosmos. Understanding the debates that were happening in Lem’s intellec-
tual circle—his proximity to the Catholic Church in Poland on the one hand
and the Polish Cybernetic Society on the other—helps frame his predictions
in Summa about AI as a ‘gnostic machine’, whose function is both epistemologi-
cal and evolutionary: the production of new knowledge at the limit of human
comprehension as a factor in the civilizational trajectory of our species.
6.2 Lem’s intellectual circle: science, literature,
theology and cybernetics
Summa was not planned as a 600-page monograph. Though several of Lem’s
essays previously published in Przegląd Kulturalny (Cultural Overview), liquidated
in 1963, constitute the core of Summa, the finished book is a long treatise on
the evolution of human science and technology, more resembling a disserta-
tion than a collection of articles. ‘Let’s consider the future of civilization from
the perspective of potential scientific developments,’ Lem proclaims (1964a, p.
125). While one might expect that the philosophical magnum opus of a science fic-
tion writer would be devoted to writing or world-building, Summa is rather a
work of popular science. Biophysicist (and Lem fan) Peter Butko (2006) consid-
ers it equal (or even superior) to formidable nonfiction books at the overlap
of science and philosophy, such as Richard Dawkins’s The Selfish Gene (1976) or
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

92
Europe
Douglas Hofstadter’s Gödel, Escher, Bach (1979), and notes that it was Summa that
firstcomprehensivelyaddressedsomeoftheissuesthatmadethesesubsequent
books so influential and widely celebrated.
Indeed, though he was a voracious reader of his fellow novelists, Lem held
scientific papers in higher regard than science fiction as a genre—it is no sur-
prise that he desired to be seen as a theoretician of science rather than only
of science fiction. He lamented that science fiction rarely transcended its desig-
nated category of genre novels, which he considered ‘trash’, due to dynamics
in the publishing industry, consumerist preferences of the average science fic-
tion fan, and also a lack of ambition, talent, and education among its writers
(1984b, ‘Science-Fiction: A Hopeless Case—With Exceptions’). His interest in
technological trajectories and the future motivated him to study paradigm
shifts in science. In consequence, his nonfiction essays, most of which have
not yet been translated into English, were like guidebooks for Polish readers
to scientific debates of the respective decades, and he was frequently commis-
sioned by the Polish press to comment on the latest developments. After his
retirement from fiction in the late 1980s, Lem penned hundreds of such essays,
seemingly on every possible subject, from 9/11 to social psychology, from poli-
tics to literature and religion, and possible development routes for artificial life
and AI (Bomba Megabitowa, 1999; Rasa Drapie˙zców, 2006; Tajemnica Chin´skiego Pokoju,
2003).
Peter Swirski, the most prolific English-language scholar of Lem’s work,
describes Summa as ‘Lem’s philosophical and futurological opus magnum which
contains his most wide-ranging reflections on the nature and regularities of
technological evolution, including its pervasive effects on human culture and
society’, and, just like Lem’s novel Niezwycię˙zony (The Invincible) (1964b), pub-
lishedinthesameyearasSumma,‘highlight[s]thesimilaritiesbetweenbiological
evolution and the evolution of culture—not least the contingency of their de-
velopment’ (Swirski, 2015, p. 137). In his usual grumpy assessment of his own
work, Lem wrote in a 1964 letter to his friend, Polish scriptwriter Aleksander
´Scibor-Rylski:
My Summa technologiae has just been published . . . It’s such a cybernetic, the-
oretical and pretentious [book] so if you have no desire to bite your way
through this dreadful text, and only intend to keep this brick on your book-
shelf as a memorabilium, [please let me know now] because I only have 3000
author copies to give away, and only 260 copies have been sent to bookstores
in Kraków.
(Orlin´ski, 2017, p. 395)
‘This dreadful text!’—so Lem describes what has been called his crown-
ing achievement, a work that has been celebrated for predicting multiple
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
93
developments in contemporary science and technology, from virtual reality,
which he in Summa calls ‘phantomatics’ (fantomatyka), to developments in artifi-
ciallifeandAI,whichwefindunderthespeculativelabels‘imitology’(imitologia)
and ‘intellectronics’ (intelektronika). Lem rather treated these then-imaginary
technologiesasthoughtexperiments—onlysixtyyearslatercanweassesshow
accurate he indeed had been.
As Anton Pervushin explores in Chapter 7 in this volume, the question of
bio-technological evolution was influential in Soviet science fiction in general,
such as in the stories of Anatoly Dneprov, which concerned machines that
could evolve. Yet, rather than simply imagining humanoid robots as an ad-
ditional link in the evolutionary chain, Summa considers the broader role that
technology as an activity plays in the evolution of human civilizations: how
it produces or staves off existential risk for our species. Published in 1964, it
is unmistakably influenced by the debates around cybernetics, evolution, and
space travel—all hot topics at the time. In fact, young Lem first learned En-
glish when his mentor, psychologist Mieczysław Choynowski, assigned him
to read Norbert Wiener’s Cybernetics (1948) in the original (Bere´s and Lem, 2013,
p. 47). Lem’s task was to review books sent to Choynowski by American and
Canadian universities for the Polish academic publication Life of Science ( ˙Zycie
Nauki, 1946–1953). The young aspiring writer spent many nights in a small
annex, ‘a tad bigger than a wardrobe, but much smaller than a room’, with
the English-Polish dictionary in hand, making his way through Cybernetics or
Claude E. Shannon’s (1948) A Mathematical Theory of Communication (Orlin´ski, 2017,
pp. 175–6).
In 1952 Lem began writing Dialogi (Dialogs), a precursor to Summa. Dialogi
(1957) are part-philosophy, part-fantasy, and contain fictional conversations
between Filonous and Hylas, characters named after Three Dialogues between Hy-
las and Philonous (1713) by Bishop George Berkeley. This eccentric collection
fictionalized many of the conversations Lem had had about cybernetics at
Choynowski’s conservatory, commenting especially excitedly on how versa-
tile a science it promised to be, with implications for warfare, governance, arts,
and literary theory. This obscure collection of strange, fantastic conversations
between imaginary sages drew little attention, not only because it was not as
readableasLem’ssubsequentsciencefictionnovels,butalsobecauseofpolitical
conditions at the time.
The first readers of Summa were largely the intellectual and technocratic
elites of the Communist bloc in the 1960s (Butko, 2006, p. 83). Lem, a life-
long member of the Polish Cybernetic Society, established in 1962, played a
part in rehabilitating the framework. In the 1950s, under Stalin, cybernetics
was considered a forbidden, bourgeois, imperialist pseudoscience. It was not
until the reforms of Nikita Khrushchev that Soviet scientists embraced the
potential of this new science, albeit seeking to integrate it completely within
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

94
Europe
the teleological goals of communist governance (Gerovitch, 2008). In Lem’s
early novel The Magellanic Cloud (Obłok Magellana) (1955), wary of using the term
‘cybernetics’, he instead labelled a similar fictional science ‘mechaneuristics’
(Bere´s, 2013, p. 71). Even so, the manuscript was held by the censors for a year
(Orlin´ski, 2017, p. 260). Competing with evolutionary science, communism
found its own idea of civilizational trajectories in a Hegelian reading of Marx,
where all social behaviours must be directed towards the fulfilment of com-
munism (Sayers, 2019). Within this tautology, all of science and culture should
serve the purpose of social betterment and the only permissible definition of
social betterment is communism. Scientific and cultural inquiry that was not
aligned with this ‘noble’ goal had to be suppressed under the aegis of social
responsibility. Soviet censors were not unjustified in their worries—already
in Dialogi, Lem proposes that cybernetics disproves totalitarianism as a gover-
nance mechanism. In theories of cybernetics, feedback loops are a key feature
of all functional systems, whether countries or weapons. Feedback informs the
‘steersman’ whether the system is working, so that appropriate corrections
can be made. Yet in totalitarian systems, as the characters in Dialogi discuss,
because of censorship and propaganda, the ‘managers’ do not receive correct
feedback—they only receive positive reinforcements. As Filonous says to Hy-
las, such a machine will collapse, like a steam engine without a safety valve.
Even so, though when it came out in 1964, no one quite knew what to make of
Summa—neither science fiction nor sustained scientific debate was part of the
Polish literary scene—with time it became ‘a textbook for a generation of So-
viet scientists and engineers obstructed by the Iron Curtain from contacts with
world science’ (Swirski, 2015, p. 34).
When the idea for Summa began crystallizing in the early 1960s, Lem en-
visioned it as a continuation of Dialogi—another attempt at popularizing
cybernetics. The root of the word cybernetics is the Latinized form of Greek
kybernan—to steer or pilot a ship. In a nod to cybernetics, Summa looks for ways
to ‘steer’ the evolutionary structures of human civilization, however imper-
fect they may be. Yet, in his 1962 letters, Lem already realized that the book
would become more than that—no longer a treaty on cybernetics, but ‘a pil-
grimage to the border of human comprehension’, a futurology that aims to
describe the civilizational trajectory of humanity in a feedback loop with sci-
entific and technological discoveries (Orlin´ski, 2017, p. 448). It is no accident
that the characters in Dialogi are named after a canonical work by a Christian
philosopher—the question of technology was for Lem from the very begin-
ning a question of metaphysical proportion. Cybernetics appeared to Lem as a
theory of totality, as skilled at describing the world—and engineering it!—as
theology promised (but failed) to be.
Lem combined his work for Choynowski—who became a model for
numerous ‘mad scientist’ figures in Lem’s later novels—with literary and
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
95
philosophical ambitions. His mentor in these endeavours was Jerzy Turow-
icz, the legendary journalist and editor of Tygodnik Powszechny, a Polish Roman
Catholic weekly magazine of social and cultural issues, around which many
intellectuals and artists gathered throughout the Soviet times and until today.
As Wojciech Orlin´ski writes in his biography of Lem:
Why was Lem so different from other science-fiction writers internation-
ally, and from Polish writers en masse? Because he was intellectually shaped
by different readings. He read what was recommended by Turowicz and
Choynowski, and so he understood international science better than the
average Polish writer, and he understood the humanities better than the
average science-fiction writer.
(Orlin´ski, 2017, 178)
Born to a Jewish family and brought up as a Catholic, Lem later identified as
an agnostic. Summa explicitly discounts all religious traditions as potential bases
for futurology. And yet, Tygodnik Powszechny, published by the Kraków Curia, its
associated social scene, as well as the significant role that the Polish Catholic
Church played in anti-communist resistance and the cultivation of arts and
philosophy, all mean that we cannot easily discount the influence of religious
themes on Lem’s work. It was in Kraków, in its specific intellectual environ-
ment, that his work was supported and read by the best Polish intellectuals
at the time, many of whom were Catholic and deeply preoccupied with the
problems of human dignity and free inquiry under communism:
Tygodnik Powszechny was an anomaly, the only such publication to the east of
the Iron Curtain . . . while it did not take an anti-communist position—the
censors would not allow that—it did take a non-communist one. This alone
constituted a challenge to the very essence of a totalitarian system, which by
definition sought to subordinate everything to one ideology.
(Orlin´ski, 2017, p. 179)
Given this proximity to Catholic intellectuals, it is not surprising that Lem
titled his defining work after St. Thomas Aquinas’s great theological treaty
Summa Theologica. Akin to a work of theology, Summa Technologiae aspires to grasp
totality and investigate the relationship between technological practice and
human destiny. Where its inspiration—Summa Theologica—sought to describe
the relationship between Creator (God) and His creation (humans), Summa
Technologiae wants to reveal the evolutionary processes that dictate the devel-
opment of human science and society and ask whether creation (humans) can
steer its Creator (Nature, to use Lem’s term). If there appears a deity in Summa,
it engineers the world in obscure ways and wields alien tools, akin to what
Richard Dawkins famously called ‘the blind watchmaker’ in his 1986 book of
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

96
Europe
that title about evolution. In another essay, Lem remarks that the genetic code
is inhuman in construction, assembling itself without a conscious engineer;
it is not simply ‘devilishly complicated’ but rather ‘burdened by unnecessary
complexity’ (Lem, 2016, p. 361). This theme of indecipherable logic, common
inCatholictheology,returnsalsoinLem’snovels.InHisMaster’sVoice(GłosPana)
(1968) scientists struggle to decode an extra-terrestrial message and are unable
to determine its meaning, or even whether it is a message at all. In Fiasco (1987),
narrated by an untrustworthy hero, human–alien communication also fails,
as it does in Solaris. If there is no intelligible divinity, andreason cannot be found
with the ‘blind watchmaker’, where could intelligent design be exercised? Such
is the guiding question of Summa: are humans capable of being the drivers of
their own evolution? Could they rise up to this challenge through scientific
inquiry and engineering?
6.3 Political contingency: science fiction
in Poland
Lem’s immediate intellectual community provides context for Summa and so
does his life as a Polish citizen under Soviet rule. It is also worth looking
into the larger circumstances of Poland and how—alongside his intellectual
influences—Lem’s political life shaped his interests as a novelist and intellec-
tual. If not for his experience of war, and later the Soviet regime, Summa might
havebeenamuchmorePrometheanwork.Asitstands,Lemnotesthathuman
agency is faulty and complex—we cannot say ‘let there be light’ and expect
there to exist a strict causality between our initial design and what we actually
produce (1964a, p. 9). Omnipotent, divine agency is as incorrect a model for ac-
tual technological design as are utopian ideals of the Soviet regime. Lem hints
at this throughout his work.
Commenting on the relationship between science fiction and politics, Ivan
Csicsery-Ronaywrites, ‘the nations that haveproduced most of the science fic-
tion in the past century and a half . . . are precisely those that have attempted
in modern times to expand beyond their national borders’, including Britain,
France, Germany, the USSR, Japan, and the United States (2006, p. 130). Lem’s
works, like the novels of Karel ˇCapek in neighbouring Czechoslovakia, are no-
table exceptions. Poland’s national identity has little to do with the idea of
techno-scientific expansion and, though once a country with some amount of
geopolitical power, over the last two centuries, Poland had frequently found
itself in the midst of imperial conflicts, struggling for sovereignty and un-
dergoing modernization while under occupation by foreign powers. As the
partitions of Poland (1772–1918) came to a halt with the end of the First
World War, Poland regained its sovereignty for a mere twenty years before
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
97
the co-ordinated invasion by the Nazi and Soviet Armies in 1939 commenced
another occupation that lasted until the fall of the Soviet Union in 1989.
Under the Soviets and as is often true of regions under colonial or imperial
occupation, seized territories were like free zones of technological and social
experimentation, laboratories where modernization happened with dazzling
speed, an ‘imperial future shock . . . at a speed that made resistance futile’
(Csicsery-Ronay, 2006, p. 133). The Poles nevertheless ‘practiced resistance
simultaneously through the refusal of modernization (for example, in agri-
culture) and through mathematics and theoretical science’ (Csicsery-Ronay,
2006, p. 146).
As mentioned in Section 6.2, Lem was interested in how scientific develop-
ments, such as cybernetics, could prove the dysfunctionality of the political
system under which he had to live. This often plays out through allegory
or allusion in his novels—naturally, because of censorship—but is rarely the
main theme. One of the notable exceptions is Memoirs Found in a Bathtub (1961),
a Kafkaesque pastiche on totalitarianism, which could only be published if, as
suggested by the censors, it were set in the Pentagon rather than the USSR, to
suggest that it was capitalism, rather than communism, that was totalitarian
(Bere´s, 2013, p. 72). We can suspect that Lem’s characters in Solaris carry Ameri-
cannamesbecausethewriterwouldnotwanttosuggestthatSovietastronauts
couldfailtheirmissions.Laterinlife,whenitwasnolongerdangerousordetri-
mental to his career, Lem revealed his difficulties in navigating intellectual and
creative interests under the communist regime. He also described his distaste
for the social realist stories he wrote as a young man—due to financial needs
but also misguided youthful idealism—as well as his fear for his family and
colleagues later when the regime frequently imprisoned misbehaving intel-
lectuals and artists (Bere´s, 2013). However, he remained on good relations with
many Soviet scientists and writers—an endearing gesture of intellectual defi-
ance. For example, Lem first discussed his novel Golem XIV (1978) in a dissident
venue in Moscow called the Institute of High Temperatures, where the sci-
entific elite of the USSR gathered. He chatted about it to, among others, Iosif
Shklovsky, who worked with Carl Sagan on extra-terrestrial communication
(Fiałkowski, 2015, p. 91).
Though with time, the principles of Marxism–Leninism were modified to
allow for the idea of scientific–technological revolution, especially to justify
the USSR’s space programme, Lem’s characters rarely have any real power
or fit with the Promethean agenda. The Lem hero is not a Promethean
revolutionary taming the cosmos with technology, but rather a defiant
metaphysician-scientist operating within a negative theology, perpetually
aware of how incomplete knowledge is. Additionally, it wouldn’t be an over-
interpretation to say that Lem’s recurring theme of technological systems
evolving to full autonomy and bypassing humans entirely—as in his novel
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

98
Europe
Golem XIV (1978)—originates from his position as a Polish citizen caught in the
midst of the American–Soviet technological race, which happened over Poland
rather than in Poland. Lem’s characters frequently participate in momentous
events that remain beyond their understanding and control. Describing how
dissociation from historical events is common to the Polish modern psyche
in general, Andrzej Leder writes in his book A Dreamt-through Revolution: Exercises
in Historical Logic (2014) that twentieth-century Polish history is ‘transpassive’.
Poles experience modern history, from Nazism to communism, as carried out
by the hands of strangers and occupants, in a dreamlike state, where historical
changes are happening through them, but are not done by them. We find a sim-
ilar logic in Lem’s narratives, where characters have to continually find their
bearing in conditions not of their own making, where miscommunications
and lack of agency abound.
This did not fit so well with what the Communist Party wanted to pro-
moteinSovietsciencefictionatthetime:afuturistic‘ethicalimperialismbased
on a romantic, rhetorical, nineteenth-century vision of humanistic values in
full control of science and technology’ (Csicsery-Ronay, 2006, p. 142). Where
Soviet science fiction was rooted in a utopian narrative of socialist values in
control of science and nature, in Lem’s oeuvre as a whole, save for his earli-
est work, attempts to perfect society produced unexpected disasters. Though
Lem’s early novels, such as The Astronauts (1951) and The Magellan Cloud (1955),
bothofwhichheresentedlaterinlife,alignedwiththePrometheanimperative
of the Soviets, ‘manifold heresies soon entered Lem’s evolutionary narratives
through the back door’ (Jarzębski, 2006, p. 106). Contingency and miscommu-
nication rule Lem’s technological cosmology, placing him in the company of
twenty-first-century scholars of technology, rather than the ideologues of his
time who wanted to use art and science for utilitarian ‘betterment’. As Paul
Virilio (1999), for example, noticed decades later, each technology is an inven-
tion of a corresponding accident. In a recent book Ironic Technics (2008), Don
Ihde comments that, while many have the tendency to describe technologies
as utopian or dystopian, technological development is mostly dominated by
the unexpected. Lem knew this not only in theory, but also through his life
experience:
There is no doubt about the harrowing effect the war years had on the shap-
ing of Lem’s intellectual and emotional outlook on life. The mature writer’s
almost obsessive return to the subjects of chance, luck, survival, aggres-
sion, the military mindset, and the inhumanity latent in humanity is clearly
rooted in the young man’s experiences in the war zone [and later under
communism—BK].
(Swirski, 2006, p. 6)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
99
Indeed, later reflecting on his work in The New Yorker, Lem admits that hav-
ing to assume fake identities and living under a constant threat of ideological
impurity, as well as near-brushes with death, made the idea of full control over
history (or technology) sound like ‘deluded hubris’ (1984a, p. 88). Living under
communism also instilled in him a lifelong mistrust of ‘ideological artifices’,
throwing light on his subsequent distaste for French and American postmod-
ernism, especially for Jacques Derrida (Lem, 1996). In Summa, he describes the
fraught evolution of ideologies in evolutionary parallels:
biological monstrosities cannot survive, contrary to the monstrosities of
linguistic nonsense or intercultural illusion. The punishment for faulty bi-
ological construction is disability or death. An analogous metaphysical sin
[in the realm of culture] costs no penance, because the human mind is a
far more liberal environment for vegetating (or penitential) ideas than the
natural environment is for live systems.
(Lem, 1964a, p. 446)
Lem believed that careful mapping of contingency and limits of human abil-
ity can pose a challenge to the political ideologies under which he had to live,
characterized by the double problem of utopian hubris and censorship of sci-
ence and art alike. In addition to Poland’s fraught geopolitical situation under
Soviet communism, in no small part he was also informed by his intellectual
circle in Kraków, where the Church was the core of intellectual, artistic, and
political resistance, and where the Polish Cybernetic Society in time provided
hisintellectualhome.Letusnowtakeacloselookathowtheseinterestsappear
in Summa when it comes to AI specifically.
6.4 AI in Summa: artificial knowledge
Subsequently reason itself—which, in this period of Lem’s career, seems
to be a kind of self-contained entity initially functioning as a subsidiary
agent in the processes of adaptation and struggle for survival—evolves,
then acquires some autonomy, and through human agency is trans-
ferred into a more convenient environment of machines . . . reason does
not necessarily serve living creatures: it simply treats Homo sapiens as self-
ishly as it does Dawkins’s famous gene, using each human being as a
temporary vehicle for its own transformation and not caring for that
individual’s fate.
(Jarzębski, 2006, p. 110)
Lem’s predictions about AI in Summa are framed by similar concerns that guide
his novels, where humans are unable to communicate with or understand
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

100
Europe
that which is beyond them. Constrained by our perception, not ourselves be-
ing able to know, could we engineer a different mode of knowing? Is it possible
for something constructed by humans to exceed the knowledge-capacity of its
makers? Summa aims to answer these questions on evolutionary terms, consid-
ering how humans could ‘evolve’ a different form of knowledge, even despite
our own limitations.
In his later essays, such as one on the Chinese room experiment (2003),
Lem continues to understand computation in terms of evolution. This lens
prevails in many of his articles published long after Summa. In ‘Artificial Non-
Intelligence’, he discusses robotics engineering inspired by insect swarms,
citing his own essay from 1984 where he suggested that we should develop ‘ar-
tificial instinct’ rather than intelligence (Lem, 2006, p. 377); that is, computer
modelling based on the neural anatomy of insect swarms. He also expresses
interest in ‘biomorphs’ or ‘live machines’ (Lem, 2006, p. 379) and would be
probably thrilled to know that today roboticists model their designs after
viruses(Monosson,2013).Inanessayfrom1994,‘LanguageandCode’,hebrings
up AI in the context of understanding language as a simultaneously biological
and computational form, again discussing it alongside the genetic code (Lem,
2006, pp. 323–42). We could multiply such examples; in the end, Lem left be-
hind hundreds of nonfiction essays. Suffice to say that we already find these
preoccupations in Summa.
In Summa, Lem describes human evolution as remarkable, but not astound-
ing. What we humans have evolved is the ability to do good and harm to each
other in ever-more technologically sophisticated ways (Lem, 1964a, p. 12). But
we do not yet have the ability to ‘light up and dim the stars’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 13).
Our interest in existential technologies that could alter the course of our species,
rather than just better or worsen relations between humans, has been largely
confined to the domain of fiction. Even so, Lem firmly believes that ‘the only
solutionto[any]technologyisanothertechnology’and‘promisesrootedinso-
calledhumanism’havenopowertoaltertheevolutionoftheHomosapiens,even
though they exert significant power over interhuman relations (1964a, p. 12).
Accordingly, he was interested in the existential potential of AI—could it help
us avoid scientific stagnation, for example?—rather than its social dimension.
Though in Summa Lem does not use the term ‘artificial intelligence’, chapter
4—‘Intellectronics’ (‘Intelektronika’)—is often considered the most relevant
section, for it is here that Lem cites Alan Turing’s essay ‘Computer Machinery
and Intelligence’ (1950), W. Ross Ashby’s (1956) work on intelligence am-
plifiers, and Mortimer Taube’s Computers and Common Sense: The Myth of Thinking
Machines (1961). Lem sets up this chapter by describing a hypothetical exis-
tential risk scenario, which he labels ‘the megabit bomb’, when science, or
human comprehension in general, is not anymore able to keep up with the
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
101
volume of information it receives (Lem, 1964a, p. 135). Human civilization,
in consequence, plateaus and then declines. He envisions three outcomes:
first, the creation of ‘synthetic researchers’ that could augment the work of
human scientists, second, the creation of a ‘cybernetic-socio-technical shell’
where civilization could close itself off from ‘Nature’ and control the vol-
ume of incoming information, and third, defeat, which culminates in creating
super-specialized microworlds where each science can only apprehend itself: a
patchwork of scientific filter bubbles (Lem, 1964a, pp. 138–41).
As a futurology, Summa indeed feels quite contemporary. Lem anticipates
John Searle’s Chinese room experiment when he proposes that we should
complicate Turing’s imitation game by imagining two different language ma-
chines. The first one successfully imitates the human brain, can converse with
humans about anything, and might be called intelligent. The second is akin to
a sophisticated gramophone—it contains ‘let’s say a hundred trillion recorded
replies to all possible questions, but it does not understand anything’ (Lem,
1964a, p. 211). (This also somewhat recalls the Shannon–McCarthy objection
to Turing from 1956.) To identify such a gramophone, Lem says, tell the ma-
chine a joke, ask if it found it funny, and if so, ask it to rephrase it so that it
retains its humour, and you shall unmask the imposter soon enough. A mere
few pages later, he also in passing describes how AI should rely on what we
today call cloud computing, describing a
thinking machine built from distributed blocks, corresponding to, let’s say,
cerebral ganglia. Now we divide the blocks and place them across the whole
planet, one in Moscow, second in Paris, third in Melbourne, fourth in Yoko-
hama. Separated from one another, the blocks are ‘psychically dead’, but
connected (through, for example, telephone cables) they become one, in-
tegral ‘persona’, one ‘thinking homeostat’.
(Lem, 1964a, p. 213)
AfterFrankRosenblatt,hegoesontodiscuss‘perceptrons’—systemsequipped
with ‘a visual receptor’ analogous to the eyes, and ‘pseudoneuronal elements,
connected randomly, able to recognise simple images, thanks to learning un-
derthesupervisionofasimplealgorithm’(Lem,1964a,p.229).Healsoproposes
that we should build ‘antagonistic machines’ that restrict and supervise each
other, what we might recognize as an early description of generative adversar-
ial networks (Lem, 1964a, p. 237). Summa is full of such delightful speculations,
which, in retrospect, strike us as especially prescient.
In contrast to these, Lem is overall unimpressed with what he calls ‘the cy-
bernetic return’ of ‘the Medieval mythos of the homunculus, an artificially
created thinking being’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 145). While he considers that it may be
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

102
Europe
possible to create ‘an electric brain’ as a copy of the biological one, he dismisses
this task as belonging to the realm of religious desire, not scientific priority:
There will be no artificial humans, because it is unnecessary. There will be no
‘rebellion’ofthinkingmachinesagainsthumans.Thereisanoldermyththat
informs these concepts—the satanic myth—but no Intelligence Amplifier
will become the Electronic Antichrist. All of these myths come down to a
common, anthropomorphic denominator, which supposedly can account
for the behavior of thinking machines.
(Lem, 1964a, p. 149)
Clearly, Lem was not at all interested in anthropocentric or anthropomor-
phic models of AI, but rather in intelligence amplifiers, black boxes, and
cybernetic models of governance, inasmuch as each of these forces us to
delineate (and maybe exceed) the limit of human knowledge and comprehen-
sion, pushing us to confront otherness and contingency, a theme common
in many of his novels. Precisely because he worries that human civilization
at large is like the characters in Solaris, who turn any potential knowledge-
surface or encounter with the alien into mirrors, he is interested in the
possibility of machine knowledge that could help us deal with the surplus of
information.
Throughout his work, Lem perceived cognitive chaos and the inability to
reason as obstacles to civilizational development. He was concerned that not
only do we humans fall prey to ideological artifice, such as communism, but
also that the domain of science itself generates a lot of noise. The desire to
know and the volume of knowledge is accelerating but human mechanisms
for discerning patterns are weak, preventing our species from understand-
ing the trajectory of our own evolution, much less being able to influence it.
Referring to Ashby’s (1956) influential book on cybernetics, Lem writes that
principles of knowledge can emerge from within a system that operates chaot-
ically and without internal logic. He believed that we should aim to find ways
to sift through this noise and continue producing knowledge, otherwise, sub-
merged in it, human civilization is ‘like a ship built without a blueprint’ and
with ‘no steersman’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 418).
6.5 The gnostic machine
One of the most powerful ideas in Summa with regards to what we may term
‘artificial knowledge’ is the brief mention of a gnostic machine. I believe it to
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
103
be especially important not only because it departs from common anthro-
pomorphic imaginations of AI, but also because it connects so well to Lem’s
work as a novelist and intellectual. It is key to what I would call his ‘secu-
lar theology’ of human technological evolution, where the Catholic tradition
of negative theology, with unknowability of the divine as its centre, overlaps
onto Lem’s life experience of contingency as a Pole caught in the USSR-Soviet
cybernetic arms race. The gnostic machine—only mentioned a few times in
Summa (1964a)—is described thus:
A gnostic machine must take into account, for the purpose of creating a the-
ory of complexity, a huge number of variables, such that the algorithms of
contemporary science cannot produce . . . At the outset we would receive a
theory, coded as, let’s say, a whole system of equations. Would humans be
able to do anything with these equations?
(pp. 234–5)
[ . . . ]
[With regards to thinking machines], how much of the matter is under hu-
man control is—let’s admit it—a matter of perspective. That man can swim
does not mean that he can swim the ocean on his own without a ship, not to
mention an analogous situation with jets and space rockets. A similar evolu-
tion is now taking place, somewhat in parallel, in the information universe.
A human might direct a gnostic machine towards a problem that he—or
his descendants—might be able to eventually solve on their own, but the
machine might during its work open his eyes to problems he had not even
suspected. In the last instance, who has the agency here?
(p. 441)
In a way, the gnostic machine is the opposite of the totalitarian machine of
ideology—the former is governed by opaque, indecipherable, inhuman logic,
where the former is homogenous and overly controlled, reduced to the ar-
tifice or utopianism of human ideology. In a subsequent chapter, ‘On the
Creation of Worlds’, on the surface unrelated to AI, Lem elaborates on this
further, focusing on how we could automate science and metaphysics by cre-
ating technologies that operate at the limit of human comprehension, rather
than ‘imitating’ human-level cognitive functions, which are prone to failure.
The goal is further removal of humans from the knowledge-production pro-
cess, the production of the ‘autognostic or cybergnostic machine’ (Lem, 1964a,
p. 409).
If gnosis is a form of revealed knowledge based on direct participation in
the divine, without mediators, Lem’s description of our technological future
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

104
Europe
resonates here: ‘could we extract information from Nature without the medi-
ation of brains, human or electric—to create something like a breeding farm
facilitating the evolution of information?’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 139). For Lem, this
project follows closely the logic of evolution—he calls this convergence ‘im-
itology’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 427). One potential method is imitating the workings
of in vitro reproduction in order to generate new metaphysics: doing with in-
formation what we already are able to do with life. What interests Lem here is
that humans, by using machines, are able to create life in an artificial setting,
while not completely understanding how ‘life’ works. This is a black box—a
system whose total inputs and outputs are not fully comprehensible to the
designer, all while the design itself remains workable. Could there be an anal-
ogous process but aimed at creating an artificial epistemology? Akin to genetic
engineering, could we ‘do something analogous in the domain of informa-
tion science? Breed and cross-breed information, initiate its fertilisation so that
in the end we receive a grown organism—a scientific theory?’ (Lem, 1964a,
p. 398). In evolutionary terms, for Lem, ‘information should originate in infor-
mation as one organism does in another. It should fertilise, cross-breed and be
subject to mutations’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 399). A total synthesis between biological
and technological evolutions.
Such breeding of information potentially creates epistemic configurations
beyond humans, just as in vitro fertilization lets humans ‘create’ other mam-
malian life. While ‘there is no thought that a human hive mind would think
that an individual brain could not think on its own’ (Lem, 1964a, p. 443), ‘im-
itology’ opens up speculative possibilities of transcending these limitations.
This proposition is also a reversal of theological and evolutionary princi-
ples: a scenario in which a less-intelligent being—humans—might be able to
create a more intelligent one. It is as if monkeys were somehow able to en-
gineer divinity. The evolutionary significance of machines is revealed, partly,
in this process. If in theology, ‘gnosis’—knowledge—denotes insight into the
infinite and the deliverance of humanity from earthly constraints, a paral-
lel phenomenon in Lem’s narrative of techno-biological evolution must be
black-boxed, to some extent automatically performed or mediated through
a machine. ‘Automatic gnosis’ or ‘artificial epistemology’ rather than ‘artifi-
cial intelligence’ is one of the latent promises of computation. One of Lem’s
later works, Golem XIV (1978), considers an example of how this could pan out.
In the novel, a superintelligent computer evolves beyond its initial military
tasks—its traditional cybernetic framework—and learns to perceive human
designs as lacking in internal consistency. It subsequently lectures humans on
existential trajectories, informing them that they are mere vessels for other-
than-human intelligence, just like their bodies are evolutionary vessels for life.
The evolution of intelligence needs ‘reason and consciousness but [is] not con-
trollable by the latter’ (Jarzębski, 2006, p. 110)—intelligence might evolve well
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
105
beyond consciousness and organic life. No novel better demonstrates Lem’s in-
tellectual trajectory from Dialogi to Summa than one that features a computer
evolving beyond its cybernetic, military, and ultimately human applications
in order to play a part in the techno-biological evolution of intelligence and
confront humans with the limits of knowledge.
6.6 Conclusion
Joanna Zylinska, media theorist and translator of Lem’s Summa into English,
writes in her book AI Art: Machine Vision and Warped Dreams that the question
of AI is ultimately about ‘rescaling our human worldview’ (2020, p. 152).
Though what we commonly understand as AI today—machine learning, nat-
ural language processing, expert systems, deep learning, computer vision,
and robotics—are only indirectly discussed in Summa, AI as an idea draws on
multiple ‘sociotechnical imaginaries’ that end up providing paradigms for un-
derstanding the relationship between our imaginations of technology, the
social order, and the designs we actually carry out (Jasanoff, 2015, p. 6). As
discussions about ‘non-western AI’ continue, Lem’s work provides an intrigu-
ing counterpoint to the increasingly common practice of using ‘eastern’ or
‘non-western’ theories of media and technology as salvation narratives for the
perceived sins of ‘Western AI’. Framed by his life and work as a Polish writer,
his unique Catholic-cybernetic intellectual scene in Kraków, and his interest
in how technology alters axioms of human cognition and evolution, the con-
cept of a ‘gnostic machine’ can be a starting point for fruitful discussions about
the possibility of ‘AI’ as an existential technology, not confined to its possible
ethical implications for humans.
Endnote
1. All translations from the Polish by the author.
References
Aquinas, St. T. (1485) Summa technologiae. Basel: Michael Wenssler.
Ashby, W. R. (1956) An introduction to cybernetics. London: Chapman & Hall Ltd.
Bere´s, S. and Lem, S. (2013) Tako rzecze Lem: Ze Stanisławem Lemem rozmawia Stanisław Bere´s.
Kraków: Cyfrant.
Berkeley,G.(1713)ThreedialoguesbetweenHylasandPhilonous. London:HenryClements.
Bratton,B.(2020)‘Syntheticgardens:AnothermodelforAIanddesign’,inVickers,
B. and Allado-McDowell, K. (eds.) Atlas of anomalous AI. London: Ignota Books,
pp. 91–112.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

106
Europe
Butko, P. (2006) ‘Summa technologiae: Looking back and ahead’, in Swirski, P. (ed.)
The art and science of Stanislaw Lem. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press,
pp. 81–104.
Csicsery-Ronay, I. (2006) ‘Lem, Central Europe, and the genre of technological
empire’, in Swirski, P. (ed.) The art and science of Stanislaw Lem. Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press, pp. 130–53.
Czaplin´ski, P. (2016) Poruszona mapa. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Dawkins, R. (1986) The blind watchmaker: Why the evidence of evolution reveals a universe without
design. New York: WW Norton & Company.
Dawkins, R. (1976/2016) The selfish gene. 40th ann. edn. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Demeter, M. (2020) ‘Representation of Eastern Europe in media studies’, Journalism
& Mass Communication Quarterly, 97(3), pp. 586–9.
Downey, J. and Mihelj, S. (eds.) (2012) Central and Eastern European media in comparative
perspective: Politics, economy and culture. London: Routledge.
Fiałkowski, T. (2015) ´Swiat na krawędzi: Ze Stanisławem Lemem rozmawia Tomasz Fiałkowski.
Kraków: Cyfrant.
Gajewska, A. (2021) Holocaust and the stars: The past in the prose of Staniław Lem, tr. K. Gucio.
London: Routledge India.
Gerovitch, S. (2008) ‘InterNyet: Why the Soviet Union did not build a nationwide
computer network’, History and Technology, 24(4), pp. 335–50.
Goffi, E. (2021) ‘Escaping the Western cosm-ethical hegemony: The importance
of cultural diversity in the ethical assessment of artificial intelligence’, AI Ethics
Journal, 2(1), pp. 1–11.
Haraway, D. (1991) Simians, cyborgs and women: The reinvention of nature. London: Free
Association Books.
Hayles, K. (1999) How we became posthuman: Virtual bodies in cybernetics, literature, and
informatics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1979) Gödel, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid (Vol. 13). New York:
Basic Books.
Hui, Y. and Amaro, R. (2020) ‘Designing for intelligence’, in Vickers, B. and
Allado-McDowell, K. (eds.) Atlas of anomalous AI. London: Ignota Books, pp.
53–75.
Ihde, D. (2008) Ironic technics. Copenhagen: Automatic Press/VIP.
Jarzębski,J.(2006)‘ModelsofevolutioninthewritingsofStanislawLem’,inSwirski,
P. (ed.) The art and science of Stanislaw Lem. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, pp. 104–17.
Jasanoff, S. (2015) ‘Future imperfect: Science, technology, and the imaginations of
modernity’, in Jasanoff, S. and S. H. Kim (eds.) Dreamscapes of modernity: Sociotechnical
imaginaries and the fabrication of power. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1–33.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

Artificial Intelligence in Stanisław Lem’s Summa Technologiae
107
Leder, A. (2014) Prze´sniona Rewolucja: ´Cwiczenia z Logiki Historycznej.
Warsaw:
Wydawnictwo Krytyki Politycznej.
Lem, S. (1951) Astronauci. Warsaw: Czytelnik.
Lem, S. (1955) Obłok Magellana. Warsaw: Pan´stwowe Wydawnictwo Iskry.
Lem, S. (1957) Dialogi o zmartwychwstaniu atomowym, teorii niemo˙zno´sci, filozoficznych ko-
rzy´sciach ludo˙zerstwa, smutku w probówce, psychoanalizie cybernetycznej, elektrycznej metempsy-
chozie, sprzę˙zeniach zwrotnych ewolucji, eschatologii cybernetycznej, osobowo´sci sieci elektrycznych,
przewrotno´sci elektromózgów, ˙zyciu wiecznym w skrzyni, konstruowaniu geniuszów, epilepsji kapital-
izmu, maszynach do rządzenia, projektowaniu systemów społecznych. Kraków: Wydawnictwo
Literackie.
Lem, S. (1961) Pamiętnik Znaleziony w Wannie. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. (1961) Solaris. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej.
Lem, S. (1964a) Summa Technologiae. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. (1964b) Niezwycię˙zony. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Naro-
dowej.
Lem, S. (1968) Głos Pana. Warsaw: Czytelnik.
Lem, S. (1978) Golem XIV. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. 1984a. ‘Chanceand order’, tr. F.Rottensteiner, The New Yorker, 30 January,
pp. 88–9.
Lem, S. (1984b) ‘Science-fiction: A hopeless case—with exceptions’, in Rotten-
steiner, F. (ed.) Microworlds: Writings on science-fiction and fantasy. San Diego: Harcourt,
Brace and Company, pp. 45–105.
Lem, S. (1987) Fiasko. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. (1996) Sex Wars. Warsaw: Niezale˙zna Oficyna Wydawnicza Nowa.
Lem, S. (1999) Bomba Megabitowa. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. (2003) Tajemnica Chin´skiego Pokoju.
Kraków: Towarzystwo Autorów
i Wydawców Prac Naukowych Universitas.
Lem, S. (2006) Rasa Drapie˙zców. Teksty ostatnie. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
Lem, S. (2016) Planeta Lema. Felietony ponadczasowe. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Literackie.
McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding media: The extensions of man. Toronto: McGraw-Hill.
Monosson, E. (2013) ‘Can life evolve from wires and plastic?’ Aeon [online]. Avail-
able at: https://aeon.co/essays/can-life-evolve-from-wires-and-plastic (Accessed
4 September 2021).
Orlin´ski, W. (2017) Lem: ˙Zycie nie z tej ziemi. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Czarne &
Wydawnictwo Agora.
Sayers, S. (2019) ‘Marx and teleology’, Science & Society, 83(1), pp. 37–63.
Shannon, C. E. (1948) ‘A mathematical theory of communication’, The Bell System
Technical Journal, 27(3), pp. 379–423.
Swirski, P. (2006) The art and science of Stanislaw Lem. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s Uni-
versity Press.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

108
Europe
Swirski, P. (2015) Stanislaw Lem: Philosopher of the future. Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press.
Taube, M. (1961) Computers and common sense: The myth of thinking machines. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Turing, A. (1950) ‘Computer machinery and intelligence’, Mind, LIX(236),
pp. 433–60.
Vickers, B. and Allado-McDowell, K. (eds.) (2020) Atlas of anomalous AI. London:
Ignota Books.
Virilio, P. (1999) Politics of the very worst: An interview with Philippe Petit. Lotringer, S. (ed.),
tr. M. Cavaliere. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Wiener, N. (1948/2019) Cybernetics or control and communication in the animal and the machine.
Reissue of the 1st edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williams, D. H. and Shipley, G. P. (2021) ‘Enhancing artificial intelligence with
indigenous wisdom’, Open Journal of Philosophy, 11(1), pp. 43–58.
Zylinska, J. (2020) AI art: Machine visions and warped dreams. London: Open Humanities
Press.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/46567/chapter/408129530 by guest on 25 June 2023

