- 239 -
EUT EDIZIONI UNIVERSITÀ DI TRIESTE
Futuribili – Rivista di studi sul futuro e di previsione sociale vol. XXIV, nn.1/2, 2019
ISSN (print) 1971-0720  
DOI: 10.13137/1971-0720/31177
https://www.openstarts.units.it/handle/10077/15705
The geoversal civilization and the unified method of 
substantiation of scientific theories
Alexander Voin, Director, International Institute of Philosophy 
and Problems of Society, Kyiv
Abstract: The problems and threats facing humanity in the age of  globalization require 
the unification of  efforts of  all peoples on the basis of  a universal human value system and 
mutual understanding in ideas about the right path for further development. This is hindered 
by the lack of  a common language, common to all system of  concepts and a method of  
substantiating conclusions. The article shows that such a common language can only be the 
unified method for substantiating scientific theories developed by the author. The Chinese phi-
losopher Zhang Shaohua, during the 5th World Congress of  Geoversal Civilization, held on 
16-21.7.2018 in Nairobi, developed the draft of  the geo-global civilization. The task posed 
by the draft is the elimination of  the contradictions of  modern humanity (people, ideologies, 
etc.) which lead to numerous armed conflicts and the destruction of  the environment. In this 
article I will discuss about the new value system proposed in which morality and responsibil-
ity will replace the pursuit of  material goods and selfishness.
Keywords: Peace, development, concept, values, method of  justification, modern contra-
dictions, geoversal civilization, New value system, World Coalition Government.
Sommario: I problemi e le minacce che l’umanità deve affrontare nell’era della globa-
lizzazione richiedono l’unificazione degli sforzi di tutti i popoli sulla base di un sistema 
di valori umani universali e di comprensione reciproca nelle idee sulla strada giusta per un 
ulteriore sviluppo. Ciò è ostacolato dalla mancanza di un linguaggio comune, comune a tutto 
il sistema di concetti e da un metodo per dimostrare le conclusioni. L’articolo mostra che un 
tale linguaggio comune può essere solo il metodo unificato per dimostrare le teorie scientifiche 
sviluppate dall’autore. Il filosofo cinese Zhang Shaohua, durante il V Congresso Mondiale 

- 240 -
AlexAnder Voin
della Civiltà Geoversale, tenutosi il 16- 21.7.2018 a Nairobi, ha sviluppato una bozza 
di civiltà geo-globale. Il compito posto dal progetto è l’eliminazione delle contraddizioni 
dell’umanità moderna (genti, ideologie, ecc.) che portano a numerosi conflitti armati e alla 
distruzione dell’ambiente. In questo articolo l’autore tratta del nuovo sistema di valori propo-
sto, in cui la moralità e la responsabilità dovranno sostituire la ricerca del benessere materiale 
e dell’egoismo.
Parole chiave: Pace, sviluppo, concetto, valori, metodo di giustificazione, contraddizioni 
moderne, civiltà geoversale, Nuovo sistema di valori, Governo di coalizione mondiale.
Modern humanity is divided by deep contradictions between peoples, coun-
tries, ideologies and religions, which leads to numerous armed conflicts with 
the threat of self-destruction due to the growing number of weapons of mass 
destruction. In addition, scientific and technological progress has led to the 
emergence of other universal human threats and problems not related to 
armed conflicts, such as the destruction of the environment and the possibil-
ity of man-made disasters on a global scale, which would require all mankind 
to unite to overcome them. The task posed by the draft of the geo-global civi-
lization, developed by the Chinese philosopher Zhang Shaohua and discussed 
at the 5th World Congress of Geoversal Civilization, held on 16-21.7.2018 
in Nairobi, is the elimination of the above-mentioned contradictions and the 
uniting of mankind in the struggle for its survival and a worthy future on the 
basis of a universal ideology and value system in which “morality and respon-
sibility” will replace the “pursuit of material goods and selfishness”. In this 
primacy will be given to the interests of all mankind, the value of the human 
person, human rights and the preservation of peace. And as a final goal the 
transition from the form of homo sapiens with his “physical desire” or “ma-
terial desire” or “selfishness” or “ego” to a new “spirit-centered species” will 
take place over a 500-year period. 
I do not look as far as 500 years ahead, but I agree with the above-men-
tioned goals of the geoversal project for the foreseeable future. However, there 
are obstacles to these goals. In particular, the creators of the project realize 
that “humanity, which has long been on the wrong path, will certainly resist 
the new thinking”. But it seems to me that awareness of these obstacles on the 

- 241 -
The geoVersAl ciVilizATion And The unified meThod of subsTAnTiATion of scienTific Theories
part of the authors of the project is not enough and, consequently, a strategy 
for overcoming them has not been properly developed. In my opinion, the 
authors of the project overestimate the degree of determinism in the process 
of human development and underestimate the possibility of dramatic devel-
opment, up to and including self-destruction.
On the path to the adoption of a new ideology and value system are not 
only individuals and groups, in particular national, state and other forms of 
selfishness, but also objective obstacles. The main one is the absence of a 
common language between representatives of different ideologies and value 
systems, as well as between different schools of humanitarian scholars, pub-
lic figures and representatives of different religions, which these ideologies 
and value systems formulate and substantiate. By common language I do not 
mean English, Chinese, Russian, or any other, but a system of concepts com-
mon to all and a way of substantiating statements. This lack of a common 
language prevents countries and peoples from agreeing that there is a right 
way for the further development of mankind, and each country separately, 
and how to properly solve specific universal human problems.
International negotiations on the resolution of endless armed conflicts be-
tween countries gives us an excellent illustration of the absence of above-
mentioned common language. Each side in such negotiations asserts that it 
strives for peace, for justice, for the interests of mankind and for all the vari-
ous forms of good: for spirituality, for morality, etc. But everyone understands 
all these things in their own way. For example, the authors of the geoversal 
project hardly consider fanatical Muslim terrorists to be moral and spiritual 
people. But the fanatics themselves are deeply convinced of their morality 
and spirituality and the rightness of their goal. And in confirmation of this, 
they produce quotations from the Koran. Of course, one can say that they 
misunderstand the Koran. But it is not enough to say so, we still need to offer 
the correct interpretation of the Koran and, most importantly, to prove to 
everyone that it is the right one. And this applies not only to the Koran, but 
also to other scriptures. After all, in the history of Christianity, for example, 
there have been holy wars, the extermination of heretics, the Inquisition, and 
all this was done in the name of God, that is, in the name of spirituality. That 
means that calling for spirituality and not having an acknowledged and relia-
ble method to determine the correct spirituality, we run the risk of not achiev-

- 242 -
AlexAnder Voin
ing the results we aspire to. This also applies to non-religious doctrines that 
teach us how to live properly, such as Marxism, and Freudianism. First of all 
then, a common language is needed, which is nothing more than a universally 
accepted and reliable method of substantiating the truth. And since there is 
none for today, we see that all the above-mentioned talks either do not lead 
to anything at all, or lead to an agreement that each of the parties considers 
unfair and harmful to humanity, and therefore it is soon violated.
The authors of the geoversal project propose to base a universal human 
value system on the general one that was in each civilization existing in histo-
ry, and this, in their opinion, should provide a common language. Of course, 
when developing a universal human value system, one must take into account 
the general value that existed in previous civilizations. But this is not enough 
to develop such a universal ideology and value system that will ensure the safe, 
sustainable and acceptable development of mankind, and to persuade repre-
sentatives of today’s ideologies and value systems to accept it.
After all, as the authors of the geoversal civilization project justly assert, we 
live in an era of globalization that is different from all the preceding ones, and, 
I add myself, in an era of rapid scientific and technological progress which has 
radically changed the conditions of our existence in comparison with previ-
ous eras and in particular given birth to human problems unknown in previ-
ous eras. Therefore, not everything that is common to what was in previous 
civilizations may prove acceptable in our era. And among the priorities put 
forward by the authors of the geoversal project, there are such values the hu-
man person and human rights, which cannot be said to have been general to 
all previous civilizations.
The authors of the geoversal project also substantiate it by the fact that 
“embryo of (future) civilization is integrated from many contingencies in his-
tory and “probability” in reality which is the unique “inevitability” in the 
future”. Here, in an explicit or implicit form, there is a conviction of authors 
of the project in the objective inevitability and lack of variance in the fu-
ture development of mankind and in the fact that they correctly describe this 
inevitable and only possible way and prove its uniqueness and inevitability. 
Of course, when designing the future, we must take into account previous 
development and “probability in reality”. This prior development and “prob-
ability” in reality” limit the possibility of an arbitrary development option in 

- 243 -
The geoVersAl ciVilizATion And The unified meThod of subsTAnTiATion of scienTific Theories
the future. But is the assumption of the complete lack of variance in future 
development justified? As for the lack of invariance of the geophysical and 
biological evolution which have occurred to this day, scientists have no com-
mon opinion. And most of them tend to believe that this development was not 
non-alternative. Then how is it possible to derive from this the invariability 
of future development? This lack of variance also contradicts my theory of 
determinism (Voin 2015). 
But let’s say that future development is non-variant. Does this mean that 
the authors of the geoversal project correctly extract the trajectory of this 
future development from the past evolution and from the “probability” in re-
ality? This is by no means self-evident. I fully share the call of the authors of 
the project to unite humanity in the name of its survival and better future. But 
this unity itself can be understood in different ways. In my opinion, the au-
thors of the project understand this unity too literally, in the sense of complete 
unification up to the merging of all cultures into one, the replacement of all 
languages with new Esperanto. If we look at previous development, for exam-
ple, in biological evolution, we will see that nature has avoided complete unifi-
cation and cared for the conservation and enhancement of biological species, 
although it has in some senses rejected the unsuitable. And the unification, for 
example, of cells into organisms was due not to the unification of incoming 
cells, but to their integration into a complex organism while preserving their 
original individual properties and differences, supplemented with new proper-
ties or functions useful to the united organism. The integration took place si-
multaneously with the increase in the diversity of the unifying elements. Simi-
larly, the evolution of human society took place. On the one hand, there was 
a union along the line: the family, the tribe, the people, the nation, humanity. 
On the other hand, within each new enlarged unit, there was a differentiation 
with division into parties, ideologies, interest groups – even up to football fans, 
who loathe some different teams and on this basis fight with each other, some-
times to the death. It follows that even if there is only one objective variant 
of future development that is rigidly determined by past development and the 
state of humanity today, then there may be different, alternative ideas about 
this path (and there are) and for all to accept the one correct one, a common 
language is necessary as a universally accepted method of substantiating of 
this correctness.

- 244 -
AlexAnder Voin
Finally, in what sense is the expression “inevitability” in the future used by 
the authors? As I understand it, it is used in the sense that this future is in-
evitable, provided that on the way to it humanity does not break its neck, for 
example, in a nuclear world war. This is as good as saying that if we do not 
follow the path indicated by the authors, then we are doomed. But even if we 
go along this path, we will reach the ultimate goal – we will turn into a new, 
absolutely spiritual species only after 500 years. But this interval of time must 
still be lived. And taking into account our present moral and spiritual state, 
well described by the authors, and the extraordinary creative and, moreover, 
destructive power that we have achieved thanks to constantly increasing sci-
entific and technical progress, we must first of all be very careful living not 
only the next 500 years, but even the next 5 years. And for this we need to 
urgently negotiate new rules of coexistence on the planet. And since we have 
to negotiate, it still and in the first place requires a common language (in the 
sense mentioned above).
Even the idea of the World Coalition Government and Parliament (an 
idea that I fully support) proposed by the authors of project does not negate 
the need for a common language, because in this government and parlia-
ment there will be different parties, different groups and different opinions, 
and a common solution will have to be worked out. (Not to mention the fact 
that before the World Coalition Government and Parliament, you still have to 
live). And although the authors of the project offer solutions to all the visible 
problems facing humanity today – the organization of the economy, social 
life, culture, ecology – and even assuming that this is the only right decision, 
life will continue and new problems will appear, which will have to be solved; 
therefore, a common language will be needed to solve them.
But is there in principle such a common language, such a single and reli-
able method of substantiating the truth and, if so, what is it like? There are 
teachings in Western philosophy, the main part of which is post-positivism, 
whose representatives claim that such a common language does not exist in 
principle. These teachings are dominant today. The most categorical version 
of this view is expressed by Kuhn, who wrote that the concepts of science 
cannot be uniquely determined and, as a result, there cannot be a common 
language between scientists and representatives of different paradigms (fun-
damental theories). Others post-positivists argue that the concepts of science 

- 245 -
The geoVersAl ciVilizATion And The unified meThod of subsTAnTiATion of scienTific Theories
are not tied to experience (Quine), that scientific theory is fundamentally fal-
lible (Popper), that science changes the “justification layer” from time to time 
(Lakatos). In general, in one form or another and with some changes, they all 
share Kuhn’s view of the absence of a common language among scientists. 
But if there cannot be a common language between scholars of humanities 
and the public figures who formulate and substantiate ideologies and values, 
then there cannot be more between politicians, who try to resolve internation-
al conflicts on the basis of justice and between ordinary people who practise 
this or that ideology, religion and value system.
The above-mentioned philosophical schools, which still dominate the West 
today, the main points of which have still not been refuted , have a strong 
influence on the transformation of the system of values and morality, not 
only in the West itself but throughout the world. Under their influence, the 
Enlightenment era was replaced in the West by the era of modernism, and 
then post-modernism, the essence of which is reduced to the relativization 
of truth and morality under the slogan: “Everything is relative.” Indeed, if 
we cannot in principle have common concepts and cannot agree on what is 
truth, then the truth becomes relative –moral truth in particular. And from 
this it follows that the only reliable values are freedom and enjoyment, which 
can be obtained by any means. This new world view, which has spread far 
beyond the Western world, has a strong impact on the ability of countries, 
peoples and representatives of different ideologies to negotiate among them-
selves over conflicts between them and the solution of human problems. Not 
only is there no common language for mutual understanding, thanks to this 
worldview there is no desire to find a common language and no belief that 
there is a truth and justice common to all, about which it makes sense to ne-
gotiate. And all these talks about peace, justice and the interests of mankind 
have become only a propaganda cover for the achievement by each side of 
its narrow group goals. And only the theoretical defeat of post-positivists and 
other relativists of scientific knowledge can restore to mankind the belief that 
the truth is one and we can comprehend it.
How do the positions of the opponents of post-positivism and their at-
tempts to refute post-positivism look today? The so-called axial religions – 
Judaism, Christianity, Islam and Buddhism – advocate the opposite point of 
view, namely that “God is one and the truth is one”, and each religion proposes 

- 246 -
AlexAnder Voin
in its God’s name a system of morality and values as the only correct one. The 
only trouble is that these systems not only of axial religions themselves, but 
also their numerous denominations, do not coincide and there is no common 
language for finding out which of them is right. Moreover, these contradic-
tions have often led in the past, and continue to lead, to bloody wars between 
representatives of different religions and even denominations of the same re-
ligion. The most vivid example of such wars is the unceasing centuries-old 
war between the Sunni and Shia sects in Islam. Therefore, representatives of 
religion cannot refute the statements of post-positivists, who base them on the 
data of modern science and rely on its authority.
The position opposite to post-positivists and other relativists of cognition 
and morality is occupied not only by representatives of axial religions, but also 
by many philosophers from other schools, and by many scholars. However, 
none of them has so far been able to refute the post-positivists who cite the ir-
refutable fact that science periodically changes its concepts and inputs. (New-
ton’s absolute time becomes relative in Einstein’s theory; velocity is formed 
according to Galileo’s formula in Newton’s theory, in Einstein’s it is formed 
according to the Lorentz formula, and so on). Based on the post-positivists 
conclusion that the concepts of science are not tied to experience, science 
does not have a unified method of substantiating its conclusions, and its con-
clusions are unreliable and do not guarantee us the truth. It is clear that if in 
science there is no unified method of justifying conclusions, then there is not 
and there cannot be a common language between scientists. And as I said, if 
it does not exist between scientists, it cannot hope to exist between politicians 
and ordinary people.
In my philosophy, I refute the conclusions of post-positivists and show that 
although science changes its concepts and conclusions in the transition from 
one fundamental theory to another, the method of justification remains un-
changed – a unified method of substantiating scientific theories. (Voin 2015; 
2017; 2nd edition). This method was developed in the process of the evolution 
of natural sciences, primarily physics, but until now it has not been not explic-
itly presented and has existed only at the level of the stereotype of naturally sci-
entific thinking. Therefore, natural scientists more or less have a common lan-
guage among themselves and are capable of accepting concrete theories, even 
if not immediately, as provena and rejecting others. And representatives of the 

- 247 -
The geoVersAl ciVilizATion And The unified meThod of subsTAnTiATion of scienTific Theories
humanities and social sciences, in which this method is generally unknown, 
do not have a common language and are divided into many schools that are 
incapable of agreeing and generally accepting this or that theory as proved. I 
presented this method explicitly and showed the possibility of applying it with 
appropriate adaptations in the field of humanities and social sciences.
I showed that although concepts and conclusions change in the transition 
from one fundamental theory to another, if both theories are based on a uni-
fied method of substantiation, then the concepts both of the old and new theo-
ries are tied to experience and only to experience (although in the new theory 
this binding takes place in a wider area of reality than in the old one). And also, 
that although the conclusions of the old and new theories differ qualitatively 
(ontologically), both are true (new ones in the extended field of reality) in the 
sense that they “predict the results of future experiments on the basis of past 
experiences” with a given accuracy and probability. (If we calculate the mo-
tion of a body in the region of velocities far from the speed of light according 
to the formulas of Newton or Einstein, we can guarantee the deviation of the 
result from the predicted value by an amount not more than given with a given 
probability). All this is only for theories substantiated by a unified method of 
substantiation and, naturally, under the conditions for which the theory is cre-
ated. For theories that are not grounded on this method, we cannot guarantee 
anything. Part of a unified method of substantiation is the theory of concepts, 
in which I show that science can uniquely define its concepts and unambigu-
ously bind them to experience and how exactly this is done.
Thus, a unified method of substantiation will give a common language to 
scientists, including in the humanities, to public figures and to all people if and 
when it is be introduced into the education system. I showed that by construct-
ing, in accordance with the requirements of a unified method of substantia-
tion, the theory of optimal morality (Voin 2015); “Determinism and freedom 
theories (Ibidem-, Parts 2 and 3 respectively, 2015); and “The rational theory 
of the spirit” (Ibidem., part 5, 2015). In the latter theory, I posited that spirit 
and spirituality do not necessarily have to be good, and that even a good spirit 
tends to deteriorate over time, and discussed how to distinguish a good spirit 
from a bad one and what to do so that it does not deteriorate. I also proposed 
a new interpretation of the teaching of the Bible based on my hermeneutics, 
based on the unified method of substantiation (Voin 2016a), the beginning of 

- 248 -
AlexAnder Voin
a new macroeconomic theory “Starts a new macro-economic theory”, (Direct 
Media, M. – Berlin, 2014), also based on the unified method of substantia-
tion. I also showed many examples in the books “A specific method of sub-
stantiating scientific theories” (Voin 2017) and “Science and Pseudoscience”, 
(Voin 2014) of the consequences of not applying the unified method of sub-
stantiation, especially in the humanities and social sciences. And in the book 
“Philosophy and the global crisis”, (Voin 2016) I showed how the state of 
modern science, in particular philosophy, connected with the absence in it of 
a recognized unified method for substantiating theories, reflects on the state 
of society and the processes taking place today in the world.
I believe that for the successful promotion and implementation of the pro-
ject of a geoversal civilization it is very important to include in the project the 
unified method of substantiation of scientific theories and to promote it along 
with the theories of Zhang Lan underlying the geoversal project. Moreover, 
this method is organically combined with the requirements of The Oneness 
of All Matters, The Oneness of All Humanities, The Oneness of All Faiths, 
etc., which underlie the geoversal project.

- 249 -
The geoVersAl ciVilizATion And The unified meThod of subsTAnTiATion of scienTific Theories
Biography
A. Voin, “Наука и лженаука”, (Science and Pseudoscience), Berlin, Direct Media, 
M., 2014.
A. Voin, “Неорационализм – духовный рационализм”. (Neo-Rationalism – 
spiritual rationalism), Berlin, Direct Media, M., 2015.
A. Voin, “Эволюция духа. От Моисея до постмодернизма”. (The evolution 
of  the spirit. From Moses to postmodernism), Berlin, Direct Media, М., 2016a.
A. Voin, “Философия и глобальный кризис”. (Philosophy and the global 
crisis), Berlin, Direct Media, M., 2016b.
A. Voin, “Единый метод обоснования научных теорий.” (A specific me-
thod of substantiating of scientific theories), Berlin, Direct Media, M., 2017, 
2nd edition.

