 
1
RMA Annual Conference, University of Aberdeen, 2008 
 
The Parameter of Space 
 
Can Instrumental and Acousmatic Music Share the Same Approach to Space? 
 
Dr Matthias Strassmüller 
m.strassmueller@gmail.com 
 
Introduction 
 
The attempt to arrive at common solutions to space in acousmatic and instrumental music 
may be beneficial in two ways: to generate approaches to spatialisation in mixed pieces, 
and to break up views that may seem incontestable within only one of the two domains. 
Building on the basis that the increased importance of spatial audio reflects a 
fundamental aesthetic evolution of contemporary art music, this paper presents a 
comparative study of approaches to space in electroacoustic and instrumental music. 
Compositional techniques are examined with reference to their deployment of space, both 
those that distinguish the acousmatic domain from the acoustic, and others that 
demonstrate the crossing over between the two domains. A discussion about space as a 
musical parameter explores resulting implications for electroacoustic and instrumental 
music. Some of the content of this paper refers to other presentations given at the RMA 
2008 annual conference, in particular John Dack’s paper about the common origins of 
instrumental and electroacoustic music with regard to space1, Nikos Stavropoulus’ 
‘Composing Space: Spatial Sound Organisation as a Carrier of Musical Structure’, and 
Jonty Harrison’s keynote. 
The ideas in this paper sprang from conceptual considerations for two work-in-progress 
pieces, one for multi-channel acousmatic sound and another for instrumental ensemble & 
electronics with live-spatialisation.  
Three key questions, all dependent on each other, reoccur throughout this paper: 
 
1. What are the attributes of space as a musical parameter? 
2. Is it possible (if yes, how?) to treat space as an emancipated parameter 
independent from the parameters of pitch, timbre and duration?  
3. Is it possible (if yes, how?) to create coherence within a piece by transferring 
motifs of spatial movement to other musical parameters? 
 
Instrumental Approaches 
 
In instrumental music, spatial approaches play an important role for the organisation of 
materials from the micro-level to larger-scale structures. The kind of approaches that 
composers have taken in the last 50 years show great variety, and reach from extra 
                                                
1 John Dack, ‘Space In Music In Space’; see also his article ‘Music In Space, Space In Music’, New Notes 
Magazine 06/08 

 
2
musical spatial images as sources of inspiration to scored instructions for the spatial 
layout in the performance situation.  
Harrison Birtwistle for example compares the perspectival thinking behind his ‘Endless 
Parade’ with a walk through an Italian town. He is fascinated by the idea of viewing 
buildings – and on an abstract level, objects – from different vantage points2, and 
translates this experience into the perspectival shifts in the resulting piece.  
 
Denis Smalley points out, that composers in the 20th century start to regard pitch as 
vertical space, rather than pitch with a harmonic function3. The music starts to evolve 
around the way contour, shapes, and velocities are projected in pitch space (Smalley’s 
terms are italisized here, and in the subsequent text). With the example of Debussy’s ‘La 
Terrasse Des Audiences Du Clair de Lune’, Smalley describes, how listeners tend to 
focus on the placement in, and motion through pitch space, rather than the harmonic 
development of the piece. Smalley describes pitch space as a subset of spectral space. 
 
When considering timbre (or colour) as a means to create proximate and distal effects, a 
three-dimensional grid may be constructed out of the parameters of colour, pitch and 
duration.  
Geoff Poole experimented with rotating instrumental gestures and textures defined by 
these three parameters. Using computer software, Poole calculated the change of 
parameter values when altering the spatial positioning of his scored objects. When 
rotating such an object to a certain degree, the values of one parameter are transferred to 
another, once they move above a given threshold.4  
 
 
 
Fig.1: Parametrical three-dimensionality 
 
In performed space, approaches reach from spatially expressed symbolic content, to 
spatial designs focusing on the movement of instrumental sound.  
                                                
2 CD liner notes about ‘Endless Parade’ on ‘The British Music Collection – Harrison Birtwistle’, Decca, 
2001 
3 Denis Smalley, ‘Space-Form And The Acousmatic Image’, Organised Sound 12(1), p.45, 2007 
4 From my notes on Geoff Poole’s inaugural professorship lecture given at Bristol University, 2007 

 
3
John Tavener’s ‘Ultimos Ritos’ incorporates spatial motion in the vertical direction, 
based on the religious symbolism of the music. The layout of the choirs and of some of 
the instruments is based on the shape of the cross; other instruments – representing the 
heavenly elevation of Christ – are placed on the upper galleries. Maja Trochimczyk 
criticizes this kind of complex spatial design, as – depending on the vantage point of the 
listener – it is hard to perceive the conveyed symbolism aurally. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Spatial layout of John Tavener’s Ultimos Ritos5  
 
In Iannis Xenakis’ ‘Terretektorh’, sound masses are moved around the performed space 
by placing stationary instrumental groups around the audience. They successively play 
sounds of the same pitch and timbre with similar dynamic envelopes. This approach is 
shared by many other pieces, including Stockhausen’s ‘Gruppen’ and ‘Carré’. The 
technique of moving sound through space by overlapping crescendi and decrescendi is 
comparable to the way acousmatic sound is moved through multi-loudspeaker systems. 
 
 
 
 
                                                
5 Diagram from Maja Trochimczyk, ‘From Circles to Nets: On the Signification Of Spatial Sound Imagery 
In New Music’, Computer Music Journal, 25(4), p. 50, 2001 

 
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Spatial layout of Iannis Xenakis’ Terretektorh6 
 
Acousmatic Approaches 
 
Within the scope of this paper I distinguish between three kinds of spaces in acousmatic 
music. First, source-bonded spaces: these are recorded spaces, where the listener can 
identify the origin of the sounds. Natasha Barrett identifies the notion of ‘spatial illusion’, 
which denotes the recreation of recognisable spaces in the concert hall.7 For this purpose 
source-bonding is intentionally used by composers, whilst source-bonding is normally 
                                                
6 From Maja Trochimczyk, ‘From Circles to Nets: On the Signification Of Spatial Sound Imagery In New 
Music’, Computer Music Journal, 25(4), p. 48, 2001 
7 Natasha Barrett: ‘Spatio-musical composition strategies’, Organised Sound 7(3), 313–323, 2002 
 

 
5
undesirable when working with abstract materials. Source-bonded spaces are comparable 
to the extra-musical spatial images mentioned above for instrumental music. However, 
the way these images are used in acousmatic music differs to their use in the instrumental 
domain. 
The second and third categories are composed space and listener space respectively. 
Composed space is created by the composer in the studio; Smalley defines it as ‘space in 
all its facets as composed into the image’8. The listener space is the ‘space in which the 
music is heard’. These two notions are closely linked to each other; and in multi-channel 
approaches to acousmatic music it is questionable, whether they are at all distinct from 
each other. The reason a distinction is made in this paper lies in the parallels with 
instrumental music: The composed space, as comparable to the inherent space written 
into an instrumental score; and the listener space as equivalent to performed space.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: Distinction of spaces in acousmatic music 
 
I would like to start the description of compositional approaches to space in acousmatic 
music with a distinction between the notions of organic and architectonic:  
Most commonly, the aim is to spatialise sound materials in a way that seems as natural as 
possible. In this organic approach to composition, larger-scale musical structures develop 
through a material/composer partnership: the inherent spatial properties of sound objects 
and their spectromorphological behaviour destine a specific kind of spatial movement. If 
applied to multi-channel composition, this approach extends on stereo-panning 
techniques as means for dramatising the intrinsic spatial characteristics of sound 
materials. Jonty Harrison explained in the keynote for this conference, that the BEAST 
approach to sound-diffusion ‘to sculpt the sound in the space and to sculpt the space with 
the sound’9, builds on this organic approach. 
 
In pieces for instruments and electronics it is more readily accepted to use multi-channel 
approaches, which localise sounds into particular loudspeakers. Jonathan Harvey’s 
‘Ricercare Una Melodia’ is an example. Harvey makes no secret out of the kind of 
electronic manipulations he uses, nor does he try to hide the fact that the electronic part is 
projected over loudspeakers. In this architectonic approach to spatialisation, the interest 
lies in the way note materials behave within a pre-defined electronic system. While in 
acousmatic-organic approaches there is normally a tendency to try to get away from the 
                                                
8 Denis Smalley, ‘Space-Form And The Acousmatic Image’, Organised Sound 12(1), p.53, 2007 
9 Jonty Harrison, ‘Sound, Space, Sculpture: Some Thoughts On The ‘What’, ‘How’ and ‘Why’ Of Sound 
Diffusion’, p.126, 1999 

 
6
technological origin of the materials, architectonic approaches accept the listener’s 
perception of the loudspeaker as the source of the sound.  
 
There seems to be a strong divide between organic and architectonic: an organic 
approach aims at blending sounds between loudspeakers, while an architectonic approach 
builds on antiphony of loudspeakers against each other.  
But most multi-channel acousmatic works are partly antiphonal: Nikos Stavropoulus’ 
piece ‘Atropos’ is an example. The opening material – although perceived as an organic 
gesture – puts an initial impact in the mono centre speaker against a texture growing into 
the circumspace.10  
On the other hand architectonic approaches can certainly produce organically perceived 
images. Horacio Vaggione describes his technique of creating a stereo feel, using only 
mono files, through micro offsets between two loudspeakers11; this technique may be 
transferred to multi-channel architectures. 
I argue that organic and architectonic approaches may be used compositionally as two 
extremes of a continuum, for transformational processes – and by ways of contrast. Such 
an approach brings with it an increased flexibility in the use of space as a musical 
parameter. 
 
 
Fig. 5 Organic – architectonic, extremes of a continuum 
 
Spatial considerations are important in the decision making about pitch and timbre during 
the composition process: spectral design factors are used to create impressions of distance 
and proximity in the composed space. This is common to instrumental and acousmatic 
music. Smalley points out that changes in spectra, employed for the creation of distal or 
proximate impressions, are perceived by the listener as actual changes in spatial position 
or movement in space. It strikes me that the parameters of pitch and timbre are then put 
into the service of the one parameter of space. Space as an emancipated parametrical 
value must gain independence from other parameters. The relationship between the 
spectral attributes of a sound and its spatial appearance may then be either supportive of 
each other, or stand in contrast to each other. The paradoxical spatial effects that may be 
achieved by such an approach would extend the vocabulary of spatial articulation. 
Further on it would mean the possibility of transferring motives of spatial motion to other 
musical parameters. 
 
In ‘Atropos’ Stavropoulos uses spatial motives, which reoccur – for example to mark 
significant points in the piece. My question is, how the motivic use of space might be 
                                                
10 See also Nikos Stavroupulos, ‘Multi-channel Formats in Electroacoustic Composition: Acoustic Space as 
a Carrier for Musical Structure’, 2006 
11 My own notes from a conference presentation by H. Vaggione at the Synthèse Festival, Bourges, 2007  

 
7
formalised in a way to be able to manipulate spatial motives by ways of parameter 
changes. 
 
Paul Miller proposes an approach to analysing spatial music with a case study on 
Stockhausen’s ‘Lichter-Wasser’ (for soprano, tenor and orchestra with synthesizer). 
Miller analyses the spatial motion in ‘Lichter-Wasser’ by detecting spatial motives, or 
sequences of recurring movements. The criteria for his analysis are: speed of motion (in 
milliseconds), distance traversed over a period of time (how far rather than how fast), and 
the rate of motion (in the sense of how often the motion occurs). With this method Miller 
detects transformations of spatial motives operating in a flat, two-dimensional space: 
rotation, retrograde, transposition, flip operations and multiplication.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 6: Spatial motion transformation in Lichter-Wasser12 
 
Although this approach to analysis proved successful in examining Stockhausen’s 
Lichterwasser, it is not necessarily useful for other works; unfortunately it only takes 
measurable data of spatial movement into account, and neglects to mention the perceived 
                                                
12  From Paul Miller, ‘A Theory for the Analysis of Spatial Music Derived from Stockhausen’s Lichter-
Wasser’, Proposal for    , Los Angeles,       
 

 
8
spatial image. However, Miller’s analysis shows how Stockhausen puts forward a 
successful spatial design. 
 
Building on the above-mentioned approaches to space I would like to draw up a set of 
parameters for the compositional – or more specifically – contrapuntal use of space. A 
spatial counterpoint uses the extremes of these parameters by ways of contrast, 
transformation, or simultaneity. Although most of the terms here are taken from the 
acousmatic domain, I would like to ask the reader to also consider these parameters in the 
light of instrumental composition: 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 7: Continua between spatial attributes 
 
1. Possibly the most commonly used variable of space is the one of space frames, a term 
by Simon Emmerson13. This parameter represents a continuum from the small to the large 
scale, or – in Emmerson’s words – from event to landscape; or – according to Smalley: 
from microphone space to arena space. 
 
2. I discussed organic and architectonic as two extremes of a continuum above – an 
interesting parallel to this is the concept of a continuum between the notions of diffused 
sound and projected sound.  
 
3. A transformation between, or contrasting use of intrinsic and extrinsic spatial 
characteristics is a well-known feature of acousmatic music. A parallel approach in 
instrumental music could be achieved through sound analysis and orchestral resynthesis 
of instrumental sounds.  
 
                                                
13 Simon Emmerson: ‘Playing Space: Towards an Aesthetics of Live Electronics’, p.97-98, 2007 

 
9
4. Spatial behaviour moves on a scale from a single point location of a sound to a linear 
trajectory, and further to a behaviour covering a wide field. There are many variants of 
spatial behaviours – a comprehensive list is beyond the scope of this paper. With a scale 
of spatial behaviours, parameter values may be transferred to other parameters, for 
example pitch or duration. David Berezan experimented in a similar way with the Flux 
system.  
 
5. A scale of channel formats runs from mono to many loudspeakers. E.g. Annie 
Mahtani’s piece (presented in concert on the preceding evening) creates a counterpoint 
between the stereo image and the eight-channel system.  
 
6. A parameter moving from illusion to allusion, and to surreal denotes the 
transformation from the spatial illusion of a real scene to a surreal space. 
 
Conclusion 
 
At the same time as designing a spatial counterpoint along these parameters, a second 
order counterpoint means moving between them. The musical argument uses either one 
of them, or several of these parameters simultaneously. The possibilities of variation and 
spatial manipulation are (a) a powerful tool for the spatial organisation of a piece, and (b) 
enlarge our vocabulary of spatial expression. In that way the multitude of approaches to 
space may be used creatively, rather than exclusively 
 
 
References 
 
1. Jane Piper Clendinning: ‘Post-modern Architecture/Post-modern Music’, in ‘Postmodern music, 
postmodern thought’, ed. Judy Lochhead & Joseph Auner, Routledge, New York, 2002 
2. Natasha Barrett: ‘Spatio-musical composition strategies’, Organised Sound 7(3), 2002 
3. Ludger Brümmer, Joachim Goßmann, Chandrasekhar Ramakrishnan: ‘The ZKM Klangdom’, NIME 
Conference Proceedings, Paris, 2006 
4. Robert J. Dow: Sound diffusion and the Sonic Image  
5. John Dack : Diffusion as Performance 
6. John Dack: ‘Music In Space, Space In Music’, New Notes Magazine 06, 2008 
7. Simon Emmerson: ‘Playing Space: Towards an Aesthetics of Live Electronics’, in ‘Living Electronic 
Music’, S. Emmerson, 2007 
8. Jonty Harrison, ‘Sound, Space, Sculpture: Some Thoughts On The ‘What’, ‘How’ and ‘Why’ Of Sound 
Diffusion’, Organised Sound 3(2), 1999 
9. Peiman Koshravi: ‘The Acousmatic Listening Experience: Exploring the Boundaries of Spectral Space 
and Tonal Pitch Space’ (RMA research student conference, University of Guildford, 2008) 
10. Paul Miller, ‘A Theory for the Analysis of Spatial Music Derived from Stockhausen’s ‘Lichter-
Wasser’’, Proposal for    , Los Angeles,       
11. Felipe Otondo: ‘Creating Sonic Spaces: An Interview with Natasha Barrett’, Computer Music Journal 
31(2), 2007  
12. Denis Smalley, ‘Space-Form And The Acousmatic Image’, Organised Sound 12(1), 2007 
13. Nikos Stavroupulos, ‘Multi-channel Formats in Electroacoustic Composition: Acoustic Space as a 
Carrier for Musical Structure’, 2006 
14. Maja Trochimczyk, ‘From Circles to Nets: On the Signification Of Spatial Sound Imagery In New 
Music’, Computer Music Journal 25(4), 2001 
15. Richard Zvonar: A History Of Spatial Music, eContact 7(4), 2005 
 

