12
1
13

1
2
3
4
5
6
2,4,6,8,10,12
made with www.bookleteer.com from proboscis
22
Links:
http://proboscis.org.uk/projects/2011-
2015/visualise-lifestreams/
https://www.blasttheory.co.uk/projects/the-
invisible-hand-on-profling-and-personalisation
https://gileslane.net/2015/10/03/reciprocally-
entangled/
https://www.manifest-data.org/about
http://proboscis.org.uk/5098/lifestreams-tactile-
poetry/
http://proboscis.org.uk/5302/digital-alchemy/
https://unbias.wp.horizon.ac.uk/fairness-toolkit/
3
At the seminar I presented the Lifestreams data 
manifestation project (2012) which demonstrated 
how we could use our senses of touch and 
proportion to engage people with otherwise 
abstract and ephemeral information being 
collected about their life patterns and behaviours. 
The project also offered an alternative vision to 
the emerging “Quantifed Self” and Internet of 
Things narratives in which complex human 
behaviours are often reduced to a set of data-
driven variables that can be processed from sensor
data. This also seemed to be an Orwellian vision 
that promised all kinds of benefts on the basis 
of a worryingly narrow perspective.
After the seminar, Marina invited me to Oxford 
to speak to her research group in Human Centred 
Computing about the Lifestreams project and 
my work in general. From there we began a 
conversation and collaboration that has continued 
over the past fve years; most recently resulting in 
the UnBias Fairness Toolkit – my contribution to the 
two year UnBias research project (of which Marina
was a Co-Investigator). 
2
Background
In February 2014 Professor Marina Jirotka and I 
met as participants at Blast Theory’s annual two 
day seminar, Act Otherwise.  The theme was “The 
Invisible Hand: On Profling and Personalisation”, 
exploring many issues around the generation and 
use of “Big Data” in artworks and by artists as well
as more generally in culture and society. We found 
ourselves sharing a healthy skepticism about the 
way “Big Data”, number-crunching and data 
visualisation are often presented as a ‘fnal’ and 
over-arching narrative to understanding modern 
life; as an “end to theory”. We both found this 
triumphalist narrative – that data-driven 
computation can comprehensively explain 
everything – to be troubling and misguided, 
especially as it seemed to be spreading across 
many other disciplines and felds of practice. 
The implication that both research and culture 
could thus be transformed into quantifable 
commodities to be analysed and neatly 
compartmentalised purely by computational 
means was another major concern.
The Data Sublime & A Poetics of Data
Giles Lane
2019-12-09 & © Giles Lane
Published by Proboscis
https://gileslane.net
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3668627
https://bkltr.it/354ygR
d

20
Perhaps by learning to appreciate the data we 
generate through our machines in such a way, we 
could learn additional techniques to appreciate the
way that nature encodes ‘data’ in all its organic and
inorganic forms – as a living experience of 
perception, not only through an analytics of 
extraction and separation.
To create any form of poetry or art is not easy: it 
is not the direct or unambiguous product of 
straightforward rules. To paraphrase Walter 
Benjamin, the energy to create “lies in 
improvisation. All the decisive blows are struck 
left-handed” (One Way Street). That is not to say 
that great craft does not require constant practice 
and experiment – that programmatic exercises 
(think of practising musical scales), rituals and 
habitual activities are not a fundamental part of the
making. Many of these are often used to surrender 
oneself into a fugue state, from which the actual 
work may emerge. Too often, such states are 
elusive, feeting and all that one is left with is the 
dross of making. But this dross might also become 
5
The Data Sublime
The category of the sublime in literary theory and 
aesthetics refers to encounters with phenomena 
that are excessive – too much to handle – and 
which inspire awe or dread in the subject. What 
renders the experience sublime is our ability to, 
nevertheless, address this vastness or dreadfulness 
and to incorporate it into a perceptual register for 
meaning or sense-making. It has been a hugely 
important and infuential category of perception in 
the Humanities for almost three centuries – as 
well as having roots in Roman-era Greek 
philosophy (Longinus’ On the Sublime, 1st century 
AD). Edmund Burke was one of the earliest English
philosophers to write about it (in A Philosophical 
Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime 
and Beautiful, 1756), followed by the German 
philosopher Immanuel Kant (in Observations on the 
Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime, 1764), then 
Arthur Schopenhauer, Georg Hegel, Rudolf Otto 
and others since (notably Jean-François Lyotard).
21
the material of a re-forged piece, worked over 
again and again, made and re-made until its creator 
judges that it has reached a state that is suffcient to
share.
What do we gain from a poetics of data in addition
to it’s more common articulations? A weaving 
together of harmony and dissonance, rhythm and 
inconsistency – a way of encompassing adaptation 
and irregularity within a transcendent whole. A way
to enhance our cognitive abilities by challenging us 
to fex other senses in meaning-making, to enhance
our capacities by widening the frames in which we 
encounter and engage with data.
A poetics of data is about engaging with its 
qualities, not just its quantities.
Giles Lane
London, October 2019
4
We also developed two proposals that were not 
realised, but which coalesced some key ideas and 
thinking which have never-the-less fowed into 
other projects and activities. Both proposals 
revolved around ideas I was beginning at the time 
to crystallise – reciprocal entanglement and the data
sublime. An early proposal in 2014 addressed Big 
Data and the Quantifed Self via the data sublime, 
whilst the other (in 2017) focused on issues at the 
heart of developing Quantum Technologies. 
Marina’s research group is a part of the NQIT Hub,
conducting studies into Responsible Research and 
Innovation (RRI) in the quantum feld. 
Whilst I have since written about reciprocal 
entanglement in relation to quantum technologies, 
the ideas behind the data sublime remained 
unpublished in proposal documents. The purpose 
here is to bring them out into the light as they 
have a renewed relevance to the new project I am 
embarking on (Materialising Data, Embodying 
Climate Change).

18
the movements of dancers. It allows us to 
communicate and experience feelings – innate 
things which are inexpressible, incalculable in 
themselves, yet somehow connect us and give us 
access to the experiences and feelings of others. A 
kind of dark energy perhaps, not something we can
directly measure, but which is nevertheless real 
and pervasive. A kind of knowing that remains tacit
rather than explicit. Often it resorts to ‘apophasis’ 
– describing what is not to indicate that which is 
ineffable or indescribable. Revealing presence 
through absence… the shape of something 
monstrously huge through the sublime. An 
incompleteness that allows us to invest its gaps and
lacunae with something of ourself; an invitation to 
become enmeshed within a whole that is never 
fnished, that expands as others share how they 
engage with it too.
It is often said that great works are the ones which
we can return to, and in each encounter, fnd 
something new. Perhaps that newness is actually 
always already within ourselves – it is we who 
7
awareness of the entanglement itself. 
It is, of course, always relational between the 
person and the thing they are encountering.
Artifcial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Big Data, 
Algorithmic Decision-Making are the latest issues 
du jour, about which we are so often told that the 
data is too big to understand, the algorithms too 
complex to represent and the decision-making 
processes too opaque to be grasped by mere 
humans. Might it be possible for us to make sense 
and meaning of such vast quantities of data and 
computational processes in ways that affect our 
social and cultural aspirations for society beyond 
the purely instrumental? We could consider the 
speed and quantity of the data being generated, 
both individually and societally, as a monumental 
encounter. Such an encounter could then be 
approached as moment of the ‘data sublime’; an 
encounter where artistic practice may offer us 
alternative opportunities to assimilate and make 
meaning from it.
19
expand and increase in relation to the work, not 
the other way round. Perhaps this is why 
perfection is said to be abhorrent and why 
craftspeople through the ages have often 
introduced intentional faws and irregularities into 
their work. A deliberate incompletion, preserving a 
space for the ineffable and unknowable.
But, I hear the objection raised, all this is mere 
metaphor. I beg to differ: it is as intrinsic a feature 
of conscious deliberation and action in the world, 
as the data manifestations we created for 
Lifestreams (and will be creating in our work at the 
Manifest Data Lab) are expressions of data – not 
representations of it. These are not metaphors of 
data, but reifcations – they are the data, simply 
expressed in physical forms that we can 
experience through additional senses to those we 
generally use with screen-based representations. It 
is up to us to devise the grammars of sensory 
engagement that enable us to ‘read’ and make 
sense of our encounters with them. Some 
grammars could be shared, others kept private. 
6
What the sublime offers us is a conceptual 
mechanism by which we can recuperate an almost 
overwhelming encounter with things which are too
massive or complex to calculate, measure or fully 
comprehend. It allows us to make sense, to make 
meaning of an encounter with the ungraspable. 
It describes an ontological encounter that 
transforms something from being numinous (or 
unknowable) into something phenomenological – 
which we can incorporate into a narrative 
experience and a type of knowledge. 
Joseph Addison’s description in 1704, “The Alps fll 
the mind with an agreeable kind of horror” (from 
Remarks on Several Parts of Italy etc. in the years 
1701, 1702, 1703), captures the internal 
ambiguities of the sublime – that horror can be 
at all agreeable – which make it such a powerful 
perceptual register of recuperating the excessive. 
Such a rupture and intertwining of perceptual and 
critical abilities within a person’s consciousness 
could, perhaps, be fgured as a form of 
entanglement between oppositional states and 
phenomena – the sublime being the moment of 

16
used to experiencing it on screens, via 
spreadsheets, tables, graphs, counters, dials or the 
linear waveforms of measuring devices. Poetry and 
poetics are time-honoured ways in which people 
have communicated things that are beyond just 
measurement – emotions, feelings, beliefs. Things 
which are at the very limit of description. Things 
which defy rationality and even reason.
I have been exploring this idea of a data poetics 
through digital materialisation and manifestation in 
projects such as Lifestreams (2012) and more 
recently in the Manifest Data Lab. I’ve written 
before in detail about the ‘tactile poetry‘ created 
by expressing data about our bodies into talismans 
that we can develop a tangible relationship with. 
Talismans that can act as mnemonics or refective 
objects that remind us of aspects of our habits and
behaviours which affect our health and wellbeing 
over and through time – not just in the series of 
fractured, fragmented moments in which we glance
at the digital display on a ‘smart’ phone or watch. 
Like Proust’s madeleine, or the chink of a teaspoon
9
via sight and sound as most contemporary 
technologies currently deliver it. We don’t just 
have to simplify and summarise data in linear ways 
to make it easier to represent visually on a screen 
(e.g. in a chart or diagram), we can also use our 
other senses – touch, sense of scale and balance, 
taste, smell, hearing, time and temperature. 
The data sublime in artistic encounters allows for 
multiple sensorial engagements, where we are 
reciprocally entangled in the possibility for meaning 
making with the work itself, through our own 
consciousness. It is a route away from the 
reductive reasoning of standardisation, 
quantifcation and calculation that lead to 
probabilistic and statistical interpretations. 
Instead it is a route to knowledge that reinserts 
key human qualities of judgement and imagination 
that can encompass the kinds of ambiguity, 
diversity and the unknowable that would be 
routinely excised from analytical systems based on 
quantifcation alone.
17
on a saucer, they help us connect out of the 
mundane discontinuity of daily life into a place of 
reverie with ourselves.
I have also likened this approach to working with 
data as a form of ‘Digital Alchemy‘: treating data as 
a material with which to encounter the numinous 
and transform the self. A process that does not 
seek to break apart into individual bits and atoms 
the delicately intertwined and mutually infuential 
patterns of matter that constitute Life; but that 
comes to an appreciation of the essence of the 
subtle forces that bind matter together. To 
appreciate the powerful bonds of relationships 
between elements that, through connection itself, 
provide sense and meaning to being and becoming.
Poetry – whether in the form of words, music, 
visual arts, performance, dance – is a portal into 
spaces that are beyond the sum of their parts. It is 
always more than the words on the page, the notes 
in a score, the brush strokes of a painting, the 
material of a sculpture, the light projected by a flm,
8
What do Arts & Humanities offer?
Art and aesthetics offer different ways to conceive 
of what happens in complex encounters than those
utilised by the sciences. When you encounter a 
work of art, it is the experience itself which 
determines your aesthetic reaction to the piece. It 
could be one of awe, delight, revulsion or 
indifference – whatever it is, it is driven by similar 
complex factors. Each person’s own aesthetic 
experience is affected by the use of materials, 
colour, scale, lighting, sense of space and 
proportion as well as by their own memory, critical
thought and emotion. There can be no right or 
wrong aesthetic experience: each person 
experiences a work of art in relation to the 
summation of their own existence.
The methodologies and critical analyses from the 
arts and humanities, such as aesthetics and 
categories like the sublime, offer alternative ways 
to develop new ways of realising knowledge from 
data and computational systems through 
encounters that work on multiple senses, not just 

14
A Poetics of Data
Personal data is not only the traces of our actions 
in the world – contributed, sensed, detected and 
recorded online, but a yoke that is coming to 
defne each one of us in ways that may often be 
beyond our ability to directly perceive. In the hands
of governments and corporations it has become 
the means by which individuals, groups and even 
whole populations can be trammelled, their 
choices shaped or ‘nudged’ into convenient 
channels and pathways for ‘better’ governance and 
exploitation. Our world is increasingly managed by 
systems that collect, collate and analyse such data, 
to calculate statistical probabilities based on our 
past actions and behaviours and to infer what 
opportunities and permissions will or will not be 
made available to us.
Such systems both reinforce and are the products 
of the standardisation of difference and diversity 
into a manageable homogeneity. The logic of their 
engineering is to drive forwards an ever deeper 
vision of ‘effciency’ into the fabric of our everyday 
11
and connect it to their own lived experiences. 
In this way we will be exploring the affordances of a
data sublime to make climate science accessible in 
ways it has not been before.
London, June 2019
15
lives – straining out that which doesn’t ft, shaving 
off the awkward edges. Too often it excises 
difference and diversity by simply refusing to 
acknowledge that an individual’s specifc context 
and situation are valid parameters that require 
nuanced judgement in decision-making. In this way 
the vulnerable and excluded experience further 
depredations; injustices and inequality are 
compounded and amplifed. Complexities are 
crudely simplifed and the richness, the colourful 
tapestry of life is elided into a seamless standard 
grey weave. For some, such order may be 
comforting, perhaps even ideal. Yet for many, 
probably most of us, this is a poor bargain.  
A zero sum game in which we have much, if not 
everything, to lose.
To what part of our humanity may we look for an 
escape from such rigidity and reductive 
standardisation? For me, the answer is to make a 
poetics of data that can trigger a phase shift in how 
we might interact with it. A shift away from the 
familiar and ordered modes through which we are 
10
Evolving technologies such as Quantum Computing
and AI – topics of extraordinary complexity and 
subtlety – run counter to mundane understandings
of the phenomenal world and stretch the limits of 
human perception. The intangible, counter-intuitive 
nature or sheer vastness of the science makes it 
hard for people to grasp, and yet so exciting in its 
implications for the future. The complexity and 
interdependence of planetary life and natural 
systems (such as climate) is another sphere that 
often seems overwhelming in terms of the scales 
involved. Modelling climate systems alone require 
some of the most complex computational methods
and powerful resources. How people can make 
sense of such data, often geographically and 
experientially remote, is one of the key challenges 
of our age.
The MDECC project will be attempting to explore
ways in which artistic expressions of data into 
physical manifestations (sculptures, installations and
inhabitable spaces) might offer new ways for 
people to make sense of such remote phenomena 

