
Theory and Reality

S C I E N C E  A N D  I T S  C O N C E P T UA L  F O U N D AT I O N S  A SERIES EDITED BY DAVID L. HULL

an introduction to the philosophy of science
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
THEORY AND REALITY
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
PETER GODFREY-SMITH
The University of Chicago Press / Chicago and London

Peter Godfrey-Smith is associate professor of philosophy and of his-
tory and philosophy of science at Stanford University. He is the author
of Complexity and the Function of Mind in Nature.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2003 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 2003
Printed in the United States of America
12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03
1 2 3 4 5
isbn: 0-226-30062-5 (cloth)
isbn: 0-226-30063-3 (paper)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Godfrey-Smith, Peter.
Theory and reality : an introduction to the philosophy of science /
Peter Godfrey-Smith.
p. cm. — (Science and its conceptual foundations)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-226-30062-5 (alk. paper) — isbn 0-226-30063-3 (pbk. : alk.
paper)
1. Science—Philosophy. I. Title. II. Series.
q175 .g596 2003
501—dc21
2002155305
o The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—Perma-
nence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1992.

For my parents


Contents
Preface • xi
A Note for Those Teaching with the Book • xiii
1
Introduction • 1
1.1 Setting Out 1
1.2 The Scope of the Theory 2
1.3 What Kind of Theory? 5
1.4 Three Answers, or Pieces of an Answer 8
1.5 Historical Interlude: A Sketch of the Scientiﬁc Revolution 13
Further Reading 18
2
Logic Plus Empiricism • 19
2.1 The Empiricist Tradition 19
2.2 The Vienna Circle 22
2.3 Central Ideas of Logical Positivism 25
2.4 Problems and Changes 30
2.5 Logical Empiricism 34
2.6 On the Fall of Logical Empiricism 37
Further Reading 37
3
Induction and Conﬁrmation • 39
3.1 The Mother of All Problems 39
3.2 Induction, Deduction, Conﬁrmation, and Explanatory Inference 40
3.3 The Ravens Problem 46
3.4 Goodman’s “New Riddle of Induction” 50
Further Reading 56
4
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation • 57
4.1 Popper’s Unique Place in the Philosophy of Science 57
4.2 Popper’s Theory of Science 57

4.3 Popper on Scientiﬁc Change 61
4.4 Objections to Popper on Falsiﬁcation 63
4.5 Objections to Popper on Conﬁrmation 67
4.6 Further Comments on the Demarcation Problem 71
Further Reading 74
5
Kuhn and Normal Science • 75
5.1 “The Paradigm Has Shifted” 75
5.2 Paradigms: A Closer Look 77
5.3 Normal Science 79
5.4 Anomaly and Crisis 82
5.5 Wrap-up of Normal Science 84
Further Reading 86
6
Kuhn and Revolutions • 87
6.1 Considerable Upset 87
6.2 Revolutions and Their Aftermath 88
6.3 Incommensurability, Relativism, and Progress 91
6.4 The X-Rated “Chapter X” 96
6.5 Final Thoughts on Kuhn 98
Further Reading 101
7
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks • 102
7.1 After Structure 102
7.2 Lakatos and Research Programs 103
7.3 Laudan and Research Traditions 108
7.4 Anything Goes 110
7.5 An Argument from History That Haunts Philosophy 113
7.6 Pluralism and the Ramblings of Madmen 115
7.7 Taking Stock: Frameworks and Two-Process Theories of Science 117
Further Reading 121
8
The Challenge from Sociology of Science • 122
8.1 Beyond Philosophy? 122
8.2 Robert Merton and the “Old” Sociology of Science 122
8.3 The Rise of the Strong Program 125
8.4 Leviathan and Latour 128
Further Reading 135
9
Feminism and Science Studies • 136
9.1 “Science Is Political” 136
9.2 The Man of Reason 137
viii
Contents

9.3 The Case of Primatology 139
9.4 Feminist Epistemology 141
9.5 Science Studies, the Science Wars, and the Sokal Hoax 144
Further Reading 148
10
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice • 149
10.1 What Is Naturalism? 149
10.2 Quine, Dewey, and Others 150
10.3 The Theory-Ladenness of Observation 155
Further Reading 162
11
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science • 163
11.1 Science as a Process 163
11.2 Kitcher and the Division of Scientiﬁc Labor 167
11.3 Social Structure and Empiricism 169
Further Reading 172
12
Scientiﬁc Realism • 173
12.1 Strange Debates 173
12.2 Approaching Scientiﬁc Realism 174
12.3 A Statement of Scientiﬁc Realism 174
12.4 Challenges from Traditional Empiricism 180
12.5 Metaphysical Constructivism 181
12.6 Van Fraassen’s View 183
12.7 Representation, Models, and Truth (Optional Section) 186
Further Reading 189
13
Explanation • 190
13.1 Knowing Why 190
13.2 The Rise and Fall of the Covering Law Theory of Explanation 191
13.3 Causation, Uniﬁcation, and More 194
13.4 Laws and Causes (Optional Section) 200
Further Reading 201
14
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence • 202
14.1 New Hope 202
14.2 Understanding Evidence with Probability 203
14.3 The Subjectivist Interpretation of Probability 205
14.4 Assessing Bayesianism 208
14.5 Scientiﬁc Realism and Theories of Evidence 210
14.6 Procedural Naturalism (Optional Section) 214
Further Reading 217
Contents
ix

15
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism? • 219
15.1 A Muddy Paste? 219
15.2 The Apparent Tensions 220
15.3 Empiricism Reformed 221
15.4 A Last Challenge 227
15.5 The Future 230
Glossary • 233
References • 243
Index • 255
x
Contents

xi
Preface
This book is based mainly on lectures given at Stanford University during
the last eleven years. So the book is a distillation of lectures, but not only
of lectures. It also bears the inﬂuence of innumerable comments, questions,
and papers by students over that time, together with remarks made by col-
leagues and friends.
The book is written primarily for students, but it is intended to be ac-
cessible to a fairly wide audience. I assume no background knowledge in
philosophy at all in the reader. My primary aim is to introduce some of the
main themes in the philosophy of science, while simultaneously telling an
accessible and interesting story about how the ﬁeld has developed in the
last one hundred years or so. In telling this story I have been led to describe
the connections between philosophy and other disciplines, and the chang-
ing intellectual climate in which theories of science have been offered, in
more detail than many introductory books do. I have also tried, in some
places, to capture some of the atmosphere of the debates, and the person-
alities of the protagonists.
Another aim of the book is the outline and defense of a particular point
of view, but I have concentrated that discussion mostly in the ﬁnal third of
the book. Philosophy of science seems to me to be still in a state of consid-
erable ferment. That poses a choice for the author of a book like this; one
can either abstract away from the disorder and uncertainty, and lay down
one particular vision, or one can use the disputes to tell a story about the
field—how did we get to where we are now? I have mostly chosen the latter
approach. This feature of the book is partly due to the inspiration of John
Heilbroner’s classic history of economic thought, The Worldly Philosophers.
For comments on this work I am very grateful to Fiona Cowie, Michael
Devitt, Stephen Downes, Richard Francis, Michael Friedman, Lori Gruen,
Tania Lombrozo, Denis Philips, J. D. Trout, Allen Wood, and Rega Wood.

Two anonymous referees for the University of Chicago Press also made
helpful criticisms.
For detailed and exceptionally useful comments on entire near-ﬁnal
drafts, resulting in numerous improvements, I am indebted to Karen Ben-
nett, Kim Sterelny, and Michael Weisberg.
Other improvements resulted, as always, from the insight, good sense,
deft touch, and unique perspective of David Hull, the editor of the Science
and Its Conceptual Foundations series. At the University of Chicago Press,
Susan Abrams was constantly enthusiastic about the project and did a great
job throughout. It is a rare pleasure to work with an editor like Susan. I am
also grateful to Stanford University for much ﬁnancial and intellectual sup-
port over the last eleven years. This support has included several grants, in-
cluding most recently a Martha Sutton Weeks Fellowship.
Finally, as this is a book written primarily for students, this seems an ap-
propriate place for me to express my enduring gratitude to the four funda-
mental mentors who taught, guided, and encouraged me when I was a stu-
dent: Kim Sterelny, Michael Devitt, Stephen Stich, and Philip Kitcher.
xii
Preface

xiii
A Note for Those Teaching with the Book
The book is organized chronologically, especially until chapter 10, and fol-
lowing the chronology is probably the most appropriate way to teach a
course using the book. However, there is also a way to use the book in a
course that follows a more thematic organization. Approached this way,
chapters 1 and 2 are background; chapters 3, 4, 10, and 14 form a block
focused on issues about evidence, testing, and theory choice; chapters 5–
11 discuss scientiﬁc change and the social organization of science, along
with the interaction between these topics and epistemological questions;
chapters 12 and 13 address issues more on the metaphysical than the epis-
temological side of the philosophy of science. The book might also be used,
of course, as a supplement to lectures and readings with a very different or-
ganization.
The “Further Reading” sections tend to contain quite a lot of primary
material, including some difﬁcult works and works intended to give the ﬂa-
vor of recent discussion (such as papers from the Proceedings of the Phi-
losophy of Science Association). This is especially true of the later chapters.
The level of difﬁculty found in the “Further Reading” escalates more
quickly than the difﬁculty of the text itself (or so I hope). The glossary, in
contrast, is intended to be very elementary, a tool for those coming to the
book with little or no background in the area.


1
1
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Introduction
1.1 Setting Out
This book is a survey of roughly one hundred years of argument about the
nature of science. We’ll look at a hundred years of argument about what
science is, how it works, and what makes science different from other ways
of investigating the world. Most of the ideas we will examine fall into the
ﬁeld called “philosophy of science,” but we will also spend a good deal of
time looking at ideas developed by historians, sociologists, psychologists,
and others.
The book mostly has the form of a “grand tour” through the decades;
ideas will be discussed in roughly the order in which they appeared. Note the
word “roughly” in the previous sentence; there are exceptions to the histor-
ical structuring of the book, and I will point out some of them as they arise.
Why is it best to start with older ideas and work through to the present?
One reason is that the historical development of general ideas about sci-
ence is itself an interesting topic. Another reason is that the philosophy of
science has been in a state of fermentation and uncertainty in recent years.
A good way to understand the maze of options and opinions in the ﬁeld at
the moment is to trace the path that brought us to the state we’re in now.
But this book does not only aim to introduce the options. I will often take
sides as we go along, trying to indicate which developments were probably
wrong turns or red herrings. Other ideas will be singled out as being on the
right track. Then toward the end of the book, I will start trying to put the
pieces together into a picture of how science works.
Philosophy is an attempt to ask and answer some very basic questions
about the universe and our place within it. These questions can sometimes
seem far removed from practical concerns. But the debates covered in this
book are not of that kind. Though these debates are connected to the most
abstract questions about thought, knowledge, language, and reality, they

have also turned out to have an importance that extends well outside of
philosophy. They have made a difference to developments in many other ac-
ademic ﬁelds, and some of the debates have reverberated much further, af-
fecting discussions of education, medicine, and the proper place of science
in society.
In fact, throughout the latter part of the twentieth century, all the ﬁelds
concerned with the nature of science went on something of a roller-coaster
ride. Some people thought that work in the history, philosophy, and soci-
ology of science had shown that science does not deserve the dominating
role it has acquired in Western cultures. They thought that a set of myths
about the trustworthiness and superiority of mainstream science had been
thoroughly undermined. Others disagreed, of course, and the resulting de-
bates swirled across the intellectual scene, frequently entering political dis-
cussion as well. From time to time, scientiﬁc work itself was affected, espe-
cially in the social sciences. These debates came to be known as the “Science
Wars,” a phrase that conveys a sense of how heated things became.
The Science Wars eventually cooled down, but now, as I write these
words, it is fair to say that there is still a great deal of disagreement about
even the most basic questions concerning the nature and status of scientiﬁc
knowledge. These disagreements usually do not have much inﬂuence on
the day-to-day practice of science, but sometimes they do. And they have
huge importance for general discussions of human knowledge, cultural
change, and our overall place in the universe. This book aims to introduce
you to this remarkable series of debates, and to give you an understanding
of the present situation.
1.2 The Scope of the Theory
If we want to understand how science works, it seems that the ﬁrst thing
we need to do is work out what exactly we are trying to explain. Where
does science begin and end? Which kinds of activity count as “science”?
Unfortunately this is not something we can settle in advance. There is a
lot of disagreement about what counts as science, and these disagreements
are connected to all the other issues discussed in this book.
There is consensus about some central cases. People often think of
physics as the purest example of science. Certainly physics has had a heroic
history and a central role in the development of modern science. Molecu-
lar biology, however, is probably the science that has developed most rap-
idly and impressively over the past ﬁfty years or so.
These seem to be central examples of science, though even here we en-
2
Chapter One

counter hints of controversy. A few have suggested that theoretical physics
is becoming less “scientiﬁc” than it used to be, as it is evolving into an es-
oteric, mathematical model–building exercise that has little contact with
the real world (Horgan 1996). And molecular biology has recently been
acquiring connections with business and industry that make it, in the eyes
of some, a less exemplary science than it once was. Still, examples like
these give us a natural starting point. The work done by physicists and mo-
lecular biologists when they test hypotheses is science. And playing a game
of basketball, no matter how well one plays, is not doing science. But in the
area between these clear cases, disagreement reigns.
At one time the classiﬁcation of economics and psychology as sciences
was controversial. Those ﬁelds have now settled into a scientiﬁc status, at
least within the United States and similar countries. (Economics retains an
amusing qualiﬁer; it is often called “the dismal science,” a phrase due to
Thomas Carlyle.) There is still a much-debated border region, however,
and at the moment this includes areas like anthropology and archaeology.
At Stanford University, where I teach, this kind of debate was one element
of a process in which the Department of Anthropology split into two sep-
arate departments. Is anthropology, the general study of humankind, a
fully scientiﬁc discipline that should be closely linked to biology, or is it a
more “interpretive” discipline that should be more closely connected to the
humanities?
The existence of this gray area should not be surprising, because in con-
temporary society the word “science” is a loaded and rhetorically powerful
one. People will often ﬁnd it a useful tactic to describe work in a border-
line area as “scientiﬁc” or as “unscientiﬁc.” Some will call a ﬁeld scientiﬁc
to suggest that it uses rigorous methods and hence delivers results we
should trust. Less commonly, but occasionally, a person might call an in-
vestigation scientiﬁc in order to say something negative about it—to sug-
gest that it is dehumanizing, perhaps. (The term “scientistic” is more often
used when a negative impression is to be conveyed.) Because the words
“science” and “scientiﬁc” have these rhetorical uses, we should not be sur-
prised that people constantly argue back and forth about which kinds of
intellectual work count as science.
The history of the term “science” is also relevant here. The current uses
of the words “science” and “scientist” developed quite recently. The word
“science” is derived from the Latin word “scientia.” In the ancient, medi-
eval, and early modern world, “scientia” referred to the results of logical
demonstrations that revealed general and necessary truths. Scientia could be
gained in various ﬁelds, but the kind of proof involved was what we would
Introduction
3

now mostly associate with mathematics and geometry. Around the seven-
teenth century, when modern science began its rise, the ﬁelds that we would
now call science were more usually called “natural philosophy” (physics,
astronomy, and other inquiries into the causes of things) or “natural his-
tory” (botany, zoology, and other descriptions of the contents of the world).
Over time, the term “science” came to be used for work with closer links to
observation and experiment, and the association between science and an
ideal of conclusive proof receded. The current senses of the term “science”
and the associated word “scientist” are products of the nineteenth century.
Given the rhetorical load carried by the word “science,” we should not
expect to be able to lay down, here in chapter 1, an agreed-on list of what
is included in science and what is not. For now we will have to let the gray
area remain gray.
A further complication comes from the fact that philosophical (and
other) theories differ a lot in how broadly they conceive of science. Some
writers use terms like “science” or “scientiﬁc” for any work that assesses
ideas and solves problems in a way guided by observational evidence. Sci-
ence is seen as something found in all human cultures, even though the
word is a Western invention. But there are also views that construe “sci-
ence” more narrowly, seeing it as a cultural phenomenon that is localized
in space and time. For views of this kind, it was only the Scientiﬁc Revolu-
tion of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Europe that gave us sci-
ence in the full sense. Before that, we ﬁnd the initial “roots” or precursors
of science in ancient Greece, some contributions from the Arab world and
from the Scholastic tradition in the late Middle Ages, but not much else. So
this is a view in which science is treated as a special social institution with
a deﬁnite history. Science is something that descends from speciﬁc people
and places, and especially from a key collection of Europeans, including
Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, Boyle, and Newton, who all lived
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
To set things up this way is to see science as unlike the kinds of investi-
gation and knowledge that routinely go along with farming, architecture,
and other kinds of technology. So a view like this need not claim that
people in nonscientiﬁc cultures must be ignorant or stupid; the idea is that
in order to understand science, we need to distinguish it from other kinds
of investigation of the world. And we need to work out how one approach
to knowledge developed by a small group of Europeans turned out to have
such spectacular consequences for humanity.
As we move from theory to theory in this book, we will ﬁnd some people
construing science broadly, others narrowly, and others in a way that lies in
between. But this does not stop us from outlining, in advance, what kind
4
Chapter One

of understanding we would eventually like to have. However we choose to
use the word “science,” in the end we should try to develop both
1. a general understanding of how humans gain knowledge of the world around
them and
2. an understanding of what makes the work descended from the Scientiﬁc Revo-
lution different from other kinds of investigation of the world.
We will move back and forth between these two kinds of questions through-
out the book.
Before leaving this topic, there is one other possibility that should be
mentioned. How conﬁdent should we be that all the work we call “sci-
ence,” even in the narrower sense described above, has that much in com-
mon? One of the hazards of philosophy is the temptation to come up with
theories that are too broad and sweeping. “Theories of science” need to be
scrutinized with this problem in mind.
1.3 What Kind of Theory?
This book is an introduction to the philosophy of science. But most of the
book focuses on one set of issues in that ﬁeld. Within the philosophy of sci-
ence, we can distinguish between epistemological issues and metaphysical
issues (as well as issues that fall into neither category). Epistemology is the
side of philosophy that is concerned with questions about knowledge, evi-
dence, and rationality. Metaphysics, a more controversial part of philos-
ophy, deals with general questions about the nature of reality. Philosophy
of science overlaps with both of these.
Most of the issues discussed in this book are, broadly speaking, episte-
mological issues. For example, we will be concerned with questions about
how observational evidence can justify a scientiﬁc theory. We will also ask
whether we have reason to hope that science can succeed in describing the
world “as it really is.” But we will occasionally encounter metaphysical is-
sues, and issues in the philosophy of language. The discussion will intersect
with work in the history of science and other ﬁelds as well.
All of philosophy is plagued with discussion and anxiety about how
philosophical work should be done and what a philosophical theory should
try to do. So we will have to deal with disagreement about the right form
for a philosophical theory of science, and disagreement about which ques-
tions philosophers should be asking. One obvious possibility is that we
might try for an understanding of scientiﬁc thinking. In the twentieth cen-
tury, many philosophers rejected this idea, insisting that we should seek a
Introduction
5

logical theory of science. That is, we should try to understand the abstract
structure of scientiﬁc theories and the relationships between theories and
evidence. A third option is that we should try to come up with a method-
ology, a set of rules or procedures that scientists do or should follow. In
more recent years, philosophers inﬂuenced by historical work have wanted
to give a general theory of scientiﬁc change.
A distinction that is very important here is the distinction between de-
scriptive and normative theories. A descriptive theory is an attempt to de-
scribe what actually goes on, or what something is like, without making
value judgments. A normative theory does make value judgments; it talks
about what should go on, or what things should be like. Some theories
about science are supposed to be descriptive only. But most of the views we
will look at do have a normative element, either ofﬁcially or unofﬁcially.
When assessing general claims about science, it is a good principle to con-
stantly ask: “Is this claim intended to be descriptive or normative, or both?”
For some people, the crucial question we need to answer about science
is whether or not it is “objective.” But this term has become an extremely
slippery one, used to mean a number of very different things. Sometimes
objectivity is taken to mean the absence of bias; objectivity is impartiality
or fairness. But the term “objective” is also often used to express claims
about whether the existence of something is independent of our minds. A
person might wonder whether there really is an “objective reality,” that is
to say, a reality that exists regardless of how people conceptualize or de-
scribe it. We might ask whether scientiﬁc theories can ever describe a real-
ity that exists in this sense. Questions like that go far beyond any issue
about the absence of bias and take us into deep philosophical waters.
Because of these ambiguities, I will often avoid the terms “objective”
and “objectivity.” But the questions that tend to be asked using those terms
will be addressed, using different language, throughout the book. And I
will return to “objectivity” in the ﬁnal chapter.
Another famous phrase is “scientiﬁc method.” Perhaps this is what most
people have in mind when they imagine giving a general theory of science.
The idea of describing a special method that scientists do or should follow is
old. In the seventeenth century, Francis Bacon and René Descartes, among
others, tried to give detailed speciﬁcations of how scientists should proceed.
Although describing a special scientiﬁc method looks like a natural thing to
try to do, during the twentieth century many philosophers and others be-
came skeptical about the idea of giving anything like a recipe for science. Sci-
ence, it was argued, is too creative and unpredictable a process for there to
be a recipe that describes it—this is especially true in the case of great scien-
tists like Newton, Darwin, and Einstein. For a long time it was common for
6
Chapter One

science textbooks to have an early section describing “the scientiﬁc method,”
but recently textbooks seem to have become more cautious about this.
I said that much twentieth-century philosophy of science aimed at de-
scribing the logical structure of science. What does this mean? The idea is
that the philosopher should think of a scientiﬁc theory as an abstract struc-
ture, something like a set of interrelated sentences. The philosopher aims
to give a description of the logical relations between the sentences in the
theory and the relations between the theory and observational evidence.
Philosophy can also try to describe the logical relations between different
scientiﬁc theories in related ﬁelds.
Philosophers taking this approach tend to be enthusiastic about the tools
of mathematical logic. They prize the rigor of their work. This kind of phi-
losophy has often prompted frustration in people working on the actual
history and social structure of science. The crusty old philosophers seemed
to be deliberately removing their work from any contact with science as it
is actually conducted, perhaps in order to hang onto a set of myths about
the perfect rationality of the scientiﬁc enterprise, or in order to have noth-
ing interfere with the endless games that can be played with imaginary the-
ories expressed in artiﬁcial languages. This kind of logic-based philosophy
of science will be discussed in the early chapters of this book. I will argue
that the logical investigations were often very interesting, but ultimately
my sympathy lies with those who insist that philosophy of science should
have more contact with actual scientiﬁc work.
If looking for a recipe is too simplistic, and looking for a logical theory
is too abstract, what might we look for instead? Here is an answer that will
be gradually developed as the book goes on: we can try to describe the sci-
entiﬁc strategy for investigating the world. And we can then hope to de-
scribe what sort of connection to the world we are likely to achieve by fol-
lowing that strategy. Initially, this may sound vague or impossible, or both.
But by the end of the book I hope to show that it makes good sense.
Several times now I have mentioned ﬁelds that “neighbor” on philos-
ophy of science—history of science, sociology of science, and parts of psy-
chology, for example. What is the relation between philosophical theories
of science and ideas in these neighboring ﬁelds? This question was part of
the twentieth-century roller-coaster ride that I referred to earlier. Some
people in these neighboring ﬁelds thought they had reason to believe that
the whole idea of a philosophical theory of science is misguided. They ex-
pected that philosophy of science would be replaced by ﬁelds like sociology.
This replacement never occurred. What did happen was that people in these
neighboring ﬁelds constantly found themselves doing philosophy them-
selves, whether they realized it or not. They kept running into questions
Introduction
7

about truth, about justiﬁcation, and about the connections between theo-
ries and reality. The philosophical problems refused to go away.
Philosophers themselves differ a great deal about what kind of input
from these neighboring ﬁelds is relevant to philosophy. This book is writ-
ten from a viewpoint that holds that philosophy of science beneﬁts from
lots of input from other ﬁelds. But the argument that philosophy of science
needs that kind of input will not be given until chapter 10.
1.4 Three Answers, or Pieces of an Answer
In this section I will introduce three different answers to our general ques-
tions about how science works. In different ways, these three ideas will be
recurring themes throughout the book.
The three ideas can be seen as rivals; they can be seen as alternative
starting points, or paths into the problem. But they might instead be con-
sidered as pieces of a single, more complicated answer. The problem then
becomes how to ﬁt them together.
The ﬁrst of the three ideas is empiricism. Empiricism encompasses a di-
verse family of philosophical views, and debates within the empiricist
camp can be intense. But empiricism is often summarized using something
like the following slogan:
Empiricism: The only source of real knowledge about the world is experience.
Empiricism, in this sense, is a view about where all knowledge comes from,
not just scientiﬁc knowledge. So how does this help us with the philosophy
of science? In general, the empiricist tradition has tended to see the differ-
ences between science and everyday thinking as differences of detail and
degree. The empiricist tradition has generally, though not always, tended to
construe science in a broad way, and it has tended to approach questions
in the philosophy of science from the standpoint of a general theory of
thought and knowledge. The empiricist tradition in philosophy has also
been largely pro-science; science is seen as the best manifestation of our ca-
pacity to investigate and know the world.
So here is a way to use the empiricist principle above to say something
about science:
Empiricism and Science: Scientiﬁc thinking and investigation have the same basic
pattern as everyday thinking and investigation. In each case, the only source of real
knowledge about the world is experience. But science is especially successful be-
cause it is organized, systematic, and especially responsive to experience.
8
Chapter One

So “the scientiﬁc method,” insofar as there is such a thing, will be routinely
found in everyday contexts as well. There was no fundamentally new ap-
proach to investigation discovered during the Scientiﬁc Revolution, ac-
cording to this view. Instead, Europe was freed from darkness and dogma-
tism by a few brave and brilliant souls who enabled intellectual culture to
“come to its senses.”
Some readers are probably thinking that these empiricist principles are
empty platitudes. Of course experience is the source of knowledge about
the world—what else could be?
For those who suspect that basic empiricist principles are completely
trivial, an interesting place to look is the history of medicine. The history
of medicine has many examples of episodes where huge breakthroughs
were made by people willing to make very basic empirical tests—in the face
of much skepticism, condescension, and opposition from people who
“knew better.” Empiricist philosophers have long used these anecdotes to
ﬁre up their readers. Carl Hempel, one of the most important empiricist
philosophers of the twentieth century, liked to use the sad example of Ig-
naz Semmelweiss (see Hempel 1966). Semmelweiss worked in a hospital in
Vienna in the mid-nineteenth century; he was able to show by simple em-
pirical tests that if doctors washed their hands before delivering babies, the
risk of infection in the mothers was hugely reduced. For this radical claim
he was opposed and eventually driven out of the hospital.
An even simpler example, which I will describe in some detail to pro-
vide a change from the usual case of Semmelweiss, has to do with the dis-
covery of the role of drinking water in the transmission of cholera.
Cholera was a huge problem in cities in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, producing death from terrible diarrhea. Cholera is still a prob-
lem whenever there are poor people crowded together without good sani-
tation, as it is transmitted from the diarrhea through drinking water. In the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there were various theories of how
cholera was caused—this was before the discovery of the role of bacteria
and other microorganisms in infectious disease. Some thought the disease
was caused by foul gases, called miasmas, exuded from the ground and
swamps. In London, John Snow hypothesized that cholera was spread by
drinking water. He mapped the outbreak of one epidemic in London in
1854 and found that it seemed to be centered on a particular public water
pump in Broad Street. With great difﬁculty he persuaded the local author-
ities to remove the pump’s handle. The outbreak immediately went away.
This was a very important event in the history of medicine. It was cen-
tral to the rise of the modern emphasis on clean drinking water and sani-
tation, a movement that has had an immense effect on human health and
Introduction
9

well-being. This is also the kind of case that shows the attractiveness of
even very simple empiricist views.
You might be thinking that we can just end the book here. Empiricism
wins; looking to experience is a sure-ﬁre guarantee of getting things right.
Those who are tempted to think that no problems remain might consider
a cautionary tale that follows up the Snow story. This is the tale of brave
Doctor Pettenkofer.
Some decades after Snow, the theory that diseases like cholera are caused
by microorganisms—the “germ theory of disease”—was developed in de-
tail by Robert Koch and Louis Pasteur. Koch isolated the bacteria respon-
sible for cholera quite early on. Pettenkofer, however, was unconvinced. To
prove Koch wrong, he drank a glass of water mixed with the alleged cholera
germs. Pettenkofer suffered no ill effects, and he wrote to Koch saying he
had disproved Koch’s theory.
It is thought that Pettenkofer might have had high stomach acid, which
can protect people against cholera infection. Or perhaps the cholera germs
had died in that sample. Clearly Pettenkofer was lucky; Koch was right
about what causes cholera. But the case reminds us that direct empirical
tests are no guarantee of success.
Some readers, I said, might be thinking that empiricism is true but too
obvious to be interesting. Another line of criticism holds that empiricism
is false, because it is committed to an absurdly simple picture of thought,
belief, and justiﬁcation. The empiricist slogan I gave earlier suggests that
experiences pour into the mind and somehow turn into knowledge. It turns
out to be very difﬁcult to reﬁne basic empiricist ideas in a way that makes
them more psychologically realistic. Empiricists do not deny that reason-
ing, including very elaborate reasoning, is needed to make sense of what we
observe. Still, they insist that the role of experience is somehow funda-
mental in understanding how we learn about the world. Many critics of
empiricism hold that this is a mistake; they see it as a hangover from a sim-
plistic and outdated picture of how belief and reasoning work. That debate
will be a recurring theme in this book.
I now turn to the second of the three families of views about how sci-
ence works. This view can be introduced with a quote from Galileo, one of
the superheroes of the Scientiﬁc Revolution:
Philosophy is written in this grand book the universe, which stands continually
open to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood unless one ﬁrst learns to com-
prehend the language and to read the alphabet in which it is composed. It is writ-
ten in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles, and
other geometric ﬁgures without which it is humanly impossible to understand a
10
Chapter One

single word of it; without these, one wanders about in a dark labyrinth. (Galileo
[1623] 1990, 237–38, emphasis added)
Putting the point in plainer language, here is the second of the three ideas.
Mathematics and Science: What makes science different from other kinds of inves-
tigation, and especially successful, is its attempt to understand the natural world
using mathematical tools.
Is this idea an alternative to the empiricist approach, or something that can
be combined with it? Perhaps surprisingly, an emphasis on mathematical
methods has often been used to argue against empiricism. Sometimes this
has been because people have thought that mathematics shows us that
there must be another route to knowledge beside experience; experience is
a source of knowledge, but not the only important source. Alternatively, we
might claim that empiricism is trivial: of course knowledge is based on ex-
perience, but that tells us nothing about what differentiates science from
other human thought. What makes science special is its attempt to quan-
tify phenomena and detect mathematical patterns in the ﬂow of events.
Nonetheless, it is surely sensible to see an emphasis on mathematics as
something that can be combined with empiricist ideas. It might seem that
Galileo would disagree; Galileo not only exalted mathematics but praised
his predecessor Copernicus for making “reason conquer sense [experience]”
in his belief that the earth goes around the sun. But this is a false opposition.
In suggesting that the earth goes round the sun, Copernicus was not ignor-
ing experience but dealing with apparent conﬂicts between different aspects
of experience, in the light of his background beliefs. And there is no ques-
tion that Galileo was a very empirically minded person; an emphasis on ob-
servations made using the telescope was central to his work, for example.
So avoiding the false oppositions, we might argue that mathematics used
as a tool within an empiricist outlook is what makes science special.
In this book the role of mathematics will be a signiﬁcant theme but not
a central one. This is partly because of the history of the debates surveyed
in the book, and partly because mathematical tools are not quite as essen-
tial to science as Galileo thought. Although mathematics is clearly of huge
importance in the development of physics, one of the greatest achieve-
ments in all of science—Darwin’s achievement in On the Origin of Species
([1859] 1964)—makes no real use of mathematics. Darwin was not con-
fined to the “dark labyrinth” that Galileo predicted as the fate of non-
mathematical investigators. In fact, most (though not all) of the huge leaps
in biology that occurred in the nineteenth century occurred without much
Introduction
11

of a role for mathematics. Biology now contains many mathematical parts,
including modern formulations of Darwin’s theory of evolution, but this is
a more recent development.
So not all of science—and not all of the greatest science—makes much
use of mathematics to understand the world.
The third of the three families of ideas is newer. Maybe the unique fea-
tures of science are only visible when we look at scientiﬁc communities.
Social Structure and Science: What makes science different from other kinds of in-
vestigation, and especially successful, is its unique social structure.
Some of the most important recent work in philosophy of science has had
to do with exploring this idea, but it took the input of historians and soci-
ologists of science to bring philosophical attention to bear on it.
In the hands of historians and sociologists, an emphasis on social struc-
ture has often been developed in a way that is strongly critical of the em-
piricist tradition. Steven Shapin argues that mainstream empiricism often
operates within the fantasy that each individual can observationally test
hypotheses for himself (Shapin 1994). Empiricism is supposed to urge that
people be distrustful of authority and go out to look directly at the world.
But of course this is a fantasy. It is a fantasy in the case of everyday knowl-
edge, and it is an even greater fantasy in the case of science. Almost every
move that a scientist makes depends on elaborate networks of cooperation
and trust. If each individual insisted on testing everything himself, science
would never advance beyond the most rudimentary ideas. Cooperation
and lineages of transmitted results are essential to science. The case of John
Snow and cholera, discussed earlier in this section, is very unusual. Snow
looks like a “lone ranger” striding up to the Broad Street water pump (with
crowds of empiricists cheering in the background). And even Snow must
have been dependent on the testimony of others in his assessment of the
state of the cholera epidemic before and after his intervention at the pump.
So trust and cooperation are essential to science. But who can be trusted?
Who is a reliable source of data? Shapin argues that when we look closely,
a great deal of what went on in the Scientiﬁc Revolution had to do with
working out new ways of policing, controlling, and coordinating the ac-
tions of groups of people in the activity of research. Experience is every-
where. The hard thing is working out which kinds of experience are rele-
vant to the testing of hypotheses, and working out who can be trusted as a
source of reliable and relevant reports.
So Shapin argues that a good theory of the social organization of science
will be a better theory of science than empiricist fantasies. But philosophers
12
Chapter One

have begun to develop theories of how science works that emphasize social
organization but are also intended to ﬁt in with a form of empiricism (Hull
1988; Kitcher 1993). These accounts of science stress the special balance
of cooperation and competition found in scientiﬁc communities. People
sometimes imagine that seeking individual credit and competition for sta-
tus and recognition are recent developments in science. But these issues
have been important since the time of the Scientiﬁc Revolution. The great
scientiﬁc societies, like the Royal Society of London, came into being quite
early—1660 in the case of the Royal Society. A key part of their role was
to handle the allocation of credit in an efﬁcient way—making sure the right
people were rewarded, without hindering the free spread of ideas. These
societies also functioned to create a community of people who could trust
each other as reliable co-workers and sources of data. The empiricist can
argue that this social organization made scientiﬁc communities uniquely
responsive to experience.
In this section I have sketched three families of ideas about how science
works and what makes it distinctive. Each idea has sometimes been seen as
the starting point for an understanding of science, exclusive of the other
two. But it is more likely that they should be seen as pieces of a more com-
plete answer. The ﬁrst and third ideas—empiricism and social structure—
are especially important. These we will return to over and over again. Part
of the challenge for philosophy of science in the years to come lies in inte-
grating the insights of the empiricist tradition with the role for social or-
ganization in understanding science. That does require signiﬁcant changes
to traditional empiricist ideas.
1.5 Historical Interlude: A Sketch of the Scientiﬁc Revolution
Before diving into the philosophical theories, we will take a brief break.
Several times already I have mentioned the Scientiﬁc Revolution. People,
events, and theories from this period carry special weight in discussions of
the nature of science. So in this section I will give a historical sketch of the
main landmarks, many of which will appear from time to time in later
chapters. Before setting out, I should note that there is a good deal of con-
troversy about how to understand this period of history; for example, some
historians think that the whole idea of christening this period “The Scien-
tiﬁc Revolution” is a mistake, as this phrase makes it sound like there are
sharp boundaries between one totally unique period and the rest of history
(Shapin 1996). But I will use the phrase in the traditional way.
The Scientiﬁc Revolution occurred roughly between 1550 and 1700.
These events are positioned at the end of a series of dramatic changes in
Introduction
13

Europe, and the Scientiﬁc Revolution itself fed into further processes of
change. In religion, the Catholic Church had been challenged by Protes-
tantism. The Renaissance of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries had in-
cluded a partial opening of intellectual culture. Populations were growing
(recovering from the Black Death), and there was increased activity in com-
merce and trade. Traditional hierarchies, including intellectual hierarchies,
were beginning to show strain. As recent writers have stressed, this was a
time in which many new, unorthodox ideas were ﬂoating around.
The worldview that had been inherited from the Middle Ages was a
combination of Christianity with the ideas of the ancient Greek philoso-
pher Aristotle. The combination is often called the Scholastic worldview,
after the universities or “Schools” that developed and defended it. The
earth was seen as a sphere positioned at the center of the universe, with the
moon, sun, planets, and stars revolving around it. A detailed model of the
motions of these celestial bodies had been developed by Ptolemy around
150 a.d. (the sun was placed between Venus and Mars).
Aristotle’s physical theory distinguished “natural” from “violent” or
unnatural motion. The theory of natural motions was part of a more gen-
eral theory of change in which biological development (from acorn to oak,
for example) was a central guiding case, and many events were explained
using the idea of purpose.
Everything on earth was considered to be made up of mixtures of four
basic elements (earth, air, ﬁre, and water), each of which had natural ten-
dencies. Objects containing a lot of earth, for example, naturally fall to-
ward the center of the universe, while ﬁre makes things rise. Unnatural mo-
tions, such as the motions of projectiles, have an entirely different kind of
explanation. Objects in the heavens are made of a ﬁfth element, which is
“incorruptible,” or unchanging. The natural motion for objects made of
this ﬁfth element is circular.
Some versions of this picture included a mechanism (using the term
loosely) for the motions of sun, planets, and stars. For example, each body
orbiting the earth might be positioned on a crystalline sphere that revolved
around the earth. Ptolemy’s own model was harder to interpret in these
terms; Ptolemy is sometimes thought to be most interested in giving a tool
for astronomical prediction (though interpreters differ on this).
In 1543 the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) pub-
lished a work outlining an alternative picture of the universe. Others had
speculated in ancient times that the earth might move around the sun in-
stead of vice versa, but Copernicus was the ﬁrst to give a detailed theory of
this kind. In his theory the earth has two motions, revolving on its axis
once a day and orbiting the sun once a year. Copernicus’s theory had the
14
Chapter One

same basic placement of the sun, moon, earth, and the known planets that
modern astronomy has. But the theory was made more complicated by his
insistence, following Aristotle and Ptolemy, that heavenly motions must be
circular. Both the Ptolemaic system and Copernicus’s system saw most or-
bits as complex compounds of circles, not single circles. Ptolemy’s and
Copernicus’s systems were about equally complicated, in fact. Writers seem
to differ on whether Copernicus’s theory was much more accurate as a pre-
dictive tool. But there were some famous phenomena that Copernicus’s
theory explained far better than Ptolemy’s. One was the “retrograde mo-
tion” of the planets, an apparently erratic motion in which planets seem to
stop and backtrack in their motions through the stars.
Copernicus’s work aroused interest, but there seemed to be compelling
arguments against taking it to be a literally true description of the universe.
Some problems were astronomical, and others had to do with obvious facts
about motion. Why does an object dropped from a tower fall at the foot of
the tower, if the earth has moved a considerable distance while the object
is in ﬂight? Copernicus’s 1543 book had an extra preface written by a cler-
gyman, Andreas Osiander, who had been entrusted with the publication,
urging that the theory be treated just as a calculating tool. This became a
historically important statement of a view about the role of scientiﬁc the-
ories known as instrumentalism, which holds that we should think of the-
ories only as predictive tools rather than as attempts to describe the hidden
structure of nature.
The situation was changed dramatically by Galileo Galilei (1564–1642),
working in Italy in the early years of the seventeenth century. Galileo vig-
orously made the case for the literal truth of the Copernican system, as op-
posed to its mere usefulness. Galileo used telescopes (which he did not
invent but did improve) to look at the heavens, and he found a multitude
of phenomena that contradicted Aristotle and the Scholastic view of the
world. He also used a combination of mathematics and experiment to be-
gin the formulation of a new science of motion that would make sense of
the idea of a moving earth and explain familiar facts about dropped and
thrown objects. Galileo’s work eventually aroused the ire of the pope; he
was forced to recant his Copernican beliefs by the Inquisition and spent his
last years under house arrest. (Galileo was treated lightly in comparison
with Giordano Bruno, whose refusal to disown his unorthodox specula-
tions about the place of the earth in the universe led to his being burned at
the stake in Rome, for heresy, in 1600.)
Galileo remained wedded to circular motion as astronomically funda-
mental. The move away from circular motion was taken by Johannes Kep-
ler (1571–1630), a mystical thinker who combined Copernicanism with an
Introduction
15

obsession with ﬁnding mathematical harmony (including musical tunes) in
the structure of the heavens. Kepler’s model of the universe, also developed
around the start of the seventeenth century, had the earth and other plan-
ets moving in ellipses, rather than circles, around the sun. This led to mas-
sive simpliﬁcation and better predictive accuracy.
So far I have mentioned only changes in astronomy and related areas of
physics, and I have taken the discussion only to the early part of the seven-
teenth century. Part of what makes this initial period so dramatic is the re-
moval of the earth from the center of the universe, an event laden with sym-
bolism. Another ﬁeld that changed in the same period is anatomy. In Padua,
Andreas Vesalius (publishing, like Copernicus, in 1543) began to free
anatomy from dependence on ancient authority (especially Galen’s con-
clusions) and set it on a more empirical path. Inﬂuenced by Vesalius’s
school, William Harvey achieved the most famous breakthrough in this pe-
riod, establishing in 1628 the circulation of blood and the role of the heart
as a pump.
The mid-seventeenth century saw the rise of a general and ambitious
new theory about matter: mechanism. The mechanical view of the world
combined ideas about the composition of things with ideas about causa-
tion and explanation. According to mechanism, the world is made up of
tiny “corpuscles” of matter, which interact only by local physical contact.
Ultimately, good explanations of physical phenomena should only be given
in terms of mechanical interactions. The universe was to be understood as
operating like a mechanical clock.
Some, like René Descartes (1596–1650), thought that an immaterial
soul and a traditional God must be posited as well as physical corpuscles.
Though many ﬁgures in the Scientiﬁc Revolution held religious views that
were at least somewhat unorthodox, most were deﬁnitely not looking for
a showdown with mainstream religion. Most of the “mechanical philoso-
phers” retained a role for a Christian God in their overall pictures of the
world. (If the world is a clock, who set it in motion, for example?) How-
ever, the idea of dropping souls, God, or both from the picture was some-
times considered.
In England, Robert Boyle (1627–91) and others embedded a version of
mechanism into an organized and well-publicized program of research that
urged systematic experiment and the avoidance of unempirical specula-
tion. In the mid-seventeenth century we also see the rise of scientiﬁc soci-
eties in London, Paris, and Florence. These societies were intended to or-
ganize the new research and break the institutional monopoly of the (often
conservative) universities.
16
Chapter One

The period ends with the work of Isaac Newton (1642–1727). In 1687
Newton published his Principia, which gave a uniﬁed mathematical treat-
ment of motion both on earth and in the heavens. Newton showed why
Kepler’s elliptical orbits were the inevitable outcome of the force of gravity
operating between heavenly bodies, and he vastly improved the ideas about
motion on earth that Galileo (and others) had pioneered. So impressive
was this work that for hundreds of years Newton was seen as having es-
sentially completed those parts of physics. Newton also did immensely in-
ﬂuential work in mathematics and optics, and he suggested the way to
move forward in ﬁelds like chemistry. In some ways Newton’s physics was
the culmination of the mechanical worldview, but in some ways it was
“post-mechanical,” since it posited some forces (gravity, most importantly)
that were hard to interpret in mechanical terms.
So by the end of the seventeenth century, the Scholastic worldview had
been replaced by a combination of Copernicanism and a form of mecha-
nism. As far as method is concerned, a combination of experiment and
mathematical analysis had triumphed (though people disagreed about the
nature of the triumphant combination). This ends the period usually re-
ferred to as the Scientiﬁc Revolution. But the changes described above fed
into further changes, both intellectual and political. Chemistry began a pe-
riod of rapid development in the middle to late eighteenth century, a period
sometimes called the Chemical Revolution. The work of Lavoisier, espe-
cially his description of oxygen and its role in combustion, is often taken to
initiate this “revolution,” though it was in the nineteenth century, with the
work of Dalton, Mendeleyev, and others, that the basic features of modern
chemistry, like the periodic table of elements, were established.
Linnaeus had systematized biological classiﬁcation in the eighteenth
century, but it was the nineteenth century that saw dramatic developments
in biology. These developments include the theory that organisms are
comprised of cells, Darwin’s theory of evolution, the germ theory of dis-
ease, and the work by Mendel on inheritance that laid the foundation for
genetics.
The Scientiﬁc Revolution also fed into more general cultural and polit-
ical changes. In the eighteenth century the philosophers of the French En-
lightenment hoped to use science and reason to sweep away ignorance and
superstition, along with oppressive religious and political institutions. The
intellectual movements leading to the American and French Revolutions in
the late eighteenth century were much inﬂuenced by currents of thought in
science and philosophy. These included empiricism, mechanism, the inspi-
ration of Newton, and a general desire to understand mankind and society
Introduction
17

in a way modeled on the understanding of the physical world achieved dur-
ing the Scientiﬁc Revolution.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
The topics in this chapter will be discussed in detail later, and references will be
given then. Two other introductory books are worth mentioning, though. Hempel’s
Philosophy of Natural Science (1966) was for many years the standard introduc-
tory textbook in this area. It opens with the story of Semmelweiss and is a clear and
reasonable statement of mainstream twentieth-century empiricism. Alan Chalmers’s
What Is This Thing Called Science? (1999) is also very clear; it presents a different
view from Hempel’s and the one defended here.
For all the topics in this book, there are also reference works that readers may
ﬁnd helpful. Simon Blackburn’s Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy is a remarkably
useful book and is fun to browse through. The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy is also of high quality. The Blackwell Companion to the Philosophy of Science
has many short papers on key topics (though many of these papers are quite ad-
vanced). The Stanford Online Encyclopedia of Philosophy is still in progress but
will be a very useful (and free) resource.
There are many good books on the Scientiﬁc Revolution, each with a different
emphasis. Cohen, The Birth of a New Physics (1985), is a classic and very good on
the physics. Henry, The Scientiﬁc Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science
(1997), is both concise and thorough. It has an excellent chapter on mechanism and
contains a large annotated bibliography. Schuster 1990 is also a useful quick sum-
mary, and Dear’s Revolutionizing the Sciences (2001) is a concise and up-to-date
book with a good reputation. But Toulmin and Goodﬁeld’s Fabric of the Heavens
(1962), an old book recently reprinted, is my favorite. It focuses on the conceptual
foundations underlying the development of scientiﬁc ideas. (It is the ﬁrst of three
books by Toulmin and Goodﬁeld on the history of science; the second, The Archi-
tecture of Matter is also relevant here.)
Kuhn’s Copernican Revolution (1957), is another classic, focused on the early
stages, as the title suggests. Shapin’s Scientiﬁc Revolution (1996), is not a good in-
troduction to the Scientiﬁc Revolution but is a very interesting book anyway. There
are several good books that focus on particular personalities. Koestler, The Sleep-
walkers (1968), is fascinating on Kepler, and Sobel, Galileo’s Daughter (1999), is
also good on Galileo (and his daughter, a nun leading a tough life). The standard
biography of the amazingly strange Isaac Newton, by Robert Westfall, comes in
both long (1980) and short (1993) versions.
For a history of medicine, covering the whole world, see Porter, The Greatest
Beneﬁt to Mankind (1998).
18
Chapter One

19
2
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Logic Plus Empiricism
2.1 The Empiricist Tradition
The ﬁrst approach to science that we will examine is a revolutionary form
of empiricism that appeared in the early part of the twentieth century,
ﬂourished for a time, was transformed and moderated under the pressure
of objections, and then slowly became extinct. The earlier version of the
view is called “logical positivism,” and the later, moderate form is more
usually called “logical empiricism.” There is variation in terminology here;
“logical empiricism” is sometimes used for the whole movement, early and
late. Although we will be looking at fossils in this chapter, these remnants
of the past are of great importance in understanding where we are now.
Before discussing logical positivism, it will be helpful to go even further
back and say something about the empiricist tradition in general. In the
ﬁrst chapter I said that empiricism is often summarized with the claim that
the only source of knowledge is experience. This idea goes back a long way,
but the most famous stage of empiricist thought was in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, with the work of John Locke, George Berkeley, and
David Hume. These “classical” forms of empiricism were based upon the-
ories about the mind and how it works. Their view of the mind is often
called “sensationalist.” Sensations, like patches of color and sounds, ap-
pear in the mind and are all the mind has access to. The role of thought is
to track and respond to patterns in these sensations. This view of the mind
is not implied by the more basic empiricist idea that experience is the
source of knowledge, but for many years such a view was common within
empiricism.
Both during these classical discussions and more recently, a problem for
empiricism has been a tendency to lapse into skepticism, the idea that we
cannot know anything about the world. This problem has two aspects.
One aspect we can call external world skepticism: how can we ever know
anything about the real world that lies behind the ﬂow of sensations? The

second aspect, made vivid by David Hume, is inductive skepticism: why do
we have reason to think that the patterns in past experience will also hold
in the future?
Empiricism has often shown a surprising willingness to throw in the
towel on the issue of external world skepticism. (Hume threw in the towel
on both kinds of skepticism, but that is unusual.) Many empiricists have
been willing to say that they don’t care about the possibility that there
might be real things lying behind the ﬂow of sensations. It’s only the sen-
sations that we have any dealings with. Maybe it makes no sense even to
try to think about objects lying behind sensations. Perhaps our concept of
the world is just a concept of a patterned collection of sensations. This view
is sometimes called “phenomenalism.” During the nineteenth century, phe-
nomenalist views were quite popular within empiricism, and their oddity
was treated with nonchalance. John Stuart Mill, an English philosopher
and political theorist, once said that matter may be deﬁned as “a Perma-
nent Possibility of Sensation” (1865, 183). Ernst Mach, an Austrian physi-
cist and philosopher, illustrated his phenomenalist view by drawing a pic-
ture of the world as it appeared through his left eye (see ﬁg. 2.1; the shape
in the lower right part of the image is his elegant mustache). All that exists
is a collection of observer-relative sensory phenomena like these.
I hope phenomenalism looks strange to you, despite its eminent propo-
nents. It is a strange idea. But empiricists have often found themselves back-
ing into views like this. This is partly because they have often tended to think
of the mind as conﬁned behind a “veil of ideas” or sensations. The mind has
no “access” to anything outside the veil. Many philosophers, including me,
agree that this picture of the mind is a mistake. But it is not so easy to set
up an empiricist view that entirely avoids the bad inﬂuence of this picture.
In discussions of the history of philosophy, it is common to talk of a
showdown in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries between “the ratio-
nalists” and “the empiricists.” Rationalists like Descartes and Leibniz be-
lieved that pure reasoning can be a route to knowledge that does not de-
pend on experience. Mathematics seemed to be a compelling example of
this kind of knowledge. Empiricists like Locke and Hume insisted that ex-
perience is our only way of ﬁnding out what the world is like. In the late
eighteenth century, a sophisticated intermediate position was developed by
the German philosopher Immanuel Kant. Kant argued that all our think-
ing involves a subtle interaction between experience and preexisting men-
tal structures that we use to make sense of experience. Key concepts like
space, time, and causation cannot be derived from experience, because a
person must already have these concepts in order to use experience to learn
20
Chapter Two

about the world. Kant also held that mathematics gives us real knowledge
of the world but does not require experience for its justiﬁcation.
Empiricists must indeed avoid overly simple pictures of how experience
affects belief. The mind does not passively receive the imprint of facts. The
active and creative role of the mind must be recognized. The trick is to
avoid this problem while still remaining true to basic empiricist principles.
As I said above, in the history of philosophy the term “rationalism” is
often used for a view that opposes empiricism. In the more recent discus-
sions of science that we are concerned with here, however, the term is gen-
erally not used in that way. (This can be a source of confusion; see the glos-
sary.) The views called “rationalist” in the twentieth century were often
forms of empiricism; the term was often used in a broad way, to indicate a
conﬁdence in the power of human reason.
So much for the long history of debate. Despite various problems,
empiricism has been a very attractive set of ideas for many philosophers.
Empiricism has often also had a particular kind of impact on discussions
Logic Plus Empiricism
21
Fig. 2.1
“The assertion, then, is correct that the world consists
only of our sensations” (Mach 1897, 10).

outside of philosophy. Making a sweeping generalization, it is fair to say
that the empiricist tradition has tended to be (1) pro-science, (2) worldly
rather than religious, and (3) politically moderate or liberal (though these
political labels can be hard to apply across times). David Hume, John Stu-
art Mill, and Bertrand Russell are examples of this tendency. Of the three
elements of my generalization, religion is the one that has the most counter-
examples. Berkeley was a bishop, for example, and Bas van Fraassen, one
of the most inﬂuential living empiricist philosophers, is also religious. But
on the whole it is fair to say that empiricist ideas have tended to be the
allies of a practical, scientiﬁc, down-to-earth outlook on life. The logical
positivists deﬁnitely ﬁt this pattern.
2.2 The Vienna Circle
Logical positivism was a form of empiricism developed in Europe after
World War I. The movement was established by a group of people who
were scientiﬁcally oriented and who disliked much of what was happening
in philosophy. This group has become known as the Vienna Circle.
The Vienna Circle was established by Moritz Schlick and Otto Neurath.
It was based, as you might expect, in Vienna, Austria. From the early days
through to the end, a central intellectual ﬁgure was Rudolf Carnap. Car-
nap seems to have been the kind of person whose presence inspired awe
even in other highly successful philosophers.
Logical positivism was an extreme, swashbuckling form of empiricism.
The term “positivism” derives from the nineteenth-century scientiﬁc phi-
losophy of Auguste Comte. In the 1930s Carnap suggested that they change
the name of their movement from “logical positivism” to “logical empiri-
cism.” This change should not be taken to suggest that the later stages in the
movement were “more empiricist” than the earlier stages. The opposite is
true. In my discussion I will use the term “logical positivism” for the in-
tense, earlier version of their ideas, and “logical empiricism” for the later,
more moderate version. Although Carnap suggested the name change in
the mid-1930s, the time during which logical positivist ideas changed most
markedly was after World War II. I will spend some time in this section de-
scribing the unusual intellectual and historical context in which logical
positivism developed. In particular, it is easier to understand logical posi-
tivism if we pay attention to what the logical positivists were against.
The logical positivists were inspired by developments in science in the
early years of the twentieth century, especially the work of Einstein. They
also thought that developments in logic, mathematics, and the philosophy
of language had shown a way to put together a new kind of empiricist phi-
22
Chapter Two

losophy that would settle, once and for all, the problems that philosophy
had been concerned with. Some problems would be solved, and other prob-
lems would be rejected as meaningless. Logical positivist views about lan-
guage were inﬂuenced by the early ideas of Ludwig Wittgenstein ([1922]
1988). Wittgenstein was an enigmatic, charismatic, and eccentric philoso-
pher of logic and language who was not an empiricist at all. Some would
say that the positivists adapted Wittgenstein’s ideas, others that they mis-
interpreted him.
Though they did admire some philosophers, the logical positivists were
distressed with much of what had been going on in philosophy. In the years
after Kant’s death in 1804, philosophy had seen the rise of a number of
systems of thought that the logical positivists found pretentious, obscure,
dogmatic, and politically harmful. One key villain was G. W. F. Hegel,
who worked in the early nineteenth century and had a huge inﬂuence on
nineteenth-century thought. Hegel was famous for his work on the relation
between philosophy and history. He thought that human history as a whole
was a process in which a “world spirit” gradually reached consciousness
of itself. For Hegel, individuals are less important than the state as a whole,
especially the role of the state in the grand march of historical progress.
These ideas were taken to support strong forms of nationalism. Hegel’s
was an “idealist” philosophy, since it held that reality is in some sense spir-
itual or mental. But this is not a view in which each person’s reality is made
up in some way by that person’s ideas. Rather, a single reality as a whole is
said to have a spiritual or rational character. This view is sometimes called
“absolute idealism.”
Hegel’s inﬂuence bloomed and then receded in continental Europe. As
it receded in continental Europe, in the later nineteenth century, it bloomed
in England and America. Absolute idealism is a good example of what log-
ical positivism was against. Sometimes the positivists would disparagingly
dissect especially obscure passages from this literature. Hans Reichenbach
(who was not part of the original Vienna Circle but who was a close ally)
began his book The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy (1951) with a quote from
Hegel’s most famous work on philosophy and history: “Reason is sub-
stance, as well as inﬁnite power, its own inﬁnite material underlying all the
natural and spiritual life; as also the inﬁnite form, that which sets the ma-
terial in motion.” Reichenbach lamented that a philosophy student, on ﬁrst
reading this passage, would usually think that it was his fault—the stu-
dent’s fault—that he did not understand it. The student would then work
away until it ﬁnally seemed obvious that Reason was substance, as well as
inﬁnite power. . . . For Reichenbach, it is entirely Hegel’s fault that the pas-
sage seems to make no sense. It seems to make no sense because whatever
Logic Plus Empiricism
23

factual meaning the claim might be intended to convey has been smothered
with misused language.
People sometimes describe the history of this period as if it was a
pitched battle between logical positivism and absolute idealism. That is not
how things went. In the early twentieth century, there were many kinds of
philosophy jostling and wrangling in Europe. There was a “back to Kant”
movement going on (as there seems to be now; perhaps this will happen
every hundred years). Another philosopher who came to seem an especially
important rival to logical positivism was Martin Heidegger.
Earlier I gave a quick summary of Hegel’s ideas. It is much harder to do
that for Heidegger. Heidegger is sometimes categorized as an existential-
ist. Perhaps he is the most famously difﬁcult and obscure philosopher who
has ever lived. I will borrow the summary reluctantly given by Thomas
Sheehan in the entry for Heidegger in the Routledge Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy (1998): “He argues that mortality is our deﬁning moment, that we
are thrown into limited worlds of sense shaped by our being-towards-death,
and that ﬁnite meaning is all the reality we get.” Simplifying even more,
Heidegger held that we must understand our lives as based, ﬁrst and fore-
most, upon practical coping with the world rather than knowledge of it.
All our experience is affected by the awareness that we are traveling toward
death. And the best thing we can do in this situation is stare it in the face
and live an “authentic” life.
This picture of life might seem to make some sense (especially on a bad
day). But Heidegger combined his descriptions of how it feels to live in the
world with abstract metaphysical speculation; especially notorious are his
discussions of the nature of “Nothing.” Heidegger also had one point in
common with some (though not all) absolute idealists: his opposition to
liberal democratic political ideas.
Heidegger was seen as a key rival by the logical positivists. Carnap gave
humorous logical dissections of Heidegger’s discussions of Nothing in his
lectures. Interestingly, recent work has shown that Carnap and Heidegger
understood each other better than was once supposed (Friedman 2000).
Logical positivism was a plea for Enlightenment values, in opposition
to mysticism, romanticism, and nationalism. The positivists championed
reason over the obscure, the logical over the intuitive. The logical posi-
tivists were also internationalists, and they liked the idea of a universal and
precise language that everyone could use to communicate clearly. Otto
Neurath was the member of the group with the strongest political and so-
cial interests. He and various others in the group could be described as
democratic socialists. They had a keen interest in some movements in art
and architecture at the time, such as the Bauhaus movement. They saw this
24
Chapter Two

work as assisting the development of a scientiﬁc, internationalist, and prac-
tical outlook on society (Galison 1990).
The Vienna Circle ﬂourished from the mid-1920s to the mid-1930s.
Logical positivist ideas were imported into England by A. J. Ayer in Lan-
guage, Truth, and Logic (1936), a vivid and readable book that conveys
the excitement of the time. Under the inﬂuence of logical positivism, and
the philosophy of G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell, English philosophy
abandoned absolute idealism and returned to its traditional empiricist em-
phasis, an emphasis it has retained (more or less) ever since.
In continental Europe the story turned out differently. For we have now,
remember, reached the 1930s. The development of logical positivism ran
straight into the rise of Adolf Hitler.
Many of the Vienna Circle had socialist leanings, some were Jewish,
and there were certainly no Nazis. So the logical positivists were persecuted
by the Nazis, to varying degrees. The Nazis encouraged and made use of
pro-German, anti-liberal philosophers, who also tended to be obscure and
mystical. In contrast to the logical positivists, Martin Heidegger joined the
Nazi party in 1933 and remained a member throughout the war.
Many logical positivists ﬂed Europe, especially to the United States.
Schlick, unfortunately, did not. He was murdered by a deranged former stu-
dent in 1936. The logical positivists who did make it to the United States
were responsible for a great ﬂowering of American philosophy in the years
after World War II. These include Rudolf Carnap, Hans Reichenbach, Carl
Hempel, and Herbert Feigl. In the United States the strident voice of logi-
cal positivists was moderated. Partly this was because of criticisms of their
ideas—criticisms from the side of those who shared their general outlook.
But the moderation was no doubt partly due to the different intellectual
and political climate in the United States. Austria and Germany in the
1930s had been an unusually intense environment for doing philosophy.
2.3 Central Ideas of Logical Positivism
Logical positivist views about science and knowledge were based on a gen-
eral theory of language; we need to start here, before moving to the views
about science. This theory of language featured two main ideas, the analytic-
synthetic distinction and the veriﬁability theory of meaning.
The analytic-synthetic distinction will probably strike you as bland and
obvious, at least at ﬁrst. Some sentences are true or false simply in virtue
of their meaning, regardless of how the world happens to be; these are an-
alytic. A synthetic sentence is true or false in virtue of both the meaning of
the sentence and how the world actually is. “All bachelors are unmarried”
Logic Plus Empiricism
25

is the standard example of an analytically true sentence. “All bachelors are
bald” is an example of a synthetic sentence, in this case a false one. Ana-
lytic truths are, in a sense, empty truths, with no factual content. Their
truth has a kind of necessity, but only because they are empty.
This distinction had been around, in various forms, since at least the
eighteenth century. The terminology “analytic-synthetic” was introduced
by Kant. Although the distinction itself looks uncontroversial, it can be
made to do real philosophical work. Here is one crucial piece of work the
logical positivists saw for it: they claimed that all of mathematics and logic
is analytic. This made it possible for them to deal with mathematical knowl-
edge within an empiricist framework. For logical positivism, mathematical
propositions do not describe the world; they merely record our conven-
tional decision to use symbols in a particular way. Synthetic claims about
the world can be expressed using mathematical language, such as when it
is claimed that there are nine planets in the solar system. But proofs and in-
vestigations within mathematics itself are analytic. This might seem strange
because some proofs in mathematics are very surprising. The logical posi-
tivists insisted that once we break down such a proof into small steps, each
step will be trivial and unsurprising.
Earlier philosophers in the rationalist tradition had claimed that some
things can be known a priori; this means known independently of experi-
ence. Logical positivism held that the only things that seem to be knowable
a priori are analytic and hence empty of factual content.
A remarkable episode in the history of science is important here. For
many centuries, the geometry of the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid
was regarded as a shining example of real and certain knowledge. Im-
manuel Kant, inspired by the immensely successful application of Euclid-
ean geometry to nature in Newtonian physics, even claimed that Euclid’s
geometry (along with the rest of mathematics) is both synthetic and know-
able a priori. In the nineteenth century, mathematicians did work out al-
ternative geometrical systems to Euclid’s, but they did so as a mathemati-
cal exercise, not as an attempt to describe how lines, angles, and shapes
work in the actual world. Early in the twentieth century, however, Einstein’s
revolutionary work in physics showed that a non-Euclidean geometry is
true of our world. The logical positivists were enormously impressed by
this development, and it guided their analysis of mathematical knowledge.
The positivists insisted that pure mathematics is analytic, and they broke
geometry into two parts. One part is purely mathematical, analytic, and
says nothing about the world. It merely describes possible geometrical sys-
tems. The other part of geometry is a set of synthetic claims about which
geometrical system applies to our world.
26
Chapter Two

I turn now to the other main idea in the logical positivist theory of lan-
guage, the veriﬁability theory of meaning. This theory applies only to sen-
tences that are not analytic, and it involves a speciﬁc kind of “meaning,”
the kind involved when someone is trying to say something about the world.
Here is how the theory was often put: the meaning of a sentence consists
in its method of veriﬁcation. That formulation might sound strange (it al-
ways has to me). Here is a formulation that sounds more natural: knowing
the meaning of a sentence is knowing how to verify it. And here is a key ap-
plication of the principle: if a sentence has no possible method of veriﬁca-
tion, it has no meaning.
By “veriﬁcation” here, the positivists meant veriﬁcation by means of
observation. Observation in all these discussions is construed broadly, to
include all kinds of sensory experience. And “veriﬁability” is not the best
word for what they meant. A better word would be “testability.” This is be-
cause testing is an attempt to work out whether something is true or false,
and that is what the positivists had in mind. The term “veriﬁable” gener-
ally only applies when you are able to show that something is true. It would
have been better to call the theory “the testability theory of meaning.”
Sometimes the logical positivists did use that phrase, but the more standard
name is “veriﬁability theory,” or just “veriﬁcationism.”
Veriﬁcationism is a strong empiricist principle; experience is the only
source of meaning, as well as the only source of knowledge. Note that ver-
iﬁability here refers to veriﬁability in principle, not in practice. There was
some dispute about which hard-to-verify claims are really veriﬁable in
principle. It is also important that conclusive veriﬁcation or testing was not
required. There just had to be the possibility of ﬁnding observational evi-
dence that would count for or against the proposition in question.
In the early days of logical positivism, the idea was that in principle one
could translate all sentences with factual meaning into sentences that re-
ferred only to sensations and the patterns connecting them. This program of
translation was fairly quickly abandoned as too extreme. But the veriﬁabil-
ity theory was retained after the program of translation had been dropped.
The veriﬁability principle was used by the logical positivists as a philo-
sophical weapon. Scientiﬁc discussion, and most everyday discussion, con-
sists of veriﬁable and hence meaningful claims. Some other parts of lan-
guage are clearly not intended to have factual meaning, so they fail the
veriﬁability test but do so in a harmless way. Included are poetic language,
expressions of emotion, and so on. But there are also parts of language that
are supposed to have factual meaning—are supposed to say something
about the world—but which fail to do so. For the logical positivists, this
includes most traditional philosophy, much of ethics, and theology as well!
Logic Plus Empiricism
27

This analysis of language provided the framework for the logical posi-
tivist philosophy of science. Science itself was seen as just a more complex
and sophisticated version of the sort of thinking, reasoning, and problem-
solving that we ﬁnd in everyday life—and completely unlike the meaning-
less blather of traditional philosophy.
So let us now look at the logical positivists’ picture of science and of the
role of philosophy in a scientiﬁc worldview. Next we should turn to an-
other distinction they made, between “observational” language and “the-
oretical” language. There was uncertainty about how exactly to set this dis-
tinction up. Usually it was seen as a distinction applied to individual terms.
“Red” is in the observational part of language, and “electron” is in the
theoretical part. There was also a related distinction at the level of sen-
tences. “The rod is glowing red” is observational, while “Helium atoms
each contain two electrons” is theoretical. A more important question was
where to draw the line. Schlick thought that only terms referring to sensa-
tions were observational; everything else was theoretical. Here Schlick
stayed close to traditional empiricism. Neurath thought this was a mistake
and argued that terms referring to many ordinary physical objects are in the
observational part of language. For Neurath, scientiﬁc testing must not be
understood in a way that makes it private to the individual. Only observa-
tion statements about physical objects can be the basis of public or “inter-
subjective” testing.
The issue became a constant topic of discussion. In time, Carnap came
to think that there are lots of acceptable ways of marking out a distinction
between the observational and theoretical parts of language; one could use
whichever is convenient for the purposes at hand. This was the start of a
more general move that Carnap made toward a view based on the “toler-
ance” of alternative linguistic frameworks.
We now need to look at logical positivist views about logic. For logical
positivism, logic is the main tool for philosophy, including philosophical
discussion of science. In fact, just about the only useful thing that philoso-
phers can do is give logical analyses of how language, mathematics, and
science work.
Here we should distinguish two kinds of logic (this discussion will be
continued in chapter 3). Logic in general is the attempt to give an abstract
theory of what makes some arguments compelling and reliable. Deductive
logic is the most familiar kind of logic, and it describes patterns of argument
that transmit truth with certainty. These are arguments with the feature that
if the premises of the argument are true, the conclusion must be true. Im-
pressive developments in deductive logic had been under way since the late
nineteenth century and were still going on at the time of the Vienna Circle.
28
Chapter Two

The logical positivists also believed in a second kind of logic, a kind that
was (and is) much more controversial. This is inductive logic. Inductive logic
was supposed to be a theory of arguments that provide support for their
conclusions but do not give the kind of guarantee found in deductive logic.
From the logical positivist point of view, developing an inductive logic
was of great importance. Hardly any of the arguments and evidence that
we confront in everyday life and science carry the kind of guarantees found
in deductive logic. Even the best kind of evidence we can ﬁnd for a scien-
tiﬁc theory is not completely decisive. There is always the possibility of er-
ror, but that does not stop some claims in science from being supported by
evidence. The logical positivists accepted and embraced the fact that error
is always possible. Although some critics have misinterpreted them on this
point, the logical positivists did not think that science ever reaches absolute
certainty.
The logical positivists saw the task of logically analyzing science as
sharply distinct from any attempt to understand science in terms of its his-
tory or psychology. Those are empirical disciplines, and they involve a dif-
ferent set of questions from those of philosophy.
A terminology standardly used to express the separations between dif-
ferent approaches here was introduced by Hans Reichenbach. Reichen-
bach distinguished between the “context of discovery” and the “context of
justiﬁcation.” That terminology is not helpful, because it suggests that the
distinction has to do with “before and after.” It might seem that the point
being made is that discovery comes ﬁrst and justiﬁcation comes afterward.
That is not the point being made (though the logical positivists were not
completely clear on this). The key distinction is between the study of the
logical structure of science and the study of historical and psychological as-
pects of science.
So logical positivism tended to dismiss the relevance of ﬁelds like his-
tory and psychology to the philosophy of science. In time this came to be
regarded as a big mistake.
Let us put all these ideas together and look at the picture of science that
results. Logical positivism was a revolutionary, uncompromising version of
empiricism, based largely on a theory of language. The aim of science—and
the aim of everyday thought and problem-solving as well—is to track and
anticipate patterns in experience. As Schlick once put it, “what every sci-
entist seeks, and seeks alone, are . . . the rules which govern the connection
of experiences, and by which alone they can be predicted” (1932–33, 44).
We can make rational predictions about future experiences by attending to
patterns in past experience, but we never get a guarantee. We could always
be wrong. There is no alternative route to knowledge besides experience;
Logic Plus Empiricism
29

when traditional philosophy has tried to ﬁnd such a route, it has lapsed into
meaninglessness.
The interpretation of logical positivism I have just given is a standard
one. There is controversy about how to interpret the aims and doctrines of
the movement, however. Some recent writers have argued that there is less
of a link between logical positivism and traditional empiricism than the
standard interpretation claims (Friedman 1999). But in the sense of em-
piricism used in this book, there is deﬁnitely a strong link. We see that in
the Schlick quote given in the previous paragraph.
During the early twentieth century, there were various other strong ver-
sions of empiricism being developed as well. One was operationalism,
which was developed by a physicist, Percy Bridgman (1927). Operational-
ism held that scientists should use language in such a way that all theoret-
ical terms are tied closely to direct observational tests. This is akin to logi-
cal positivism, but it was expressed more as a proposed tightening up of
scientiﬁc language (motivated especially by the lessons of Einstein’s theory
of relativity) than as an analysis of how all science already works.
In the latter part of the twentieth century, an image of the logical posi-
tivists developed in which they were seen as stodgy, conservative, unimag-
inative science-worshipers. Their strongly pro-science stance has even been
seen as antidemocratic, or aligned with repressive political ideas. This is very
unfair, given their actual political interests and activities. Later we will see
how ideas about the relation between science and politics changed through
the twentieth century in a way that made this interpretation possible. The
accusation of stodginess is another matter; the logical positivists’ writings
were often extremely dry and technical. Still, even the driest of their ideas
were part of a remarkable program that aimed at a massive, transdiscipli-
nary, intellectual housecleaning. And their version of empiricism was or-
ganized around an ideal of intellectual ﬂexibility as a mark of science and
rationality. We see this in a famous metaphor used by Neurath (who exem-
pliﬁes these themes especially well). Neurath said that in our attempts to
learn about the world and improve our ideas, we are “like sailors who have
to rebuild their ship on the open sea.” The sailors replace pieces of their
ship plank by plank, in a way that eventually results in major changes but
which is constrained by the need to keep the ship aﬂoat during the process.
2.4 Problems and Changes
Logical positivist ideas were always in a state of ﬂux, and they were subject
to many challenges. One set of problems was internal to the program. For
example, there was considerable difﬁculty in getting a good formulation of
30
Chapter Two

the veriﬁability principle. It turned out to be hard to formulate the prin-
ciple in a way that would exclude all the obscure traditional philosophy but
include all of science. Some of these problems were almost comically simple.
For example, if “Metals expand when heated” is testable, then “Metals ex-
pand when heated and the Absolute Spirit is perfect” is also testable. If we
could empirically show the ﬁrst part of the claim to be false, then the whole
claim would be shown false, because of the logic of statements containing
“and.” (If A is false then A&B must be false too.) Patching this hole led to
new problems elsewhere; the whole project was quite frustrating (Hempel
1965, chap. 4). The attempt to develop an inductive logic also ran into se-
rious trouble. That topic will be covered in the next chapter.
Other criticisms were directed not at the details but at the most basic
ideas of the movement. The criticism that I will focus on here is one of
these, and its most famous presentation is in a paper sometimes regarded
as the most important in all of twentieth-century philosophy: W. V. Quine’s
“Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (1953).
Quine argued for a holistic theory of testing, and he used this to moti-
vate a holistic theory of meaning as well. In describing the view, ﬁrst I
should say something about holism in general. Many areas of philosophy
contain views that are described using the term “holism.” A holist argues
that you cannot understand a particular thing without looking at its place
in a larger whole. In the case we are concerned with here, holism about test-
ing says that we cannot test a single hypothesis or sentence in isolation. In-
stead, we can only test complex networks of claims and assumptions. This
is because only a complex network of claims and assumptions makes def-
inite predictions about what we should observe.
Let us look more closely at the idea that individual claims about the
world cannot be tested in isolation. The idea is that in order to test one
claim, you need to make assumptions about many other things. Often these
will be assumptions about measuring instruments, the circumstances of
observation, the reliability of records and of other observers, and so on. So
whenever you think of yourself as testing a single idea, what you are really
testing is a long, complicated conjunction of statements; it is the whole
conjunction that gives you a deﬁnite prediction. If a test has an unexpected
result, then something in that conjunction is false, but the failure of the test
itself does not tell you where the error is.
For example, suppose you want to test the hypothesis that high air pres-
sure is associated with fair, stable weather. You make a series of observa-
tions, and what you seem to ﬁnd is that high pressure is instead associated
with unstable weather. It is natural to suspect that your original hypothe-
sis was wrong, but there are other possibilities as well. It might be that your
Logic Plus Empiricism
31

barometer does not give reliable measurements of air pressure. There might
also be something wrong with the observations made (by you or others) of
the weather conditions themselves. The unexpected observations are telling
you that something is wrong, but the problem might lie with one of your
background assumptions, not with the hypothesis you were trying to test.
Some parts of this argument are convincing. It is true that only a net-
work of claims and assumptions, not a single hypothesis alone, tells us
what we should expect to observe. The failure of a prediction will always
have a range of possible explanations. In that sense, testing is indeed ho-
listic. But this leaves open the possibility that we might often have good rea-
sons to lay the blame for a failed prediction at one place rather than an-
other. In practice, science seems to have some effective ways of working out
where to lay the blame. Giving a philosophical theory of these decisions is
a difﬁcult task, but the mere fact that failed predictions always have a range
of possible explanations does not settle the holism debate.
Holist arguments had a huge effect on the philosophy of science in the
middle of the twentieth century. Quine, who sprinkled his writings with
deft analogies and dry humor, argued that mainstream empiricism had
been committed to a badly simplistic view of testing. We must accept, as
Quine said in a famous metaphor, that our theories “face the tribunal of
sense-experience . . . as a corporate body” (1953, 41). Logical positivism
must be replaced with a holistic version of empiricism.
But there is a puzzle here. The logical positivists already accepted that
testing is holistic in the sense described above. Here is Herbert Feigl, writing
in 1943: “No scientiﬁc assumption is testable in complete isolation. Only
whole complexes of inter-related hypotheses can be put to the test” (1943,
16). Carnap had been saying the same thing (1937, 318). We can even ﬁnd
statements like this in Ayer’s Language, Truth, and Logic (1936).
Quine did recognize Pierre Duhem, a much earlier French physicist and
philosopher, as someone who had argued for holism about testing. (Holism
about testing is often called “the Duhem-Quine thesis.”) But how could it
be argued that logical positivists had dogmatically missed this important
fact, when they repeatedly expressed it in print? Regardless of this, many
philosophers agreed with Quine that logical positivism had made a bad
mistake about testing in science.
Though the history of the issue is strange, it might be fair to say this: al-
though the logical positivists ofﬁcially accepted a holistic view about test-
ing, they did not appreciate the signiﬁcance of the point. The veriﬁability
principle seems to suggest that you can test sentences one at a time. It seems
to attach a set of observable outcomes of tests to each sentence in isolation.
32
Chapter Two

Strictly, the positivists generally held that these observations are only asso-
ciated with a speciﬁc hypothesis against a background of other assump-
tions. But then it seems questionable to associate the test results solely with
the hypothesis itself. Quine, in contrast, made the consequences of holism
about testing very clear. He also drew conclusions about language and
meaning; given the link between testing and meaning asserted by logical
positivism, holism about testing leads to holism about meaning. And holism
about meaning causes problems for many logical positivist ideas.
The version of holism that Quine defended in “Two Dogmas” was an
extreme one. It included an attack on the one idea in the previous section
that you might have thought was completely safe: the analytic-synthetic
distinction. Quine argued that this distinction does not exist; this is an-
other unjustiﬁed “dogma” of empiricism.
Here again, some of Quine’s arguments were directed at a version of the
analytic-synthetic distinction that the logical positivists no longer held.
Quine said that the idea of analyticity was intended to treat some claims as
immune to revision, and he argued that in fact no statement is immune to
revision. But Carnap had already decided that analytic statements can be
revised, though they are revised in a special way. A person or community
can decide to drop one whole linguistic and logical framework and adopt
another. Against the background provided by a given linguistic and logical
framework, some statements will be analytic and hence not susceptible to
empirical test. But we can always change frameworks. By the time that
Quine was writing, Carnap’s philosophy was based on a distinction between
changes made within a linguistic and logical framework, and changes be-
tween these frameworks.
In another (more convincing) part of his paper, Quine argued that there
is no way to make scientiﬁc sense of a sharp analytic-synthetic distinction.
He connected this point to his holism about testing. For Quine, all our
ideas and hypotheses form a single “web of belief,” which has contact with
experience only as whole. An unexpected observation can prompt us to
make a great variety of possible changes to the web. Even sentences that
might look analytic can be revised in response to experience in some cir-
cumstances. Quine noted that strange results in quantum physics had sug-
gested to some that revisions in logic might be needed.
In this discussion of problems for logical positivism, I have included
some discussions that started early and some that took place after World
War II, when the movement had begun its U.S.-based transformation. Let
us now look at some central ideas of logical empiricism, the later, less ag-
gressive stage of the movement.
Logic Plus Empiricism
33

2.5 Logical Empiricism
Let’s see how things looked in the years after World War II. Schlick is dead,
and other remnants of the Vienna Circle are safely housed in American uni-
versities—Carnap at Chicago, Hempel at Pittsburgh and then Princeton,
Reichenbach at UCLA (via Turkey), Feigl at Minnesota. Many of the same
people are involved, but the work is different. The revolutionary attempt
to destroy traditional philosophy has been replaced by a program of care-
ful logical analysis of language and science. Discussion of the contribu-
tions that could be made by the scientiﬁc worldview to a democratic so-
cialist future have been dropped or greatly muted. (Despite this, the FBI
collected a ﬁle on Carnap as a possible Communist sympathizer.)
As before, ideas about language guided logical empiricist ideas about
science. The analytic-synthetic distinction had not been rejected, but it
was regarded as questionable. The logical empiricists felt the pressure of
Quine’s arguments. The veriﬁability theory, which had been so scythe-like
in its early forms, was replaced by a holistic empiricist theory of meaning.
Theories were seen as abstract structures that connect many hypotheses
together. These structures are connected, as wholes, to the observable
realm, but each bit of a theory—each claim or hypothesis or concept—
does not have some speciﬁc set of observations associated with it. A theo-
retical term (like “electron” or “gene”) derives its meaning from its place
in the whole structure and from the structure’s connection to the realm
of observation.
Late in the logical empiricist era, in 1970, Herbert Feigl gave a pictorial
representation of what he called “the orthodox view” of theories (see
fig. 2.2). A network of theoretical hypotheses (“postulates”) is connected
by stages to what Feigl calls the “soil” of experience. This anchoring is the
source of the network’s meaning. Feigl used this picture to describe a single
scientiﬁc theory. For the more extreme holism of Quine, a person’s total set
of beliefs form a single network.
The logical positivist distinction between observational and theoretical
parts of language was kept roughly intact. But the idea that observational
language describes private sensations had been dropped. The observational
base of science was seen as made up of descriptions of observable physical
objects (though Carnap thought it might occasionally be useful to work
with a language referring to sensations).
Logical positivist views about the role of logic in philosophy and
about the sharp separation between the logic of science and the historical-
psychological side of science were basically unchanged. A good example of
the kind of work done by logical empiricists is provided by their work on
34
Chapter Two

explanation in science (see especially Hempel and Oppenheim 1948; Hem-
pel 1965). For Hempel, to explain something is to show how to infer it us-
ing a logical argument, where the premises of the argument include at least
one statement of a natural law (see chapter 13 below). This illustrates the
idea, common to logical positivism and logical empiricism, that logic is the
main tool of philosophy of science.
We saw that logical positivism held that the sole aim of science is to
track patterns in experience. For logical positivism, when a scientist seems
to be trying to describe unobservable structures in the world that give rise
to what we see, the scientist must instead be seen as describing the observ-
able world in a special, abstract way. Scientiﬁc language is only meaning-
ful insofar as it picks out patterns in the ﬂow of experience. Now, does log-
ical empiricism make the same claim? Does logical empiricism claim that
scientiﬁc language ultimately only describes patterns in observables?
The answer is that logical empiricists agonized over this. In their hearts
their answer was yes, but this answer seemed to get harder and harder to
defend. Carl Hempel wrote a paper in 1958 called “The Theoretician’s
Dilemma,” which was the height of logical empiricist agony over the issue.
As a fairly traditional empiricist, Hempel was attracted to the idea that the
Logic Plus Empiricism
35
Fig. 2.2
Feigl’s picture of the logical empiricist view of theories
(From Feigl 1970; reproduced courtesy
of University of Minnesota Press)

only possible role for those parts of language that seem to refer to unob-
servable entities is to help us pick out patterns in the observable realm. And
if the parts of theories that appear to posit unobservable things are really
any good, this “goodness” has to show up in advantages the theory has in
its handling of observables. So there is no justiﬁcation for seeing these parts
of scientiﬁc language as describing real objects lying beyond experience.
But Hempel and the logical empiricists found themselves forced to concede
that this view does not make much sense of actual scientiﬁc work. When
scientists use terms like “electron” or “gene,” they act as if they are do-
ing more than tracking complex patterns in the observable realm. But the
idea that the logical empiricists were being pushed toward—the idea that
scientiﬁc theories are aimed at describing unobservable real structures—
was hard to put on the table and defend. Empiricist philosophy of language
seemed implacably opposed to it.
Empiricists were familiar with bad versions of the idea that behind the
ordinary world of observables there is a special and superior realm, pure
and perfect. This “layered” view of reality seemed to empiricists a source
of endless trouble, right from the time of the ancient Greek philosopher
Plato, who distinguished the illusory, unstable world of “appearances”
from the more perfect and real world of “forms.” Empiricists have rightly
been determined to avoid this kind of picture. But much of science does ap-
pear to be a process in which people hypothesize hidden structures that
give rise to observable phenomena. These hidden structures are not “pure
and perfect” or “more real” than the observable parts of the world, but
they do lie behind or beneath observable phenomena. Of course, unob-
servable structures posited by a theory at one time might well turn out to
be observable at a later time. In science, there is no telling what kinds of
new access to the hidden parts of the world we might eventually achieve.
But still, much of science does seem to proceed by positing entities that are,
at the time of the research in question, truly hidden. For the traditional em-
piricist philosopher, understanding scientiﬁc theorizing in a way that posits
a layer of observable phenomena and a layer of hidden structure respon-
sible for the phenomena takes us far too close to bad old philosophical
views like Plato’s. We are too close for comfort, so we must give a different
kind of description of how science works.
The result is the traditional empiricist insistence that, ultimately, the
only thing scientiﬁc language can do is describe patterns in the observable
realm. In the ﬁrst published paper that introduced logical positivism, Car-
nap, Hahn, and Neurath said: “In science there are no ‘depths’; there is sur-
face everywhere” ([1929] 1973, 306). This is a vivid expression of the em-
piricist aversion to a view in which the aim of theorizing is to describe hidden
36
Chapter Two

levels of structure. Science uses unusual theoretical concepts (which look ini-
tially like attempts to refer to hidden things) as a way of discovering and de-
scribing subtle patterns in the observable realm. So the logical positivists and
the logical empiricists talked constantly about prediction as the goal of sci-
ence. Prediction was a substitute for the more obvious-looking—but ulti-
mately forbidden—goal of describing the real hidden structure of the world.
Twentieth-century empiricism made an important mistake here. We can
make sense of science only by treating much of it as an attempt to describe
hidden structures that give rise to observable phenomena. This is a version
of scientiﬁc realism, an idea that will be discussed later in this book. In sci-
ence there are depths. There is not a simple and ﬁxed distinction between
two “layers” in nature—the empiricists were right to distrust this idea. In-
stead there are many layers, or rather a continuum between structures that
are more accessible to us and structures that are less accessible. Genes are
hidden from us in some ways, but not as hidden as electrons, which in turn
are not as hidden as quarks. Although there are “depths” in science, what
is deep at one time can come to the surface at later times, and there may be
lots of ways of interacting with what is presently deep.
2.6 On the Fall of Logical Empiricism
Logical empiricist ideas dominated much American philosophy, and they
were very inﬂuential elsewhere in the English-speaking world and in some
parts of Europe, in the middle of the twentieth century. But by the mid-
1960s the view was deﬁnitely under threat; and by the middle or late
1970s, logical empiricism was near to extinction. The fall of logical em-
piricism was due to several factors, all of which I have either introduced in
this chapter or will discuss in later chapters. One is the breakdown of the
view of language that formed the basis of many logical positivist and logi-
cal empiricist ideas. Another is pressure from holist arguments. A third is
the frustrating history of attempts to develop an inductive logic (chapter 3).
A fourth is the development of a new role for ﬁelds like history and psy-
chology in the philosophy of science (chapters 5–7). And eventually there
was pressure from scientiﬁc realism. But this was only possible after logi-
cal empiricism had begun to decline.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
For much more on the empiricist tradition in general, see Garrett and Barbanell,
Encyclopedia of Empiricism (1997).
Logic Plus Empiricism
37

Schlick’s “Positivism and Realism” (1932–33) and Feigl’s “Logical Empiricism”
(1943) are good statements of logical positivism by original members of the Vienna
Circle. (Feigl uses the term “logical empiricism,” but his paper describes a fairly
strong, undiluted version of the view.) Ayer’s Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) is
readable, vivid, and exciting. Some see it as a distortion of logical positivist ideas.
The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1998) has an interesting collection
of articles, especially in the light of new debates about the history of logical posi-
tivism. The article on logical positivism is by Friedman and reﬂects his somewhat
unorthodox reading (de-emphasizing the empiricist tradition). Stadler’s entry on
the Vienna Circle gives a more traditional view. See also Creath’s entry on Carnap.
On all these issues, see also the essays in Giere and Richardson 1997.
Peter Galison’s “Aufbau/Bauhaus” (1990) is a wonderful account of the artistic,
social, and political interests of the logical positivists and the links between these
interests and their philosophical ideas. Passmore 1966 is a good and accessible sur-
vey of philosophical movements and trends in the late nineteenth and early twenti-
eth centuries, including absolute idealism.
Hempel, Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation (1965), is the deﬁnitive statement of
logical empiricism. His Philosophy of Natural Science (1966) is the easy version.
Carnap’s later lectures have been published as Introduction to the Philosophy of
Science (1995).
An attempt to revive some logical positivist ideas has recently begun; see, for ex-
ample, Elliott Sober’s forthcoming book Learning from Logical Positivism.
38
Chapter Two

39
3
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Induction and Conﬁrmation
3.1 The Mother of All Problems
In this chapter we begin looking at a very important and difﬁcult problem,
the problem of understanding how observations can conﬁrm a scientiﬁc
theory. What connection between an observation and a theory makes that
observation evidence for the theory? In some ways, this has been the fun-
damental problem in the last hundred years of philosophy of science. This
problem was central to the projects of logical positivism and logical em-
piricism, and it was a source of constant frustration for them. And although
some might be tempted to think so, this problem does not disappear once
we give up on logical empiricism. The problem, in some form or other,
arises for nearly everyone.
The aim of the logical empiricists was to develop a logical theory of ev-
idence and conﬁrmation, a theory treating conﬁrmation as an abstract re-
lation between sentences. It has become fairly clear that their approach to
the problem is doomed. The way to analyze testing and evidence in science
is to develop a different kind of theory. But it will take a lot of discussion,
in this and later chapters, before the differences between approaches that
will and will not work in this area can emerge. The present chapter will
mostly look at how the problem of conﬁrmation was tackled in the middle
of the twentieth century. And that is a tale of woe.
Before looking at twentieth-century work on these issues, we must again
look further into the past. The conﬁrmation of theories is closely connected
to another classic issue in philosophy: the problem of induction. What rea-
son do we have for expecting patterns observed in our past experience to
hold also in the future? What justiﬁcation do we have for using past obser-
vations as a basis for generalization about things we have not yet observed?
The most famous discussions of induction were written by the eighteenth-
century Scottish empiricist David Hume ([1739] 1978). Hume asked, What
reason do we have for thinking that the future will resemble the past? There

is no contradiction in supposing that the future could be totally unlike the
past. It is possible that the world could change radically at any point, ren-
dering previous experience useless. How do we know this will not happen?
We might say to Hume that when we have relied on past experience before,
this has turned out well for us. But Hume replies that this is begging the
question—presupposing what has to be shown. Induction has worked in
the past, sure, but that’s the past! We have successfully used “past pasts”
to tell us about “past futures.” But our problem is whether anything about
the past gives us good information about what will happen tomorrow.
Hume concluded that we have no reason to expect the past to resemble
the future. Hume was an “inductive skeptic.” He accepted that we all use
induction to make our way around the world. And he was not suggesting
that we stop doing so (even if we could). Induction is psychologically nat-
ural to us. Despite this, Hume thought it had no rational basis. Hume’s in-
ductive skepticism has haunted empiricism ever since. The problem of con-
ﬁrmation is not the same as the classical problem of induction, but it is
closely related.
3.2 Induction, Deduction, Conﬁrmation, and Explanatory Inference
The logical empiricists tried to show how observational evidence could
provide support for a scientiﬁc theory. The idea of “support” is important
here; there was no attempt to show that scientiﬁc theories could be proved.
Error is always possible, but evidence can support one theory over another.
The cases that were to be covered by this analysis included the simplest
and most traditional cases of induction: if we see a multitude of cases of
white swans, and no other colors, why does that give us reason to believe
that all swans are white? But obviously not all cases of evidence in science
are like this. The observational support for Copernicus’s theory that the
earth goes around the sun, or for Darwin’s theory of evolution, seems to
work very differently. Darwin did not observe a set of individual cases of
evolution and then generalize.
The logical empiricists wanted a theory of evidence, or “theory of con-
firmation,” that would cover all these cases. They were not trying to develop
a recipe for conﬁrming theories. Rather, the aim was to give an account of
the relationships between the statements that make up a scientiﬁc theory
and statements describing observations, which make the observations sup-
port the theory. You might wonder, at this point, what use there could be
for a theory with so distant a relationship to actual scientiﬁc behavior. Who
cares whether a logical analysis of this kind exists or not? In defense of log-
ical empiricism, we might say this: although scientiﬁc behavior is not being
40
Chapter Three

directly described by the theory of conﬁrmation, nonetheless scientiﬁc pro-
cedures might be based on assumptions described in the theory of conﬁr-
mation. Perhaps scientists do many things that cannot be justiﬁed if con-
ﬁrmation does not exist.
Let us look more closely at what the logical empiricists tried to do. First,
I should say more about the distinction between deductive and inductive
logic (a distinction introduced in chapter 2). Deductive logic is the well-
understood and less controversial kind of logic. It is a theory of patterns of
argument that transmit truth with certainty. These arguments have the fea-
ture that if the premises of the argument are true, the conclusion is guar-
anteed to be true. An argument of this kind is deductively valid. The most
famous example of a logical argument is a deductively valid argument:
premises
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
conclusion
Socrates is mortal.
A deductively valid argument might have false premises. In that case the
conclusion might be false as well (although it also might not be). What you
get out of a deductive argument depends on what you put in.
The logical empiricists loved deductive logic, but they realized that it
could not serve as a complete analysis of evidence and argument in science.
Scientiﬁc theories do have to be logically consistent, but this is not the
whole story. Many inferences in science are not deductively valid and give
no guarantee. But they still can be good inferences; they can still provide
support for their conclusions.
For the logical empiricists, there is a reason why so much inference in
science is not deductive. As empiricists, they believed that all our evidence
derives from observation. Observations are always of particular objects
and occurrences. But the logical empiricists thought that the great aim of
science is to discover and establish generalizations. Sometimes the aim was
seen as describing “laws of nature,” but this concept was also regarded
with some suspicion. The key idea was that science aims at formulating
and testing generalizations, and these generalizations were seen as having
an inﬁnite range of application. No ﬁnite number of observations can con-
clusively establish a generalization of this kind, so these inferences from
observations in support of generalizations are always nondeductive. (In
contrast, all it takes is one case of the right kind to prove a generalization
to be false; this fact will loom large in the next chapter.)
In many discussions of these topics, the logical empiricists (and some
Induction and Conﬁrmation
41

later writers) used a simple terminology in which all arguments are either
deductive or inductive. Inductive logic was thought of as a theory of all good
arguments that are not deductive. Carnap, especially, used “induction” in
a very broad way. But this terminology can be misleading, and I will set
things up differently.
I will use the term “induction” only for inferences from particular ob-
servations in support of generalizations. To use the most traditional ex-
ample, the observation of a large number of white swans (and no swans of
any other color) might be used to support the hypothesis that all swans are
white. We could express the premises with a list of particular cases—
“Swan 1 observed at time t1 was white; swan 2 observed at time t2 was
white. . . .” Or we might simply say: “All the many swans observed so far
have been white.” The conclusion will be the claim that all swans are
white—a conclusion that could well be false but which is supported, to
some extent, by the evidence. Sometimes “enumerative induction” or
“simple induction” is used for inductive arguments of this most traditional
and familiar kind. Not all inferences from observations to generalizations
have this very simple form, though. (And a note to mathematicians: math-
ematical induction is really a kind of deduction, even though it has the su-
perﬁcial form of induction.)
A form of inference closely related to induction is projection. In a projec-
tion, we infer from a number of observed cases to arrive at a prediction about
the next case, not to a generalization about all cases. So we see a number of
white swans and infer that the next swan will be white. Obviously there
is a close relationship between induction and projection, but (surprisingly,
perhaps) there are a variety of ways of understanding this relationship.
Clearly there are other kinds of nondeductive inference in science and
everyday life. For example, during the 1980s Luis and Walter Alvarez be-
gan claiming that a huge meteor had hit the earth about 65 million years
ago, causing a massive explosion and dramatic weather changes that coin-
cided with the extinction of the dinosaurs (Alvarez et al. 1980). The Al-
varez team claimed that the meteor caused the extinctions, but let’s leave
that aside here. Consider just the hypothesis that a huge meteor hit the
earth 65 million years ago. A key piece of evidence for this hypothesis is the
presence of unusually high levels of some rare chemical elements, such as
iridium, in layers in the earth’s crust that are about 65 million years old.
These chemical elements tend to be found in meteors in much higher con-
centrations than they are near the surface of the earth. This observation is
taken to be strong evidence supporting the Alvarez theory that a meteor hit
the earth around that time.
If we set this case up as an argument, with premises and a conclusion,
42
Chapter Three

it clearly is not an induction or a projection. We are not inferring to a gen-
eralization, but to a hypothesis about a structure or process that would ex-
plain the data. A variety of terms are used in philosophy for inferences of
this kind. C. S. Peirce called these “abductive” inferences as opposed to in-
ductive ones. Others have called them “explanatory inductions,” “theoret-
ical inductions,” or “theoretical inferences.” More recently, many philoso-
phers have used the term “inference to the best explanation” (Harman
1965; Lipton 1991). I will use a slightly different term—“explanatory
inference.”
So I will recognize two main kinds of nondeductive inference, induction
and explanatory inference (plus projection, which is closely linked to in-
duction). The problem of analyzing conﬁrmation, or the problem of ana-
lyzing evidence, includes all of these.
How are these kinds of inference related to each other? For logical pos-
itivism and logical empiricism, induction is the most fundamental kind of
nondeductive inference. Reichenbach claimed that all nondeductive infer-
ence in science can be reconstructed in a way that depends only on a form
of inference that is close to traditional induction. What looks like an ex-
planatory inference can be somehow broken down and reconstructed as a
complicated network of inductions and deductions. Carnap did not make
this strong claim, but he did seem to view induction as a model for all other
kinds of nondeductive inference. Understanding induction was in some
sense the key to the whole problem. And the majority of the logical em-
piricist literature on these topics was focused on induction rather than ex-
planatory inference.
So one way to view the situation is to see induction as fundamental. But
it is also possible to do the opposite, to claim that explanatory inference is
fundamental. Gilbert Harman argued in 1965 that inductions are justiﬁed
only when they are explanatory inferences in disguise, and others have fol-
lowed up this idea in various ways.
Explanatory inference seems much more common than induction within
actual science. In fact, you might be wondering whether science contains
any inductions of the simple, traditional kind. That suspicion is reason-
able, but it might go too far. Science does contain inferences that look like
traditional inductions, at least on the face of them. Here is one example.
During the work that led to the discovery of the structure of DNA by James
Watson and Francis Crick, a key piece of evidence was provided by “Char-
gaff’s rules.” These “rules,” described by Erwin Chargaff in 1947, have to
do with the relation between the amounts of the four “bases,” C, A, T, and
G, that help make up DNA. Chargaff found that in the DNA samples he
analyzed, the amounts of C and G were always roughly the same, and the
Induction and Conﬁrmation
43

amounts of T and A were always roughly the same. This fact about DNA
became important in the discussions of how DNA molecules are put to-
gether. I called it a “fact” just above, but of course Chargaff in 1947 had
not observed all the molecules of DNA that exist, and neither have we. In
1947 Chargaff’s claim rested on an induction from a small number of cases
(in just eight different kinds of organisms). Today we can give an argument
for why Chargaff’s rules hold that is not just a simple induction; the struc-
ture of DNA explains why Chargaff’s rules must hold. But it might appear
that, back when the rules were originally discovered, the only reason to
take the rules to describe all DNA was inductive.
So it might be a good idea to refuse to treat one of these kinds of infer-
ence as “more fundamental” than the other. Maybe there is more than one
kind of good nondeductive inference (and perhaps there are others besides
the ones I have mentioned). Philosophers often ﬁnd it attractive to think
that there is ultimately just one kind of nondeductive inference, because
that seems to be a simpler situation. But the argument from simplicity is
unconvincing.
Let us return to our discussion of how the problem was handled by the
logical empiricists. They used two main approaches. One was to formulate
an inductive logic that looked as much as possible like deductive logic, bor-
rowing ideas from deductive logic whenever possible. That was Carl Hem-
pel’s approach. The other approach, used by Rudolf Carnap, was to apply
the mathematical theory of probability. In the next two sections of this
chapter, I will discuss some famous problems for logical empiricist theories
of conﬁrmation. The problems are especially easy to discuss in the context
of Hempel’s approach, which was simpler than Carnap’s. A detailed ex-
amination of Carnap is beyond the scope of this book. Through his career,
Carnap developed very sophisticated models of conﬁrmation using proba-
bility theory applied to artiﬁcial languages. Problems kept arising. More
and more special assumptions were needed to make the results come out
right. There was never a knockdown argument against him, but the proj-
ect came to seem less and less relevant to real science, and it eventually ran
out of steam (Howson and Urbach 1993).
Although Carnap’s approach to analyzing conﬁrmation did not work
out, the idea of using probability theory to understand conﬁrmation re-
mains popular and has been developed in new ways. Certainly this looks
like a good approach; it does seem that observing the raised iridium level
in the earth’s crust made the Alvarez meteor hypothesis more probable
than before. In chapter 14 I will describe new ways to use probability the-
ory to understand the conﬁrmation of theories.
44
Chapter Three

Before moving on to some famous puzzles, I will discuss a simple pro-
posal that may have occurred to you.
The term hypothetico-deductivism is used in several ways by people
writing about science. Sometimes it is used to describe a simple view about
testing and conﬁrmation. According to this view, hypotheses in science are
conﬁrmed when their logical consequences turn out to be true. This idea
covers a variety of cases; the conﬁrmation of a white-swan generalization
by observing white swans is one case, and another is the conﬁrmation of a
hypothesis about an asteroid impact by observations of the true conse-
quences of this hypothesis.
As Clark Glymour has emphasized (1980), an interesting thing about
this idea is that it is hopeless when expressed in a simple way, but some-
thing like it seems to ﬁt well with many episodes in the history of science.
One problem is that a scientiﬁc hypothesis will only have consequences of
a testable kind when it is combined with other assumptions, as we have
seen. But put that problem aside for a moment. The suggestion above is
that a theory is conﬁrmed when a true statement about observables can be
derived from it. This claim is vulnerable to many objections. For example,
any theory T deductively implies T-or-S, where S is any sentence at all. But
T-or-S can be conclusively established by observing the truth of S. Suppose
S is observational. Then we can establish T-or-S by observation, and that
conﬁrms T. This is obviously absurd. Similarly, if theory T implies obser-
vation E, then the theory T& S implies E as well. So T&S is conﬁrmed by
E, and S here could be anything at all. (Note the similarity here to a prob-
lem discussed at the beginning of section 2.4.) There are many more cases
like this.
The situation is strange, and some readers may feel exasperation at this
point. People do often regard a scientiﬁc hypothesis as supported when its
consequences turn out to be true; this is taken to be a routine and reason-
able part of science. But when we try to summarize this idea using simple
logic, it seems to fall apart. Does the fault lie with the original idea, with our
summary of the idea using basic logic, or with basic logic itself? The logi-
cal empiricist response was to hang steadfastly onto the logic, and often to
hang onto their translations of ideas about science into a logical frame-
work as well. This led them to question or modify some very reasonable-
looking ideas about evidence and testing. But it is hard to work out where
the fault really lies.
A related feature of logical empiricism is the use of simpliﬁed and artiﬁ-
cial cases rather than cases from real science. The logical empiricists sought
to strip the problem of conﬁrmation down to its bare essentials, and they saw
Induction and Conﬁrmation
45

these essentials in formal logic. But to many, philosophy of science seemed
to be turning into an exercise in “logic-chopping” for its own sake. And as
we will see in the next sections, even the logic-chopping did not go well.
Despite this, there is a lot to learn from the problems faced by logical
empiricism. Conﬁrmation really is a puzzling thing. Let us look at some fa-
mous puzzles.
3.3 The Ravens Problem
The logical empiricists put much work into analyzing the conﬁrmation of
generalizations by observations of their instances. At this point we will
switch birds, in accordance with tradition. How is it that repeated obser-
vations of black ravens can conﬁrm the generalization that all ravens are
black?
First I will deal with a simple suggestion that will not work. Some read-
ers might be thinking that if we observe a large number of black ravens and
no nonblack ones, then at least we are cutting down the number of ways in
which the hypothesis that all ravens are black might be wrong. As we see
each raven, there is one less raven that might fail to ﬁt the theory. So in some
sense, the chance that the hypothesis is true should be slowly increasing.
But this does not help much. First, the logical empiricists were concerned
to deal with the case where generalizations cover an inﬁnite number of in-
stances. In that case, as we see each raven we are not reducing the number
of ways in which the hypothesis might fail. Also, note that even if we for-
get this problem and consider a generalization covering just a ﬁnite num-
ber of cases, the kind of support that is analyzed here is a very weak one.
That is clear from the fact that we get no help with the problem of projec-
tion. As we see each raven we know there is one less way for the general-
ization to be false, but this does not tell us anything about what to expect
with the next raven we see.
So let us look at the problem differently. Hempel suggested that, as a
matter of logic, all observations of black ravens conﬁrm the generalization
that all ravens are black. More generally, any observation of an F that is
also G supports the generalization “All F’s are G.” He saw this as a basic
fact about the logic of support.
This looks like a reasonable place to start. And here is another obvious-
looking point: any evidence that conﬁrms a hypothesis H also conﬁrms any
hypothesis that is logically equivalent to H.
What is logical equivalence? Think of it as what we have when two sen-
tences say the same thing in different terms. More precisely, if H is logically
46
Chapter Three

equivalent to H*, then it is impossible for H to be true but H* false, or vice
versa.
But these two innocent-looking claims generate a problem. In basic
logic the hypothesis “All ravens are black” is logically equivalent to “All
nonblack things are not ravens.” Let us look at this new generalization. “All
nonblack things are not ravens” seems to be conﬁrmed by the observation
of a white shoe. The shoe is not black, and it’s not a raven, so it ﬁts the hy-
pothesis. But given the logical equivalence of the two hypotheses, anything
that conﬁrms one conﬁrms the other. So the observation of a white shoe
conﬁrms the hypothesis that all ravens are black! That sounds ridiculous.
As Nelson Goodman (1955) put it, we seem to have the chance to do a lot
of “indoor ornithology”; we can investigate the color of ravens without
ever going outside to look at one.
This simple-looking problem is hard to solve. Debate about it contin-
ues. Hempel himself was well aware of this problem—he is the one who
originally thought of it. But there has not been a solution proposed that
everyone (or even most people) have agreed upon.
One possible reaction is to accept the conclusion. This was Hempel’s re-
sponse. Observing a white shoe does conﬁrm the hypothesis that all ravens
are black, though presumably only by a tiny amount. Then we can keep our
simple rule that whenever we have an “All F’s are G” hypothesis, any ob-
servation of an F that is G conﬁrms it and also conﬁrms everything logi-
cally equivalent to “All F’s are G.” Hempel stressed that, logically speaking,
an “All F’s are G” statement is not a statement about F’s but a statement
about everything in the universe—the statement that if something is an F
then it is G. We should note that according to this reply, the observation of
the white shoe also conﬁrms the hypothesis that all ravens are green, that
all aardvarks are blue, and so on. Hempel was comfortable with this situ-
ation, but most others have not been.
A multitude of other solutions have been proposed. I will discuss just
two ideas, which I regard as being on the right track.
Here is the ﬁrst idea. Perhaps observing a white shoe or a black raven
may or may not conﬁrm “All ravens are black.” It depends on other factors.
Suppose we know, for some reason, that either (1) all ravens are black and
ravens are extremely rare, or else (2) most ravens are black, a few are white,
and ravens are common. Then a casual observation of a black raven will
support (2), a hypothesis that says that not all ravens are black. If all ravens
were black, we should not be seeing them at all. Observing a white shoe,
similarly, may or may not conﬁrm a given hypothesis, depending on what
else we know. This reply was ﬁrst suggested by I. J. Good (1967).
Induction and Conﬁrmation
47

Good’s move is very reasonable. We see here a connection to the issue
of holism about testing, discussed in chapter 2. The relevance of an obser-
vation to a hypothesis is not a simple matter of the content of the two state-
ments; it depends on other assumptions as well. This is so even in the
simple case of a hypothesis like “All F’s are G” and an observation like
“Object A is both F and G.” Good’s point also reminds us how artiﬁcially
simpliﬁed the standard logical empiricist examples are. No biologist would
seriously wonder whether seeing thousands of black ravens makes it likely
that all ravens are black. Our knowledge of genetics and bird coloration
leads us to expect some variation, such as cases of albinism, even when we
have seen thousands of black ravens and no other colors.
Here is a second suggestion about the ravens, which is consistent with
Good’s idea but goes further. Whether or not a black raven or a white shoe
conﬁrms “All ravens are black” might depend on the order in which you
learn of the two properties of the object.
Suppose you hypothesize that all ravens are black, and someone comes
up to you and says, “I have a raven behind my back; want to see what color
it is?” You should say yes, because if the person pulls out a white raven,
your theory is refuted. You need to ﬁnd out what is behind his back. But
suppose the person comes up and says, “I have a black object behind my
back; want to see whether it’s a raven?” Then it does not matter to you
what is behind his back. You think that all ravens are black, but you don’t
have to think that all black things are ravens. In both cases, suppose the ob-
ject behind his back is a black raven and he does show it to you. In the ﬁrst
situation, your observation of the raven seems relevant to your investiga-
tion of raven color, but in the other case it’s irrelevant.
So perhaps the “All ravens are black” hypothesis is only conﬁrmed by a
black raven when this observation had the potential to refute the hypothe-
sis, only when the observation was part of a genuine test.
Now we can see what to do with the white shoe. You believe that all
ravens are black, and someone comes up and says, “I have a white object
behind my back; want to see what it is?” You should say yes, because if he
has a raven behind his back your hypothesis is refuted. He pulls out a shoe,
however, so your hypothesis is OK. Then someone comes up and says, “I
have a shoe behind my back; want to see what color it is?” In this case you
need not care. It seems that in the ﬁrst of these two cases, you have gained
some support for the hypothesis that all ravens are black. In the second case
you have not.
So perhaps some white-shoe observations do conﬁrm “All ravens are
black,” and some black-raven observations don’t. Perhaps there is only
48
Chapter Three

conﬁrmation when the observations arise during a genuine test, a test that
has the potential to disconﬁrm as well as conﬁrm.
Hempel saw the possibility of a view like this. His responses to Good’s
argument and to the order-of-observation point were similar, in fact. He
said he wanted to analyze a relation of conﬁrmation that exists just be-
tween a hypothesis and an observation itself, regardless of extra informa-
tion we might have, and regardless of the order in which observations were
made. But perhaps Hempel was wrong here; there is no such relation. We
cannot answer the question of whether an observation of a black raven
conﬁrms the generalization unless we know something about the way the
observation was made and unless we make assumptions about other mat-
ters as well.
Hempel thought that some observations are just “automatically” rele-
vant to hypotheses, regardless of what else is going on. That is true in the
case of the deductive refutation of generalizations; no matter how we come
to see a nonblack raven, that is bad news for the “All ravens are black”
hypothesis. But what is true for deductive disconﬁrmation is not true for
conﬁrmation.
Clearly this discussion of order-of-observation does not entirely solve
the ravens problem. Why does order matter, for example, and what if both
properties are observed at once? I will return to this issue in chapter 14, us-
ing a more complex framework. Putting it brieﬂy, we can only understand
conﬁrmation and evidence by taking into account the procedures involved
in generating data. Or so I will argue.
I will make one more comment on the ravens problem. This one is a di-
gression, but it does help illustrate what is going on. In psychology there 
is a famous experiment called the “selection task” (Wason and Johnson-
Laird 1972). The experiment has been used to show that many people (in-
cluding highly educated people) make bad logical errors in certain circum-
stances. The experimental subject is shown four cards with half of each card
masked. The subject is asked to answer this question: “Which masks do
you have to remove to know whether it is true that if there is a circle on the
left of a card, there is a circle on the right as well?” See ﬁg. 3.1 and try to
answer the question yourself before reading the next paragraph.
Large majorities of people in many (though not all) versions of this ex-
periment give the wrong answer. Many people tend to answer “only card A”
or “card A and card C.” The right answer is A and D. Compare this to the
ravens problem; the problems have the same structure. I am sure Hempel
would have given the right answer if he had been a subject in the four-card
experiment, but the selection task might show something interesting about
Induction and Conﬁrmation
49

why conﬁrmation has been hard to analyze. For some reason it is difﬁcult
for people to see the importance of “card D” tests in cases like this, and it
is easy for people to wrongly think that “card C” tests are important. If you
are investigating the hypothesis that all ravens are black, card D is analo-
gous to the situation when someone says he has a white object behind his
back. Card C is analogous to the situation where he says he has a black ob-
ject behind his back. Card D is a real test of the hypothesis, but card C is
not. Unmasking Card C is evidentially useless, even though it may ﬁt with
what the hypothesis says. Not all observations of cases that ﬁt a hypothe-
sis are useful as tests.
3.4 Goodman’s “New Riddle of Induction”
In this section I will describe an even more famous problem, revealed by
Nelson Goodman (1955). This argument looks strange, and it is easy to
misinterpret. But the issues it raises are very deep.
First we need to be clear about what Goodman was trying to do with
his argument. His primary goal was to show that there cannot be a purely
“formal” theory of conﬁrmation. He does not think that conﬁrmation is
impossible, or that induction is a myth. He just thinks they work differ-
ently from the way many philosophers—especially logical empiricists—
have thought.
What is a “formal” theory of conﬁrmation? The easiest way to explain
50
Chapter Three
Fig. 3.1
The Wason selection task
A
B
D
C

this is to look at deductive arguments. Recall the most famous deductively
valid argument:
Argument 1
premises
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
conclusion
Socrates is mortal.
The premises, if they are true, guarantee the truth of the conclusion. But
the fact that the argument is a good one does not have anything in partic-
ular to do with Socrates or manhood. Any argument that has the same
form is just as good. That form is as follows:
All F’s are G.
a is an F.
a is G.
Any argument with this form is deductively valid, no matter what we sub-
stitute for “F,” “G,” and “a.” As long as the terms we substitute pick out
deﬁnite properties or classes of objects, and as long as the terms retain
the same meaning all the way through the argument, the argument will
be valid.
So the deductive validity of arguments depends only on the form or pat-
tern of the argument, not the content. This is one of the features of deduc-
tive logic that the logical empiricists wanted to build into their theory of
induction and conﬁrmation. Goodman aimed to show that this is impos-
sible; there can never be a formal theory of induction and conﬁrmation.
How did Goodman do it? Consider argument 2.
Argument 2
All the many emeralds observed, in diverse circumstances,
prior to 2010 a.d. have been green.
All emeralds are green.
This looks like a good inductive argument. (Like some of the logical em-
piricists, I use a double line between premises and conclusion to indicate
that the argument is not supposed to be deductively valid.) The argument
does not give us a guarantee; inductions never do. And if you would prefer
Induction and Conﬁrmation
51

to express the conclusion as “probably, all emeralds are green” that will not
make any difference to the rest of the discussion.
(If you know something about minerals, you might object that emeralds
are regarded as green by deﬁnition: emeralds are beryl crystals made green
by trace amounts of chromium. Please just regard this as another unfortu-
nate choice of example by the literature.)
Now consider argument 3:
Argument 3
All the many emeralds observed, in diverse circumstances,
prior to 2010 a.d. have been grue.
All emeralds are grue.
Argument 3 uses a new word, “grue.” We deﬁne “grue” as follows:
grue: An object is grue if and only if it was ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and is
green, or if it was not ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and is blue.
The world contains lots of grue things; there is nothing strange about grue
objects, even though there is something strange about the word. The grass
outside my door as I write this is grue. The sky outside on July 1, 2020, will
be grue, if it is a clear day. An individual object does not have to change
color in order to be grue—this is a common misinterpretation. Anything
green that has been observed before 2010 passes the test for being grue. So,
all the emeralds we have seen so far have been grue.
Argument 3 does not look like a good inductive argument. Argument 3
leads us to believe that emeralds observed in the future will be blue, on the
basis of previously observed emeralds being green. The argument also con-
ﬂicts with argument 2, which looks like a good argument. But arguments
2 and 3 have exactly the same form. That form is as follows:
All the many E’s observed, in diverse circumstances,
prior to 2010 a.d., have been G.
All E’s are G.
We could represent the form even more schematically than this, but that
does not matter to the point. Goodman’s point is that two inductive argu-
ments can have the exact same form, but one argument can be good while
52
Chapter Three

the other is bad. So what makes an inductive argument a good or bad one
cannot be just its form. Consequently, there can be no purely formal the-
ory of induction and conﬁrmation. Note that the word “grue” works per-
fectly well in deductive arguments. You can use it in the form of argument
1, and it will cause no problems. But induction is different.
Suppose Goodman is right, and we abandon the idea of a formal the-
ory of induction. This does not end the issue. We still need to work out what
exactly is wrong with argument 3. This is the new riddle of induction.
The obvious thing to say is that there is something wrong with the word
“grue” that makes it inappropriate for use in inductions. So a good theory
of induction should include a restriction on the terms that occur in induc-
tive arguments. “Green” is OK and “grue” is not.
This has been the most common response to the problem. But as Good-
man says, it is very hard to spell out the details of such a restriction. Sup-
pose we say that the problem with “grue” is that its deﬁnition includes a
reference to a speciﬁc time. Goodman’s reply is that whether or not a term
is deﬁned in this way depends on which language we take as our starting
point. To see this, let us deﬁne a new term, “bleen.”
bleen: An object is bleen if and only if it was ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and is
blue, or if it was not ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and is green.
We can use the English words “green” and “blue” to deﬁne “grue” and
“bleen,” and if we do so we must build a reference to time into the deﬁni-
tions. But suppose we spoke a language that was like English except that
“grue” and “bleen” were basic, familiar terms and “green” and “blue”
were not. Then if we wanted to deﬁne “green” and “blue,” we would need
a reference to time.
green: An object is green if and only if it was ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and
is grue, or if it was not ﬁrst observed before 2010 a.d. and is bleen.
(You can see how it will work for “blue.”) So Goodman claimed that
whether or not a term “contains a reference to time” or “is deﬁned in terms
of time” is a language-relative matter. Terms that look OK from the stand-
point of one language will look odd from another. So if we want to rule out
“grue” from inductions because of its reference to time, then whether an
induction is good or bad will depend on what language we treat as our
starting point. Goodman thought this conclusion was ﬁne. A good induc-
tion, for Goodman, must use terms that have a history of normal use in our
Induction and Conﬁrmation
53

community. That was his own solution to his problem. Most other philoso-
phers did not like this at all. It seemed to say that the value of inductive
arguments depended on irrelevant facts about which language we happen
to use.
Consequently, many philosophers have tried to focus not on the words
“green” and “grue” but on the properties that these words pick out, or the
classes or kinds of objects that are grouped by these words. We might ar-
gue that greenness is a natural and objective feature of the world, and grue-
ness is not. Putting it another way, the green objects make up a “natural
kind,” a kind uniﬁed by real similarity, while the grue objects are an artiﬁ-
cial or arbitrary collection. Then we might say: a good induction has to use
terms that we have reason to believe pick out natural kinds. Taking this ap-
proach plunges us into hard problems in other parts of philosophy. What
is a property? What is a “natural kind”? These are problems that have been
controversial since the time of Plato.
Although Goodman’s problem is abstract, it has interesting links to real
problems in science. In fact, Goodman’s problem encapsulates within it
several distinct hard methodological issues in science; that is partly why the
problem is so interesting. First, there is a connection between Goodman’s
problem and the “curve-ﬁtting problem” in data analysis. Suppose you have
a set of data points in the form of x and y values, and you want to discern
a general relationship expressed by the points by ﬁtting a function to them.
The points in ﬁgure 3.2 fall almost exactly on a straight line, and that seems
to give us a natural prediction for the y value we expect for x = 4. However,
there is an inﬁnite number of different mathematical functions that ﬁt our
three data points (as well or better) but which make different predictions
for the case of x = 4. How do we know which function to use? Fitting a
strange function to the points seems to be like preferring a grue induction
over a green induction when inferring from the emeralds we have seen.
Scientists dealing with a curve-ﬁtting problem like this may have extra
information telling them what sort of function is likely here, or they may
prefer a straight line on the basis of simplicity. That suggests a way in which
we might deal with Goodman’s original problem. Perhaps the green induc-
tion is to be preferred on the basis of its simplicity?
That might work, but there are problems. First, is it really so clear that
the green induction is simpler? Goodman will argue that the simplicity of
an inductive argument depends on which language we assume as our start-
ing point, for the kinds of reasons given earlier in this section. For Good-
man, what counts as a simple pattern depends on which language you
speak or which categorization you assume. Also, though a preference for
54
Chapter Three

simplicity is very common in science, such a preference is often hard to jus-
tify. Simpler theories are easier for us to work with, but that does not seem
to give us reason to prefer them if we are seeking to learn what the world
is really like. Why should the world be simple rather than complex?
Earlier I mentioned attempts to solve Goodman’s problem using the
idea of a “natural kind,” a collection uniﬁed by real similarity as opposed
to stipulation or convention. Though this term is philosophical, a lot of ar-
gument within science is concerned just this sort of problem—with getting
the right categories for prediction and extrapolation. The problem is espe-
cially acute in sciences like economics and psychology that deal with com-
plex networks of similarities and differences across the cases they try to
generalize about. Do all economies with very high inﬂation fall into a nat-
ural kind that can be used to make general predictions? Are the mental dis-
orders categorized in psychiatric reference books like the DSM IV really
natural kinds, or have we applied standard labels like “schizophrenia” to
groups of cases that have no real underlying similarity? The periodic table
of elements in chemistry seems to pick out a set of real natural kinds, but
is this something we can hope for in all sciences? If so, what does that tell
us about inductive arguments in different ﬁelds?
That concludes our initial foray into the problems of induction and con-
firmation. These problems are simple, but they are very resistant to solution.
For a good part of the twentieth century, it seemed that even the most
innocent-looking principles about induction and conﬁrmation led straight
into trouble.
Induction and Conﬁrmation
55
Fig. 3.2
The curve-ﬁtting problem

Later (especially in chapter 14) I will return to these problems. But in
the next chapter we will look at a philosophy that gets a good part of its
motivation from the frustrations discussed in this chapter.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Once again, Hempel’s Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation (1965) is a key source, con-
taining a long (and exhausting) chapter on conﬁrmation. Skyrms, Choice and Chance
(2000), is a classic introductory book on these issues, and it introduces probability
theory as well. Even though it argues for a view that will not be discussed until
chapter 14, Howson and Urbach’s Scientiﬁc Reasoning (1993) is a useful introduc-
tion to various approaches to conﬁrmation. It has the most helpful short summary
of Carnap’s ideas that I have read. Carnap’s magnum opus on these issues is his Log-
ical Foundations of Probability (1950). For a discussion of explanatory inference,
see Lipton, Inference to the Best Explanation (1991).
For the use of order-of-observation to address the ravens problem, see Horwich,
Probability and Evidence (1982), but you should probably read chapter 14 of this
book ﬁrst.
Goodman’s most famous presentation of his “new riddle of induction” is in
Fact, Fiction & Forecast (1955). The problem is in chapter 3 (along with other in-
teresting ideas), and his solution is in chapter 4. His subsequent papers on the topic
are collected in Problems and Projects (1972). Douglas Stalker has edited a collec-
tion on Goodman’s riddle, called Grue! (1994). It includes a very detailed bibliog-
raphy. The Quine and Jackson papers are particularly good.
For discussions of properties and kinds, and their relevance to induction, see
Armstrong 1989, Lewis 1983, Dupre 1993, and Kornblith 1993. (These are fairly
advanced discussions, except for Armstrong’s, which is introductory.) There is a
good discussion of simplicity in Sober 1988.
56
Chapter Three

57
4
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
4.1 Popper’s Unique Place in the Philosophy of Science
Karl Popper is the only philosopher discussed in this book who is regarded
as a hero by many scientists. Attitudes toward philosophy among scientists
vary, but hardly ever does a philosopher succeed in inspiring scientists in
the way Popper has. It is also rare for a philosopher’s view of science to be
used within a scientiﬁc debate to justify one position over another. This has
happened with Popper too. Within biology, recent debates about the clas-
siﬁcation of organisms and about ecology have both seen Popper’s ideas
used in this way (Hull 1999). I once went to a lecture by a famous virolo-
gist who had won a Nobel Prize in medicine, to hear about his work. What
I heard was mostly a lecture about Popper. In 1965, Karl Popper even be-
came Sir Karl Popper, knighted by the queen of England.
Popper’s appeal is not surprising. His view of science is centered around
a couple of simple, clear, and striking ideas. His vision of the scientiﬁc en-
terprise is a noble and heroic one. Popper’s theory of science has been crit-
icized a great deal by philosophers over the years. I agree with many of
these criticisms and don’t see any way for Popper to escape their force. De-
spite the criticism, Popper’s views continue to have an important place in
philosophy and continue to appeal to many working scientists.
4.2 Popper’s Theory of Science
Popper began his intellectual career in Vienna, between the two world
wars. He was not part of the Vienna Circle, but he did have contact with
the logical positivists. This contact included a lot of disagreement, as Pop-
per developed his own distinctive position. Popper does count as an “em-
piricist” in the broad sense used in this book, but he spent a lot of time dis-
tinguishing his views from more familiar versions of empiricism. Like the
logical positivists, Popper left Europe upon the rise of Nazism, and after

spending the war years in New Zealand, he moved to the London School
of Economics, where he remained for the rest of his career. There he built
up a loyal group of allies, whom he often accused of disloyalty. His semi-
nar series at the London School of Economics became famous for its gru-
eling questioning and for the fact that speakers had a difﬁcult time actually
presenting much of their lectures, because of Popper’s interruptions.
Popper once had a famous confrontation with Wittgenstein, on the lat-
ter’s turf at Cambridge University. One version of the story, told by Popper
himself, has Wittgenstein brandishing a ﬁreplace poker during a discussion
of ethical rules, leading Popper to give as an example of an ethical rule: “not
to threaten visiting lecturers with pokers.” Wittgenstein stormed out. Other
versions of the story, including those told by Wittgenstein’s allies, deny
Popper’s account (see Edmonds and Eidinow 2001 for this controversy).
The logical positivists developed their theory of science as part of a gen-
eral theory of language, meaning, and knowledge. Popper was not much
interested in these broader topics, at least initially; his primary aim was to
understand science. As his ﬁrst order of business, he wanted to understand
the difference between scientiﬁc theories and nonscientiﬁc theories. In par-
ticular, he wanted to distinguish science from “pseudo-science.” Unlike the
logical positivists, he did not regard pseudo-scientiﬁc ideas as meaningless;
they just weren’t science. For Popper, an inspiring example of genuine sci-
ence was the work of Einstein. Examples of pseudo-science were Freudian
psychology and Marxist views about society and history.
Popper called the problem of distinguishing science from non-science
the “problem of demarcation.” All of Popper’s philosophy starts from his
proposed solution to this problem. “Falsiﬁcationism” was the name Pop-
per gave to his solution. Falsiﬁcationism claims that a hypothesis is scien-
tiﬁc if and only if it has the potential to be refuted by some possible obser-
vation. To be scientiﬁc, a hypothesis has to take a risk, has to “stick its neck
out.” If a theory takes no risks at all, because it is compatible with every
possible observation, then it is not scientiﬁc. As I said above, Popper held
that Marx’s and Freud’s theories were not scientiﬁc in this sense. No mat-
ter what happens, Popper thought, a Marxist or a Freudian can ﬁt it some-
how into his theory. So these theories are never exposed to any risks.
So far I have described Popper’s use of falsiﬁability to distinguish scien-
tiﬁc from nonscientiﬁc theories. Popper also made use of the idea of falsi-
ﬁcation in a more far-reaching way. He claimed that all testing in science
has the form of attempting to refute theories by means of observation. And
crucially, for Popper it is never possible to conﬁrm or establish a theory
by showing its agreement with observations. Conﬁrmation is a myth. The
58
Chapter Four

only thing an observational test can do is to show that a theory is false. So
the truth of a scientiﬁc theory can never be supported by observational ev-
idence, not even a little bit, and not even if the theory makes a huge num-
ber of predictions that all come out as expected.
As you might think, Popper was a severe critic of the logical empiricists’
attempts to develop a theory of conﬁrmation or “inductive logic.” The prob-
lems they encountered, some of which I discussed in chapter 3, were music
to his ears. Popper, like Hume, was an inductive skeptic, and Popper was
skeptical about all forms of conﬁrmation and support other than deductive
logic itself.
Skepticism about induction and conﬁrmation is a much more contro-
versial position than Popper’s use of falsiﬁcation to solve the demarcation
problem. Most philosophers of science have thought that if induction and
conﬁrmation are just myths, that is very bad news for science. Popper tried
to argue that there is no reason to worry; induction is a myth, but science
does not need it anyway. So inductive skepticism, for Popper, is no threat
to the rationality of science. In the opinion of most philosophers, Popper’s
attempt to defend this radical claim was not successful, and some of his dis-
cussions of this topic are rather misleading to readers. As a result, some of
the scientists who regard Popper as a hero do not realize that Popper be-
lieved it is never possible to conﬁrm a theory, not even slightly, and no mat-
ter how many observations the theory predicts successfully.
Popper placed great emphasis on the idea that we can never be com-
pletely sure that a theory is true. After all, Newton’s physics was viewed as
the best-supported theory ever, but early in the twentieth century it was
shown to be false in several respects. However, almost all philosophers of
science accept that we can never be 100 percent certain about factual mat-
ters, especially those discussed in science. This position, that we can never
be completely certain about factual issues, is often known as fallibilism (a
term due to C. S. Peirce). Most philosophers of science accept fallibilism.
The harder question is whether or not we can be reasonable in increasing
our conﬁdence in the truth of a theory when it passes observational tests.
Popper said no. The logical empiricists and most other philosophers of sci-
ence say yes.
So Popper had a fairly simple view of how testing in science proceeds.
We take a theory that someone has proposed, and we deduce an observa-
tional prediction from it. We then check to see if the prediction comes out
as the theory says it will. If the prediction fails, then we have refuted, or fal-
siﬁed, the theory. If the prediction does come out as predicted, then all
we should say is that we have not yet falsiﬁed the theory. For Popper, we
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
59

cannot conclude that the theory is true, or that it is probably true, or even
that it is more likely to be true than it was before the test. The theory might
be true, but we can’t say more than that.
We then try to falsify the theory in some other way, with a new predic-
tion. We keep doing this until we have succeeded in falsifying it. What if
years pass and we seem to never be able to falsify a theory, despite repeated
tests? We can say that the theory has now survived repeated attempts to fal-
sify it, but that’s all. We never increase our conﬁdence in the truth of the
theory; and ideally, we should never stop trying to falsify it. That’s not to
say we should spend all our time testing theories that have passed tests over
and over again. We do not have the time and resources to test everything
that could be tested. But that is just a practical constraint. According to
Popper, we should always retain a tentative attitude toward our theories,
no matter how successful they have been in the past.
In defending this view, Popper placed great emphasis on the difference
between conﬁrming and disconﬁrming statements of scientiﬁc law. If some-
one proposes a law of the form “All F’s are G,” all it takes is one observa-
tion of an F that is not a G to falsify the hypothesis. This is a matter of de-
ductive logic. But it is never possible to assemble enough observations to
conclusively demonstrate the truth of such a hypothesis. You might won-
der about situations where there is only a small number of F’s and we could
hope to check them all. Popper and the logical empiricists regarded these
as unimportant situations that do not often arise in science. Their aim was
to describe testing in situations where there is a huge or inﬁnite number of
cases covered by a hypothesized law or generalization. So Popper stressed
that universal statements are hard or impossible to verify but easy, in prin-
ciple, to falsify. The logical empiricist might reply that statements of the
form “Some F’s are G” have the opposite feature; they are easy to verify but
hard or impossible to falsify. But Popper claimed (and the logical empiri-
cists tended to agree) that real scientiﬁc theories rarely take this form, even
though some statements in science do.
Despite insisting that we can never support or conﬁrm scientiﬁc theo-
ries, Popper believed that science is a search for true descriptions of the
world. How can one search for truth if conﬁrmation is impossible?
This is an unusual kind of search. We might compare it to a certain kind
of search for the Holy Grail, conducted by an imaginary medieval knight.
Suppose there are lots of grails around, but only one of them is holy. In fact,
the number of nonholy grails is inﬁnite or enormous, and you will never
encounter them all in a lifetime. All the grails glow, but only the Holy Grail
glows forever. The others eventually stop glowing, but there is no telling
when any particular nonholy grail will stop glowing. All you can do is pick
60
Chapter Four

up one grail and carry it around and see if it keeps on glowing. You are only
able to carry one at a time. If the one you are carrying is the Holy Grail, it
will never stop glowing. But you would never know if you currently had the
Holy Grail, because the grail you are carrying might stop glowing at any
moment. All you can do is reject grails that are clearly not holy (since they
stop glowing at some point) and keep picking up a new one. You will even-
tually die (with no afterlife, in this scenario) without knowing whether you
succeeded.
This is similar to Popper’s picture of science’s search for truth. All we
can do is try out one theory after another. A theory that we have failed to
falsify up till now might, in fact, be true. But if so, we will never know this
or even have reason to increase our conﬁdence.
4.3 Popper on Scientiﬁc Change
So far I have described Popper’s views about the demarcation of science
from non-science and the nature of scientiﬁc testing. Popper also used the
idea of falsiﬁcation to propose a theory of scientiﬁc change.
Popper’s theory has an appealing simplicity. Science changes via a two-
step cycle that repeats endlessly. Stage 1 in the cycle is conjecture—a sci-
entist will offer a hypothesis that might describe and explain some part of
the world. A good conjecture is a bold one, one that takes a lot of risks by
making novel predictions. Stage 2 in the cycle is attempted refutation—the
hypothesis is subjected to critical testing, in an attempt to show that it is
false. Once the hypothesis is refuted, we go back to stage 1 again—a new
conjecture is offered. That is followed by stage 2, and so on.
As the process moves along, it is natural for a scientist to propose con-
jectures that have some relation to previous ones. A theoretical idea can be
reﬁned and modiﬁed via many rounds of conjecture and refutation. That is
ﬁne, for Popper, though it is not essential. One thing that a scientist should
not do, however, is to react to the falsiﬁcation of one conjecture by cook-
ing up a new conjecture that is designed to just avoid the problems revealed
by earlier testing, and which goes no further. We should not make ad hoc
moves that merely patch the problems found in earlier conjectures. Instead,
a scientist should constantly strive to increase the breadth of application of
a theory and increase the precision of its predictions. That means con-
stantly trying to increase the “boldness” of conjectures.
What sort of theory is this? Popper intended it as a description of the
general pattern that we actually see in science, and as a description of good
scientiﬁc behavior as well. He accepted that not all scientists succeed in
sticking to this pattern of behavior all the time. Sometimes people become
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
61

too wedded to their hypotheses; they refuse to give them up when testing
tells them to. But Popper thought that a lot of actual scientiﬁc behavior
does follow this pattern and that we see it especially in great scientists such
as Einstein. For Popper, a good or great scientist is someone who combines
two features, one corresponding to each stage of the cycle. The ﬁrst feature
is an ability to come up with imaginative, creative, and risky ideas. The sec-
ond is a hard-headed willingness to subject these imaginative ideas to rig-
orous critical testing. A good scientist has a creative, almost artistic, streak
and a tough-minded, no-nonsense streak. Imagine a hard-headed cowboy
out on the range, with a Stradivarius violin in his saddlebags. (Perhaps at
this point you can see some of the reasons for Popper’s popularity among
scientists.)
Popper’s view here can apparently be applied in the same way to indi-
viduals and to groups of scientists. An isolated individual can behave sci-
entiﬁcally by engaging in the process of conjecture and refutation. And a
collection of scientists can each, at an individual level, follow Popper’s two-
step procedure. But another possibility is a division of labor; one individ-
ual (or team) comes up with a conjecture, and another does the attempted
refutation. Popper’s basic description of the two-step conjecture-and-
refutation pattern of science seems compatible with all these possibilities.
But the case where individual A does the conjecture and individual B does
the refutation will be suspicious to Popper. If individual A is a true scien-
tist, he should take a critical attitude toward his own ideas. If individual A
is completely ﬁxated on his conjecture, and individual B is ﬁxated on show-
ing that A is wrong in order to advance his own conjecture, this is not good
scientiﬁc behavior according to Popper.
This raises an interesting question. Empiricist philosophies stress the
virtues of open-mindedness, and Popper’s view is no exception. But per-
haps an open-minded community can be built out of a collection of rather
closed-minded individuals. If actual scientists are wedded to their own
conjectures, but each is wedded to a different conjecture and would like to
prove the others wrong, shouldn’t the overall process of conjecture and
refutation work? What is wrong with the situation where B’s role is to crit-
ically test A’s ideas? So long as the testing occurs, what does it matter
whether A or B does it? One problem is that if everyone is so closed-
minded, the results of the test might have no impact on what people be-
lieve. Perhaps the young and tender minds of incoming graduate students
could be the community’s source of ﬂexibility; unsuccessful theories will
attract no new recruits and will die with their originators. This would be a
rather slow way for science to change (but many would argue that we do
see cases like this).
62
Chapter Four

In later chapters of this book, we will look at theories that focus on so-
cial structure in science, and at various kinds of division of labor between
individual scientists. Although Popper did stress community standards in
science, he did seem to have a picture in which the good scientist should,
as an individual, have the willingness to perform both the imaginative and
the critical roles. A good scientist should retain a tentative attitude toward
all theories, including his own.
I will make one more point before moving on to criticisms of Popper.
The two-step process of conjecture and refutation that Popper describes
has a striking resemblance to another two-step process: Darwin’s explana-
tion of biological evolution in terms of variation and natural selection. In
science according to Popper, scientists toss out conjectures that are sub-
jected to critical testing. In evolution, according to both Darwin himself
and more recent versions of evolutionary theory, populations evolve via a
process in which variations appear in organisms in a random or “undi-
rected” way, and these novel characteristics are “tested” through their ef-
fects on the organism in its interactions with the environment. Variations
that help organisms to survive and reproduce, and which are of the kind
that gets passed on in reproduction, tend to be preserved and become more
common in the population over time.
Ironically, at one time Popper thought that Darwinism is not a scientiﬁc
theory, but he later retracted that claim. In any case, both Popper and oth-
ers have explored the analogy between Popperian science and Darwinian
evolution in detail. The analogy should not be taken too seriously; evolu-
tion is not a process in which populations really “search” for anything, in
the way that scientists search for good theories, and there are other crucial
differences too. But the similarity is certainly interesting. Analogies be-
tween science and evolution will come again in later chapters (6 and 11).
4.4 Objections to Popper on Falsiﬁcation
Let us now turn to a critical assessment of Popper’s ideas. We should start
with his solution to the demarcation problem. Is falsiﬁability a good way
to distinguish scientiﬁc ideas from nonscientiﬁc ones?
Let me ﬁrst say that I think this question probably has no answer in the
form in which Popper expressed it. We should not expect to be able to go
through a list of statements or theories and label them “scientiﬁc” or “not
scientiﬁc.” However, I suggest that something fairly similar to Popper’s
question about demarcation does make sense: can we describe a distinctive
scientiﬁc strategy of investigating the world, a scientiﬁc way of handling
ideas?
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
63

Some of Popper’s ideas are useful in trying to answer this question. In
particular, Popper’s claim that scientiﬁc theories should take risks is a good
one; this will be followed up in the last section of this chapter. But Popper
had an overly simple picture of how this risk-taking works.
For Popper, theories have the form of generalizations, and they take
risks by prohibiting certain kinds of particular events from being observed.
If we believe that all pieces of iron, of whatever size and shape, expand
when heated, then our theory forbids the observation of something that we
know to be a piece of iron contracting when heated. A problem may have
occurred to you: how sure can we be that, if we see a piece of “iron” con-
tracting when heated, that it is really iron? We might also have doubts
about our measurements of the contraction and the temperature change.
Maybe the generalization about iron expanding when heated is true, but
our assumptions about the testing situation and our ability to know that a
sample is made of iron are false.
This problem is a reappearance of an issue discussed in chapter 2:
holism about testing. Whenever we try to test a theory by comparing it
with observations, we must make a large number of additional assump-
tions in order to bring the theory and the observations into “contact” with
each other. If we want to test whether iron always expands when heated,
we need to make assumptions about our ability to ﬁnd or make reasonably
pure samples of iron. If we want to test whether the amounts of the bases
C and G are equal and the amounts of A and T are equal in all samples of
DNA (Chargaff’s rules), we need to make a lot of assumptions about our
chemical techniques. If we observe an unexpected result (iron contracting
on heating, twice as much C as G in a sample of DNA), it is always pos-
sible to blame one of these extra assumptions rather than the theory we are
trying to test. In extreme cases, we might even claim that the apparent ob-
servation was completely misunderstood or wrongly described by the ob-
servers. Indeed, this is not so uncommon in our attempts to work out what
to make of reports of miracles and UFO abductions. So how can we really
use observations to falsify theories in the way Popper wants?
This is a problem not just for Popper’s solution to the demarcation
problem, but for his whole theory of science as well.
Popper was well aware of this problem, and he struggled with it. He re-
garded the extra assumptions needed to connect theories with testing situ-
ations as scientiﬁc claims that might well be false—these are conjectures
too. We can try to test these conjectures separately. But Popper conceded
that logic itself can never force a scientist to give up a particular theory, in
the face of surprising observations. Logically, it is always possible to blame
other assumptions involved in the test. Popper thought that a good scien-
64
Chapter Four

tist would not try to do this; a good scientist is someone who wants to ex-
pose the theory itself to tests and will not try to deﬂect the blame.
Does this answer the holist objection? What Popper has done is to move
from describing a characteristic of scientiﬁc theories to describing a charac-
teristic of scientiﬁc behavior. In some ways this is a retraction of his initial
aim, which was to describe something about scientiﬁc theories themselves
that makes them special. That is a problem. Then again, this shift to de-
scribing scientiﬁc modes of thought and behavior, rather than theories, may
well be a step forward. This will be discussed in more detail in section 4.6.
Popper also accepted that we cannot be completely certain about the ob-
servation reports that we use to falsify theories. We have to regard the ac-
ceptance of an observation report as a “decision,” one that is freely made.
Once we have made the decision, we can use the observation report to fal-
sify any theory that conﬂicts with it. But for Popper, any falsiﬁcation pro-
cess is based, in the end, on a decision that could be challenged. Someone
might come along later and try to show, via more testing, that the obser-
vation report was not a good one—that person might investigate whether
the conditions of observation were misleading. That testing has the same
conjecture-and-refutation form described earlier. So this investigation into
the controversial observation ultimately depends on “decisions” too.
Is this bad news for Popper? Popper insisted that making these deci-
sions about single observations is very different from making free decisions
directly about the theories themselves. But what sort of difference is this?
If observation reports rest on nothing more than “decisions,” and these de-
termine our choice of theories, how is that better than directly choosing the
theories themselves, without worrying about observation? Or why couldn’t
we just “decide” to hang onto a theory and reject the observation reports
that conﬂict with it? I am not saying that we should do these things, just
that Popper has not given us a good reason not to do them. I believe that
we should not do these things because we have good reason to believe that
observation is a generally reliable way of forming beliefs. As I will argue in
chapter 10, we need to make use of a scientiﬁc theory of perception at this
point in the story. But that argument will have to come later. Popper him-
self does not try to answer these questions by giving an argument about the
reliability of perception.
This point about the role of decisions affects Popper’s ideas about de-
marcation as well as his ideas about testing. Any system of hypotheses can
be held onto despite apparent falsiﬁcation, if people are willing to make
certain decisions. Does that mean that Popper’s theory fails to differenti-
ate between science and pseudo-science after all? The answer is “yes and
no.” The yes comes from the fact that scientiﬁc theories can be handled in
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
65

a way that makes them immune to falsiﬁcation, and nonscientiﬁc theories
can be rejected if people decide to accept claims about particular matters
that are incompatible with the theory. But there is a “no” part in the answer
as well. A scientiﬁc theory is falsiﬁable via a certain kind of decision—a de-
cision about an observation report. A pseudo-scientiﬁc theory, Popper says,
does not clash with any possible observations. So if a pseudo-scientiﬁc the-
ory is to be rejected, some different kind of decision must be made. We can
accept, with Popper, that this is a signiﬁcant difference. But Popper has not
told us why this way of doing things, the scientiﬁc way, is more rational
than some other way.
I have been fairly tough on Popper’s views about falsiﬁcation in this sec-
tion, and there is another problem to discuss as well. The problem is bad
for Popper, but I should emphasize that it is bad for many others as well.
What can Popper say about theories that do not claim that some obser-
vation O is forbidden, but only that it is very unlikely? If I believe that a cer-
tain coin is “fair,” I can deduce from this hypothesis various claims about
the probabilities of long “all heads” or “all tails” sequences of tosses. Sup-
pose I observe 100 tosses turning up heads 100 times. This is very unlikely
according to my hypothesis about the coin, but it is not impossible. Any ﬁ-
nite stretch of heads tosses is possible with a fair coin, although longer and
longer runs of heads are treated by the theory as more and more unlikely.
But if a hypothesis does not forbid any particular observations, then, ac-
cording to Popper, it is taking no risks. That seems to entail that theories
that ascribe low probabilities to speciﬁc observations, but do not rule them
out altogether, are unfalsiﬁable and hence unscientiﬁc for Popper.
Popper’s response was to accept that, logically speaking, all hypotheses
of this kind are unscientiﬁc. But this seems to make a mockery of the im-
portant role of probability in science. So Popper said that a scientist can de-
cide that if a theory claims that a particular observation is extremely im-
probable, the theory in practice rules out that observation. So if the
observation is made, the theory is, in practice, falsiﬁed. According to Pop-
per, it is up to scientists to work out, for their own ﬁelds, what sort of prob-
ability is so low that events of that kind are treated as prohibited. So
probabilistic theories can only be construed as falsiﬁable in a special “in
practice” sense. And we have here another role for “decisions” in Popper’s
philosophy of science, as opposed to the constraints of logic.
Popper is right that scientists reject theories when observations occur
which the theory says are highly improbable (although it is a complicated
matter which kinds of improbability have this importance). And Popper is
right that scientists spend a good deal of time working out “how improb-
able is too improbable.” Complex statistical methods are used to help sci-
66
Chapter Four

entists with these decisions. But in making this move, Popper has badly
damaged his original picture of science. This was a picture in which obser-
vations, once accepted, have the power to decisively refute theoretical hy-
potheses. That is a matter of deductive logic, as Popper endlessly stressed.
Now Popper is saying that falsiﬁcation can occur without its being backed
up by a deductive logical relation between observation and theory.
4.5 Objections to Popper on Conﬁrmation
As described earlier, Popper believed that theories are never conﬁrmed by
observations, and he thought inductive arguments are never justiﬁed. Pop-
per thought that a theory of the rational choice of theories could be given
entirely in terms of falsiﬁcation, so he thought that rejecting induction and
conﬁrmation was no problem.
In the previous section I discussed problems with Popper’s views about
falsiﬁcation. But let us leave those problems aside now, and assume in this
section that we can use Popperian falsiﬁcation as a method for decisively
rejecting theories. If we make this assumption, is Popper’s attempt to de-
scribe rational theory choice successful? No, it is not.
Here is simple problem that Popper has a very difﬁcult time with. Sup-
pose we are trying to build a bridge, and we need to use physical theories
to tell us which designs are stable and will support the weight that the
bridge must carry. This is a situation where we must apply our scientiﬁc
theories to a practical task. As a matter of fact, engineers and scientists in
this situation will undoubtedly tend to use physical theories that have sur-
vived empirical testing; they will use “tried and true” methods as far as
possible. The empiricist approach to the philosophy of science holds that
such a policy is rational. The problem for an empiricist philosophy is to ex-
plain in more detail why this policy is the right one. That task is hard, as I
hope became clear in chapter 3. But let us focus on Popper, who wants to
avoid the need for a theory of conﬁrmation. How does Popper’s philosophy
treat the bridge-building situation?
Popper can say why we should prefer to use a theory that has not been
falsiﬁed over a theory that has been falsiﬁed. Theories that have been falsi-
ﬁed have been shown to be false (here again I ignore the problems discussed
in the previous section). But suppose we have to choose between (1) a the-
ory that has been tested many times and has passed every test, and (2) a
brand new theory that has just been conjectured and has never been tested.
Neither theory has been falsiﬁed. We would ordinarily think that the ra-
tional thing to do is to choose the theory that has survived testing. But
what can Popper say about this choice? Why exactly would it be irrational,
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
67

for Popper, to build the bridge using a brand new theory that has never
been tested?
Popper recognized and struggled with this problem too. Perhaps this has
been the most common objection to Popper from other empiricist philoso-
phers (e.g., Salmon 1981). Popper is not able to give a very good reply.
Popper refuses to say that when a theory passes tests, we have more rea-
son to believe that the theory is true. Both the untested theory and the well-
tested theory are just conjectures. But Popper did devise a special concept
to use in this situation. Popper said that a theory that has survived many
attempts to falsify it is “corroborated.” And when we face choices like the
bridge-building one, it is rational to choose corroborated theories over the-
ories that are not corroborated.
What is “corroboration”? Popper gave a technical deﬁnition and held
that we can measure the amount of corroboration that a theory has at a par-
ticular time. The technicalities do not matter, though. We need to ask, What
sort of property is corroboration? Has Popper just given a new name to con-
firmation? If so, he can answer the question about building the bridge, but
he has given up one of his main differences from the logical empiricists and
everyone else. If corroboration is totally different from conﬁrmation—so
different that we cannot regard corroboration as any guide to truth—then
why should we choose a corroborated theory when we build the bridge?
This issue has been much discussed (see Newton-Smith 1981). Popper’s
concept of corroboration can be interpreted in a way that makes it differ-
ent from conﬁrmation, but Popper can give no good answer to why we
should choose corroborated theories over new ones when building bridges.
To understand corroboration, think of the difference between an aca-
demic transcript and a letter of recommendation. This distinction should
be vivid to students! An academic transcript says what you have done. It
measures your past performance, but it does not contain explicit predic-
tions about what you will do in the future. A letter of recommendation usu-
ally says something about what you have done, and it also makes claims
about how you are likely to do in the future. Conﬁrmation, as understood
by the logical empiricists, is something like a letter of recommendation for
a scientiﬁc theory. Corroboration, for Popper, is only like an academic
transcript. And Popper thought that no good reasons could be given for be-
lieving that past performance is a reliable guide to the future. So corrobo-
ration is entirely “backward-looking.” Consequently, no reason can be
given for building a bridge with a corroborated theory rather than a non-
corroborated but unfalsiﬁed one.
I think the best thing for Popper to say about the bridge-building situa-
tion is to stick to his inductive skepticism. He should argue that we really
68
Chapter Four

don’t know what will happen if we build another bridge with a design that
has worked in the past. Maybe it will stay up and maybe it won’t. There
might also be practical reasons for choosing that design if we are very fa-
miliar with it. But if someone comes along with a brand new untested de-
sign, we won’t know whether it’s a bad design until we try it.
Popper liked to say here that there is no alternative policy that is more
rational than using the familiar and well-tested design, and we do have to
make some decision. So we can go ahead and use the established design.
But as Wesley Salmon (1981) replied, this does not help at all. If conﬁrma-
tion does not exist, then it seems there is also no policy that is more rational
than choosing the untested design. All we have here is a kind of “tie” be-
tween the options.
For most people, this is an unsatisfactory place for a philosophy of sci-
ence to end up. Inductive skepticism of this kind is hard to take seriously
outside of abstract, academic discussion. However, the efforts of the last
two hundred years have shown how extremely hard it is to produce a good
theory of induction and conﬁrmation. One of the valuable roles of Pop-
per’s philosophy is to show what sort of theory of science might be possible
if we give up on induction and conﬁrmation.
In the ﬁrst chapter of this book, I said that few philosophers still try to
give descriptions of a deﬁnite “scientiﬁc method,” where this is construed
as something like a recipe for science. Popper is something of an exception
here, since he does come close to giving a kind of recipe (although Popper
insists there is no recipe for coming up with interesting conjectures). His
view has an interesting relationship to descriptions of scientiﬁc method
given in science textbooks.
In many textbooks, one ﬁnds something called the “hypothetico-
deductive method.” Back in chapter 3, I discussed a view about conﬁrma-
tion that is often called “hypothetico-deductivism.” Now we are dealing
with a method rather than a theory of conﬁrmation. Science textbooks are
more cautious about laying out recipes for science than they used to be, but
descriptions of the hypothetico-deductive method are still fairly common.
Formulations of the method vary, but some are basically a combination of
Popper’s view of testing and a less skeptical view about conﬁrmation. In
these versions, the hypothetico-deductive method is a process in which sci-
entists come up with conjectures and then deduce observational predic-
tions from those conjectures. If the predictions come out as the theory says,
then the theory is supported. If the predictions do not come out as the the-
ory says, the theory is not supported and should be rejected.
This process has the basic pattern that Popper described, but the idea
that theories can be “supported” by observations is not a Popperian idea.
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
69

The term “support” is vague, but I think discussions of the hypothetico-
deductive method generally assume that if a theory makes a lot of success-
ful predictions, we have more reason to believe that the theory is true than
we had before the successful predictions were made. We will never be com-
pletely sure, of course. But the more tests a theory passes, the more conﬁ-
dence we can have in its truth. The idea that we can gradually increase our
conﬁdence that a theory is true is an idea that Popper rejected. As I said at
the start of this chapter, some of Popper’s scientiﬁc admirers do not realize
that Popper’s view has this feature, because some of Popper’s discussions
were misleading.
Other formulations of the hypothetico-deductive method include a ﬁrst
stage in which observations are collected and a conjecture is generated
from these observations. Popper disagreed with this picture of scientiﬁc
procedure because he argued that fact-gathering can only take place in a
way guided by a conjecture. But this is a fairly minor point.
Another term that some textbooks use in discussing scientiﬁc method
(though not so much any more) is “strong inference.” This term was intro-
duced by a chemist named John Platt (1964). Strong inference is roughly a
Popperian kind of testing plus another further assumption, which Popper
rejected. This assumption is that we can write down all the possible theo-
ries that might be true in some area, and test them one by one. We ﬁnd
the true theory by eliminating the alternatives—it’s a kind of “Sherlock
Holmes” method. For Popper, this is impossible. In any real case, there will
be an inﬁnite number of competing theories. So even if we eliminate ten or
one hundred possibilities, there is still the same inﬁnite number remaining.
According to Popper, all we can do is to choose one theory, test it, then
choose another, and so on. We can never have conﬁdence that we have elim-
inated all, or most, of the alternatives. (More recent attempts to make use
of this “Sherlock Holmes” method will be discussed in chapter 14.)
I have not discussed objections to Popper’s theory of scientiﬁc change
(section 4.3) yet, but I will do so in the next few chapters.
What is Popper’s single most important and enduring contribution to
philosophy of science? I’d say it is his use of the idea of “riskiness” to de-
scribe the kind of contact that scientiﬁc theories have with observation.
Popper was right to concentrate on the ideas of exposure and risk in his de-
scription of science. Science tries to formulate and handle ideas in such a
way that they are exposed to falsiﬁcation and modiﬁcation via observa-
tion. Popper’s formulation is valuable because it captures the idea that the-
ories can appear to have lots of contact with observation when in fact they
only have a kind of “pseudo-contact” with observation because they are
exposed to no risks. This is an advance in the development of empiricist
70
Chapter Four

views of science. Popper’s analysis of how this exposure works does not
work too well, but the basic idea is good.
4.6 Further Comments on the Demarcation Problem
Popper is onto something when he says that scientiﬁc theories should take
risks. In this section I will try to develop this idea a bit differently.
Popper was interested in distinguishing scientiﬁc theories from unsci-
entiﬁc ones, and he wanted to use the idea of risk-taking to make the dis-
tinction. But this idea of risk-taking is better used as a way of distinguish-
ing scientiﬁc from unscientiﬁc ways of handling ideas. And we should not
expect a sharp distinction between the two.
The scientiﬁc way of handling an idea is to try to connect it with other
ideas, to embed it in a larger conceptual structure, in a way that exposes it
to observation. This “exposure” is not a matter of simple falsiﬁcation; there
are many ways in which exposure to observation can be used to modify and
assess an idea. But if a hypothesis is handled in a way that keeps it apart
from all the risks associated with observation, that is an unscientiﬁc
handling of the idea.
So it is a mistake to try to work out whether theories like Marxism or
Freudianism are themselves “scientiﬁc” or not, as Popper did. A big idea
like Marxism or Freudianism will have scientiﬁc and unscientiﬁc versions,
because the main principles of the theory can be handled scientiﬁcally or
unscientiﬁcally. Scientiﬁc versions of Marxism and Freudianism are pro-
duced when the main principles are connected with other ideas in a way
that exposes these principles to testing. To scientiﬁcally handle the basic
principles of Marxism is to try to work out what difference it would make
to things we can observe if the Marxist principles were true. To do this it is
not necessary that we write down some single observation that, if we ob-
serve it, will lead us to deﬁnitively reject the main principles of the theory.
It will remain possible that an auxiliary assumption is at fault, and there is
no simple recipe for adjudicating such decisions.
To continue with Popper’s examples, Marxism holds that the driving
force of human history is struggle between economic classes, guided by on-
going changes in economic organization. This struggle results in a pre-
dictable sequence of political changes, leading eventually to socialism.
Freudianism holds that the normal development of a child includes a series
of interactions and conﬂicts between unconscious aspects of the child’s
mind, where these interactions have a lot to do with resolving sexual feel-
ings toward his or her parents. Adventurous ideas like these can be handled
scientiﬁcally or unscientiﬁcally. Over the twentieth century, the Marxist
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
71

view of history has been handled scientiﬁcally enough for it to have been
disconﬁrmed. Too much has happened that seems to have little to do with
class struggle; the ever-increasing political role of religious and cultural sol-
idarity is an example (Huntington 1996). And capitalist societies have
adapted to problems—especially economic tensions—in ways that Marx-
ist views about politics and economics do not predict. Of course, it remains
possible to hang onto the main principles of Marxism despite this, but
fewer and fewer people handle the theory in that way anymore. Many still
think that Marxism contains useful insights about economic matters, but
the fundamental claims of the theory have not stood up well.
Freudianism is another matter; the ideas are still popular in some cir-
cles, but not because of success under empirical testing. Instead, the theory
seems to hang around because of its striking and intriguing character, and
because of a subculture in ﬁelds such as psychotherapy and literary theory
which guards the main ideas and preserves them despite their empirical
problems. The theory is handled very unscientiﬁcally by those groups.
Freud’s theory is not taken seriously by most scientiﬁcally oriented psy-
chology departments in research universities, but it is taking a while for
this fact to ﬁlter out to other disciplines.
Evolution is another big idea that can be handled scientiﬁcally or un-
scientiﬁcally. People (including Popper) have wondered from time to time
whether evolutionary theory, or some speciﬁc version of it such as Dar-
winism, is testable. So they have asked, What observations would lead sci-
entists to give up current versions of evolutionary theory? A one-line reply
that biologists sometimes give to this question is “a Precambrian rabbit.”
An evolutionary biology textbook by Douglas Futuyma expresses the same
point more soberly: ﬁnding “incontrovertibly mammalian fossils in incon-
trovertibly pre-cambrian rocks” would “refute or cast serious doubt on
evolution” (1998, 760). The one-liner is a start, but the real situation is
more complicated. So let us look at the case.
The Precambrian era ended around 540 million years ago. Suppose we
found a well-preserved rabbit fossil in rocks 600 million years old. All our
other evidence suggests that the only animals around then were sponges
and a few other invertebrates and that mammals did not appear until over
300 million years later. Of course, a good deal of suspicion would be di-
rected toward the ﬁnding itself. How sure are we that the rocks are that
old? Might the rabbit fossil have been planted as a hoax? Remember the
apparent fossil link between humans and apes that turned out to be a hoax,
the Piltdown man of 1908 (see Feder 1996). Here we encounter another as-
pect of the problem of holism about testing—the challenging of observa-
tion reports, especially observation reports that are expressed in a way that
72
Chapter Four

presupposes other pieces of theoretical knowledge. This will be discussed
in chapter 10. But let us suppose that all agree the fossil is clearly a Pre-
cambrian rabbit.
This ﬁnding would not be an instant falsiﬁcation of all of evolutionary
theory, because evolutionary theory is now a diverse package of ideas, in-
cluding abstract theoretical models as well as claims about the actual history
of life on earth. The theoretical models are intended to describe what var-
ious evolutionary mechanisms can do in principle. Claims of that kind are
usually tested via mathematical analysis and computer simulation. Small-
scale evolution can also be observed directly in the lab, especially in bacte-
ria and fruit ﬂies, and the Precambrian rabbit would not affect those results.
But a Precambrian rabbit fossil would show that somewhere in the
package of central claims found in evolutionary biology textbooks, there
are some very serious errors. These would at least include errors about the
overall history of life, about the kinds of processes through which a rabbit-
like organism could evolve, and about the “family tree” of species on earth.
The challenge would be to work out where the errors lie, and that would
require separating out and independently reassessing each of the ideas that
make up the package. This reassessment could, in principle, result in the
discarding of very basic evolutionary beliefs—like the idea that humans
evolved from nonhumans.
Over the past twenty years or so, evolutionary theory has in fact been
exposed to a huge and sustained empirical test, because of advances in mo-
lecular biology. Since the time of Darwin, biologists have been trying to
work out the total family tree linking all species on earth, by comparing
their similarities and differences and taking into account factors such as ge-
ographical distribution. The family tree that was arrived at prior to the rise
of molecular biology can be seen summarized in various picturesque old
charts and posters.
Then more recently, molecular biology made it possible to compare the
DNA sequences of many species. Similarity in DNA is a good indicator of
the closeness of evolutionary relationship. Claims about the evolutionary
relationships between different species can be tested reasonably directly by
discovering how similar their DNA is and calculating how many years of
independent evolution the species have had since they last shared a “com-
mon ancestor.” As this work began, it was reasonable to wonder whether
the wealth of new information about DNA would be compatible or in-
compatible with the family tree that had been worked out previously. Sup-
pose the DNA differences between humans and chimps had suggested that
the human lineage split off from the lineage that led to chimps many hun-
dreds of millions of years ago and that humans are very closely genetically
Popper: Conjecture and Refutation
73

related to squid. This would have been a disaster for evolutionary theory,
one of almost the same magnitude as the Precambrian rabbit.
As it happened, the DNA data suggest that humans and chimps di-
verged about 4.6–5 million years ago and that chimps or pigmy chimps
(bonobos) are our nearest living relatives. Prior to the DNA data, it was
unclear whether humans were more closely related to chimps or to goril-
las, and the date for the chimp-human divergence was much less clear. That
is how the grand test of our old pre-molecular family tree has tended to go.
There have been no huge surprises but lots of new facts and a lot of ad-
justments to the previous picture.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Popper’s most famous work is his book The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, published
in German in 1935 and in English in 1959. The book is mostly very readable. Chap-
ters 1–5 and 10 are the key ones. For the issues in section 4.4 above, see chapter 5
of Popper; for section 4.5, see chapter 10. A quicker and very useful introduction
to Popper’s ideas is the paper “Science: Conjectures and Refutations” in his collec-
tion Conjectures and Refutations (1963).
Newton-Smith, The Rationality of Science (1981), contains a clear and detailed
assessment of Popper’s ideas. It includes a simpliﬁed presentation of some of the
technical issues surrounding corroboration that I omitted here. Salmon 1981 is an
exceptionally good critical discussion of Popper’s views on induction and predic-
tion. See also Putnam 1974. Schilpp (1974) collects many critical essays on Popper,
with Sir Karl’s replies.
Popper’s inﬂuence on biologists and his (often peculiar) ideas about evolution-
ary theory are discussed in Hull 1999. Horgan’s book The End of Science (1996)
contains a very entertaining interview with Popper.
74
Chapter Four

75
5
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Kuhn and Normal Science
5.1 “The Paradigm Has Shifted”
In this chapter we encounter the most famous book about science written
during the twentieth century—The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, by
Thomas Kuhn. Kuhn’s book was ﬁrst published in 1962, and its impact
was enormous. Just about everything written about science by philoso-
phers, historians, and sociologists since then has been inﬂuenced by it. The
book has also been hotly debated by scientists themselves. But Structure (as
the book is known) has not only inﬂuenced these academic disciplines;
many of Kuhn’s ideas and terms have made their way into areas like poli-
tics and business as well.
A common way of describing the importance of Kuhn’s book is to say
that he shattered traditional myths about science, especially empiricist
myths. Kuhn showed, on this view, that actual scientiﬁc behavior has little
to do with traditional philosophical theories of rationality and knowledge.
There is some truth in this interpretation, but it is often greatly exag-
gerated. Kuhn spent much of his time after Structure trying to distance
himself from some of the radical views of science that came after him, even
though he was revered by the radicals. And the connection between Kuhn’s
views and logical empiricism is actually quite complicated. For example, it
comes as a surprise to many to learn that Kuhn’s book was published in a
series organized and edited by the logical empiricists; Structure was pub-
lished as part of their International Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science series.
As a matter of historical fact, though, there is no denying that this was
something of a “Trojan horse” situation. Logical empiricism was widely
perceived as being seriously damaged by Kuhn.
I said above that some of Kuhn’s ideas and terms have made their way
into areas far from the philosophy of science. The best example is Kuhn’s
use of the term “paradigm.” Here is a passage from Tom Wolfe’s 1998 novel,

A Man in Full. Charlie Croker, a real estate developer who has debt prob-
lems, is talking with his ﬁnancial adviser, Wismer (“Wiz”) Stroock.
“I’m afraid that’s a sunk cost, Charlie,” said Wismer Stroock. “At this point the
whole paradigm has shifted.”
Charlie started to remonstrate. Most of the Wiz’s lingo he could put up with,
even a “sunk cost.” But this word “paradigm” absolutely drove him up the wall, so
much so that he had complained to the Wiz about it. The damned word meant noth-
ing at all, near as he could make out, and yet it was always “shifting,” whatever it
was. In fact, that was the only thing the “paradigm” ever seemed to do. It only
shifted. But he didn’t have enough energy for another discussion with Wismer
Stroock about technogeekspeak. So all he said was:
“OK, the paradigm has shifted. Which means what?” (71)
This sort of talk derives completely from Kuhn. But what is a paradigm?
The short answer is that a paradigm, in Kuhn’s theory, is a whole way of
doing science, in some particular ﬁeld. It is a package of claims about the
world, methods for gathering and analyzing data, and habits of scientiﬁc
thought and action. In Kuhn’s theory of science, the big changes in how sci-
entists see the world—the “revolutions” that science undergoes every now
and then—occur when one paradigm replaces another. Kuhn argued that
observational data and logic alone cannot force scientists to move from
one paradigm to another, because different paradigms often include within
them different rules for treating data and assessing theories. Some people
have interpreted Kuhn as claiming that changes between paradigms are
completely irrational, but Kuhn deﬁnitely did not believe that. Instead,
Kuhn had a complicated and subtle view about the roles of observation
and logic in scientiﬁc change.
In a passage like the Tom Wolfe one above, “paradigm” is used in a
looser way derived from its role in Kuhn’s theory of science. A paradigm in
this sense means something like a way of seeing the world and interacting
with it.
Kuhn did not invent the word “paradigm.” It was an established term,
which meant (roughly) an illustrative example of something, on which
other cases can be modeled. Kuhn discusses this original meaning in Struc-
ture (1996, 23). And although Kuhn’s theory is the inspiration for all the
talk about paradigm shifts that one hears, Kuhn only occasionally used the
phrase “paradigm shift.” More often he talked about paradigms changing
or being replaced. Whichever term one uses, though, Kuhn’s theory was it-
self something like a paradigm change in the history and philosophy of sci-
ence. Nothing has been the same since.
76
Chapter Five

5.2 Paradigms: A Closer Look
A moment ago I said that a paradigm in Kuhn’s theory is a package of
claims about the world, methods for gathering and analyzing data, and
habits of scientiﬁc thought and action. However, it is more accurate to say
that this is one sense in which Kuhn used the term “paradigm.” In Struc-
ture, the term is used in several different ways; one critic counted as many
as twenty-one different senses (Masterman 1970). Kuhn later agreed that
he had used the word ambiguously, and throughout his career he kept ﬁne-
tuning this and other key concepts. To keep things simple, though, in this
book I will recognize two different senses of the term “paradigm.”
The ﬁrst sense, which I will call the broad sense, is the one I described
above. Here, a paradigm is a package of ideas and methods, which, when
combined, make up both a view of the world and a way of doing science.
When I say “paradigm” in this book without adding “broad” or “narrow,”
I mean this broad sense. But there is also a narrower sense. According to
Kuhn, one key part of a paradigm in the broad sense is a speciﬁc achieve-
ment, or an exemplar. This achievement might be a strikingly successful ex-
periment, such as Mendel’s experiments with peas, which eventually be-
came the basis of modern genetics. It might be the formulation of a set of
equations or laws, such as Newton’s laws of motion or Maxwell’s equations
describing electromagnetism. Whatever it is, this achievement is a source
of inspiration to others; it suggests a way to investigate the world. Kuhn of-
ten used the term “paradigm” just for a speciﬁc achievement of this kind.
I will call these achievements paradigms in the narrow sense. So paradigms
in the broad sense (whole ways of doing science) include within them par-
adigms in the narrow sense (examples that serve as models, inspiring and
directing further work). Kuhn himself did not use this “narrow/broad” ter-
minology, but it is helpful. When Kuhn ﬁrst introduced the term “para-
digm” in Structure, he deﬁned it in the narrower sense. But in much of his
writing, and in most of the work written after Structure using the term, the
broad sense is intended.
Kuhn used the phrase “normal science” for scientiﬁc work that occurs
within the framework provided by a paradigm. A key feature of normal sci-
ence is that it is well organized. Scientists doing normal science tend to
agree on which problems are important, on how to approach these prob-
lems, and on how to assess possible solutions. They also agree on what the
world is like, at least in broad outlines. A scientiﬁc revolution occurs when
one paradigm breaks down and is replaced by another.
This initial sketch is enough for us to go straight to some central points
about the message of Kuhn’s book.
Kuhn and Normal Science
77

The ﬁrst point can be approached via a contrast with Popper. For Pop-
per, science is characterized by permanent openness, a permanent and all-
encompassing critical stance, even with respect to the fundamental ideas in
a ﬁeld. Other empiricist views will differ on the details here, but the idea
of science as featuring permanent openness to criticism and testing is com-
mon to many versions of empiricism. Kuhn disagreed. He argued that it is
false that science exhibits a permanent openness to the testing of funda-
mental ideas. Not only that, but science would be worse off if it had the
kind of openness that philosophers have treasured.
The second point concerns scientiﬁc change. Here again a contrast with
Popper is convenient. For Popper, all science proceeds via a single process,
the process of conjecture and refutation. There can still be episodes called
“revolutions” in such a view, but revolutions are just different in degree
from what goes on the rest of the time; they involve bigger conjectures and
more dramatic refutations. For Kuhn, there are two distinct kinds of sci-
entiﬁc change: change within normal science, and revolutionary science.
(These are bridged by “crisis science,” a period of unstable stasis.) These
two kinds of change have very different epistemological features; when we
try to apply concepts such as justiﬁcation, rationality, and progress to sci-
ence, according to Kuhn we ﬁnd that normal and revolutionary science
have to be described very differently. Within normal science, there are clear
and agreed-upon standards for the justiﬁcation of arguments; within revo-
lutionary science there are not. Within normal science there is clear pro-
gress; within revolutionary science it is very hard to tell (and it is hard to
even interpret the question). Because revolutions are essential to science,
the task of describing rationality and progress in science as a whole be-
comes very complicated.
So Kuhn is ﬁrst making some claims about how science actually oper-
ates, and then drawing philosophical conclusions from those claims.
Even if we leave aside the details of Kuhn’s claims, this strategy of argument
was controversial and inﬂuential. Kuhn addressed philosophical questions
about reason and evidence via an examination of history. As we saw in
chapter 2, the logical empiricists made a sharp distinction between ques-
tions about the history and psychology of science, on the one hand, and
questions about evidence and justiﬁcation, on the other. Kuhn was delib-
erately mixing together things that the logical empiricists had insisted
should be kept apart. One of the reasons that Kuhn was interpreted as a
“destroyer” of logical empiricism was that Kuhn’s work seemed to show
how interesting it is to connect philosophical questions about science with
questions about the history of science. Kuhn seemed to open up an excit-
ing new way of approaching a set of problems that the logical empiricists
78
Chapter Five

were approaching in a very abstract manner. And although I emphasized in
earlier chapters some appealing parts of the logical empiricist approach, I
agree with Kuhn about the useful role of history in addressing philosophi-
cal questions about science.
Before we go deeper into the details of Kuhn’s view, there is one other
preliminary point to make. This has to do with a question that one should
always ask when thinking about Kuhn’s theory and other theories like it.
The question is, Which parts of the theory are just descriptive, and which
are normative? That is, when is Kuhn just making a claim about how
things are, and when is he making a value judgment, saying how they
should be? Kuhn certainly accepted that he was making some normative
claims (1996, 8). Some commentators were critical of Kuhn, however, be-
cause it’s often hard to tell when he is just “saying how things are” and
when he is making claims about good and bad science. My own interpre-
tation of Kuhn stresses the normative element in his work. I think Kuhn
had a very deﬁnite picture of how science should work and of what can
cause harm to science. In fact, it is here that we ﬁnd what I regard as the
most fascinating feature of The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. This is
the relationship between
1. Kuhn’s constant emphasis on the arbitrary, personal nature of factors often in-
ﬂuencing scientiﬁc decisions, the rigidity of scientiﬁc indoctrination of students,
the “conceptual boxes” that nature gets forced into by scientists . . . , and
2. Kuhn’s suggestion that these features are actually the key to science’s success—
without them, there is no way for scientiﬁc research to proceed as effectively as
it does.
Kuhn is saying that without the factors referred to in (1), we would not
have the most valuable and impressive features of science. But how can this
be? How can features that look like failings and ﬂaws actually help science?
How can it help science for decisions to be made on the basis of anything
other than what the data say? To answer these questions, we need to look
more closely at the details of Kuhn’s story about scientiﬁc change.
5.3 Normal Science
Normal science is work inspired by a striking achievement that provides a
basis for further work (a paradigm in the narrow sense). Kuhn does not
think that all science needs a paradigm. Each scientiﬁc ﬁeld starts out in a
state of “pre-paradigm science.” During this pre-paradigm state, scientiﬁc
work can go on, but it is not well organized and usually not very effective.
Kuhn and Normal Science
79

At some point, however, some striking piece of work appears. This achieve-
ment is taken to provide insight into the workings of some part of the
world, and it supplies a model for further investigation. This achievement
is so impressive that a tradition of further work starts to grow up around
it. The ﬁeld has its ﬁrst paradigm.
What are some examples of paradigms? Kuhn gave examples from
physics and chemistry, such as Newton’s and Einstein’s paradigms. Here I
will mention two cases from other ﬁelds. Within psychology around the
middle of the twentieth century, a great deal of work was based upon the
behaviorist approach of B. F. Skinner. Two basic principles of Skinnerian
behaviorism are (1) that learning is basically the same in humans, rats, pi-
geons, and other animals and (2) that learning proceeds by reinforce-
ment—behaviors followed by good consequences tend to be repeated,
while behaviors followed by bad consequences tend not to be repeated.
Along with these principles, the Skinnerian paradigm included a set of
experimental tools, such as standardized boxes in which pigeons made
choices in response to stimuli by pecking lighted keys. It also included sta-
tistical techniques used to analyze data and various habits and skills for
working out relevant and interesting experiments.
Here is an example from biology. Modern molecular genetics is based
on a set of principles such as the following: (1) genes are made of DNA (in
all organisms except some viruses, which have RNA genes), (2) genes have
their effects by producing protein molecules and regulating other genes,
and (3) nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) specify the structure of proteins but
not vice versa. This last principle is often called “the central dogma.” Along
with these theoretical claims, molecular genetics includes a set of tech-
niques for sequencing genes, for producing and studying mutations, for
analyzing the similarity of different genes, and so on.
For Kuhn, a scientiﬁc ﬁeld usually has only one paradigm guiding it at
any particular time. Sometimes Kuhn wrote as if this were true by deﬁni-
tion—a ﬁeld being deﬁned as an area of scientiﬁc investigation uniﬁed by
a single paradigm. This led him to divide some scientiﬁc ﬁelds up more
ﬁnely than is usual. Kuhn does allow that occasionally a ﬁeld can be gov-
erned by several related paradigms, but this is rare. In general, a key part of
Kuhn’s theory is the principle one paradigm per ﬁeld per time.
A paradigm’s role is to organize scientiﬁc work; the paradigm coordi-
nates the work of individuals into an efﬁcient collective enterprise. A key
feature that distinguishes normal science from other kinds of science for
Kuhn is the absence of debate about fundamentals. Because scientists doing
normal science agree on these fundamentals, they do not waste their time
arguing about the most basic issues that arise in their ﬁeld. Once biologists
80
Chapter Five

agree that genes are made of DNA, they can focus and coordinate their
work on how speciﬁc genes affect the characteristics of plants and animals.
Once chemists agree that understanding chemical bonding is understand-
ing the interactions between the outer layers of electrons within different
atoms, they can work together to investigate when and how particular re-
actions will occur. Kuhn places great emphasis on this “consensus-forging”
role of paradigms. He argues that without it, there is no chance for scien-
tists to achieve a really detailed and deep understanding of phenomena. De-
tailed work and revealing discoveries require cooperation and consensus.
Cooperation and consensus require closing off debate about fundamentals.
As usual, we should be careful to distinguish between the descriptive
and the normative here. Kuhn certainly claims that normal science does
close off debate about fundamentals. But does he go beyond that and claim
this is something that normal science should do? I think it is clear that he
does (see Kuhn 1996, 24–25, 65), but these issues are controversial.
If Kuhn does make a normative claim here, then we see an important
contrast with Popper. Although Popper can certainly allow that not every-
thing can be criticized at once within science, Popper’s view does hold that
a good scientist is permanently open-minded with respect to all issues in
the ﬁeld in which he or she is working, even the very basic issues. Any
“closing off” of debate is bad news according to Popper. Popper criticized
Kuhn explicitly on this point; Popper said that although “normal science”
of Kuhn’s kind does occur, it is a bad thing that it does (1970).
What is the work of a good normal scientist like? Kuhn describes much
of the work done in normal science as “puzzle-solving.” The normal scien-
tist tries to use the tools and concepts provided by the paradigm to de-
scribe, model, or create new phenomena. The “puzzle” is trying to get a
new case to ﬁt smoothly into the framework provided by the paradigm.
Kuhn used the term “puzzle” rather than “problem” for a reason. A puzzle
is something we have not yet solved but which we think does have a solu-
tion. A problem might, for all we know, have no solution. Normal science
tries to apply the concepts provided by a paradigm to issues that the para-
digm suggests should be soluble. Part of the guidance provided by a para-
digm is guiding the selection of good puzzles.
The term “puzzle” also seems to suggest that the work is in some way
insigniﬁcant or trivial. Here again, Kuhn intends to convey a precise mes-
sage with the term. A normal scientist does, Kuhn thinks, spend a lot of
time on topics that look insigniﬁcant from the outside. (He even uses the
term “minuscule” [1996, 24].) But it is this close attention to detail—which
only the well-organized machine of normal science makes possible—that
is able to reveal deep new facts about the world. I think Kuhn felt a kind of
Kuhn and Normal Science
81

awe at the ability of normal science to home in on topics and phenomena
that look insigniﬁcant from outside but which turn out eventually to have
huge importance. And although the normal scientist is not trying to ﬁnd
phenomena that lead to paradigm change—far from it!—these detailed
discoveries often contain the seeds of large-scale change and the destruc-
tion of the paradigm that produced them.
5.4 Anomaly and Crisis
I said that a central feature of normal science, for Kuhn, is that the funda-
mental ideas associated with a paradigm are not debated. Fundamental
principles are insulated from refutation. Normal scientists spend their time
trying to extend the paradigm, theoretically and experimentally, to deal
with new cases. When there is a failure to get the results expected, the good
normal scientist reacts by trying to work out what mistake she or he has
made. The proverb “only a poor workman blames his tools” applies. The
normal scientist should take failure as a challenge.
Kuhn accepts that theories are sometimes refuted by observation;
within normal science, hypotheses are refuted (and conﬁrmed) all the time.
The paradigm supplies principles for making these decisions. But throwing
out an entire paradigm is much more difﬁcult. According to Kuhn, the re-
jection of a paradigm happens only when (1) a critical mass of anomalies
has arisen and (2) a rival paradigm has appeared. For now we will look just
at the ﬁrst of these—the accumulation of a critical mass of anomalies.
An “anomaly” for Kuhn is a puzzle that has resisted solution. Kuhn
holds that all paradigms face some anomalies at any given time. As long as
there are not too many of them, normal science proceeds as usual and sci-
entists regard them as a challenge. But the anomalies tend to accumulate.
Sometimes a single one becomes particularly prominent, by resisting the ef-
forts of the best workers in the ﬁeld. Eventually, according to Kuhn, the sci-
entists start to lose faith in their paradigm. The result is a crisis.
Crisis science, for Kuhn, is a special period when an existing paradigm
has lost the ability to inspire and guide scientists, but when no new para-
digm has emerged to get the ﬁeld back on track. The transition to a crisis
is almost like a phase transition, like the change of a substance from solid
to liquid during melting. For whatever reason, the scientists in a ﬁeld lose
their conﬁdence in the paradigm. As a consequence, the most fundamental
issues are back on the table for debate. Amusingly, Kuhn even suggests that
during crises scientists tend to suddenly become interested in philosophy, a
ﬁeld that he sees as quite useless for normal science.
I used the term “critical mass” of anomalies to describe the trigger for
82
Chapter Five

a crisis. This atomic-age metaphor is appropriate in several ways. In partic-
ular, I use it here to suggest that Kuhn sees the breakdown of a paradigm as
something that is part of the “proper functioning” of science, though it does
not feel that way to the scientists involved. Normal science is structured in
a way that makes its own destruction inevitable, but only in response to the
right stimulus. The “right stimulus” is the appearance of problems that are
deep rather than superﬁcial, problems that reveal a real inadequacy in the
paradigm. Because normal scientists will tolerate a good deal of temporary
trouble without abandoning normal science—they will blame the failure
on themselves, at least for a while—a paradigm does not break down eas-
ily. But when the right stimulus comes, the paradigm will break down. In
this way, a paradigm is like a well-shielded and well-designed bomb. A
bomb is supposed to blow up; that is its function. But a bomb is not sup-
posed to blow up at any old time; it’s supposed to blow up in very speciﬁc
circumstances. A well-designed bomb will be shielded from minor buffets.
Only a very speciﬁc stimulus will trigger the explosion.
Some might ﬁnd this militaristic analogy unpleasant, but I think it cap-
tures a lot of what Kuhn says. Kuhn’s story is guided by his claim that all
paradigms constantly encounter anomalies. For a Popperian view, or for
other simpler forms of empiricism, these anomalies should count as “refu-
tations” of the theory. But Kuhn thinks that science does not treat these
constantly arising anomalies as refutations, and also that it should not. If
scientists dropped their paradigms every time a problem arose, they would
never get anything done.
Much of the secret of science, for Kuhn, is the remarkable balance it
manages to strike between being too resistant to change in basic ideas, and
not being resistant enough. If the simplest form of empiricist thinking pre-
vailed, people would throw ideas away too quickly when unexpected ob-
servations appeared, and chaos would result. Ideas need some protection,
or they can never be properly developed. But if science was completely un-
responsive to empirical failures, conceptual advance would grind to a halt.
For Kuhn, science seems to get the balance just right. And this delicate bal-
ance is not something we can describe in terms of a set of explicit rules. It
exists implicitly in the social structures and transmitted traditions of sci-
entiﬁc behavior, and in the quirks of the scientiﬁc mind.
These ideas about the balance that makes science work are an impor-
tant challenge to empiricism, at least in its simpler forms. The idea that a
willingness to revise ideas in response to observation can go too far is un-
expected from the point of view of empiricist philosophy. And Kuhn sup-
ported this claim with a mass of evidence from the history of science.
So far we have gone from pre-paradigm science, through normal science,
Kuhn and Normal Science
83

to crisis. The next stage in Kuhn’s story is revolution. But before we get
there, I will make some summary remarks about Kuhn’s theory of normal
science.
5.5 Wrap-up of Normal Science
Let’s sum up what we have so far. Paradigms function to organize scientiﬁc
work. Normal science is work aimed at extending and reﬁning the para-
digm. A good normal scientist is committed to the paradigm and does not
question it. Normal scientists extend their paradigm both theoretically and
experimentally. Anomalies inevitably arise, however, and eventually these
reach a kind of critical mass, at which point scientists lose faith in the par-
adigm and the ﬁeld plunges into a state of crisis.
We have not yet reached the most controversial part of Kuhn’s theory,
but are there any problems with what we have so far? One problem comes
from Kuhn’s insistence that, except in unusual cases, a scientiﬁc ﬁeld has
one paradigm per ﬁeld per time. Kuhn held that, in general, a single para-
digm will dominate its ﬁeld. He did not think that two or three separate and
competing paradigms could normally coexist. Many critics have thought
Kuhn was wrong about this, both in the cases of physics and chemistry,
which he discussed extensively, and, even more so, for areas like biology
and psychology, which he did not often discuss. We will come back to this
issue in chapter 7.
Secondly, Kuhn exaggerates the degree of commitment that a normal
scientist does and should have to a paradigm. Kuhn describes the attitude
of a normal scientist in very strong terms. Scientiﬁc education is a kind of
“indoctrination,” which results in scientists having a deep “faith” in their
paradigm. As a description of how science actually works, this seems ex-
aggerated. Sometimes there is a faithlike commitment, but sometimes there
is not. Many scientists are able to say that they always work within a par-
adigm, for practical reasons, while being very aware of the possibility of er-
ror and the eventual replacement of their framework. One of the ironies of
Kuhn’s inﬂuence is that his book might have weakened the faith of some
normal scientists, even though Kuhn thought that normal scientists should
have a deep faith in their paradigms!
Leaving aside the factual issue of whether a tenacious commitment to a
paradigm is what we generally ﬁnd, we should also ask about Kuhn’s belief
that this strong commitment is a good thing. For Kuhn, the great virtue of
normal science is its organized, coordinated structure, a structure that re-
sults in precision and efﬁciency. Unless debate about fundamentals is closed
off, this precision and efﬁciency will be reduced. A key contrast here is with
84
Chapter Five

Popper, who insists on permanent open-mindedness. For Kuhn, a constant
questioning and criticism of basic beliefs is liable to result in chaos—in
the partially “random” fact-gathering and speculation that we see in pre-
paradigm science. But here again, Kuhn probably goes too far. He does not
take seriously the possibility that scientists could agree to work together in
a coordinated way, not wasting time on constant discussion of fundamen-
tal issues, while retaining a cautious attitude toward their paradigm. Surely
this is possible.
To close this chapter, I will describe an example that is very far from
Kuhn’s usual cases—an example that is on the periphery of science, but
which I think illustrates Kuhn’s insights well. During the 1980s and 1990s,
there was a lot of excitement about a new ﬁeld known as “Artiﬁcial Life.”
The aim was to use computers to model the most basic features of living sys-
tems, in such a way that it might eventually be reasonable to say that the ar-
tiﬁcial systems were alive. I went to several “Alife” conferences during this
time and watched the ﬁeld develop. At the time that I write this, the ﬁeld
seems to have ground to a halt. Maybe it will revitalize. But the failure of the
field in recent years seems to me to involve some very “Kuhnian” reasons.
During the heyday of the movement, two or three pieces of work ap-
peared that were strikingly successful. Perhaps the most impressive of all was
Tom Ray’s Tierra project, in which Ray was able to create open-ended evo-
lution among self-replicating programs in a computer (Ray 1992). Work by
Chris Langton and Steven Wolfram on the mathematical analysis of “cellu-
lar automata,” simple systems in which local interactions between elements
give rise to global, self-sustaining patterns, might be another case. And closer
to the borderline with mainstream biology, there was Stuart Kaufmann’s
work on “the origins of order” in complex systems (Kauffman 1993).
All of this was impressive work, and it pointed the way forward to a
consolidation of what these imaginative individuals had done. But the con-
solidation never happened. At each conference I went to, the larger group
of people involved all seemed to want to do things from scratch, in their
own way. Each had his or her own way of setting up the issues. There was
not nearly enough work that built on the promising beginnings of Ray and
others. The ﬁeld never made a transition into anything resembling normal
science. And it has now ground to a halt.
Another reason for the breakdown also relates to Kuhn. The ﬁeld of
Alife suffered from a kind of “premature commercialization.” It was real-
ized early on that some of the work had great potential for animation and
other kinds of commercial art. At some Alife events, the climax of each talk
seemed to be not some new theoretical idea, but a dramatic video. (I even
heard speakers half-apologize before the video, as if they knew this was
Kuhn and Normal Science
85

somehow not the right emphasis for their work.) For Kuhn, science de-
pends on the good normal scientist’s keen interest in puzzle-solving for its
own sake. Looking outside the paradigm too often to applications and ex-
ternal rewards is not good for normal science.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Lakatos and Musgrave’s collection Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (1970)
contains an excellent set of essays on Kuhn. A more recent edited collection is Hor-
wich, World Changes (1993).
Kuhn’s collection of essays The Essential Tension (1977b) is an important extra
source. Kuhn also wrote two historical books (1957, 1978). His later essays have
been collected in The Road since Structure (2000).
Levy 1992 is a readable survey of Alife work. Many of the best Alife papers may
be found in the collection Artiﬁcial Life II (Langton et al. 1992).
86
Chapter Five

87
6
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Kuhn and Revolutions
I have argued so far only that paradigms are constitutive of science. Now I wish to dis-
play a sense in which they are constitutive of nature as well.
THOMAS KUHN, Structure
Look,” Thomas Kuhn said. The word was weighted with weariness, as if Kuhn was re-
signed to the fact that I would misinterpret him, but he was still going to try—no
doubt in vain—to make his point. “Look,” he said again. He leaned his gangly frame
and long face forward, and his big lower lip, which ordinarily curled up amiably at the
corners, sagged. “For Christ’s sake, if I had my choice of having written the book or
not having written it, I would choose to have written it. But there have certainly been
aspects involving considerable upset about the response to it.”
JOHN HORGAN, The End of Science
6.1 Considerable Upset
The most famous, most striking, and most controversial parts of Kuhn’s
book were his discussions of scientiﬁc revolutions. They are the topic of
this chapter. Why have two chapters on Kuhn? One reason is the continu-
ing importance and great subtlety of his book. Another is that while the
discussions of revolution are the most famous parts of the book, Kuhn’s
analysis of normal science is just as important—and perhaps of more en-
during signiﬁcance. Sometimes it gets lost in the excitement about revolu-
tions: hence chapter 5.
Kuhn argued that some periods of scientiﬁc change involve a funda-
mentally different kind of process from what we ﬁnd in normal science.
The revolutionary periods see a breakdown of order and a questioning of
the rules of the game, and they are followed by a process of rebuilding that
can create fundamentally new kinds of conceptual structures. Revolutions
involve a breakdown, but they are essential to science as we know it. They
“

have a “function,” Kuhn often said, within the totality of science. The spe-
cial features we associate with science arise from the combination and in-
teraction of two different kinds of activity—the orderly, organized, disci-
plined process of normal science, and the periodic breakdowns of order
found in revolutions. These two processes happen in sequence, within each
scientiﬁc ﬁeld. Science as a whole is a result of their interaction and of
nothing less.
Kuhn seemed to divide science into units with strange boundaries be-
tween them. Looking within a period of normal science, you can easily dis-
tinguish good work from bad, rational moves from irrational, big problems
from small problems, and so on. Progress is evident as time goes by. But all
this ends with a revolution. In a scientiﬁc revolution, as in a political one,
rules break down and have to be rebuilt afresh. If you look at two pieces of
scientiﬁc work across a revolutionary divide, it will not be clear whether
there has been progress from earlier to later. It might not even be clear how
to compare the theories or pieces of work at all—they may look like fun-
damentally different kinds of intellectual activity. The people on different
sides of the divide will be “speaking different languages.” In the climax of
his book, Kuhn says that workers in different paradigms are living in dif-
ferent worlds.
6.2 Revolutions and Their Aftermath
A revolution is a kind of discontinuity in the history of a scientiﬁc ﬁeld. The
suggestion that science has two modes of change, one of them dramatic
and abrupt, does not itself have big consequences for philosophy, though it
is interesting. The big issues depend upon what the two modes of change
are like. And here there are two sets of issues that caused intense discus-
sion. The ﬁrst is how revolutions occur—what goes on within them. The
second has to do with the relations between what we have before and what
we have after a revolution.
How do revolutions occur? We ﬁnished the previous chapter describing
the transition from normal science to crisis. In Kuhn’s story, large-scale sci-
entiﬁc change usually requires both a crisis and the appearance of a new
candidate paradigm. A crisis alone will not induce scientists to regard a
large-scale theory or paradigm as “falsiﬁed.” We do not ﬁnd pure falsiﬁca-
tions, rejections of one paradigm without simultaneous acceptance of a
new one. Rather, the rejection of one paradigm accompanies the accept-
ance of another. But also, the switch to a new paradigm does not occur just
because a new idea appears which looks better than the old one. Without
a crisis, scientists will not have any motivation to consider radical change.
88
Chapter Six

All of Kuhn’s claims about what follows what in scientiﬁc change tend
to be qualiﬁed; he is describing the central and characteristic patterns of
change, not every case without exception. But the idea that revolutions
generally require crises raised some hard historical issues. Was there a cri-
sis in the state of astronomy before Copernicus, or in biology before Dar-
win? Was there a state of disorder following an earlier period of conﬁdent
work? Maybe. But taking another biological example, if the appearance of
genetics as a science around 1900 was a revolution, it is very hard to ﬁnd
a crisis in the work on inheritance that preceded it. (Maybe Kuhn would
regard this as a transition from pre-paradigm science to normal science,
though that could not be said about most of biology around that time.)
Some other twentieth-century revolutions, such as the molecular revolu-
tion in biology, seem even less crisis-induced.
In his 1970 “Postscript” to Structure, Kuhn qualiﬁed his claims about
the role of crisis (181). He still maintained that crises are the “usual pre-
lude” to revolutions. But even that claim is controversial. Kuhn’s emphasis
on crises sometimes seems driven more by the demands of his hypothesized
mechanism for scientiﬁc change than by the historical data; Kuhn’s story
demands crises because only a crisis can loosen the grip of a paradigm and
make people receptive to alternatives.
Suppose we do have a crisis, a period full of confusion and strange
guests in the philosophy department. Then a new candidate paradigm ap-
pears, precipitating a revolution. Using my distinction from the previous
chapter, what initially appears is a new paradigm in the narrow sense, an
achievement that begins to inspire people and seems to point the way for-
ward. More speciﬁcally, what is usually involved is that the new work ap-
pears to solve one or more of the problems that prompted the crisis in the
old paradigm. The sudden appearance of problem-solving power is the
spark to the revolution. Kuhn did not think these processes could be de-
scribed by an explicit philosophical theory of evidence and testing. Instead,
we should think of the shift to a new paradigm as like a “conversion” phe-
nomenon, or like a gestalt switch. Kuhn also argued that revolutions are
capricious, disorderly events. They are affected by idiosyncratic personal
factors and accidents of history.
One reason for the disorderly character of revolutions is that some of the
principles by which scientiﬁc evidence is assessed are themselves liable to be
destabilized by a crisis, and they can change with a revolution. Kuhn did not
argue that traditional philosophical ideas about how theories should relate
to evidence are completely misguided. He made it clear in his later work
that there are some core ways of assessing theories that are common to
all paradigms (1977c, 321–22). Theories should be predictively accurate,
Kuhn and Revolutions
89

consistent with well-established theories in neighboring ﬁelds, able to unify
disparate phenomena, and fruitful of new ideas and discoveries. These
principles, along with other similar ones, “provide the shared basis for the-
ory choice” (322). (I should note that some commentators think these later
essays change, rather than clarify, the views presented in Structure.)
But Kuhn thought that when these principles were expressed in a broad
enough way to be common across all of science, they would be so vague that
they would be powerless to settle hard cases. Also, these goals must often
be traded off against each other; emphasizing one will require downplay-
ing another. Within a single paradigm, more precise ways of assessing hy-
potheses will operate. These will include sharper versions of the common
principles listed above, but these sharper versions will not really be explicit
“principles” anymore. Instead they will be more like habits and values, as-
pects of the shared mind-set of normal scientists imparted to them by their
common training and common activities. There will also be some variation
within normal science in how these principles are understood and ac-
quired—Kuhn came to see this diversity as a strength of scientiﬁc commu-
nities as well. But the most important point here is that these sharper, more
deﬁnite ways of assessing ideas are liable to change in the course of a revo-
lution. In the next section I will give an example of this phenomenon.
So we have two kinds of scientiﬁc change in Kuhn’s picture, neither of
which is what empiricist philosophies of science might have led us to expect.
Change within normal science is orderly and responsive to evidence—but
normal science works via a closing of debate about fundamental ideas. The
other kind of change—revolutionary change—does involve challenges to
fundamentals, but these are episodes in which the orderly assessment of
ideas breaks down. Displays of problem-solving power have a key role in
these fundamental transitions between paradigms, but the shifts also in-
volve sudden gestalt switches and leaps of faith.
In Kuhn’s treatment of revolutionary change, the distinction between
descriptive and normative issues is very important. Kuhn uses language
that suggests that not only are revolutions bound to happen, but they have
a positive role in science. They are part of what makes science so powerful
as a means for exploring the world (a “supremely efﬁcient instrument”
[1996, 169]). Different interpreters have very different reactions to this
kind of talk. Some regard it as colorful and not essential to Kuhn’s general
message. I have the opposite view; I think this is central to Kuhn’s overall
picture. Science for Kuhn is a social mechanism that combines two capac-
ities. One is the capacity for sustained, cooperative work. The other is sci-
ence’s capacity to partially break down and reconstitute itself from time to
90
Chapter Six

time. When a paradigm runs out of steam, there is nothing within the
community that could reliably give science a set of directions for orderly
movement toward a new paradigm. Instead, the goals of science are best
served at these special times by a disorderly process, in which even very ba-
sic ideas are put back on the table for discussion, and a new direction even-
tually emerges from the chaos. This sounds strange, but I think it was
Kuhn’s picture.
6.3 Incommensurability, Relativism, and Progress
Kuhn said that revolutions have a “non-cumulative” nature; this is essen-
tial to his claims about the large-scale historical patterns in science. There
is no steady buildup of some useful commodity like truth as science goes
along. Instead, according to Kuhn, in a revolution you always gain some
things and lose some things. Questions that the old paradigm answered
now become puzzling again, or they cease to be questions. So we might
want to ask, Do we usually gain more than we lose? In at least the middle
chapters of his book, Kuhn seems to think there is no way to answer this
question in an unbiased way (1996, 109, 110). Of course it will feel like we
have gained more than we’ve lost, or we would not have had the revolution
at all. But that does not mean that there is some unbiased way of compar-
ing what we had before with what we have after.
This question connects us to one of the most famous topics in Kuhn’s
work, the idea that different paradigms in a ﬁeld are incommensurable
with each other.
What does “incommensurable” mean here? Most literally, it means not
comparable by use of a common standard or measure. This idea needs to
be carefully expressed, however. Two rival paradigms can be compared
well enough for it to be clear that they are incompatible, that they are ri-
vals. And people working within any one paradigm will have no problem
saying why their paradigm is superior to the other, by citing key differences
in what can be explained and what cannot. But these comparisons will be
compelling only to those inside the paradigm from which the claim of su-
periority is being made. If we look down “from above” on two people who
work within different paradigms who are arguing about which is better, it
will often appear that the two people are talking past each other.
There are two reasons for this—there are (roughly speaking) two aspects
of the problem of incommensurability. First, people in different paradigms
will not be able to fully communicate with each other; they will use key
terms in different ways and in a sense will be speaking slightly different
Kuhn and Revolutions
91

languages. Second, even when communication is possible, people in dif-
ferent paradigms will use different standards of evidence and argument.
They will not agree on what a good theory is supposed to do.
First let us look at the issues involving language. Here Kuhn’s claims
depend on a holistic view about the meaning of scientiﬁc language. Each
term in a theory derives its meaning from its place in the whole theoretical
structure. Two people from different paradigms might seem to use the same
word—“mass” or “species”—but the meanings of these terms will be
slightly different because of their different roles in the two rival theories.
Here I said “slightly different.” Kuhn insisted he had a moderate view.
Some critics have argued that a holistic view of meaning really has no way
to make sense of these differences of degree, because it is not possible to
say whether two terms have a “similar” role within two very different the-
oretical networks (Fodor and LePore 1992). So the critics argue that when
holists about scientiﬁc language talk about “partial” communication and
“slight” differences in the meanings of words, they are blufﬁng in order to
hide the impossibly radical nature of their views.
Neither the holists nor anyone else has had much success in developing
a good theory of meaning for scientiﬁc language. This is a confusing and
unresolved area. However, a different kind of criticism of Kuhn is possible
here. If incommensurability of meanings is real, as Kuhn says, then it
should be visible in the history of science. So those who study the history
of science should be able to ﬁnd many examples of the usual signs of failed
communication—confusion, correction, a sense of failure to make con-
tact. Although I am not a historian of science, my impression is that histo-
rians have not found many examples of failed communication in crucial
debates across rival paradigms. Scientists are often adept at “scientiﬁc
bilingualism,” switching from one framework to another. And they are of-
ten able to improvise ways of bridging linguistic gaps, much as traders from
different cultures are able to, by improvising “pidgin” languages (Galison
1997). Scientists often willfully misrepresent each other’s claims, in the ser-
vice of rhetorical points, but that is not a case of failed comprehension or
communication.
The other form of incommensurability is much more important. This is
incommensurability of standards. Here Kuhn argued that paradigms tend
to bring with them their own standards for what counts as a good argu-
ment or good evidence.
This topic was introduced in the previous section. There I said that Kuhn
thought that although all scientiﬁc work is responsive to some broad prin-
ciples of theory choice, the detailed standards for assessing ideas will often
92
Chapter Six

be internal to paradigms and liable to change with revolutions. For Kuhn,
“paradigms provide scientists not only with a map but also with some of
the directions essential for map-making” (1996, 109).
One of Kuhn’s most interesting examples of this phenomenon involves
the role of causal explanation. Should a scientiﬁc theory be required to
make causal sense of why things happen? Should we always hope to un-
derstand the mechanisms underlying events? Or can a theory be entirely ac-
ceptable if it gives a mathematical formalism that describes phenomena
without making causal sense of them? A famous example of this problem
concerns Newton’s theory of gravity. Newton gave a mathematical de-
scription of gravity—his famous inverse square law—but did not give a
mechanism for how gravitational attraction works. Indeed, Newton’s view
that gravity acts instantaneously and at a distance seemed to be extremely
hard to supplement with a mechanistic explanation. Was this a problem
with Newton’s theory, or should we drop the demand for a causal mecha-
nism and be content with the mathematical formalism? Would it be scien-
tiﬁcally acceptable to regard gravity as just an “innate” power of matter
that follows a mathematical law? People argued about this a good deal in
the early eighteenth century. Kuhn’s view is that there is no general answer
to the question of whether scientiﬁc theories should give causal mecha-
nisms for phenomena; this is the kind of principle that will be present in
one paradigm and absent from another.
During the earliest part of the twentieth century, there was a similar, al-
though smaller-scale, debate within English biology. In the latter part of
the nineteenth century, a group of biologists called the “Biometricians”
had formulated a mathematical law that they thought described inheri-
tance. They had no mechanism for how inheritance works, and their law
did not lend itself to supplementation with such a mechanism. In 1900 the
pioneering work done by Mendel in the mid-nineteenth century was redis-
covered, and the science of genetics was launched. For about six years,
though, the Biometricians and the Mendelians conducted an intense de-
bate about which approach to understanding inheritance was superior.
One of the issues at stake was what kind of theory of inheritance should be
the goal. The Biometricians thought that a mathematically formulated law
was the right goal, while William Bateson, in the Mendelian camp, argued
that understanding the mechanism of inheritance was the goal. In the short
term, the Mendelians won the battle. In time the two approaches were mar-
ried; modern biology now has both the math and the mechanism. But dur-
ing the battle there was considerable argument about what a good scien-
tiﬁc theory should do (Provine 1971; MacKenzie 1981).
Kuhn and Revolutions
93

So although Kuhn’s claims about linguistic incommensurability were
overstated, I agree with him that incommensurability of standards is a real
and interesting problem.
Kuhn’s discussion of incommensurability is the main reason why his
view of science is often referred to as “relativist.” Kuhn’s book is often con-
sidered one of the ﬁrst major steps in a tradition of work in the second half
of the twentieth century that embraced relativism about science and knowl-
edge. Kuhn himself was shocked to be interpreted this way.
But what is relativism? This is a chaotic area of discussion. Roughly
speaking, relativist views tend to hold that the truth or justiﬁcation of a
claim, or the applicability of a rule or standard, depends on one’s situation
or point of view. Such a claim might be made generally (“all truth is rela-
tive”) or in a more restricted way, about art, morality, good manners, or
some other particular domain. The “point of view” might be that of an in-
dividual, a society, or some other group.
If people differ about the facts or the proper standards in some domain,
that itself does not imply that relativism is true for that domain; some of
the people might just be wrong. It is also important that if someone holds
that moral rightness or good reasoning “depends on context,” that need
not be a form of relativism, although it might be. This is because a single
set of moral rules (or rules of reasoning) might have built into them some
sensitivity to circumstances. A set of moral rules might say, “If you are in
circumstances X, you should do Y.” That is not relativism, even though not
everyone might be in circumstances X.
In this discussion we are mostly concerned with relativism applied to
standards. More speciﬁcally, we are concerned with standards governing
reasoning, evidence, and the justiﬁcation of beliefs. And the “point of
view” here is that of the users of a paradigm.
Is Kuhn a relativist with regard to these matters? The answer is that it’s
complicated. Kuhn had a subtle view that is hard to categorize. There is no
simple answer, and I doubt that everything Kuhn said on the topic can be
ﬁtted together consistently. The issue of relativism in Kuhn is also bound
up with the question of how to understand scientiﬁc progress, something
Kuhn struggled with in the ﬁnal pages of his book.
As we have seen, Kuhn argued that different paradigms often carry with
them different rules for assessing theories and different standards for good
and bad scientiﬁc work. So far, this does not tell us whether Kuhn was a
relativist about these standards. But Kuhn also argued that the paradigms
we have in science now are not closer than earlier paradigms to an “ideal”
or “perfect” paradigm. Science is not heading toward a ﬁnal paradigm that
is superior to all others. We cannot say that there is, in principle, an ideal
94
Chapter Six

paradigm that contains methodological principles that are entitled to gov-
ern all of science, even though we do not have this paradigm yet.
This seems to be taking us close to a relativist view about the standards
that are not shared across paradigms. But Kuhn said some rather different
things in the ﬁnal, somewhat puzzling, pages of Structure. There he said
that our present paradigms have more problem-solving power than earlier
paradigms did. This claim was made when Kuhn confronted the question
of how to understand progress in science.
Kuhn gave two very different kinds of explanation for the apparent
large-scale progress we see in science, and these two explanations are in-
tertwined with each other in complex ways. Kuhn’s ﬁrst form of explana-
tion was a kind of “eye of the beholder” explanation. Science will in-
evitably appear to exhibit progress because each ﬁeld has one paradigm per
time, the victors after each revolution will naturally view their victory as
progressive, and science is insulated from outside criticism. Happy cele-
brations of progress on the part of the victors will not be met with any se-
rious objection. This deﬂationary explanation of the appearance of pro-
gress is consistent with a relativist view of the changes between paradigms.
Kuhn also developed a second, very different account of the appearance
of progress in science. This one seems to conﬂict with a relativist reading.
Here Kuhn argued that science has a special kind of efﬁciency, and this ef-
ﬁciency results in a real form of progress across revolutions. The progress
is measured in problem-solving power; the number and precision of solu-
tions to problems in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld tend to grow over time (1996, 170). It
is hard to reconcile this claim with some of his discussions of incommen-
surability in earlier chapters. There he said that revolutions always involve
losses as well as gains, and he also said that the standards that might be
used to classify some problems as important and others as unimportant
tend to change in revolutions. So we should be skeptical about whether the
kind of measurement of problem-solving power that Kuhn envisages in the
last pages of Structure is compatible with the rest of the book.
If our later paradigms have more overall problem-solving power than
our earlier ones, then it seems that we are entitled to regard the later ones
as superior. This takes us away from relativism. Clearly Kuhn’s aim was to
work out an intermediate or moderate position (1996, 205–6). People will
be arguing about this for a while to come.
So far I have been mostly discussing the comparison of different para-
digms within science. What about the comparison of science with entirely
different approaches to knowledge? Here Kuhn is sometimes read as a rel-
ativist, but this is straightforwardly a mistake. Kuhn thought that the over-
all structure of modern scientiﬁc investigation gives us a uniquely efﬁcient
Kuhn and Revolutions
95

way of studying the world. So if we want to compare scientiﬁc procedures
of investigation with nonscientiﬁc ones, it is clear that Kuhn thought sci-
ence was superior. He was not a relativist about this issue, and perhaps that
is the most important issue.
That concludes my discussion of incommensurability and relativism.
There is one more issue that is often grouped with the problem of incom-
mensurability; this is the “theory-ladenness of observation.” Kuhn argued
that we cannot think of observation as a neutral source of information for
choosing between theories, because what people see is inﬂuenced by their
paradigm. Kuhn and a number of others developed radical views about ob-
servation around the same time. This is an important topic, as it challenges
empiricism in a fundamental way. It will be discussed in chapter 10.
6.4 The X-Rated “Chapter X”
Kuhn’s book starts out with his patient analysis of normal science. The
middle chapters become more adventurous, and then the book climaxes
with Chapter X. Here Kuhn puts forward his most radical claims. Not only
do ideas, standards, and ways of seeing change when paradigms change; in
some sense the world changes as well. Reality itself is paradigm-relative or
paradigm-dependent. After a revolution, “scientists work in a different
world” (1996, 135).
Philosophers and other commentators tend to split between two differ-
ent attitudes toward this part of Kuhn’s work. One group thinks that Kuhn
exposes the fact that any idea of a single, stable world persisting through
our various attempts to conceptualize it is an idea dependent on a failed
view of science and outdated psychological theories. Kuhn, on this inter-
pretation, shows that changing our view of science requires us to change
our metaphysics too—our most basic views about reality and our rela-
tionship to it. Holding onto the idea of a single ﬁxed world that science
strives to describe is holding onto the last and most fundamental element
of a conservative view of conceptual change.
That is one position. Others think that this whole side of Kuhn’s work
is a mess. When paradigms change, ideas change. Standards change also,
and maybe the way we experience the world changes as well. But that is
very different from claiming that the world itself depends on paradigms.
The way we see things changes, but the world itself does not change.
I am in the second camp; the X-rated Chapter X is the worst material in
Kuhn’s great book. It would have been better if he had left this chapter in a
taxi, in one of those famous mistakes that authors are prone to.
I should say immediately that it is not always clear how radical Kuhn
96
Chapter Six

wants to be in this chapter. Sometimes it seems that all he is saying is that
our ideas and experience change. Also, there are some entirely reasonable
claims we can make about changes to the world that result from paradigm
changes. As paradigms change, scientists change their behavior and their
experimental practices as well as their ideas. So some bits of the world
change, in ordinary ways. And scientiﬁc revolutions result in new technol-
ogies that have far-reaching effects on the world we live in.
These changes can be far-reaching, but they are still restricted by the
causal powers of human action. We can change plants and animals by con-
trolled breeding and genetic engineering. We can dam rivers and also pol-
lute them. But our reach is not indeﬁnite. Kuhn discussed some cases in
Chapter X that make it clear that he did not have these kinds of ordinary
causal inﬂuences in mind. He discussed cases where changes in ideas about
stars, planets, and comets led to astronomers “living in a different world,”
for example (1996, 117).
Most generally, though, the problem with these dramatic discussions is
that Kuhn seems to think that the belief that we all inhabit a single world,
existing independently of paradigms, also commits us to a naive set of ideas
about perception and belief. But this is just not so. We might decide that
perception is radically affected by beliefs and expectations, while still hold-
ing that perception is something that connects us to a single real world that
we all inhabit.
Did Kuhn really make a mistake of this kind? As I have been so tough
on him in this section, I should present my best “smoking gun” quote on
the issue. Kuhn says:
At the very least, as a result of discovering oxygen, Lavoisier saw nature differently.
And in the absence of some recourse to that hypothetical ﬁxed nature that he “saw
differently,” the principle of economy will urge us to say that after discovering oxy-
gen Lavoisier worked in a different world. (1996, 118)
The passage is very strange. “Principle of economy”? Would it be eco-
nomical for us to give up the idea that Lavoisier was living in the same
world as the rest of us and acquiring new ideas about it? It is supposed to
be economical to think that with every conceptual change of this kind, the
scientist comes to live in a new, different world? Appeals to “economy” are
often suspicious in the philosophy of science. They are usually weak argu-
ments. This one also seems to have the accounting wrong.
From the point of view of a special kind of skeptical philosophical dis-
cussion, it can be considered “hypothetical” that there is a world beyond
our momentary sensory experiences and ideas. But this is a very special
Kuhn and Revolutions
97

sense of “hypothetical”! If we are trying to understand science as a social
activity, as Kuhn is, there is nothing hypothetical about the idea that sci-
ence takes place in a single, structured world that interacts with the com-
munity of scientists via the causal channels of perception and action.
The issues just discussed connect to another noteworthy feature of
Kuhn’s view of science. Kuhn opposed the idea that the large-scale history
of science involves an accumulation of more and more knowledge about
how the world really works. He was willing, on occasion, to recognize
some kinds of accumulation of useful results as science moves along. There
is an accumulation (maybe) of a kind of problem-solving power. But we
cannot see, in science, an ongoing growth of knowledge about the struc-
ture of the world.
When Kuhn wrote about this issue, he often came back to cases in the
history of physics. Like Popper and others, Kuhn seems to have been hugely
inﬂuenced by the fall of the Newtonian picture of the world at the start of
the twentieth century. Many philosophers of science seem to have been
made permanently pessimistic about conﬁrmation and the accumulation
of factual knowledge by this episode. But Kuhn, and perhaps others, was
surely too focused on the case of theoretical physics. He seems to have
thought that we can only see science as achieving a growth of knowledge
about the structure of the world if we can see this kind of progress in the
parts of science that deal with the most low-level and fundamental entities
and processes. But if we look at other parts of science—at chemistry and
molecular biology, for example—it is much more reasonable to see a con-
tinuing growth (with some hiccups) in knowledge about how the world re-
ally works. We see a steady growth in knowledge about the structures of
sugars, fats, proteins, and other important molecules, for example. There is
no evidence that these kinds of results will come to be replaced, as opposed
to extended, as science moves along. This type of work does not concern
the most basic features of the universe, but it is undoubtedly science. It is
possible that, when we try to work out how to describe the growth of
knowledge over time in science, we should treat theoretical physics is a spe-
cial case and not as a model for all science (McMullin 1984). So Kuhn’s
pessimism regarding the accumulation of knowledge about the structure of
the world in science seems badly overstated.
6.5 Final Thoughts on Kuhn
Kuhn changed the philosophy of science by describing a tremendously vivid
picture of scientiﬁc change. This picture was full of unexpected features,
and Kuhn tried to shed light on traditional epistemological questions by
98
Chapter Six

looking at these questions from unusual angles. Most importantly, Kuhn
attributed the success and the power of science to a delicate balance be-
tween factors in a complex and fragile mechanism. Science owes its strength
to an interaction between the ordered cooperation and single-mindedness
of normal science, together with the ability of these ordered behavioral pat-
terns to break down and reconstitute themselves in revolutions. Periodic in-
jections of disorder are just as essential to the process as the well-regulated
behaviors found in normal science.
That is Kuhn’s mechanism. Quite quickly, critics were able to ﬁnd prob-
lems with this mechanism when interpreted as a description of how science
actually works. I have already mentioned two important objections: single
paradigms rarely have the kind of dominance that Kuhn describes, and
large-scale changes can occur without crises. Many parts of Kuhn’s mech-
anism are especially hard to apply to the history of biology, which Kuhn
did not much discuss. Kuhn’s account of the mechanisms behind scientiﬁc
change is in several ways too tightly structured, too speciﬁc. The real story
is more mixed. But Kuhn’s was the ﬁrst prominent attempt at a new kind
of approach to the philosophy of science, a new kind of theory. These are
theories that approach questions in the philosophy of science by looking at
the social structure of science and the mechanisms underlying scientiﬁc
change. This approach has ﬂourished.
Back in the ﬁrst chapter, I distinguished views that construe science
broadly from those that construe it narrowly. Some philosophies of science
are really extensions of more general theories in epistemology, psychology,
or the philosophy of language. These views see the difference between sci-
ence and everyday problem-solving as a matter of detail and degree. Kuhn’s
theory is nothing like this. His theory of science emphasizes the differences
between science, narrowly construed, and various other kinds of empirical
learning and problem-solving. Science is a form of organized behavior with
a speciﬁc social structure, and science seems only to thrive in certain kinds
of societies. As a consequence, science appears in this story as a rather frag-
ile cultural achievement; subtle changes in the education, incentive struc-
ture, and political situation of scientists could result in the loss of the spe-
cial mechanisms of change that Kuhn described.
Before moving on, as a kind of brief appendix I will mention some in-
teresting connections between Kuhn’s theory of science and a few other fa-
mous mechanisms for change. First, in some ways Kuhn’s view of science
has an “invisible hand” structure. The Scottish political and economic the-
orist Adam Smith argued in the Wealth of Nations ([1776] 1976) that in-
dividual selﬁshness in economic behavior leads to good outcomes for soci-
ety as a whole. The market is an efﬁcient distributor of goods to everyone,
Kuhn and Revolutions
99

even though the people involved are each just out for themselves. Here we
have an apparent mismatch between individual-level characteristics and
the characteristics of the whole; selﬁshness at one level leads to the general
beneﬁt. But the mismatch is only apparent; it disappears when we look
at the consequences of having a large number of individuals interacting
together. We see something similar in Kuhn’s theory of science: narrow-
mindedness and dogmatism at the level of the individual lead to intellec-
tual openness at the level of science as a whole. Anomaly and crisis produce
such stresses in the normal scientist that an especially wholesale openness
to novelty is found in revolutions. In the next chapter we will look at one
critic who was suspicious of Kuhn on exactly this point; he thought Kuhn
was trying to excuse and encourage the most narrow-minded and unimag-
inative trends in modern science.
Here is one more comparison, which is more complicated and requires
more background knowledge. In the chapter on Popper, I brieﬂy compared
Popper’s conjecture-and-refutation mechanism with a Darwinian mutation-
and-selection mechanism in biology. A biological analogy can also be
found in the case of Kuhn. During the 1970s, the biologists Stephen Jay
Gould, Niles Eldredge, and others argued that the large-scale pattern seen
in much biological evolution is “punctuated equilibrium” (Eldredge and
Gould 1972). A lineage of organisms in evolutionary time will usually ex-
hibit long periods of relative stasis, in which we see low-level tinkering but
little change to fundamental structures. These periods of stasis or equilib-
rium are punctuated by occasional periods of much more rapid change in
which new fundamental structures arise. (Note that “rapid” here means
taking place in thousands of years rather than millions.) The rapid periods
of change are disorderly and unpredictable when compared to the simplest
kind of natural selection in large populations. The periods of stasis also
feature a kind of “homeostasis” in which the genetic system in the popu-
lation tends to resist substantial change.
The analogy with Kuhn’s theory of science is striking. We have the same
long periods of stability and resistance to change, punctuated by unpre-
dictable, rapid change to fundamentals.
The theory of punctuated equilibrium in biology was controversial for
a time, especially because it was sometimes presented by Gould in rather
radical forms (Gould 1980). The idea of a kind of “homeostatic” resis-
tance to change brought about by the genetic system is a tendentious idea,
for example. And the idea that ordinary processes of natural selection do
not operate normally during the periods of rapid change, but are replaced
by other kinds of processes, is also very unorthodox. But as the years have
passed, the idea of punctuated equilibrium has been moderated and has
100
Chapter Six

passed, in its more moderate form, into mainstream biology’s description
of at least some patterns in evolution (Futuyma 1998).
Gould also wrote a paper called “Eternal Metaphors in Paleontology”
(1977), in which he argued that the history of theorizing about the history
of life sees the same basic kinds of ideas about change come up again and
again, often mixed and matched into new combinations. The analogy be-
tween Kuhn’s theory and the biological theory of punctuated equilibrium
shows the same kind of convergence on a story about processes of change.
We also see similar kinds of opposition between the “punctuated equilib-
rium” story found in Kuhn and Gould, on one side, and a more uniform,
one-process view of change found in Popper and in some rival views of bi-
ological evolution, on another. I say “convergence” here, but Gould has ac-
knowledged the inﬂuence of Kuhn’s picture of science on him when he was
working out his biological ideas in the 1960s and 1970s (Gould 2002,
967). Kuhn himself was also interested in (different) possible analogies be-
tween his picture of science and evolutionary change (1996, 171–72).
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
The readings from chapter 5 are relevant here as well. For a very detailed discussion
of Kuhn’s philosophy, see Hoyningen-Huene 1993. Kitcher, The Advancement of
Science (1993), contains thorough (and sometimes difﬁcult) critical discussions of
some of Kuhn’s most inﬂuential arguments about revolutions and progress, includ-
ing several aspects of the incommensurability problem. Kitcher also reanalyzes sev-
eral of Kuhn’s big historical examples. Doppelt 1978 is a clear discussion of in-
commensurability of standards.
Kuhn and Revolutions
101

102
7
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
7.1 After Structure
The period after the publication of Kuhn’s book was one of intense and
sometimes heated discussion in all the ﬁelds that try to understand science.
In this chapter we will discuss some other philosophical accounts of science
developed around this time, all of them developed in interaction with Kuhn
or in response to him.
Then we will pause for a breath, and we’ll consider some general pat-
terns in the ideas described in the previous chapters.
First, we will look at the views of Imre Lakatos. Lakatos’s main contri-
bution was the idea of a research program. A research program is similar
to a paradigm in Kuhn’s (broad) sense, but it has a key difference: we ex-
pect to ﬁnd more than one research program in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld at any given
time. The large-scale processes of scientiﬁc change should be understood
as competition between research programs.
It should be obvious from the previous chapters that this was an idea
waiting to be developed. Kuhn’s insistence that scientiﬁc ﬁelds usually have
only one paradigm operating at any time was criticized right from the ini-
tial publication of Structure. Lakatos was the ﬁrst person to develop a pic-
ture of science in which larger paradigm-like units operate in parallel and
compete in an ongoing way. Lakatos’s own development of this idea has
problems, and it was embedded within a general philosophical program
that has very peculiar features. Shortly after Lakatos’s work, another
philosopher, Larry Laudan, worked out a superior version of the same ba-
sic idea.
After looking at Lakatos and Laudan, we turn to Paul Feyerabend, the
wild man of twentieth-century philosophy of science.
Feyerabend is the most controversial and extreme ﬁgure contributing to
the debates discussed in this book. I called him “the” wild man, even though
there have been various other wild men—and wild women—in the ﬁeld

besides Feyerabend. But Feyerabend’s voice in the debates was uniquely
wild. He argued for “epistemological anarchism,” a view in which rules of
method and normal scientiﬁc behavior were to be replaced by a freewheel-
ing attitude in which “anything goes.”
Kuhn, Lakatos, and Feyerabend all interacted and developed some of
their ideas in response to each other (with the exception perhaps of much
inﬂuence of Lakatos on Kuhn). Feyerabend’s most important work (1975)
was written, he said, as a kind of letter to Lakatos, but Lakatos died in
1974 before writing a reply.
7.2 Lakatos and Research Programs
Imre Lakatos had a remarkable life. Born in Hungary, he was a member of
the resistance to Nazi occupation during World War II. After the war he
worked in politics and was jailed for over three years by the Stalinist
regime. He left Hungary, made his way to England, and eventually ended
up at the London School of Economics working with Popper. Lakatos of-
ten claimed that his main ideas about science were implicit in Popper or
were one side of Popper’s views. Although there is some truth in this, it is
better to consider Lakatos’s ideas in their own terms.
Lakatos’s reaction to Kuhn’s work was one of dismay. He saw Kuhn’s in-
ﬂuence as destructive—destructive of reason and ultimately dangerous to
society. For Lakatos, Kuhn had presented scientiﬁc change as a fundamen-
tally irrational process, a matter of “mob psychology” (1970, 178), a pro-
cess where the loudest, most energetic, and most numerous voices would
prevail regardless of reasons. The interpretation I gave of Kuhn in the pre-
vious two chapters is very different; in this interpretation Kuhn saw science
as an almost miraculously well-structured machine for exploring the world.
Even the disordered episodes found in revolutions have a positive role in the
functioning of the whole. Lakatos, in contrast, saw the disorder in Kuhn’s
picture as no more than dangerous chaos. But Lakatos also saw the force
of Kuhn’s historical arguments. So his project was to rescue the rationality
of science from the damage Kuhn had done.
Lakatos had some views about the relation between the history of sci-
ence and the philosophy of science that are spectacularly strange. Lakatos
argued that historical case studies should be used to assess philosophical
views of science. Fine, so far. But he also said that we should write “rational
reconstructions” of the historical episodes, in which scientists’ decisions
are made to look as rational as possible. We should then separately (or
in footnotes) point out places where the rational reconstruction is not an
accurate description of what actually went on. So it is OK to deliberately
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
103

misrepresent what happened in the past, so long as the footnotes set things
straight (see Lakatos 1970, 138 n, 140 n). What matters most is that in the
main discussion we are able to spin a story in which the scientiﬁc decisions
come out looking rational. I have never understood why this idea is not met
with more amazement and criticism from philosophers. (Hacking 1983 is
a vigorous exception.)
In among all this, however, Lakatos developed a view of the organiza-
tion of science that was very inﬂuential. This is known as his methodology
of scientiﬁc research programs (though he spelled it “programmes,” in the
British way).
A research program, for Lakatos, is roughly analogous to a Kuhnian
paradigm (in the broad sense). The big difference, as I said above, is that
there is usually more than one research program per ﬁeld at any given time.
According to Lakatos, competition between research programs is what we
actually ﬁnd in science, and it is also essential to rationality and progress.
This view was applied to all of science, from physics to the social sciences.
A research program is a historical entity; it evolves over time. It will con-
tain a sequence of related theories. Later theories are developed in response
to problems with the earlier ones. For Lakatos, as for Kuhn, it is common
and justiﬁable for a research program to live for a while despite empirical
anomalies and other problems. Workers within a research program typi-
cally have some commitment to the program; they do not reject the basic
ideas of the program as soon as something goes wrong. Rather, they try to
modify their theories to deal with the problem. However, for Lakatos as
for Kuhn, research programs are sometimes abandoned. So a complete the-
ory of scientiﬁc change must consider two different kinds of change: (1)
change within individual research programs, and (2) change at the level of
the collection of research programs within a scientiﬁc ﬁeld.
A research program has two main components, in Lakatos’s view. First,
it contains a hard core. This is a set of basic ideas that are essential to the
research program. Second, a research program contains a protective belt.
This is a set of less fundamental ideas that are used to apply the hard core
to actual phenomena. The detailed, speciﬁc versions of a scientiﬁc theory
that can actually be tested will contain ideas from the hard core combined
with ideas from the protective belt.
For example, the Newtonian research program of eighteenth-century
physics has Newton’s three laws of motion and his gravitational law as its
hard core. The protective belt of Newtonianism will change with time, and
at any time it will contain detailed ideas about matter, a view about the struc-
ture of the universe, and mathematical tools used to link the hard core to real
104
Chapter Seven

phenomena. The nineteenth-century Darwinian research program in biol-
ogy has a hard core that claims that different biological species are linked
by descent and form a family tree (or perhaps a very small number of sep-
arate trees). Changes in biological species are due mostly to the accumula-
tion of tiny variations favored by natural selection, with some other causes
of evolution playing a secondary role. The protective belt of nineteenth-
century Darwinism is made up of a shifting set of more detailed ideas about
which species are closely related to which; ideas about inheritance, varia-
tion, competition, and natural selection; ideas about the distribution of or-
ganisms around the earth; and so on.
We now reach Lakatos’s principles of scientiﬁc change. Let us ﬁrst look
at change within research programs. The ﬁrst rule is that changes should
only be made to the protective belt, never to the hard core. The second rule
is that changes to the protective belt should be progressive. Here Lakatos
borrowed from Popper’s ideas. A progressive research program constantly
expands its application to a larger and larger set of cases, or strives for a
more precise treatment of the cases it presently covers. A progressive re-
search program is one that is succeeding in increasing its predictive power.
In contrast, a research program is degenerating if the changes that are be-
ing made to it only serve to cover existing problems and do not successfully
extend the research program to new cases. Lakatos assumed, like Kuhn,
that all research programs are faced with anomalies, unsolved empirical
problems, at any time. A degenerating research program is one that is
falling behind, or only barely keeping up, in its attempt to deal with anom-
alies. A progressive research program fends off refutation and also extends
itself to cover new phenomena. Lakatos thought that, in principle, we
could measure how quickly a research program is progressing.
Now let us look at the higher level of change in Lakatos’s system,
change at the level of the collection of research programs present in a sci-
entiﬁc ﬁeld.
Each ﬁeld will have a collection of research programs at any given time,
some of which are progressing rapidly, others progressing slowly, and oth-
ers degenerating. You might be thinking that the next rule for Lakatos is
obvious: “choose the most progressive research program.” That would es-
tablish a decision procedure for scientists looking at their whole ﬁeld, and
it would give us a way of deciding who is making rational or irrational de-
cisions. But that is not what Lakatos said.
For Lakatos, it is acceptable to protect a research program for a while,
during a period when it is degenerating. It might recover. This is even the
case when another research program has overtaken it (Lakatos 1971). The
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
105

history of science contains cases of research programs recovering from
temporary bad periods. So a reasonable person can wait around and hope
for a recovery. How long is it reasonable to wait? Lakatos does not say.
Feyerabend swooped on this point (1975). For him it was the Achilles’
heel in Lakatos’s whole story. If Lakatos does not give us a rule for when a
rational scientist should give up on one research program and switch to an-
other, his account of rational theory choice is completely empty.
So is there a third rule that tells us how to handle decisions between re-
search programs? Not really. Lakatos did say that the decision to stay with
a degenerating research program is a high-risk one (1971). So Lakatos
might advise the rational scientist to stay with a degenerating research pro-
gram only if he or she is willing to tolerate a high-risk situation. And
Lakatos is right that different people can reasonably have very different at-
titudes toward risk. But Lakatos did not follow the suggestion up, to close
the gap in his theory. The tremendous appearance of order and method-
ological strictness in Lakatos’s philosophy of science is much undermined
by his failure to say something deﬁnite about this crucial point. Feyerabend
was right to see a mismatch between the rhetoric and the reality of Lakatos’s
views. Indeed, it sometimes looks as if the whole point of Lakatos’s proj-
ect was to give us a way of retrospectively describing episodes in science as
rational.
This is a good place to emphasize the vast difference between Lakatos
and Kuhn in their underlying attitudes. Kuhn has a deep trust in the shared
standards implicit in paradigms and the ability of science to ﬁnd a way for-
ward after crises, despite some groping and ﬂailing along the way. For
Kuhn, once we rid our picture of science of some myths, the picture we are
left with is fundamentally healthy; Kuhn trusts science left in the hands of
implicit shared values. Lakatos, in contrast, wants to have the whole en-
terprise guided by methodological rules—or at least he needs for us to be
able to tell ourselves a story of that kind.
Let us not worry further about the oddities in Lakatos’s view. Instead,
we can ask, Does his picture of the structure of science have any useful el-
ements? Once we ask this, I think it is clear that the basic idea of compet-
ing research programs is a useful one. Certainly there are some ﬁelds where
this seems a far more accurate description of what goes on than Kuhn’s
paradigm-based view. Psychology is an obvious example. Current work in
“evolutionary psychology” looks a lot like a research program in some-
thing like Lakatos’s sense (Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992).
We might also consider the possibility of mixtures of Kuhn-like and
Lakatos-like stories. In biology, what we often ﬁnd is consensus about very
basic principles but competition between research programs at a slightly
106
Chapter Seven

lower level. Looked at very broadly, evolutionary biology might contain
something close to a single paradigm: the “synthetic theory,” a combina-
tion of Darwinism and genetics. But at a lower level of generality, we seem
to ﬁnd competing research programs. The “neutral theory of molecular
evolution” is a research program that tries to understand most variation
and change at the molecular genetic level in terms of random processes
rather than natural selection (Kimura 1983). This research program is
compatible with the central claims of the synthetic theory, but it conﬂicts
with some standard ways in which the synthetic theory is applied to genetic
variation within populations.
In the case of the neutral theory and also in other cases, what we ﬁnd is
a research program being “budded off” from the mainstream of biology
and being explored for a few decades to see how much it can explain. Then
it may turn out that the limits of the research program are reached, at
which point it is moderated and folded back into the mainstream. That is
what seems to be happening with the neutral theory.
So we now have the tools for describing a range of different large-scale
processes in science. Some ﬁelds may have dominant paradigms and Kuhn-
ian normal science. Others may have competing research programs. Some
might have very general paradigms plus lower-level research programs bud-
ding off periodically. (Here I should note that the term “research program”
can also sometimes be used to describe different noncompeting approaches
within a single ﬁeld.)
I have been discussing the usefulness of the research program idea in de-
scribing how science actually works. There is also the possibility of nor-
mative theories that make use of this concept. But I will not follow up that
idea further within Lakatos’s framework. We will return to the topic in the
next section.
I will make one last point before leaving Lakatos. In the last few chap-
ters, I have contrasted Popper, who called for permanent open-mindedness
and criticism, with Kuhn, who endorsed a tenacious commitment to the
basic ideas of a paradigm. This is a standard way of marking a fundamen-
tal disagreement between Kuhn and Popper. There is a bit more complex-
ity here, however. Lakatos, as I said, saw many of his ideas as implicit in
Popper. And we can indeed ﬁnd passages in Popper where he accepts that
theories should not be discarded at the ﬁrst sign of trouble but, instead,
should be protected initially to see if they can overcome their problems
(Popper 1963, 49; 1970, 55). So is there really no difference, or much less
difference, between Popper and Kuhn on this point? Has Popper retreated
from one of his most basic ideas? Not really. When Popper came to directly
confront Kuhn’s arguments on this issue (1970), he did not choose to blur
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
107

the difference between his view and Kuhn’s. He said that Kuhnian normal
science does sometimes exist, but it was not nearly as common as Kuhn
said. And more importantly, he regarded it as a bad thing, which should
not be encouraged.
7.3 Laudan and Research Traditions
In an interesting book called Progress and Its Problems (1977), Larry Lau-
dan developed a view that is similar to Lakatos’s in basic structure but which
is far superior. Like Lakatos, Laudan thought that Kuhn had described
science as an irrational process, as a process in which scientiﬁc decision-
making is “basically a political and propagandistic affair” (1977, 4). This
reading of Kuhn (I say yet again) is inaccurate. But Laudan also recognized
the power of Kuhn’s discussions of historical cases. Like Lakatos, Laudan
wanted to develop a view in which paradigm-like entities could coexist and
compete in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld. He gave many cases from the history of science
to motivate this picture. So we are heading toward the idea of a research
program. But in an understandable piece of product differentiation, Lau-
dan called the large-scale units of scientiﬁc work “research traditions” rather
than research programs.
The difference between Laudan and Lakatos is not just terminological.
Laudan’s description of research traditions makes more sense than Lakatos’s
account. Lakatos saw the sequence of theories within a research program
as linked very closely by logic; each new theory was supposed to have a
broader domain of application than its predecessor in that research pro-
gram. And for Lakatos, the hard core never changes. For Laudan, the theo-
ries grouped within research traditions are more loosely related. There
can be some movement of ideas in and out of the hard core. Moreover, for
Laudan there is nothing unusual or bad about a later theory covering less
territory than an earlier one; sometimes a retreat is necessary. For Laudan,
theories can also break away from one research tradition and be absorbed
by others. For example, the early thermodynamic ideas of Sadi Carnot were
developed within a research tradition that saw heat as a ﬂuid (“caloric”),
but these ideas were taken over in time by a rival research tradition that saw
heat as the motion of matter.
Another key innovation in Laudan’s account is his distinction between
the acceptance and the pursuit of theories.
The philosophies discussed here so far have tended to recognize just one
kind of attitude that scientists can have to theories. Usually the attitude of
a scientist to a theory has been treated as something like belief. Of course,
belief can come in degrees; there are cautiously held and ﬁrmly held beliefs.
108
Chapter Seven

Scientists will often—and should often—have only a cautious belief. But
still the idea here is that there is one basic kind of attitude—belief or some-
thing like it—though it comes in degrees. Laudan argued that there are two
different kinds of attitudes to theories and research traditions found in sci-
ence, acceptance and pursuit. Acceptance is close to belief; to accept some-
thing is to treat it as true. But pursuit is different. It involves deciding to
work with an idea, and explore it, for reasons other than conﬁdence that
the idea is likely to be true. Crucially, it can be reasonable to pursue an idea
that one deﬁnitely does not accept. Someone might have reason to believe
that if the idea was true, it would be of huge importance and the payoff
from working on it would be high. Someone might think that although an
idea is not likely to be true, it should be explored, and that she or he is the
person best equipped to do so. There is a whole constellation of different
reasons that a person might have for working with a scientiﬁc idea.
Laudan built the distinction between acceptance and pursuit into his
account of rational decision-making in science. He was able to give some
fairly sharp rules where Lakatos had not. For Laudan, it is always rational
to pursue the research tradition that has the highest current rate of progress
in problem-solving (1977, 111). But that does not mean one should accept
the basic ideas of that research tradition. The acceptability of theories and
ideas is measured by their present overall level of problem-solving power,
not by the rate of change. We should accept (perhaps cautiously) the theo-
ries that have the highest level of problem-solving power. So a scientist
might be inclined to accept the ideas in a mainstream research tradition but
work on a more marginal research tradition that has a spectacular rate of
progress. For Laudan that decision would be a rational one.
With any rule like this, it will be possible to think of cases where the rule
might lead a person astray. What if a research tradition has a low rate of pro-
gress right now, but there is good reason to think it might take off very soon?
This is the kind of possibility that made Lakatos hesitate. Laudan clearly
hoped that the distinction between acceptance and pursuit would help
with this kind of problem, and so it does. But he does not try to lay down
rules that will deal with every possible situation, including all the various
kinds of bad luck. Here we run into a general problem about the aims of
philosophy of science; it is very unclear what kinds of principles a philos-
ophy of science should be looking for. Some think that looking for rules of
procedure, even sophisticated ones like Laudan’s, is just a mistake. But it is
fair to say that Laudan was able to give quite an impressive normative the-
ory of science using the idea of competition between research traditions.
Laudan’s theory was impressive, but here is an interesting gap in both
theories discussed in this chapter that some readers may have picked up on
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
109

already. Both Lakatos and Laudan were interested in the situation where a
scientist is looking out over a range of research programs in a ﬁeld and de-
ciding which one to join. But here is a question that neither of them seemed
to ask: does the answer depend on how many people are already working
in a given research program? Both Lakatos and Laudan seemed to think
that it would be ﬁne for their theories to direct everyone to work on the
same research program, if it was far superior to the others. But perhaps
that is a mistake. Science might be better served by some kind of mecha-
nism in which the ﬁeld hedges its bets. That suggests a whole different
question that might be addressed by the philosophy of science: what is the
best distribution of workers across a range of research programs?
There are two different ways of approaching this new question. One
way is to look at individual choices. Does it make sense for me to work on
research program 1 rather than research program 2, given the way people
are already distributed across the two programs? Is research program 1
overcrowded? Perhaps Lakatos and Laudan thought this question was not
relevant to their project because it seems to require introducing selﬁsh
goals into the picture. But we can also approach the issue another way. We
can ask, Which distribution of people across rival research programs is best
for science?
Kuhn, interestingly, was aware of this issue, especially in his work after
Structure (e.g., 1970). This is ironic because Kuhn did not think that ongo-
ing competition between paradigms was usually found in science. But Kuhn
did say that one of the strengths of science lay in its ability to distribute risk
by having different scientists make different choices, especially during crises.
Lakatos and Laudan were in a good position to make a really thorough in-
vestigation of this issue, but they did not (see also Musgrave 1976). It was
not until more recently that this question was brought into sharp philo-
sophical focus. We will take up the issue in detail in chapter 11.
7.4 Anything Goes
Now we turn to Paul Feyerabend, the most controversial and adventurous
ﬁgure in the post-Kuhn debates. Feyerabend, like many key ﬁgures in this
book, was born in Austria. He fought in the German infantry during World
War II and was wounded. He switched from science to philosophy after the
war and eventually made his way to the University of California at Berke-
ley, where he taught for most of his career. Feyerabend was initially inﬂu-
enced by Popper, with whom he worked for a year in the 1950s. But by the
early 1960s, he was moving toward the adventurous views for which he be-
came famous. He and Kuhn inﬂuenced each other signiﬁcantly. (In dis-
110
Chapter Seven

cussing Feyerabend after Lakatos and Laudan, I am departing from the
chronological organization of this book).
So what were his notorious ideas? A two-word summary gets us started:
anything goes. Feyerabend’s most famous work was his 1975 book Against
Method. Here he argued for “epistemological anarchism.” The epistemo-
logical anarchist is opposed to all systems of rules and constraints in sci-
ence. Great scientists are opportunistic and creative, willing to make use of
any available technique for discovery and persuasion. Any attempt to es-
tablish rules of method in science will result only in a straitjacketing of this
creativity. We see this, Feyerabend said, when we look at the history of sci-
ence. Great scientists have always been willing to break even the most ba-
sic methodological rules that philosophers might try to lay down. The only
rule that we can be sure will not impede imagination and progress is this:
anything goes.
In defending his position, Feyerabend made use of a range of ideas
about scientiﬁc language and the psychology of observation. Like Kuhn,
he thought that rival scientiﬁc theories are often linguistically incommen-
surable (section 6.3 above). He argued that observations in science are con-
taminated with theoretical assumptions and hence cannot be considered a
neutral test of theory. These arguments were based on speculative ideas
about scientiﬁc language, and they are not very convincing. His more in-
teresting arguments are of two kinds. These involve both the history of sci-
ence and a direct confrontation of some hard questions about how science
relates to freedom and human well-being.
Before launching into this unruly menagerie of ideas, we need to keep
in mind a warning that Feyerabend gave at the start of Against Method. He
said that the reader should not interpret the arguments in the book as ex-
pressing Feyerabend’s “deep convictions.” Instead, they “merely show how
easy it is to lead people by the nose in a rational way” (1975, 32). The epis-
temological anarchist is like an “undercover agent” who uses reason in or-
der to destabilize it. Again we are being told by an author not to trust what
we are reading. It is hard to know what to make of this, but I think it is pos-
sible to sort through Feyerabend’s claims and distinguish some that do rep-
resent his “deep convictions.” Feyerabend’s deepest conviction was that
science is an aspect of human creativity. Scientiﬁc ideas and scientiﬁc change
are to be assessed in those terms.
In his article for the Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1998),
Michael Williams suggests that we think of Feyerabend as a late represen-
tative of an old skeptical tradition, represented by Sextus Empiricus and
Montaigne, in which the skeptic “explores and counterposes all manner of
competing ideas without regarding any as deﬁnitely established.” This is a
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
111

useful comparison, but it is only part of the story. To capture the other part,
we might compare Feyerabend to Oscar Wilde, the nineteenth-century
Irish playwright, novelist, and poet who was imprisoned in England for ho-
mosexual behavior. Wilde is someone who liked to express strange, para-
doxical claims about knowledge and ideas (“I can believe anything so long
as it’s incredible”). But behind the paradoxes there was a deﬁnite message.
For Wilde, the most important kind of assessment of ideas is aesthetic as-
sessment. A book or an idea might look immoral or blasphemous, but if it
is beautiful, then it is worthwhile. Other standards—moral, religious, log-
ical—should never be allowed to get in the way of the free development of
art. This, I suggest, is close to Feyerabend’s view; what is important in all
intellectual work, including science, is the free development of creativity
and imagination. Nothing should be allowed to interfere with this.
Feyerabend’s focus on values and creativity guided his readings of oth-
ers. His paper “Consolations for the Specialist” (1970) shows him to be
one of the most perceptive critics of Kuhn. Most philosophers of science
found an alarming disorder in Kuhn’s view of science. Feyerabend found the
opposite: an incitement for scientists to become orderly and mechanical.
Feyerabend saw Kuhn as glorifying the mind-numbing routine of normal
science and the rigid education that Kuhn thought produced a good nor-
mal scientist. He saw Kuhn as encouraging the worst trends in twentieth-
century science toward professionalization, narrow-mindedness, and ex-
clusion of unorthodox ideas.
Feyerabend recognized the “invisible hand” side of Kuhn’s story, his at-
tempt to argue that individual narrow-mindedness is all for the best in sci-
ence. Back in chapter 5, I said that it is often hard to distinguish the de-
scriptive from the normative in Kuhn’s discussions. Feyerabend saw this
ambiguity in Kuhn’s writing as a deliberate rhetorical device for insinuat-
ing into the reader a positive picture of the most mundane type of science.
For Feyerabend, the mind-set that Kuhn encouraged also leads to a lack of
concern for the moral consequences of scientiﬁc work.
Feyerabend also argued that Kuhn was factually wrong about the role
of normal science in history. According to Feyerabend, paradigms almost
never succeed in exerting the kind of control Kuhn described. There are al-
ways imaginative individuals trying out new ideas.
Feyerabend was not, as he is sometimes portrayed, an “enemy of sci-
ence.” He was an enemy of some kinds of science. In the seventeenth cen-
tury, according to Feyerabend, science was the friend of freedom and cre-
ativity and was heroically opposed to the stultifying grip of the Catholic
church. He admired the scientiﬁc adventurers of this period, especially
Galileo. But the science of Galileo is not the science of today. Science, for
112
Chapter Seven

Feyerabend, has gone from being an ally of freedom to being an enemy. Sci-
entists are turning into “human ants,” entirely unable to think outside of
their training (1975, 188). And the dominance of science in society threat-
ens to turn man into a “miserable, unfriendly, self-righteous mechanism
without charm or humour” (175). In the closing pages of Against Method,
he declares that society now has to be freed from the strangling hold of a
domineering scientiﬁc establishment, just as it once had to be freed from
the grip of the One True Religion.
7.5 An Argument from History That Haunts Philosophy
Let us now look at the argument that is perhaps most central to Feyer-
abend’s work. This is an argument from history.
A large part of Against Method is taken up with a discussion of Galileo’s
arguments against his Aristotelian opponents in the early seventeenth cen-
tury (see section 1.5). Galileo aimed to defend the literal truth of Coperni-
cus’s claim that the earth goes round the sun rather than vice versa. One of
the things Galileo had to confront was a set of obvious arguments from ex-
perience against a moving earth. For example, when a ball is dropped from
a tower, it lands at the foot of the tower even though, on Copernicus’s view,
the tower has moved a signiﬁcant distance (along a huge circle) while the
ball is in the air. All of our everyday experience of motion suggests that the
earth is stationary. These are not arguments from the wisdom of Aristotle
or the sayings of the biblical apostles; they are arguments from what we ob-
serve every day. If empiricism in philosophy has any teeth at all, Feyerabend
claims, it entails that people in the seventeenth century had excellent rea-
sons to resist Galileo and believe that the earth is not moving.
Galileo, of course, rejected the arguments. In his Dialogue concerning
the Two Chief World Systems ([1632] 1967), he patiently tries to show that
Copernicus’s model is compatible with everyday experiences of motion. If
the earth is moving, then a ball dropped from a tower has a mixed kind of
motion. It is falling toward the earth but is also moving in a huge circle just
as the tower is. Our everyday perception of motion is unable to distinguish
the case where both tower and ball have a circular motion from the case
where neither does.
Galileo defuses the arguments, but he does not suggest that this is easy.
Indeed, he marvels at Copernicus and others who have “through sheer
force of intellect done such violence to their own senses as to prefer what
reason told them over that which sensible experience plainly showed them
to be the contrary” (quoted in Feyerabend 1975, 101).
According to Feyerabend, what Galileo had to do was to create a
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
113

different kind of observational description of the world, one in which de-
scriptions of apparent motion were compatible with the Copernican hy-
pothesis. Only then would the arguments for Copernicanism become plau-
sible. What science had to do, here and in other cases, was to break through
the constraints of an outdated worldview that had permeated even the most
basic observational description. Science, for Feyerabend, is often a matter
of challenging rather than following the lessons of observation.
What we see here is a simple case of something that Feyerabend regards
as ubiquitous. A very basic empiricist principle, of the kind dear to philoso-
phers, would seem to be pointing people in the seventeenth century away
from the scientiﬁc theory that we think now to be true. The philosopher
complacently spouts generalities about how science is great because it is re-
sponsive to observational data. But history suggests that the principles the
philosopher likes so much would steer us in the wrong direction if people
back in the crucial period had applied them.
Through all the exaggerations, deliberate provocations, jokes, insults,
and outrageous statements in Feyerabend’s works, this form of argument
runs as a constant and challenging thread. Are there any principles of
method, measures of conﬁrmation, or summaries of the scientiﬁc strategy
that do not fail the great test of the early seventeenth century? Look at the
massiveness of the rethinking that Galileo urged, and the great weight of
ordinary experience telling against him. Given these, would all traditional
philosophical accounts of how science works, especially empiricist ac-
counts, have instructed us to stick with the Aristotelians rather than take a
bet on Galileo? This is the Feyerabendian argument that haunts philosophy
of science.
However, Feyerabend massively overextends his argument, into a prin-
ciple that cannot be defended: “Hence it is advisable to let one’s inclina-
tions go against reason in any circumstances, for science may proﬁt from
it” (1975, 156). Feyerabend claims that because some principle or rule may
go wrong, we should completely ignore it. The claim is obviously crazy.
The policy of catching trains that are scheduled to take you where you plan
to go is a policy that may go wrong. The train might crash. Or if you caught
a different train, you might meet the love of your life on the way. All that is
possible, but no rational person regards these mere possibilities as sufﬁcient
to discredit the rule that it is best to take trains that are scheduled to go
where you want to go. All applications of everyday rules of rational behav-
ior presuppose judgments about which outcomes are probable, or typical,
and which are far-fetched or unlikely. Sometimes we might be able to put
exact numbers on the chances of these different outcomes, but often we
cannot. Sometimes we rely on informal judgment to guide us. In rational
114
Chapter Seven

behavior, nothing is guaranteed, but some policies and rules can be justi-
ﬁed despite this. (The modern Bayesian theory of belief and action, which
will be discussed in chapter 14, is based upon this idea.) And what is true
for everyday behavior is true also for science. The mere possibility that a
rule might lead to bad consequences proves very little. We need more than
a mere possibility before we have grounds to doubt a principle. Science
“may proﬁt” from all kinds of strange decisions, but “may” is not enough.
So we have a mixture of good and bad argument in Feyerabend’s treat-
ment of these issues. It would be foolish for a philosopher to ignore the
strangeness of having one’s favorite principles of theory choice come out in
favor of the seventeenth-century Aristotelians and against Galileo. The ex-
ample is so important in the history of science that it takes a brave philoso-
pher to ignore it. It is by no means clear that well-developed philosophical
theories do make the wrong call, though. Recall Laudan’s rules discussed
in section 7.4 above; they would probably steer us rather well here. These
rules would at least tell us to pursue the Galilean program, on account of
its rate of increase in problem-solving power. And in time, it would become
rational to accept the Galilean view.
7.6 Pluralism and the Ramblings of Madmen
For Feyerabend, science beneﬁts from the presence of a range of alternative
ideas and perspectives. Let us look at Feyerabend’s ideas about pluralism
and diversity in science.
In his 1970 paper about Kuhn and Lakatos, Feyerabend proposed two
general principles that should guide science. We should keep in mind that
“rules are made to be broken” in Feyerabend’s view. But the principles are
worth discussing.
The ﬁrst rule Feyerabend called the “principle of tenacity.” This prin-
ciple tells us to hold onto attractive theories despite initial problems and
allow them a chance to develop their potential.
That is a start, but if everyone followed this rule, nothing would ever
change. So Feyerabend adds a second principle, the “principle of prolifer-
ation.” This principle tells us to make up new theories, propose new ideas.
Kuhn says the proliferation of new ideas should wait for a crisis. But
why not put forth new ideas all the time? Thus we reach Feyerabend’s ideal
picture of science: we have a population of people happily developing their
theories and also trying to think up new ones. Some pedestrian work is
needed to help develop the existing ideas, but this should not interfere with
the imaginative work.
Feyerabend claimed to be following the tradition of the philosopher and
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
115

political theorist John Stuart Mill. In his classic paper On Liberty ([1859]
1978), Mill argued that society beneﬁts from a diversity of ideas and ways
of life. The constant proliferation of new theories creates a “marketplace of
ideas,” in which many options are explored and the best prevail. Some of
Feyerabend’s descriptions of ways in which science might beneﬁt from un-
usual sources of ideas—“the ramblings of madmen” (1975, 68)—were in-
tended as descriptions of inputs into this marketplace. (See also Lloyd
1997.) Feyerabend argued that we can often only perceive the limitations
of our current perspective if we try to step outside it, at least temporarily.
Achieving a novel, external perspective on ideas that we usually assume
uncritically is often the beginning of progress. What we usually consider
“established facts,” including observable facts, are often laden and con-
taminated with prejudices and outdated ideas. Any source of an external
vantage point is to be valued. Alternative theories, even theories with mas-
sive problems, can provide this kind of external vantage point.
These ideas about the need for external vantage points in challenging
familiar assumptions are interesting. And the idea of a marketplace of
ideas is a powerful one. But Feyerabend’s account seems to have left out
something very important. And this omission undermines his version of
the “marketplace of ideas” doctrine.
What is missing in Feyerabend’s picture is some rule or mechanism for
the rejection and elimination of ideas. Feyerabend gives a recipe that, if it
was followed, would lead to the accumulation of an ever-increasing range
of scientiﬁc ideas being discussed in every ﬁeld. Some ideas would probably
become boring and might be dropped for that reason. But aside from that,
there is no way for an idea to be taken off the table. So a question immedi-
ately becomes pressing: what are we supposed to do when we have to ap-
ply one of these theories to a practical problem? What do we do when the
bridge has to be built? Which ideas should we use? Not the most “creative”
ones, surely! Feyerabend never gave a satisfactory answer to this question.
If what we really want from science is to have a community full of lively,
imaginative discussion, then Feyerabend’s recipe for scientiﬁc behavior is
an appropriate one. Science then would be very similar to art. But if part
of the role of science is to guide us in solving practical problems, then Fey-
erabend’s recipe seems completely misguided. If science must be applied to
problems, there must be a mechanism of selection in science, a mechanism
for the rejection of some ideas. Proliferation of alternatives is part of sci-
ence, and another part is selection among alternatives.
In the last few years, for example, the government of Thabo Mbeki in
South Africa has shown an interest in radical ideas about the causation of
AIDS. According to these ideas, the virus identiﬁed by mainstream science
116
Chapter Seven

as the cause of AIDS, HIV, is regarded as either relatively unimportant or
altogether harmless. In reply to the storm of criticism that resulted, Mbeki
has sometimes said that he is simply interested in an open-minded ques-
tioning of theories and the exploration of diverse possibilities. Surely that
is a properly scientiﬁc attitude? This reply has been rightly criticized as
disingenuous. Science needs the invention of alternatives, but it also needs
mechanisms for pruning the range of options and abandoning some. When
the time comes to apply scientiﬁc ideas in a public health context, this se-
lection process is of paramount importance. Then we must take from sci-
ence the well-supported view that AIDS is caused by a virus transmitted
through body ﬂuids, and we must guide policy and behavior with this view.
Michael Williams, in the encyclopedia article I mentioned earlier, says
the following about how Feyerabend looks in retrospect: “While some of
his views may strike some philosophers as overstated, their general spirit
has some claim to be seen as today’s conventional wisdom.” I would give
an almost opposite summary. While a few individual pieces of Feyerabend’s
view have become something close to conventional, the “general spirit” of
his work involves a principle that is still unconventional because it is clearly
false. This is the principle that we should think of the social role of science
in the same way we think of the social role of art. On the contrary, imagi-
nation and creativity are one side of science but not the only side.
7.7 Taking Stock: Frameworks and Two-Process Theories of Science
In this section I will discuss a general theme that has appeared several times
over the last few chapters. This section is a “time out” from the chrono-
logical story central to the book.
The theme I will discuss has reverberated continually through twentieth-
century philosophy and continues to be important. I will introduce it as a
distinction between views about scientiﬁc change, or conceptual change
more generally. The distinction is between one-process and two-process
theories. If we are trying to understand scientiﬁc change, should we recog-
nize two “levels” in science, with different types of change occurring at
these two levels? More precisely, should we see scientiﬁc change as involv-
ing (1) changes made within the boundaries provided by a general frame-
work and (2) changes at the level of the frameworks themselves?
The alternative (or rather, one alternative) is to give a uniﬁed account,
in which there is no qualitative distinction made between two levels, layers,
or kinds of change.
The opposition between Popper and Kuhn can be used to make the con-
trast vivid. For Popper, scientiﬁc change always involves the same process—
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
117

the cycle of conjecture and refutation. This is what we see at the level of
small changes to details and also at the level of fundamental changes in
worldview. For Kuhn, in contrast, there are two qualitatively different kinds
of change in science; changes within paradigms and change between para-
digms involve fundamentally different processes. A paradigm (in the broad
sense) is a clear example of a framework in the sense relevant here. Change
within a framework is guided by principles supplied by the framework. Be-
cause frameworks supply these principles, moves between frameworks are
more problematic, hard to describe, and often disorderly.
Let us move to another contrast that is fairly clear and vivid: the con-
trast between Carnap and Quine. Carnap, in his later philosophy, used the
term linguistic framework and distinguished moves made within these
frameworks from changes made between them. The principles that are fun-
damental to a framework will appear as analytic sentences if they are ex-
plicitly stated. Moves made within a framework involve the assessment and
testing of synthetic claims. For Carnap, many alternative frameworks are
possible, and people can switch between them. These switches, however,
involve a different kind of process from moves made within them. Moves
made between frameworks are not sensitive to particular factual results;
they are sensitive to a kind of pragmatic assessment of the overall useful-
ness of the framework. If one framework seems not to be working, then we
try another. Carnap’s frameworks are “thinner” than Kuhn’s; they involve
just basic linguistic and logical rules, not scientiﬁc principles.
Quine, in “Two Dogmas of Empiricism” and elsewhere, argued against
this two-layered view of language and knowledge. For Quine, all changes
made to our belief system, whether large or small, involve the same kind of
holistic tinkering with the web of belief. We accommodate experience by
making as few changes as possible and keeping our worldview as simple as
we can. There is no distinction between changes within and changes be-
tween frameworks.
How might we decide between a one-process view and a two-process
view? Within twentieth-century philosophy, many people were persuaded
by Quine’s holism. These arguments were based on very general consider-
ations and not on the history of speciﬁc episodes in science. Quine’s most
powerful argument is usually seen to be his claim that there is no way to
mark out the distinction between changes within and changes between
frameworks in a way that is scientiﬁc and does not beg the question.
Kuhn, however, had no problem distinguishing normal science from
revolutionary change in actual scientiﬁc cases. He saw two processes as a
clear fact of history. And it could be argued that Kuhn was led to impor-
tant insights via his recognition of this distinction. Recently, Michael Fried-
118
Chapter Seven

man (2001) has argued that Kuhn was right and Quine was wrong on this
point. If we approach actual scientiﬁc episodes using the idea of frame-
works and the distinction between two kinds of change, we will be able to
make more sense of how the sciences evolved. Quine’s claim that we can-
not make good sense out of a distinction between two kinds of conceptual
change seems to be based on an overly stringent conception of what we
would have to do in order to recognize two kinds of change.
Is Quine’s denial of the two-process view justiﬁable? Thomas Ricketts,
in a 1982 defense of Quine, tries to say in more detail how Quine might re-
sist a two-process view. Suppose a scientist actually pins a set of basic prin-
ciples on the laboratory door and insists that these principles constitute his
framework. The principles on the door might change, the scientist says, but
then they will change by a special process. Surely Quine will have to accept
a two-process view in that case? Perhaps not. A scientist might pin some
principles on the door and say they are different, but if Quine is right about
the holistic nature of testing, the actual processes by which the scientist
makes modiﬁcations to his beliefs will all be of the same kind. A pragmatic
process of making adjustments to avoid tensions and unexpected observa-
tions is all that goes on, whether the ideas being changed are pinned on the
door or not. There is no sense in which the moves made within the frame-
work are “guided by facts” and those made to the framework are “merely
pragmatic.” All changes made to any belief result from the same kind of tin-
kering with the total network.
So in working out whether the two-process nature of scientiﬁc change
is merely an illusion or not, we are led once again to fundamental questions
about testing and conﬁrmation. Still, I would have to say that despite these
problems, the idea of a two-process theory of scientiﬁc change certainly
looks like it has been useful to people working on speciﬁc cases. Alongside
Kuhn we have Lakatos and Laudan, who have different kinds of two-process
views. As I said earlier in this chapter, we can use the different theories of
Kuhn and Laudan to make distinctions between different kinds of scien-
tiﬁc ﬁelds—some ﬁelds are guided by Kuhnian paradigms, and some in-
volve ongoing competition between research programs. Other ﬁelds might
have a mixture of the two. These certainly look like useful distinctions. And
Quine and his allies would concede that usefulness is the ultimate arbiter
in a case like this.
This whole area has been the topic of lively discussion recently, and there
is a lot more that could be said. The ghost of Immanuel Kant hangs over the
whole discussion, as Kant was the ﬁrst philosopher to develop a detailed
view in which an abstract conceptual framework acts to guide empirical in-
vestigation ([1781] 1998). According to Kant, the basic framework that we
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
119

bring to bear on the world is ﬁxed and universal across all normal humans.
We can never escape the framework (and would not want to if we could).
Through the twentieth century, many philosophers found the idea of a “con-
ceptual scheme” or framework appealing but insisted that these schemes
can be changed and are not universal across cultures. Some of the radical
ideas discussed in the next chapter can be seen as combining Kantian ideas
about the role of conceptual schemes with a relativistic view in which al-
ternative schemes are possible.
Not all philosophers of science can be neatly categorized as having
“two-process” views or “one-process” views. Feyerabend is an interesting
case. He recognized the psychological power of linguistic and cosmologi-
cal frameworks, but he insisted that the imaginative person can resist the
bounds of a framework. Popper, also, rejected the whole idea of frame-
works as constraining thought and knowledge. He called it “the myth of
the framework.” Feyerabend did not see frameworks as mythical, but he
thought that their bounds could be resisted and overcome.
Another interesting response to these issues is seen in Peter Galison’s
work (1997). Galison argues that what we often ﬁnd in science is that fun-
damental changes in the different elements making up a scientiﬁc discipline
are not in step with each other. Whereas Kuhn described a process in which
there is simultaneous change in theoretical ideas, methods, standards, and
observational data, Galison argues that within physics, fundamental change
in experimental traditions tends to occur nonsimultaneously with funda-
mental change in theory. This is because of the partial autonomy of these
different aspects of large-scale science. (Instrumentation is yet another tra-
dition, with its own rates and causes of change.) So a big theoretical shift
will be made more manageable by the fact that we can expect other aspects
of the same ﬁeld not to be changing at the same time. Disruptions happen
more locally than they do on the Kuhnian model, and there are more re-
sources available to the ﬁeld to negotiate the transitions in an orderly way.
The history of a scientiﬁc ﬁeld shows “seams” of several different kinds,
but these seams do not line up with each other. The structure as a whole is
made stronger as a result.
Galison’s picture shows us that there are many options for thinking
about the relation between different kinds of scientiﬁc change. We should
not think that there is a simple choice between the one-process camp (Pop-
per, Quine, and Feyerabend in a sense) and the two-process camp (Carnap,
Kuhn, Lakatos, Laudan, and Friedman). The situation is more compli-
cated. And different kinds of frameworks have different roles—we should
not think that Kant’s universal conceptual framework has the same role as
one of Laudan’s research traditions! These are very different kinds of things.
120
Chapter Seven

I have also not said anything about the distinction between two-process
views that see people as modifying their frameworks and those that see
people as jumping between them. (Maybe in the end there is no difference.)
In any case, the introduction and criticism of two-process views of con-
ceptual change has been a recurring motif in the last hundred years of
thinking about science and knowledge.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Lakatos’s most famous work is his long paper in Lakatos and Musgrave, Criticism
and the Growth of Knowledge (1970). Another key paper is Lakatos 1971. Cohen,
Feyerabend, and Wartofsky 1976 is a collection on his work.
Feyerabend’s most famous book is Against Method (1975), but his earlier pa-
pers are also interesting (collected in Feyerabend 1981). His later books are not as
good, though Science in a Free Society (1978) has some interesting parts. The Worst
Enemy of Science (Preston, Munévar, and Lamb 2000) is a collection of essays on
Feyerabend. Horgan 1996 contains another great interview.
The Lakatos-Feyerabend relationship is documented in detail in Motterlini 1999.
Carnap’s most famous paper on frameworks is his “Empiricism, Semantics, and
Ontology” (1956), which is very readable, by Carnap standards. Another very in-
ﬂuential (though difﬁcult) discussion of “conceptual schemes,” which follows up
some of Quine’s themes, is Davidson 1984.
Lakatos, Laudan, Feyerabend, and Frameworks
121

122
8
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
8.1 Beyond Philosophy?
In the latter part of the twentieth century, ideas about science were in a
state of ﬂux. Options proliferated, including radical options. The previous
chapter looked at some of these developments from the side of philosophy
of science. The same phenomenon is found—perhaps even more so—in
ﬁelds that border on philosophy. That is one topic of this chapter. I will fo-
cus on sociology of science, as this is an area that began to interact in-
tensely with philosophy. Some of the same issues arose in the history of sci-
ence, but it was sociology that sometimes set itself up as a replacement, or
“successor discipline,” to the philosophy of science (Bloor 1983).
8.2 Robert Merton and the “Old” Sociology of Science
Science is a social enterprise. It seems, then, that one ﬁeld we should turn
to in order to understand this fact is sociology, the general study of human
social structures.
The “sociology of science” developed in the middle of the twentieth
century. For a while it had little interaction with philosophy of science. The
founder of the ﬁeld, and the central ﬁgure for many years, was Robert
Merton.
“Mertonian sociology of science” is basically mainstream sociology ap-
plied to the structure of science and to its historical development. In the
1940s Merton isolated what he called the “norms” of science—a set of ba-
sic values that govern scientiﬁc communities. These norms are universalism,
communism, disinterestedness, and organized skepticism. Universalism is
the idea that the personal attributes and social background of a person are
irrelevant to the scientiﬁc value of the person’s ideas. Communism involves
the common ownership of scientiﬁc ideas and results. Anyone can make
use of any scientiﬁc idea in his or her work; the French are not barred from

using English results. The norm of disinterestedness is made questionable
by Merton’s later ideas, but the basic idea is that scientists are supposed to
act for the beneﬁt of a common scientiﬁc enterprise, rather than personal
gain. Organized skepticism is a community-wide pattern of challenging and
testing ideas instead of taking them on trust. (Merton sometimes added hu-
mility to his list of norms, but that one is less important.)
The four norms are one part of Merton’s account of science. Merton
added another big idea in a famous (and wonderfully readable) paper ﬁrst
presented in 1957. This is Merton’s account of the reward system in sci-
ence. Merton claimed that the basic currency for scientiﬁc reward is recog-
nition, especially recognition for being the ﬁrst person to come up with an
idea. This, Merton claimed, is the only property right recognized in sci-
ence. Once an idea is published, it becomes common scientiﬁc property, ac-
cording to the norm of communism. In the best case, a scientist is rewarded
by having the idea named after him, as we see in such cases as Darwinism,
Planck’s constant, and Boyle’s law.
Merton argued that the importance of recognition is made evident by
the fact that the history of science is crammed with priority disputes, often
of the most acrimonious kind. And let no one suggest that the ﬁgures in-
volved were always jealous also-rans. Galileo fought tooth and nail over
recognition for various ideas of his. Newton fought Hooke over the inverse
square law of gravity, and he fought Leibniz over the invention of calculus.
The pattern has continued similarly from the seventeenth century to today.
National loyalties are often a factor, as seen recently in the dispute between
the American Robert Gallo and the Frenchman Luc Montagnier over the
1983 discovery of HIV. There are some exceptions to the general tendency;
the most famous is the tremendously polite and gentlemanly non-dispute
between Charles Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace over the theory of
evolution by natural selection in the nineteenth century. But the usual pat-
tern when two scientists seem to hit on an idea around the same time is
to ﬁght for priority. As Merton says, the moral fervor seen in these debates,
even on the part of those with no direct involvement, suggests that a basic
community standard is operating.
Merton argued that the reward system of science mostly functions to
encourage original thinking, which is a good thing. But the machine can
also misﬁre, especially when the desire for reward overcomes everything else
in a scientist’s mind. The main “deviant” behaviors that result are fraud,
plagiarism, and libel and slander. Of these, Merton held that fraud is very
rare, plagiarism somewhat less rare, and libel and slander very common.
Fraud is rare largely because of a rigorous internal policing by scientists,
which derives partly from their own ambitions but also from organized
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
123

skepticism. Plagiarism does happen, but the most usual outlet for deviant
behavior is libel and slander of competitors. More precisely, what we ﬁnd
is a special form of slander that relates to the reward structure of science:
accusation of plagiarism. This is vastly more common than actual theft.
When two scientists seem to hit on an idea simultaneously, it is easy and
often effective to insinuate that while my discovery was legitimate, it is no
accident that Professor Z unveiled something very similar around the same
time. After all, Professor Z was taking notes intensely during an informal
talk I gave some months ago, and he cornered one of my graduate students
and wanted to know how we had managed to . . . (etc.). Professor Z, or Z’s
allies, will often reply in kind.
Merton also has a poignant discussion of the fact that the kind of recog-
nition that is the basic reward in science will only be given to a small num-
ber of scientists. There are not enough laws and constants for everyone to
get one. The result is mild forms of deviancy such as the mania to publish.
For pedestrian workers who cannot hope to produce a world-shaking dis-
covery, publication becomes a substitute for real recognition.
Though the mania to publish is certainly real (and no less real in philos-
ophy than in science), I suggest that Merton’s analysis is not quite right on
this point. Scientists (and philosophers) who cannot hope to produce an-
other e = mc2 will nonetheless often have real standing in a small commu-
nity of people who work on the same detailed problems. Recognition even
in a tiny community of colleagues can be a signiﬁcant source of motivation.
Kuhn’s analysis of normal science recognized this fact. And in explaining
the mania to publish, at least in recent years, university administrations
and their desire for a simple way to measure productivity surely play a role.
Merton’s editor Norman Storer suggests that we think of Merton’s four
norms as like a “motor” and think of the reward system as like the “elec-
tricity” that makes the motor run (Merton 1973). The norms describe a
structure of social behavior, and the reward system is what motivates people
to participate in these activities. But it is not so clear what the relation is
between the two parts of the story. As Merton himself noted, the reward
system can be at tension with the norms. In fact, I cannot see what remains
of the norm of disinterestedness once we give Merton’s analysis of the re-
ward system. What we seem to have is not disinterestedness but a special
kind of ambition and self-interest.
Earlier discussions in this book also suggest possible problems with
Merton’s “organized skepticism.” There is deﬁnitely something right in this
idea, and it has the same kind of intuitive appeal as simple statements of
empiricism. But we must confront Kuhn’s argument that too much will-
ingness to revise basic beliefs makes for chaos in science. What we ﬁnd in
124
Chapter Eight

science, Kuhn claimed, is a delicate balance between skepticism and trust,
between open-mindedness and dogmatism.
Still, we see in Merton’s analysis a good pattern for a theory of the struc-
ture of science. We have a description of the rewards and incentives that
motivate individual scientists, and we have an account of how these indi-
vidual behaviors generate the higher-level social features of science. We
will return to this idea in chapter 11.
Merton’s sociology is often seen as the “old” style of sociology of sci-
ence, a style that was superseded nearly thirty years ago. But there are some
good ideas here, especially in the treatment of rewards. And sociology of
science in the Merton tradition does continue, albeit with less drama and
gnashing of teeth than we ﬁnd in the newer approaches.
8.3 The Rise of the Strong Program
The sociology of science changed, expanded, and became more ambitious
in the 1970s. Here is a standard way in which the “old” and “new” work
are often distinguished. The older work wanted to describe the social struc-
ture and social placement of science as a whole but did not try to explain
particular scientiﬁc beliefs in sociological terms. The newer approach has
tried to use sociological methods to explain why scientists believe what
they do, why they behave as they do, and how scientiﬁc thinking and prac-
tice change over time.
That standard description has some truth in it. But the newer sociology
of science is also very interested in general norms, especially norms of rea-
sonableness. Recent sociology of science has also worked with a different
view of what scientiﬁc theories are like. At least in some of his work,
Merton assumed a view of scientiﬁc theories that is close to logical em-
piricism—theories are basically networks of predictive generalizations.
The newer sociology embraced Kuhn, holism about testing, incommensu-
rability, new ideas about observation, and various speculative views about
scientiﬁc language. In fact, these ideas make up a kind of “anti-positivist
package” that was accepted not just by sociologists, but also by many his-
torians, feminist critics, and others concerned with science in the latter
part of the twentieth century.
The sociologists embraced some philosophers, but they intended their
work to conﬂict with many traditional philosophical ideas about science.
Some thought of sociology as replacing philosophy of science, a ﬁeld that
had become dried up and burdened with useless myths. The logical posi-
tivists, who seemed the most dried-up and abstract, became the bad guys,
and eventually they turned into paradigm cases of Dead White Males.
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
125

The most famous project in this new form of sociology of science is the
strong program in the sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge. This project was
developed by an interdisciplinary group based in Edinburgh, Scotland, in
the 1970s, headed (to some extent) by Barry Barnes and David Bloor. A
central idea of the strong program is the “symmetry principle.” This prin-
ciple holds that all forms of belief and behavior should be approached us-
ing the same kinds of explanations. In particular, we should not give totally
different kinds of explanations for beliefs that we think are true and beliefs
that we think are false. Our own assessment of an idea should have no ef-
fect on how we explain its history and social role.
Applied to science, the symmetry principle tells us that scientiﬁc beliefs
are products of the same general kinds of forces as other kinds of belief.
Scientists are not some special breed of pure, disinterested thinkers who
pay attention to nothing but data and logic. People of all kinds live in com-
munities that have socially established local norms for regulating belief—
norms for supporting claims, for handling disagreement, for working out
who will be listened to and who will be ignored. These norms will often be
subtle habits, rather than explicitly stated rules.
Scientists are people who work in an unusual kind of local community.
This community is characterized by high prestige, lengthy training and ini-
tiation, notoriously bad fashion choices, and expensive toys. But according
to the sociologists, it is still a community in which beliefs are established
and defended via local norms that are human creations, maintained by so-
cial interaction. Scientists often look down on beliefs found in other com-
munities, but this disparaging attitude is part of the local norms of the sci-
entiﬁc community. It is one of the rules of the game.
As a result, we must recognize that the kinds of factors that explain why
scientists came to believe that genes are made of DNA are the same kinds of
factors used in explaining how other communities arrive at their very dif-
ferent beliefs—for example, a tribal community’s belief that a drought was
due to the ill will of a local deity. In both cases the beliefs are established
and maintained in the community by the deployment of local norms of ar-
gument and justiﬁcation. The norms themselves vary between the tribal
community and the community of scientists, but the same general prin-
ciples apply in both cases. Most importantly, we should not give the Real
World a special role in the explanation of scientiﬁc belief that it does not
have in the explanation of other beliefs that pass local community norms.
The strong program also sought to analyze particular scientiﬁc theories
and their relation to social circumstances. This work became especially
controversial. The aim was to explain some scientiﬁc beliefs in terms of the
political “interests” of scientists and their place within society.
126
Chapter Eight

For example, Donald MacKenzie (1981) argued that the development
of some of the most important ideas in modern statistics should be under-
stood in terms of the role these tools had in nineteenth-century English
thinking about human evolution and its social consequences. That con-
nection went partly via the program of eugenics, the attempt to inﬂuence
human evolution by encouraging some people to breed and discouraging
others from doing so. MacKenzie argued that a body of biological, math-
ematical, and social ideas was well matched to the “interests” of the am-
bitious, reformist English middle classes. So he was asserting some kind of
link between the popularity of speciﬁc scientiﬁc and mathematical ideas,
on the one hand, and broader political factors on the other. What kind of
link was this supposed to be? MacKenzie was cautious. When links are
made between speciﬁc scientiﬁc ideas and their political context, the soci-
ologist of science is quick to say that no simple determination of scientiﬁc
thinking by political factors is being alleged. Sometimes metaphorical
terms like “reﬂect” are used; scientiﬁc ideas will “reﬂect the interests” of a
social group. Certainly it can sometimes be shown that the popularity of a
scientiﬁc idea beneﬁts a social group. But is this beneﬁt supposed to explain
the popularity of the scientiﬁc idea, or not? If so, is the explanation sup-
posed to be a causal explanation, albeit a qualiﬁed one, or some other kind
of explanation? This has been the source of some obscurity, but the issue
of causal analysis in complex social systems is often very difﬁcult. Some
kind of explanation is intended, though.
This work on scientiﬁc ideas and “interests” antagonized conventional
philosophers and historians, but it antagonized not only the “old farts.”
Even Kuhn was critical of it. Although Kuhn’s work is always cited by those
seeking to tie science to its broader political context, Structure did not have
much to say about the inﬂuence of “external” political life on science. Kuhn
analyzed the “internal” politics of science—who writes the textbooks,
who determines which problems have high priority. But he saw an insula-
tion of scientiﬁc decision making from broader political inﬂuences as a
strength of science. Despite his status as a hero, Kuhn did not like the more
radical sociology of science that followed him.
The strong program is also often associated with relativism. Many so-
ciologists accepted this label, but we need to be careful. There are so many
deﬁnitions of relativism ﬂoating around that the sense of relativism em-
braced by the sociologists need not be the same as that used by commen-
tators and critics. The forms of relativism that are important here concern
standards of rationality, evidence, and justiﬁcation. Basically, relativism in
this context holds that there is no single set of standards entitled to govern
the justiﬁcation of beliefs. The applicability of such standards depends on
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
127

one’s situation or point of view (see also glossary and section 6.3). In this
sense, the strong program does tend to be relativist. It holds that science
has no special authority that extends beyond all local norms. Instead, the
norms and standards that govern scientiﬁc belief can be justiﬁed only from
the inside, and that is true of other, nonscientiﬁc norms as well. We who
live within science-dominated societies will ﬁnd it compelling to say, “Sci-
ence really is the best way of learning about the world.” But, according to
the strong program, saying those things is just an expression of our local
norms. No one can hope to take a point of view outside all local norms and
conceptual systems and say, This conceptual system or this set of local
norms really is the best, the one that adapts us best to the world.
So, despite some differences within the ﬁeld, it is fair to say that the
strong program is an expression of a relativist position about belief and jus-
tiﬁcation.
A famous problem for relativists is the application of relativism to itself.
The problem does have various solutions, but it can deﬁnitely lead to tan-
gles. Unfortunately, that is what happened in sociology of science. The ap-
plication of the ﬁeld’s principles to itself led to interminable discussions
that have weighed down the ﬁeld. If all beliefs are to be explained in terms
of the same kinds of social factors, and no set of local norms can be judged
“really” superior from an external standpoint, then what about the theo-
ries found in sociology of science? This came to be called the “problem of
reﬂexivity.” Mostly the sociologists of science accepted that their claims
were true of their own ideas. They accepted that their own theories were
only justiﬁed according to local social norms. This conclusion is OK, but
the whole issue led to endless methodological obsessing and navel-gazing.
In this section I have focused on a particular, dramatic strand in post-
Merton sociology of science. But although it is easy to write as if “the
strong program” was a clean and deﬁnite package, the program contained
a good deal of variety. And it was not the only kind of sociology of science
developing in this period. Just as the strong program elbowed aside earlier
social accounts of science in the 1970s, it was to be partially elbowed aside
in turn, in the 1980s.
8.4 Leviathan and Latour
This section will look at the two most famous works in recent sociology of
science.
The ﬁrst is a piece of sociologically informed history, rather than pure
sociology: Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer’s Leviathan and the Air Pump
(1985; I will abbreviate the book as Leviathan). This book does not advo-
128
Chapter Eight

cate the strong program, but it is often seen as a sophisticated development
of those ideas. The book is so widely respected, in fact, that various differ-
ent camps tend to claim it as their own.
The second work is more controversial; it was important in a shift that
took place in sociology of science: Bruno Latour and Stephen Woolgar’s
Laboratory Life (1979). This book appeared before Leviathan; it is famous
as a pioneering work in its style.
Leviathan discusses the rise of experimental science in seventeenth-
century England. This is seen as a pivotal case for our understanding of sci-
ence, pivotal for its historical role in establishing the social structure that
science has and also for illustrating this structure especially clearly. The
book focuses on a dispute between Robert Boyle, a leader in the new ex-
perimental science, and Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes is remembered now
mainly as a political philosopher (Hobbes’s 1660 book Leviathan, which
Shapin and Schaffer refer to in their title, is a work of that kind), but he
also engaged in scientiﬁc disputes. The battle between Boyle and Hobbes
was not “science versus religion” or anything like that; it was a battle over
some speciﬁc scientiﬁc issues and over the proper form for scientiﬁc work
and argumentation. Boyle prevailed.
According to Shapin and Schaffer, what came out of this period, and es-
pecially from Boyle’s work, was a new way of bringing experience to bear
on theoretical investigation. Boyle and his allies developed a new picture of
what should be the subject of organized investigation and dispute, and how
these disputes should be settled. The Royal Society of London, founded in
1660 by Boyle’s group, became the institutional embodiment of the new
approach. Boyle’s approach did not become the model for science during
the later seventeenth century, but it became one very important model, es-
pecially in England. There were some fairly strong differences in scientiﬁc
“style” between different European countries during this period (and many
would say that these have not entirely disappeared).
Boyle sought to sharply distinguish the public, cooperative investigation
of experimental “matters of fact” from other kinds of work. Proposing
causal hypotheses about experimental results is always speculative and
should only be done cautiously. Theological and metaphysical issues should
be kept entirely separate from experimental work.
In marking out a speciﬁc area in which dispute could be controlled and
productive, Boyle hoped to show that scientiﬁc argument was compatible
with social order. The seventeenth century had seen civil war in England,
and this whole period in European history was one in which even the most
abstract theological questions seemed capable of leading to violent unrest.
So there was much concern with the problem of how to control dissent and
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
129

dispute—how to stop it from spilling over into chaos. According to Shapin
and Schaffer, Boyle saw his group of experimentally minded colleagues as
a model for order and conﬂict resolution in society at large.
Boyle was not only setting up new ways of organizing work; he was also
setting up new ways of talking: new ways of asking and answering ques-
tions, handling objections, and reaching agreement. We see this, Shapin
and Schaffer argue, in Boyle’s handling of key terms like “vacuum.” The
existence of vacuums was a key topic of debate in the seventeenth century.
Aristotle’s physics held that vacuums could not exist, but various lines of
experiment suggested that perhaps they could. Boyle’s experimental work
involved the use of a pump that could apparently evacuate all or almost all
the air from a glass container, in which experiments could then be per-
formed. Shapin and Schaffer argue that Boyle was not really trying to an-
swer the standard questions about vacuums. Instead, he was reconstruing
questions about vacuums in a way that brought them into contact with his
experimental apparatus. Critics could—and did—complain that Boyle’s
pump could not settle the questions they wanted to ask. Boyle’s strategy
was to subtly replace these questions with other questions that could be the
topic of experimental work. The old questions—such as whether an ab-
solutely pure vacuum could exist—had been set up in such a way that they
would generate endless and uncontrollable dispute.
Shapin and Schaffer present their view in terms taken from the (later)
philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Since Wittgenstein has inﬂuenced many
people in the sociology of science, it is worth taking a moment to sketch
the relevant ideas. Wittgenstein’s early ideas about logic and language in-
ﬂuenced logical positivism. His later ideas, especially his Philosophical In-
vestigations (1953), were very different, and they had massive effect on
late-twentieth-century thought. These later ideas are more an “anti-theory”
than a theory; they are an attempt to show that philosophical problems arise
from pathologies of language. Philosophy arises from a subtle transition
between ordinary use of language and a kind of linguistic misﬁring, in which
questions that are really incoherent can seem to make sense. Wittgenstein
wanted to diagnose and put an end to these misguided linguistic excur-
sions. He avoided formulating theories of anything, but some of his ideas
have been adapted for use in theories in various areas, including sociology
of science (Bloor 1983).
Two ideas are especially popular. A “form of life” for Wittgenstein is
something like a set of basic practices, behaviors, and values. Actions and
decisions can make sense within a form of life, but a form of life as a whole
cannot be justiﬁed externally. It’s just the way a group of people live. Witt-
genstein was not much interested in the kinds of cultural variation studied
130
Chapter Eight

by sociologists and anthropologists, and it is not clear what sort of “unit”
a form of life is for him. But sociologists have adapted the concept to ﬁt the
kinds of groups they study.
The second big concept drawn from Wittgenstein is the concept of a
“language game.” A language game is something like a pattern of linguis-
tic habits that contribute to a form of life and make sense within it. Witt-
genstein opposed a picture of language in which words and sentences are
attached to their own particular meanings (mental images, perhaps) that
determine how language is used. Instead, Wittgenstein claimed we should
think of the socially maintained patterns of language use as all there is to
the “meaning” of language. Shapin and Schaffer argue that Boyle’s treat-
ment of key terms like “vacuum” established a new language game. This
language game was a key component in a new form of life, the form of life
of experimental science.
At this point you may be remembering the logical positivists and their
attempt to analyze the meaning of scientiﬁc language in terms of patterns
in experience. Is the idea of a language game developed to serve experi-
mental science different from this positivist idea? It is different. The logi-
cal positivists claimed that the right theory of meaning would show that all
meaningful language ever does is describe patterns in experience. Accord-
ing to Shapin and Schaffer, Boyle was setting up a new way of using lan-
guage. So there is perhaps more of a connection to the “operationalism” of
the physicist Bridgman, who was brieﬂy mentioned in chapter 2. Bridgman
(1927) urged that scientists reform their use of language to ensure that
each term has a direct connection to empirical testing.
Those are the central ideas in Leviathan and the Air Pump. But some-
thing should be said about another, more problematic, feature of the book.
Shapin and Schaffer claim that Boyle and other scientists are engaged in
the manufacture of facts. In everyday talk the phrase “manufacture of facts”
would be taken to indicate deception, but that is not what Shapin and
Schaffer have in mind. For them, there is nothing bad about the manufac-
ture of facts; they want us to get used to the idea that facts in general are
made rather than found. This is reminiscent of Kuhn’s claim, in Chapter X
of Structure, that the world changes during a scientiﬁc revolution. Like
many others who use these terms, Shapin and Schaffer want to reject a pic-
ture of the scientist as a passive receiver of information from the world. But
a denial of passivity does not require this kind of talk, and it often leads to
trouble. For example, at the very end of Leviathan, their discussion of
“making” leads Shapin and Schaffer to express their overall conclusions in
a way that involves a real confusion. They say: “It is ourselves and not re-
ality that is responsible for what we know” (1985, 344). This is a classic
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
131

example of a false dichotomy. Neither we alone nor reality alone is “re-
sponsible” for human knowledge. The rough answer is that both are re-
sponsible for it; knowledge involves an interaction between the two. Even
this formulation is imperfect; human knowledge is part of reality, not
something separate from or outside it. But, speaking roughly, in order to
understand knowledge, we need both a theory of human thought, lan-
guage, and social interaction, and a theory of how these human capacities
are connected to the world outside us.
I now move on to a second famous work in the sociology of science, La-
tour and Woolgar’s Laboratory Life (1979). In the mid-1970s, Bruno La-
tour, a French sociologist, spent a couple of years visiting a molecular bi-
ology laboratory, the Salk Institute in San Diego. He went as a charming
observer who knew little about molecular biology. During the time that La-
tour was there, the lab did work that resulted in a Nobel Prize; they dis-
covered the chemical structure of a hormone involved in the regulation of
human growth. Latour wrote Laboratory Life, with Steven Woolgar, as a
description of the lab’s work.
Latour and Woolgar, in their account, ignored most of what a normal de-
scription of a piece of science would focus on. They ignored the state of our
knowledge of hormones; they ignored the ways in which experimental meth-
ods in the ﬁeld are able to discriminate alternative chemical structures; they
ignored how the new discovery ﬁtted into the rest of biology. Instead, Latour
looked at the lab in a sort of deliberately superﬁcial and self-contained way.
The lab was a kind of machine where chemicals, small animals, and reams
of blank paper came in at one end, and small printed pieces of paper—jour-
nal articles and technical reports—came out at the other end. In between
the two, a huge amount of “processing” went on, processing that turned
the mass of raw materials into the intricate ﬁnished products (see ﬁg. 8.1).
Latour saw this processing as aimed at taking scientiﬁc claims and
building structures of “support” around them, so they would eventually be
taken as facts. A key step in this process is hiding the human work involved
in turning something into a fact; to turn something into a fact is to make it
look like it is not a human product but is given directly by nature.
Laboratory Life was a huge success. To many it seemed like a breath of
fresh air, a book that exuded wit and imagination. Along with other works,
it prompted a shift within the ﬁeld. The strong program came to seem
crude. The strong program wanted to get rid of explanations of scientiﬁc
belief in which nature just stamps itself on the minds of the scientiﬁc com-
munity. But perhaps the strong program was replacing this with an equally
crude picture, in which social and political “interests” stamp themselves
on the scientiﬁc community. This is not a very fair reading of the strong
132
Chapter Eight

program. The sociologists were being caricatured, just as they had carica-
tured traditional philosophy of science! Some would see justice there. La-
tour also inspired a different style in sociology of science, a style that might
be described as elusive, self-conscious, and literary.
Latour’s approach, which borrows from French philosophy, sociology,
and semiotics, is sometimes called the “actor-network” theory. What the
sociologist does is to study the ﬁne structure of the internal dynamics of
scientiﬁc work, especially dispute and negotiation about what has been es-
tablished. The sociologist does not begin the story by taking for granted
“pressures” or “interests” in society at large, and “nature” or the real world
is not taken for granted either. Instead, both “society” and “nature” are
seen as products, not causes, of the settlement of scientiﬁc controversies
(Latour 1987). Where traditional empiricist philosophy had seen science as
“data-driven,” and the strong program had seen science as “interest-driven,”
Latour sees scientiﬁc work itself as the driver.
In Latour’s view, when we explain why one side succeeded and another
failed in a scientiﬁc controversy, we should never give the explanation in
terms of nature itself. Both sides will be claiming that they are the ones
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
133
Fig. 8.1
The lab according to Latour and Woolgar (From Laboratory Life: The Construction of
Scientiﬁc Facts, by Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, © 1986; reprinted by permission
of Princeton University Press)

in tune with the facts. But when one side wins, that side’s version of “the
facts” becomes immune to challenge. Latour describes this ﬁnal step as a
process in which facts are created, or constructed, by scientiﬁc work.
There is an interesting strategy in Latour’s work here, along with much
obscurity. Latour gets us to look at the dynamics of controversy in science
in a very ﬁne-grained way. What social role is played by appeals to “truth,”
“nature,” and “the facts”? How do people use these terms before, during,
and after the settlement of disputes? These are good questions. One kind
of understanding we might have of the concepts of “truth” and “nature”
is an understanding of how they are used as resources in arguments and
discussion.
An investigation of this kind might tell us a lot about how people decide
what they take to be real, but this does not mean that the settlement of sci-
entiﬁc disputes determines what is real. However, Latour refuses to make
this distinction when he presents his work. To some extent this seems to be
due to his interest in very unorthodox philosophical positions. But some-
times his neglect of this distinction seems to be just a matter of his dashing,
provocative writing style (a style common in French intellectual life).
Revolutions, as is well known, have a habit of eating their children. Al-
though Latour is often seen as displacing or digesting the strong program,
that program has been showing some resistance to the French stomach
acids. A striking attack on Latour was recently published by the strong pro-
grammer David Bloor (1999). Bloor’s paper radiates exasperation at the
fact that Latour’s obscure project has come to seem the more sophisticated
and appealing option. Bloor urges a return to the strong program, and he
presents that program in a way that avoids careless talk about the “con-
struction of reality.” Bloor is an exception; sociology of science has rarely
treated this issue with care. And although I doubt that the strong program
is the way of the future, Bloor is right that recognizing the role of social
structure in science does not require strange inversions of the relations be-
tween thought and reality.
In both its radical work and its more cautious work, sociology of sci-
ence in the latter part of the twentieth century tended to suggest an unusual
picture of science. This is a picture in which science is controlled entirely
by human collective choices and social interests. What makes science run is
negotiation, conﬂict resolution, hierarchies, power inequalities. . . . There
seems to be no place in the picture for the responsiveness of scientiﬁc be-
lief to the real structure of the world being investigated. Often sociologists
accept that of course the real world imposes some constraints on what we
believe. But any particular observations that a person might make are al-
ways subject to so much reinterpretation, reconstruing, ﬁltering, and ne-
134
Chapter Eight

gotiation that they cannot guide belief or theory change. What makes
things happen in science—what makes people believe one theory rather
than another—is the interaction of social forces.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
A standard collection of Merton’s works is The Sociology of Science (1973). A cen-
tral work in the rise of the strong program is Bloor’s Knowledge and Social Imagery
(1976). See also Barnes, Bloor, and Henry 1996. Shapin 1982 is a good survey of
historical work done by sociologists of science. On the issue of relativism, see
Barnes and Bloor 1982 and other papers in that collection (Hollis and Lukes 1982).
Shapin has followed up the argument in Leviathan with some other very inter-
esting work, especially A Social History of Truth (1994). Latour’s other famous
books include Science in Action (1987), The Pasteurization of France (1988), and
We Have Never Been Modern (1993).
The Challenge from Sociology of Science
135

136
9
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Feminism and Science Studies
9.1 “Science Is Political”
The relationship between science and politics was subjected to new kinds of
scrutiny in the late twentieth century. To some extent, the overall image of
science changed, especially in the humanities. Generalizations are risky here,
but we might say that through much of the last three hundred years, science
has been regarded in Western societies as a progressive, anti-authoritarian
force, able to challenge and break down entrenched ideas and arrangements.
This view was most vivid in the “Enlightenment” period, in the eighteenth
century; conﬁdence in science as a progressive force is one aspect of what
are now called “Enlightenment values.” There have always been exceptions
to this cultural image of science, within nineteenth-century romanticism,
for example, and in some Marxist thought. But various parts of intellec-
tual culture saw a larger shift in attitudes toward science in the latter part
of the twentieth century. The cold war was a crucial cause of this shift, but
there were other currents at work also.
Science came to be seen instead as a force in the maintenance of the
“status quo,” especially with respect to political inequalities. On the side
of politics that considers itself progressive rather than conservative, many
began to treat science as part of a larger, multi-tentacled political structure
that acts to reinforce subtle forms of exclusion and coercion, even in ap-
parently “free and democratic” societies. The anti-authoritarian image of
science came to be seen largely as just “good PR.” And the institution of
science itself, it was argued, is full of hidden features that include some in-
dividuals and exclude others.
Many thought that by showing the connections between scientiﬁc insti-
tutions and political power, it would become clear that “science is politi-
cal,” rather than being an institution outside of politics that enjoys a spe-
cial authority derived from this political neutrality. Revealing the political

embedding of science would also have relevance to questions about educa-
tion, medicine, and a variety of other crucial areas of social policy.
The most important manifestation of this new attitude is found in the
development of feminist critiques of science and feminist philosophies of
science. That is the topic of the ﬁrst part of this chapter. The second part
looks at the growth of another new approach to understanding science, the
interdisciplinary ﬁeld known as “Science Studies.”
9.2 The Man of Reason
Feminist thinking about science makes up a diverse movement. It is uniﬁed,
perhaps, by the idea that science has been part of a structure that has per-
petuated inequalities between men and women. Science itself, and main-
stream theorizing about science and knowledge, have helped to keep
women in a “second-class” position as thinkers, knowers, and intellectual
citizens. (Even these generalizations about feminist discussions of science
have exceptions.) According to feminist analyses, society has suffered from
this, and so has science itself. So reform of some kind is needed. There is
disagreement on the appropriate kind of reform—ranging from simple
suggestions like the inclusion of more women in the sciences, through the
encouragement of a speciﬁc kind of female “voice” in science, to dethron-
ing science from its preeminent position in Western culture. Feminist think-
ing about science was often allied with work in the sociology of science,
and Kuhn, Feyerabend, and Wittgenstein were also seen as helpful. Some
feminists made more unfortunate alliances with Freudian psychoanalysis.
We should distinguish feminist philosophical ideas about science from
more basic feminist political ideas. Feminism in general aims to understand
and ﬁght against inequalities between the sexes, with respect to political
rights, economic standing, and social status. This has a simple application
to science: women were for many years excluded or discouraged from a life
in science, as they were excluded from other high-prestige areas of work.
This is a simple matter of equality of opportunity, one that raises questions
about policy (such as the appropriateness of afﬁrmative action) but does
not raise issues in the philosophy of science itself.
Other feminist work did engage with philosophical issues about sci-
ence. The work might be categorized in terms of three overlapping strands.
One strand is feminist analysis in the history of ideas and the history of sci-
ence. A second is feminist analysis of speciﬁc scientiﬁc ﬁelds and theories,
especially in social science, biology, and medicine. The third is feminist epis-
temology, the attempt to analyze rationality, knowledge, and other basic
Feminism and Science Studies
137

epistemological concepts from a feminist point of view. Here I include anal-
ysis of the social structure of science, when that work bears on epistemology.
I will start by discussing a book written fairly early in the tradition,
Genevieve Lloyd’s The Man of Reason (1984). Lloyd analyzes the histori-
cal roots of ideas about knowledge and rationality and also draws conclu-
sions for epistemology. The discussion that is speciﬁcally relevant to us is
found in the early chapters, where she considers ﬁgures such as Plato, Aris-
totle, Descartes, and Bacon. The book illustrates what I think has been a
common pattern. Lloyd tells a very interesting—sometimes compelling—
story in the history of ideas. But it is harder to work out what consequences
these historical facts have for epistemology.
Lloyd argues that the early development of ideas about reason and
knowledge were greatly affected by views about the relation between male-
ness and femaleness. The concept of reason evolved in Western philosophy
in a way that associated reasonableness with maleness, and associated the
female mind with a set of psychological traits that contrast with reason-
ableness.
A key source for this pattern of thinking, according to Lloyd, is the old
association between femaleness and nature; the earth is fertile, female, the
source of life. Via this association, ideas about the relationship between the
mind and nature were modeled on the relationship between male and fe-
male. The relations between the sexes also provided a model for theorizing
about the relations between different aspects of the mind itself—between
perception and thought, and between reason and emotion. The upshot was
that the ideas feeding into the early development of science and philosophy
in Europe incorporated, in various different forms, an association between
reason and maleness. And the development of the idea of femininity was
shaped by an opposition between femininity and reason. Femininity was
associated with receptivity, intuition, empathy, and emotion.
Lloyd’s best example is the case of Francis Bacon, the seventeenth-century
English thinker who wrote extensively about the new empirical methods of
investigation and their promise for mankind. Bacon attacked the ancient
Greek picture of knowledge as contemplation. For Bacon, real knowledge
is manifested in control of nature: “Knowledge is power.” But as Bacon de-
veloped this idea, he retained the image of nature as female. His model for
the relation between the mind and nature was the model of marriage, a
marriage between the knower (man) and nature (woman). The features of
a good marriage, as run by the man, correspond to the features of success-
ful knowledge of the world. So what is a good husband like? A good hus-
band is respectful, but he is also ﬁrm and deﬁnitely in charge. The scientist
138
Chapter Nine

approaching nature should approach her with respect and restraint. But
control is certainly needed; “Nature betrays her secrets more fully when in
the grip and under the pressure of art than when in enjoyment of her nat-
ural liberty.” And the products of what occurs on the “nuptual couch” will
be useful knowledge for the improvement of mankind (quoted in Lloyd
1984, 11–12. Some other feminists have been far tougher on Bacon than
Lloyd was: see Harding 1986).
Cases like this suggest that views about the relations between men and
women were important resources in the development of ideas about reason
and knowledge. Although the question is difﬁcult, it surely seems likely
that these associations did affect both the lives of women and the path
taken by science in the early modern period. The harder question is what
philosophical consequences these historical facts have for us now, given the
massive changes to political life and to science since then. It is not hard to
ﬁnd a residue of these old associations embedded in metaphors that are still
around. To pick a simple case, scientists constantly talk about whether or
not a phenomenon will “yield” to a particular method of analysis. To my
ears (though not to everyone’s), this metaphor always has a resonance of
sexual conquest. But whether these metaphors have much effect on either
society or science today is a more difﬁcult issue.
Evelyn Fox Keller is one feminist who thinks there is a real problem
here. She holds that the general picture of science we have inherited has real
effects on women entering science; the woman scientist has to choose be-
tween “inauthenticity” and “subversion.” The concept of authenticity is a
subtle one drawn from existentialist philosophy, but Keller illustrates her
point with an analogy: “Just as surely as inauthenticity is the cost a woman
suffers by joining men in misogynist jokes, so it is, equally, the cost suffered
by a woman who identiﬁes with an image of the scientist modeled on the
patriarchal husband” (2002, 134–35).
9.3 The Case of Primatology
I turn now to a case that many see as a good, clear example of the role that
gender has played in a particular part of science. More speciﬁcally, this is of-
ten seen as a case in which the gender of researchers has had an effect on the
development of ideas, one where science has beneﬁted from an increasing
role for women in the ﬁeld. The example concerns the last thirty years or so
in the study of social behavior, especially sexual behavior, in nonhuman pri-
mates like chimps and baboons. These phenomena are studied (with slightly
different emphases) in the ﬁelds of primatology and behavioral ecology.
Feminism and Science Studies
139

These parts of biology initially developed a picture of primate sexual
life in which females were seen as rather passive. Social life, and sexual life
in particular, were regarded as controlled, sometimes cruelly, by males.
That picture was linked to some important pieces of “high theory” in evo-
lutionary biology. In many animals, although by no means all, there is a
great deal of variation across individuals in male reproductive success, and
less variation in female reproductive success. This is a consequence of the
fact that one male can, in principle, impregnate large numbers of females.
As it is often said, “sperm are cheap.” Female reproductive success is lim-
ited in many animals by the high costs of pregnancy.
This kind of asymmetry between the sexes is of considerable evolution-
ary importance in the organisms in which it is found. But it has often been
used in rather simplistic patterns of explanation, without regard for many
ways in which its effects can be modiﬁed by other factors. In early prima-
tology, it was taken to support a view holding that male sexual behavior
had been ﬁnely honed by natural selection, while female behavior had not,
because females could do much less to affect their reproductive success.
According to Sarah Blaffer Hrdy (2002), this picture began to shift in
the 1970s. Careful observation revealed a far more active and complex role
for female primates. It became apparent that many female primates have
elaborate sex lives, involving a lot more different kinds of sexual contact
than one would expect, based on the old picture. Females seem to engage
in subtle patterns of manipulation of male behavior, and much of the ma-
nipulation may be directed at inﬂuencing male behavior toward offspring.
The basic theoretical idea that the high potential variance in male mating
success has large effects on the evolution of behavior still stands, but there
is now a much more sophisticated picture of the interaction between this
factor and other factors, especially the strategies available to females.
This shift in thinking within primatology coincided, at least roughly,
with an inﬂux of women into the ﬁeld. Primatology is, in fact, one of the
scientiﬁc ﬁelds in which the presence of women is unusually strong. What
role did the presence of women have in changing opinions within the ﬁeld?
According to Hrdy (and according to others I have spoken to), the idea that
this increasing representation of women had a signiﬁcant role in shifting
people’s views about female primate behavior is fairly routinely accepted
within primatology. Hrdy adds that this view seems to be accepted more in
the United States than in Britain (2002, 187). Hrdy herself is rather cau-
tious about this issue, but she suggests that women researchers, like her-
self, did tend to empathize with female primates and watched the details of
their behavior more closely than their male colleagues had.
140
Chapter Nine

9.4 Feminist Epistemology
Let us now look more closely at feminist epistemology, or rather, the part
of feminist epistemology that deals with science. This is a diverse and some-
times difﬁcult ﬁeld. It includes work that uses feminist theory as a basis for
criticizing how science handles evidence and assesses theories. It also in-
cludes feminist criticism of the social structure and organization of science,
where that structure affects epistemological issues. Most ambitiously, some
feminist epistemologists have argued that even our fundamental concepts
of reason, evidence, and truth are covertly sexist. Feminist epistemology
also goes beyond criticism to make suggestions about reform—how to
make science better at ﬁnding out about the world (if that goal is to be re-
tained), and also how to make science more socially responsible.
In discussing some of the options here, I will modify some categoriza-
tions used by Sandra Harding (1986, 1996). Harding distinguishes three
kinds of feminist criticism of science. The earliest and least controversial
she calls spontaneous feminist empiricism. This is the project of using a
feminist point of view to criticize biases and other problems in scientiﬁc
work, but doing so in a way that does not challenge the traditional ideals,
methods, and norms of science.
Harding’s second category is philosophical feminist empiricism. Helen
Longino’s work (1990) is probably the most inﬂuential within this camp,
and I will discuss it below. Here the aim is to revise and improve traditional
ideas about science and knowledge, but to do so in a way that remains
faithful to the most basic empiricist themes. Relativism is to be avoided.
One hope is that more sophisticated criticisms of particular scientiﬁc prac-
tices will result.
The third category I will call radical feminist epistemology. Two main
approaches might be distinguished within this grouping. One is what
Harding calls feminist postmodernism. This work tends to embrace rela-
tivism. Members of different genders, different ethnic groups, and differ-
ent socioeconomic classes see the world fundamentally differently. The
idea of a single “true” description of the world that transcends these dif-
ferent perspectives is a harmful illusion.
The second radical approach is standpoint epistemology. This is not a
relativist view; it is more ambitious than that. Standpoint epistemology
stresses the role of the “situatedness” of an investigator or knower—their
physical nature, location, and status in the world. The idea is that while tra-
ditional epistemology has seen “situatedness” as a potential problem for
an investigator, in fact it can be a strength. Standpoint theory holds that
Feminism and Science Studies
141

there are some facts that are only visible from a special point of view, the
point of view of people who have been oppressed or “marginalized” by so-
ciety. Those at the margins, or the bottom of the heap, will be able to crit-
icize the basics—both in scientiﬁc ﬁelds and in political discussion—in a
way that others cannot. Science will beneﬁt from taking more seriously the
ideas developed by people with this special point of view. This is not a rel-
ativist position because the marginalized are seen as really having better
access to crucial facts than other people have.
One of the main debates in feminist epistemology has been between
forms of philosophical feminist empiricism and views that are more radi-
cal, especially standpoint epistemology. The arguments for more radical
options have not been convincing. Standpoint theory holds that the expe-
riences of marginalized people have special value. If that is right, what sort
of value is this? As Longino argues, it is not likely to be a general superi-
ority of a kind that would justify our treating a marginalized point of view
as the most important or reliable. If some facts are more visible to the mar-
ginalized and oppressed, other facts will surely be more visible to the priv-
ileged. The experiences of the marginalized are more likely to be valuable
as a special kind of input into discussion and argument. So the right way
to think here is in terms of a “pool” of different ideas, contributed by those
with different points of view. Longino argues that the picture that results
is a revised version of empiricism.
Longino calls this revised view “contextual empiricism.” This is a form
of empiricism that emphasizes the role of social interaction. Longino ar-
gues that in order to be able to distinguish rationality from irrationality we
should take the social group as our basic unit. Science is rational to the ex-
tent that it chooses theories from a diverse pool of options reﬂecting differ-
ent points of view, and makes its choice via a critical dialogue that reaches
consensus without coercion. Diversity in the ideas in the pool is facilitated
by diversity in the backgrounds of those participating in the discussion.
Epistemology becomes a ﬁeld that tries to distinguish good community-
level procedures from bad ones.
If this is the right way to incorporate feminist ideas into epistemology, it
is a way that follows a fairly old tradition (as Longino would not deny). Paul
Feyerabend, as we saw in chapter 7, argued for the importance of main-
taining diversity in scientiﬁc communities. And as Elisabeth Lloyd argues,
Feyerabend was extending and radicalizing a line of argument from John
Stuart Mill (Lloyd 1997). Diversity, for Mill, provides the raw materials for
social and intellectual progress, via a vigorous “marketplace of ideas.”
The idea that a diversity of viewpoints improves critical discussion is
deﬁnitely appealing. The role of gender in the mix is a separate question,
142
Chapter Nine

as writers like Longino accept. Is it really true that men and women in mod-
ern Western societies have different perspectives of a kind that is relevant
to science? Feminists accept that other differences, especially class differ-
ences and ethnic differences, may have as much of an effect as do gender
differences, or even more than that. But many feminists expect there to be
some deﬁnite “patterning” in the great soup of intellectual diversity that is
due to gender differences.
So might we expect women to have a different style of theorizing or
reasoning that derives from their different experience? Certainly there will
be some facts that women will tend to have a different perspective on. The
physical experience of being a woman or a man will make a difference to
how some aspects of life are experienced. And at least for the near future,
the early education and acculturation of girls and boys will have this effect
as well. But we should be careful of claims that go far beyond this. It is a
much harder question whether or not the experience and viewpoint of
women is systematically different from that of men in a way that is likely
to matter to scientiﬁc disputes. There is a risk of lapsing into simplistic gen-
eralizations here.
This problem takes us back to some issues discussed in the previous sec-
tion. In some situations it can be argued that a particular bias, or neglect
of options, found in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld may be due to gender. Primatology is
one area where this argument has been taken seriously. It is also possible
to go beyond this and argue that there is a distinctive way of thinking, and
interacting with the world, found in women scientists. If so, this might be
partly due to a distinctive way that women tend to think, and it might also
be partly due to their situation and experience in male-dominated ﬁelds. A
famous example is Evelyn Fox Keller’s work on Barbara McClintock, the
geneticist who discovered “jumping genes” that move around within the
genome of an organism. The jumping-genes idea was for some time con-
sidered to be a very strange hypothesis, but McClintock turned out to be
right. McClintock was very much an outsider in genetics, and Keller also
argues that McClintock had a “feeling for the organism” that enabled her
to do a different style of science from that of her male colleagues (1983).
Keller is rather cautious in her claims here; she does not want to argue that
there will be a “sharp differentiation” between women’s and men’s work in
science (2002, 134). But she does seem to think there will be some system-
atic differences. Many would object to the suggestion that a “feeling for
the organism” is likely to be an example, however. A case could be made
that this psychological trait is found in many good biologists and that it has
nothing to do with gender. Feminists themselves (including Keller) are also
very wary about the possibility of contributing to a stereotyping of female
Feminism and Science Studies
143

contributions to scientiﬁc thinking. (“We must have a woman on this team,
Jim, so someone will pick up on the holistic, interconnected stuff that might
be going on in these reactions!”)
Here I have discussed possible differences in “theoretical style” between
men and women. Another possibility is that women will tend to bring a dif-
ferent kind of social interaction to scientiﬁc communities. Feminists have
sometimes suggested that women are, on the whole, less competitive and
more cooperative than men, though many feminists would now want to
avoid simple generalizations of this kind (Miner and Longino 1987). If there
are any differences of this nature, they may have important consequences
for science. The next chapter will discuss the relation between cooperation
and competition within science in detail, so we will return to the issue of
gender differences then.
9.5 Science Studies, the Science Wars, and the Sokal Hoax
One of the main themes in this chapter and the previous one has been the
constant expansion of the range of ﬁelds seeking to contribute to a general
understanding of science. The two examples I have discussed in detail are
sociology of science (chapter 8) and feminist criticism (this chapter). As
well as this expansion, there has been a blurring of disciplinary bound-
aries. During the 1980s a number of workers decided to embrace this trend
and create a new approach to studying science that would draw on many
different ﬁelds without worrying about “whose questions were whose.”
The resulting ﬁeld is generally known as “Science Studies.” The mixture
has come to include not only history, sociology, and philosophy but also
cultural anthropology, classics, economics, some parts of literary theory,
feminist theory, and more marginal ﬁelds like semiotics, cultural studies,
and critical theory. The aim is to draw on pretty much any ﬁeld that can
contribute our understanding of how science developed, how it works, and
what role it has. Recently, the study of technology, as distinct from science,
has sometimes been explicitly added as a goal.
The result of this reorganization has not been a massive breakthrough (as
some might have hoped), and it has not been a disaster either (I will explain
below why it might be seen that way). The history of recent thinking about
science does show that there are good opportunities for cross-fertilization,
borrowing, and joint work in this area. But it is not likely that the bound-
aries between ﬁelds will really disappear; philosophers, historians, sociol-
ogists, and literary theorists do look at the world somewhat differently. So,
of course, we ﬁnd a mixture of styles of work within Science Studies, rang-
ing from the most sober, intricate historical research to wild ﬂights of fancy
144
Chapter Nine

that make Bruno Latour look like Rudolf Carnap. I am not denying that
there are some distinctive tendencies and emphases in the ﬁeld as a whole,
however; one will be discussed at the end of this chapter.
Some of the most controversial work in Science Studies is allied to the
notorious movement in the humanities known as “postmodernism” (Har-
vey 1989, Lyotard 1984). Postmodernism is a family of ideas and projects,
ranging from architecture through art, history, and philosophy of language.
The themes that are relevant to us here have to do with representation and
meaning. Postmodernism is part of a recent tradition in the humanities
that opposes the idea that language should be analyzed as a system used to
represent, or “stand for,” objects and situations in the world. This anti-
representationalist view of language inﬂuenced a lot of literary theory, as
well as other humanistic disciplines, in the latter part of the twentieth cen-
tury. Postmodernism is a spectacular outgrowth of that line of thought.
Sometimes postmodernists seem to be arguing that we, right now, live
in a special time in history. We live in a time when a representational role
for symbols is being replaced by a new role. The sea of symbols and lan-
guages in which we live, and their role in politics and in consumer culture,
has undermined ordinary representational relations between symbols and
objects. In understanding the role of symbols in our lives, it is no longer
useful to apply concepts like accuracy, reference, and truth: behind every
symbol lies not a real object, but another symbol. At other times post-
modernism seems to become a tremendously obscure way of arguing for
extreme forms of relativism, sometimes for a kind of skepticism and do-
nothingism, and for extravagant metaphysical views about how language
and reality are related.
Science Studies was rather welcoming to postmodernism and other ad-
venturous ideas from the humanities. That did not mean that the sober his-
torians of science stopped doing their sober, rigorous work; Science Stud-
ies is a diverse entity. However, the relationship between the new approach
to science and obscure trends in the humanities affected the image that Sci-
ence Studies came to have. And in time, there came a backlash.
The backlash occurred in the form of an attack both on Science Studies
and on recent work in the humanities more generally. Some of the backlash
arose within science itself; scientists were alarmed at the picture of science
being presented to the broader culture. But much of the heat and noise was
due to commentators’ criticizing larger tends within academia and educa-
tion. The perception was that science itself was under threat.
The resulting clash became known as the “Science Wars.” Science Stud-
ies, and other work covered in this chapter, became a key battle ground.
Some of the attacks on this work came from the side of conservatism in
Feminism and Science Studies
145

political and social thought. Advocates of “traditional” education, both in
schools and in universities, worried that transmission of the treasures and
values of Western civilization was being undermined by radical leftist fac-
ulty members in universities and soft-minded administrators in schools.
The humanities had gone to hell, and now they were trying to wreck sci-
ence as well, via endless relativist bleating that science is “just another ap-
proach to knowledge with no special status.”
Although some of these battles had a simple political structure, the most
inﬂuential and interesting episode did not. In 1994 an American physicist,
Alan Sokal, submitted a paper to a literary-political journal called Social
Text, which was doing a special issue on science. The paper was a parody
of radical work in Science Studies; it used the jargon of postmodernism to
discuss progressive political possibilities implicit in recent mathematical
physics. The title of the paper gives a sense of the style: “Transgressing the
Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity.”
The argument of the paper was completely ridiculous and often quite funny.
The aim was to see if the paper would be accepted and printed by the jour-
nal; Sokal believed that this would show the ﬁeld had lost all intellectual
standards and would print anything that used the right buzzwords and ex-
pressed the appropriate political sentiments.
Social Text published the paper (Sokal 1996b), and Sokal revealed his
hoax in the journal Lingua Franca (1996a), an irreverent journal of aca-
demic life (sadly, defunct, at least for now). The uproar reverberated across
the academic world and also made the newspapers. One of the things that
made Sokal’s attack so effective was that he was not writing from the point
of view of conservative politics. He presented himself as a left-winger who
felt that the Left had lost its way. The siren song of trendy French philos-
ophy and literary theory had led the Left, and “progressive” politics more
generally, away from its earlier alliance with science and landed it in a use-
less and pretentious quagmire.
Many philosophers in the English-speaking world felt vindicated by the
Sokal hoax. Although English-speaking philosophy had produced radical
ideas about science, for the most part it had not accepted postmodernism
and other French-inﬂuenced literary-philosophical movements. Jacques Der-
rida, perhaps the most famous ﬁgure in all the humanities during this pe-
riod, had never been embraced by the philosophical establishment and was
regarded by many as a virtual charlatan. Philosophers thought their own
journals were “hoax-proof” because of the philosophical demand for clear
argumentation. (I do not know whether this conviction has been tested.)
Some mainstream philosophers of science, who had been made to look
dried-up and boring by decades of racier work in neighboring ﬁelds, were
146
Chapter Nine

elated. At the 1996 meetings of the Philosophy of Science Association, the
presidential address was given by Abner Shimony, a senior philosopher of
physics. Shimony’s address was a reassertion of Enlightenment values, the
values of science, democracy, rationality, equality, and secularism. Shimony
called Sokal “a hero of the enlightenment” for his work in unmasking the
foolishness of radical Science Studies.
Although some philosophers felt vindicated, others felt that damage
had been done. In the discussion period after Shimony’s talk, Arthur Fine
and Philip Kitcher, two other prominent philosophers of science, lamented
that after years spent bridging gaps between disciplines and establishing di-
alogue, Sokal’s work was likely to polarize everything again. This fear was
quite reasonable, as there had often been distrust between some ﬁelds.
Philosophers might cease to pay any attention to work in neighboring
ﬁelds, in the belief that they had lost all intellectual standards. Sociologists,
on the other side, were likely to think that the underlying conservatism of
philosophy had been revealed again; after all, they would say, the smug
philosophers had sided with Sokal’s cheap shot.
Science Studies was not seriously damaged by the Sokal hoax, but there
have been some lasting effects. As I stressed earlier, the ﬁeld was always di-
verse, even though its image to outsiders was sometimes dominated by the
most high-risk work. There is less tolerance now for very jargon-laden and
obscure writing. This is a good thing, and it is reason enough to be glad of
what Sokal did. Internal obsessing about how Science Studies should be
conducted is excessive, but it was excessive well before Sokal. More im-
portantly, the fear that the gaps between different ﬁelds would widen dra-
matically has not been realized.
I have emphasized the mix within Science Studies of “straight” history
with the most “bent” literary analysis of science and culture. But the ﬁeld
does exhibit some general tendencies. One is especially relevant here. Sci-
ence Studies is rather hostile toward the idea of explaining patterns in sci-
entiﬁc change in terms of relations between scientiﬁc theories and the
structure of the world. Kuhn and the sociological work discussed in chap-
ter 8 have left an enduring mark here. The explanations that are most em-
phatically rejected by Science Studies are explanations of the popularity of
a theory in terms of its real accuracy or explanatory power. Explaining the
historical role of a theory in terms of our present estimation of its worth is
taken to be a bad mistake. And more generally, Science Studies is suspicious
of the whole idea of looking at scientiﬁc theories in terms of how they re-
late to the preexisting structure of the world itself. What results is a gap in
the account of science that Science Studies provides. After we have de-
scribed the social structure of science itself, we need to also understand
Feminism and Science Studies
147

how that social structure and its products connect to the larger natural
world within which scientiﬁc activity is embedded. This will be one of the
themes in the chapters to follow.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Keller and Longino, Feminism and Science (1996), and Janet Kourany, The Gender
of Science (2002), are both useful collections. The latter is quite comprehensive and
includes the Hrdy paper I use in section 9.3. Hrdy’s book The Woman That Never
Evolved (1999) is a more detailed discussion of her ideas. Donna Haraway’s Pri-
mate Visions (1989) is a very detailed historical and sociological discussion of pri-
matology from a feminist point of view. For another interesting feminist case study,
see Elisabeth Lloyd’s work on theories of the evolution of female orgasm (1993).
Harding, The Science Question in Feminism (1986), and Longino, Science as
Social Knowledge (1990), are two of the most inﬂuential books in feminist episte-
mology as applied to science. The Monist had a special issue on feminist episte-
mology in 1994.
Mario Biagioli, The Science Studies Reader (1999), is a good collection that il-
lustrates the diversity of work in that ﬁeld. For the Science Wars, see Gross and
Levitt, Higher Superstition (1994), which includes criticisms of Bloor, Latour,
Shapin, Schaffer, Harding, Longino, and various others I have discussed in these
chapters. See also Koertge, A House Built on Sand (1998). The Sokal hoax is the
subject of a book (of that name) edited by the Lingua Franca editors (2000). There
is also a mass of material about the Sokal hoax on the World Wide Web; see espe-
cially Sokal’s site: http://physics.nyu.edu/faculty/sokal/.
148
Chapter Nine

149
10
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
10.1 What Is Naturalism?
What kind of theory should the philosophy of science try to develop? The
logical empiricists had a deﬁnite answer to this question: the philosophy of
science is concerned above all with the logic of science. By the middle of the
1970s, this view had well and truly broken down. Many wondered whether
philosophy had become desiccated and irrelevant. As we saw in the previ-
ous chapter, this led to attempts by other ﬁelds to annex some of the tradi-
tional territory of philosophy of science. If philosophers could not say any-
thing useful about how science works, others would do it instead.
Many philosophers came to agree that philosophy of science had to go
beyond logical analysis, but there was less agreement on what should be
done instead. In this chapter we look at one increasingly popular answer
to this question: naturalism.
Naturalism is often summarized by saying that “philosophy should be
continuous with science.” This slogan sounds nice, but it is hard to work
out what it really means. Naturalists reject the idea that philosophy should
be sharply separated from other ﬁelds. In particular, naturalists hold that
there should be some kind of close connection between scientiﬁc theories
and philosophical theories, but they do not all agree on what this connec-
tion should be like. And what does a naturalistic outlook on philosophy
mean in practice? Is it any more than a slogan and a label? In this chapter
I will describe naturalism in general and then illustrate the naturalistic ap-
proach with an example. The next chapter will continue along the same
lines. And from this point onward, the book starts to depart from the
chronological structure that guided earlier chapters. The remainder of the
book is organized more by topic than by chronology.
A moment ago I said that naturalists hold that philosophy should be
continuous with science but do not agree on what this continuity is. Per-
haps a more useful summary of naturalism is the idea that philosophy can

use results from the sciences to help answer philosophical questions and
can do this even in the philosophy of science itself.
From the perspective of many other philosophical positions, to use sci-
entiﬁc ideas when theorizing about science involves a vicious circularity.
How can we assume, at the outset, the reliability of the scientiﬁc ideas that
we are trying to investigate and assess? Surely we have to stand outside of
science when we are trying to describe its most general features and assess
the integrity of its methods.
The idea that we should do the philosophy of science from an external
and more secure standpoint is often referred to as foundationalism. (This
term is sometimes used for other ideas as well.) Foundationalism requires
that no assumptions be made about the accuracy of particular scientiﬁc
ideas when doing philosophy of science. This is because before our philo-
sophical theory is established, the status of scientiﬁc work is in doubt. One
way to describe naturalism is to say that it is opposed to foundationalism
in philosophy.
Naturalists think that the project of trying to give general philosophical
foundations for science is always doomed to fail. They also think that a
philosophical foundation is not something science needs in any case. In-
stead, we can only hope to develop an adequate description of how knowl-
edge and science work if we draw on scientiﬁc ideas as we go. And the de-
scription of knowledge and science that results will be no more certain or
secure than the scientiﬁc theories themselves.
Most philosophers who call themselves naturalists would agree with
that sketch. From there on, however, there is a lot of disagreement. “Natu-
ralism” is one of those words that a wide range of people ﬁnd appealing as
a label for themselves. As Elliott Sober likes to say, the term suggests that
one’s theories contain “no artiﬁcial ingredients.” Philosophers, like sham-
poo manufacturers, would always like to call their products “natural.” So
there is a risk that naturalism as a movement will be swamped by the over-
use of the term and will dissolve into platitudes. Despite this risk, “natu-
ralism” is the label I use for most of my own philosophical work, and
throughout the rest of this book I will often suggest that naturalism is our
best hope for solving the core problems of philosophy of science.
10.2 Quine, Dewey, and Others
Where did contemporary naturalistic philosophy come from? The birth of
modern naturalism is often said to be the publication of W. V. Quine’s pa-
per “Epistemology Naturalized” (1969). Certainly Quine’s work is very
important here, but we should not think of modern naturalism as coming
150
Chapter Ten

entirely out of Quine. The American philosopher John Dewey is usually
thought of as a pragmatist, but during the later part of his career (from
roughly 1925 onward) his philosophy was a form of naturalism. In some
areas Dewey’s version of naturalism is superior to Quine’s. But Dewey’s
philosophy was neglected during the second half of the twentieth century,
and Quine is deﬁnitely the ﬁgure who had the most inﬂuence on natural-
ism. (Quine once acknowledged Dewey as an earlier naturalist, but Quine
experts regard this as a polite gesture rather than a sign of real inﬂuence.)
Quine’s article “Epistemology Naturalized” made a number of claims.
He ﬁrst attacked the idea that philosophers should give “foundations” for
scientiﬁc knowledge. Quine’s claims on this point have become central to
naturalistic philosophy. But Quine also made a more radical claim. He sug-
gested that epistemological questions are so closely tied to questions in sci-
entiﬁc psychology that epistemology should not survive as a distinct ﬁeld
at all. Instead, epistemology should be absorbed into psychology. The
only questions asked by epistemologists that have any real importance, in
Quine’s view, are questions best answered by psychology itself. Philoso-
phers should expect that psychology will eventually give us a purely scien-
tiﬁc description of how beliefs are formed and how they change, and we
should ask for no more.
This version of naturalism is one that I, and many others, oppose. This
opposition will probably come as no surprise; Quine seems to be claiming
that philosophers interested in questions about belief and knowledge
should close up shop and go home. Just as scientists warm to the heroic de-
scription of scientiﬁc work given by Popper, many philosophers turn a cold
shoulder to Quine’s claim that there is nothing important for us to do (un-
less we get psychology degrees and move to the psychology department).
But aside from wanting to keep the paychecks coming, there is a deeper is-
sue here.
In a different version of naturalism, there is such a thing as a philo-
sophical question, distinct from the kinds of questions asked by scientists.
A naturalist can think that science can contribute to the answers to philo-
sophical questions, without thinking that science should replace philo-
sophical questions with scientiﬁc questions. That is the version of natural-
ism that I defend. This contrasts with the kind of naturalism described by
Quine in his 1969 paper; there we think of science as the only proper source
of questions as well as the source of answers.
If we think that philosophical questions are important and also tend to
differ from those asked by scientists, there is no reason to expect a re-
placement of epistemology by psychology and other sciences. Science is
used as a resource for philosophy, not as a replacement.
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
151

What might be examples of these questions that remain relevant in nat-
uralistic philosophy but which are not directly addressed within science it-
self? Many naturalists have argued that normative questions are important
examples here—questions that involve a value judgment. If epistemology
was absorbed by psychology, we might get a good description of how be-
liefs are actually formed, but apparently we would not be told which belief-
forming mechanisms are good and which are bad. We would not be able to
address the epistemological questions that have to do with how we should
handle evidence, and how we can tell a good argument from a bad one.
Those questions are central to philosophy. For the naturalist, the answers
to these questions will often depend on facts about psychological mecha-
nisms and the connections that exist between our minds and the world. But
the naturalist expects that it will remain the task of philosophy to actually
try to answer these questions. The sciences tend to concern themselves
with different issues.
The term “normative naturalism” is often used for naturalistic views
that want to retain the normative side of epistemology. (The term was
coined by Larry Laudan [1987]; see also Kitcher 1992). I should also note
here that although Quine’s original discussions seemed to leave no place
for normative questions in epistemology, toward the end of his career he
modiﬁed his view, bringing it closer to normative naturalism (Quine 1990).
Normative naturalism accepts many (though not all) of the normative
questions that have been passed down to us from traditional epistemology.
But what is the basis for making these value judgments? What is the basis
for a distinction between good and bad policies for forming beliefs? At this
point normative naturalism confronts one aspect of the old and difﬁcult
problem of locating values in the world of facts. In the face of this prob-
lem, normative naturalists have often chosen a simple reply. The value judg-
ments relevant to epistemology are made in an instrumental way.
In philosophical discussions of decision-making, an action is said to be
instrumentally rational if it is a good way of achieving the goal that the
agent is pursuing, whatever that goal might be. When assessing actions ac-
cording to their instrumental rationality, we do not worry about where the
goals come from or whether they are appropriate goals. We just ask
whether the action is likely to achieve the outcome that the agent desires.
And if some action A is being used as a means to B, it is a factual matter
whether or not A is likely to lead the agent to B. So it is a factual matter
whether or not action A is instrumentally rational for that agent.
It is uncontroversial to say that one kind of rationality is instrumental
rationality. It is much more controversial to say that this is the only kind of
rationality. Some normative naturalists think that instrumental rationality
152
Chapter Ten

is the only kind of rationality that is relevant to epistemology. The problem
of assessing which of a person’s ultimate goals are justiﬁable is either re-
jected (because there can be no such assessment) or not addressed.
Earlier I said that John Dewey’s work in the 1920s and 1930s describes
and applies a good version of naturalism. Dewey’s handling of the question
of epistemological norms and values is one strength of the view. In his 1938
book Logic, Dewey develops a version of what would now be called nor-
mative naturalism. He says that in his epistemology, claims of “good” and
“bad” reasoning are intended in the same way that we would understand
claims about “good” and “bad” farming (1938, 103–4). Everyone is aware,
he says, that some farming techniques are better than others at achieving
the usual sorts of goals that farmers have. The likely consequences of dif-
ferent farming decisions are a factual matter, and we learn about these con-
sequences from experience. The methods of farming that we presently re-
gard as good ones are not perfect, and they might be improved further in
the future. But there is no philosophical problem with making value judg-
ments of this kind. Dewey says that the same is true of value judgments in
epistemology.
I have focused on the role of normative questions here, but these are not
the only kinds of questions that belong within epistemology, as opposed to
the sciences that “feed into” epistemology. Another set of questions asked
by philosophers have to do with the relationships between our common-
sense or everyday view of the world, on one hand, and the scientiﬁc picture
of the world, on the other. What kind of match (or mismatch) is there be-
tween the two pictures? We ﬁnd questions of this kind in epistemology:
what relationship is there between the common-sense or everyday picture
of human knowledge, and a scientiﬁc description of our real contact with
the world?
Answering this kind of question requires that we summarize both the
everyday and the scientiﬁc pictures in a concise way and then compare them.
One of the fastest-moving and most interesting parts of naturalistic philos-
ophy in recent decades has been the naturalistic philosophy of mind. How
does the everyday picture of the human mind and its contents (thoughts,
beliefs, desires, memories) compare with the picture of the mind that is
emerging from psychology and neurobiology?
Another set of philosophical questions that remain pressing for the nat-
uralist have to do with the relations between different sciences. The various
sciences each give us fragments, based on empirical work, of what the world
is like and how it runs. But do the fragments tend to ﬁt together neatly, or
are there mismatches and tensions between them? The philosopher patrols
the relationships between adjacent sciences, occasionally climbing into a
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
153

helicopter to get a synoptic view of how all the pieces ﬁt together. This can
result in philosophical criticism of particular scientiﬁc ideas, but the criti-
cism is made from the point of view of our overall scientiﬁc picture.
So I can now summarize the version of naturalism that I accept. Natu-
ralism in philosophy requires that we begin our philosophical investiga-
tions from the standpoint provided by our best current scientiﬁc picture of
human beings and their place in the universe. We begin from this picture,
and we do not try to give a general justiﬁcation, from outside of science,
for our entitlement to use it. The science we rely on is not completely cer-
tain, of course, and may eventually change. The questions we try to answer,
however, need not be derived from the sciences; our questions will often be
rather traditional philosophical questions about the nature of belief, justi-
ﬁcation, and knowledge. Science is a resource for settling philosophical
questions, rather than a replacement for philosophy or the source of phi-
losophy’s agenda.
I should note that I am not arguing that all work done by philosophers
should be naturalistic in this sense. In particular, philosophy has long served
another unusual and useful role in intellectual culture; it has acted as an
“incubator” for novel, speculative ideas, giving them room to develop to a
point where they may become scientiﬁcally useful. There are other roles for
philosophy as a discipline as well. Philosophy often beneﬁts, in fact, from
its somewhat loose organization and open-ended agenda. We never know
what new ideas, issues, or approaches might appear. But to the extent that
we can expect to solve the big problems in ﬁelds like epistemology, natu-
ralism is probably the right approach.
So what questions should we address in naturalistic philosophy of sci-
ence? Back in chapter 1, I distinguished two sets of questions that would
shape this book. We should try to achieve (1) a general understanding of
how humans gain knowledge of the world around them, and (2) an under-
standing of what makes the work descended from the Scientiﬁc Revolution
different from other kinds of investigation of the world. Those summaries
are a start, but I can now ﬁll in a bit more detail.
Does a naturalistic investigation of the role of observation in science
support the familiar idea that observation and experiment make science re-
sponsive to the real structure of the world? One way to understand the work
of some sociologists of science, including Latour, is to see it as proposing a
theory of scientiﬁc change that gives no role to this notion of “responsive-
ness” to the world. Where exactly does a view like that go wrong? There
could, in principle, be an institution that looked like what we call “sci-
ence” but in which there was no genuine responsiveness to the world. Ex-
periments would be no more than expensive “PR” exercises, and theories
154
Chapter Ten

would change via a process of negotiation between factions. How do we
know that our own science is not like this? In order to resolve this issue, we
need to distinguish some “in principle” questions and some “in practice”
questions. Does the nature of human thought and perception allow that,
in principle, scientiﬁc belief can be made responsive to the real structure of
the world? Even if this is possible in principle, do actual scientiﬁc commu-
nities operate in a way that makes this responsiveness occur in practice?
Suppose we are indeed able to vindicate the idea that science is respon-
sive to the world; then what sort of contact with the world do our success-
ful theories achieve? It is familiar to think of truth as the goal that we set
for our theories; a good theory is one that represents the world truly. But
is the traditional concept of truth a coherent and useful one here? Does it
help us understand scientiﬁc progress at all? (Kuhn believed it does not.)
What sense, if any, can a naturalist make of the idea of an “inductive logic,”
or a general theory of evidence? If we are able to isolate features of scien-
tiﬁc thinking or scientiﬁc community structure that seem powerful and
valuable, how can these be safeguarded and strengthened? Are there fea-
tures of science that are self-defeating or harmful, which we might try to
resist or change?
This version of naturalism will guide the remaining chapters of the book.
But as I emphasized earlier, there are many different views that people like
to label as naturalistic. And even philosophical discussions of science that
are not carried out under the banner of naturalism have become more re-
sponsive to a variety of sources of ideas. This broadened perspective on the
kinds of information that might be helpful has been a notable feature of re-
cent philosophy. Some philosophers think the result has been chaotic, a
profusion of ambiguous fragments and half-ﬁnished forays in too many di-
rections. Discipline has been lost. But others, including me, think that the
result has generally been progress.
10.3 The Theory-Ladenness of Observation
In this section I will focus on a debate that developed in the 1960s and con-
tinues to the present. The debate concerns the role of observation in science,
and it is often called the debate about the “theory-ladenness of observa-
tion.” Put most simply, the debate has to do with whether observational ev-
idence can be considered an unbiased or neutral source of information
when choosing between theories, or whether observations tend to be “con-
taminated” by theoretical assumptions in a way that prevents them from
having this role. The problem is especially important for people who want
to develop empiricist views. Advocates of radical theories of science, of the
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
155

kind discussed in the last few chapters, have often seen the theory-ladenness
of observation as a powerful argument against mainstream empiricism.
So the debate is important. The reason it is discussed in this chapter is
that this debate becomes much easier to settle if it is approached from a
naturalistic point of view. This issue gives us a good illustration of how
naturalistic philosophy works in practice.
Our topic is observation. But “observation” is being understood in a
very broad way here, to include all kinds of sensory contact with the world,
all kinds of perception. Empiricists have agreed that observation is our
source of knowledge about the world. Despite a good deal of disagreement
within the empiricist movement, observation has generally been seen as
theory-neutral. This neutrality, or absence of bias, is often the basis for the
claim that observation is an “objective” way to settle disagreements.
It was against this background that arguments for the “theory-
ladenness” of observation developed, especially in the work of N. R. Han-
son, Kuhn, and Feyerabend. These arguments are a mixture, but their in-
tended upshot is clear: observation cannot function as an unbiased way of
testing theories (or larger units like paradigms), because observational judg-
ments are affected by the theoretical beliefs of the observer. Therefore, tra-
ditional empiricist views about the role of observation in science are false.
As I said, these arguments are a mixture. Sometimes they are about the
language of observation reports, sometimes about observation as a psycho-
logical phenomenon, sometimes about the beliefs resulting from observa-
tion, sometimes all of these. And while some of the phenomena discussed
in the arguments are important and challenging, others are not. Some ar-
guments only trouble logical positivism, while others trouble all possible
views about science other than radical skepticism or extreme relativism.
Let us start with the more innocuous arguments. Sometimes it is
claimed that observation is guided by theory, because theories tell scientists
where to look and what to look for. This is true, but no sensible empiricist
has ever denied it. This fact does not affect the capacity of observation to
act as a test of theory, unless scientists are refusing to look where un-
friendly observations might be found. All empiricists would regard that as
a breakdown of fundamental scientiﬁc procedures.
At other times it is claimed that scientists must use theoretical assump-
tions to decide which observations to take seriously. Some apparent obser-
vations might involve malfunctions or mistakes of various kinds and can
be disregarded. The observations that affect theory choice are “ﬁltered”
through a process in which some data are discarded. Because theoretical
beliefs affect this ﬁltering, there is the possibility of bias here.
Those problems are real. What they involve, however, is the problem of
156
Chapter Ten

holism about testing, which was introduced back in chapter 2. Philoso-
phers are still trying to unravel this problem, as they try to develop new the-
ories of testing and conﬁrmation. In the absence of a general solution to
these problems, some pieces of an answer can be suggested. The theoreti-
cal assumptions that affect the relevance of an observation to a piece of
theory can themselves be tested separately. We might also venture some
low-level recommendations: perhaps in crucial tests, scientists should be
more reluctant to discard observations. But in this area it is hard to know
which pieces of common sense are helpful, which are trivial, and which are
ﬂat wrong.
Another set of arguments about observation concern language. When a
scientist has an experience, he or she can only make this experience rele-
vant to science by putting it into words. The vocabulary used, and the mean-
ings of even innocent-looking terms, will be inﬂuenced by the scientist’s
theoretical framework. Given the interconnections between the meanings
of words in a language, there is no part of language whose application to
phenomena is totally “theory-free.”
Some versions of this argument are not of enduring importance because
they cause trouble only for the logical positivist ideal of a purely observa-
tional language, sharply distinct from the parts of language that use or as-
sume theoretical ideas. Sometimes critics of empiricism write as if once it
has been shown that the language of observation is in some sense “theo-
retical,” that is the end of the argument and empiricism is dead. This is a
mistake. In working out the relevance of this issue to more modern forms
of empiricism, everything depends on which kinds of theories affect the
language of observation and on the nature of this effect. For example,
maybe observational reports assume “theories” that are so low-level that
the testing of real scientiﬁc theories will never be affected. We can think of
the assumption that objects generally retain their shape when we are not
looking at them as “theoretical” in a sense, but the effect of this assump-
tion on observation reports does not usually matter to testing in science.
But suppose it can be shown that observation reports are affected by the
kinds of theories that are themselves being tested. For example, Feyerabend
tried to show that innocent-looking descriptions of motion in the seven-
teenth century were affected by theoretical background assumptions in this
way. This looks like trouble. But even this kind of effect may or may not be
philosophically important. A theory might contribute the concepts used to
express an observation, without this affecting the capacity of an observa-
tion report to test the theory in question. Not every result described in terms
of the concepts preferred by theory T will be an observation report that is
favorable to theory T. Back in my discussion of Popper, I mentioned that an
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
157

observation of rabbit fossils in Precambrian rocks would be a massive shock
to evolutionary theory (section 4.6). Suppose we regard “I saw rabbit fos-
sils in Precambrian rocks” as an observation report that is very much
“laden” with biological and geological theory. Some might want to say it is
so laden with theory that it is not an observation report at all. But regard-
less of this, the report would still be a massive shock to evolutionary theory.
So imagine that we had a simple falsiﬁcationist view of testing in sci-
ence. It is clear that the fact that observation reports are expressed using
concepts derived from a theory has no effect on the capacity of nature to
say NO to a conjecture. Simple falsiﬁcationism is not an adequate view
of testing in science, but that does not matter to the present point. The
point is that an inﬂuence of theory on observational vocabulary does not,
on its own, prevent observation from acting as an unbiased test of theory.
The ﬁnal aspect of the theory-ladenness arguments that I will consider
is the most important. Kuhn and others have argued that even the experi-
ences themselves that a person has are inﬂuenced by their beliefs, includ-
ing their theories. Not just the use of observation reports in assessing the-
ories, and not just the linguistic form of the reports are affected, but the
perceptual experiences themselves are. There is no stage in the processes of
observation in science where theories do not play a role.
When giving these arguments, Kuhn and others liked to use the results
of psychological research in the middle of the twentieth century. This re-
search was taken to refute a “passive” view of perception and replace it
with a view holding that perception is active and intelligent. Psychologists
emphasized the multiple ways in which a pattern of stimulation on the
retina could be caused by objects in the world. If there are multiple possi-
bilities, then theoretical assumptions must be used by the visual system to
make a choice (Gregory 1970).
This kind of theory-ladenness argument was attacked by Jerry Fodor in
a very convincing (and very funny) 1984 article called “Observation Re-
considered.” My reply to the argument largely follows his. As in the case of
the inﬂuence of theory on observational language, everything hinges on
which theories affect observation and how they affect it.
Fodor turned the tables on some theory-ladenness arguments via a dis-
cussion of perceptual illusions of the kind often discussed in psychology text-
books. Consider the Müller-Lyer illusion, represented in ﬁgure 10.1. The two
lines are the same length, although we tend to see the lower one as longer
than the upper one. According to psychology, the illusion is brought about
by the unconscious use of background assumptions in the processing of
visual inputs. People have taken this result to show a kind of theory-
158
Chapter Ten

ladenness in perception; we do not realize it, but our general and implicit
beliefs about the world are affecting what we see.
But Fodor then notes that although it is true that the illusions seem to
be produced by the effects of unconscious theory, some pieces of theory or
background knowledge seem to have no effect on perception. Most no-
tably, the illusion is not affected by the knowledge that it is an illusion, or
by knowledge of the theory of illusions. Those pieces of background knowl-
edge do not make the illusion go away. We seem to have a situation in which
the mechanisms of perception are inﬂuenced by some theories and not oth-
ers. And the theories that do have this effect are not high-level scientiﬁc the-
ories. They are low-level sets of assumptions about the physical layout of
the world—the three-dimensional nature of space, the effect of distance on
apparent size, and so on.
Fodor links his argument to a research program in psychology that
posits modules in the explanation of perception and some other tasks
(Fodor 1983). Modules are automatic, innate pieces of mental machinery
that do their processing unconsciously and make use of a ﬁxed subset of a
person’s background knowledge. In perception, modules send their output
to the “central” cognitive mechanisms. These central mechanisms have ac-
cess to all a person’s theories and ideas when working out what to do with
the observation. So although the later stages of responding to observation
are affected, in principle, by all the theories a person might have, the out-
put of the perceptual module is not. The module’s operation—which de-
termines how things seem to a person—is not biased by whether the per-
son accepts one scientiﬁc theory or another.
As Fodor says, this does not solve the entire problem of the role of ob-
servation in testing. Even if observation itself is not biased by commitments
to scientiﬁc theories, as has been alleged, there is still the issue of what a
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
159
Fig. 10.1
The Müller-Lyer illusion

person does with the observation. That takes us back to the problem of
holism about testing.
Not all the problems have been solved, but we have made progress. And
I think it is clear how this discussion provides support for a naturalistic ap-
proach to philosophy of science. Observation is a natural phenomenon,
studied by ﬁelds like psychology and psychophysics. Those disciplines tell
us what perceptual mechanisms are like and what kind of connection we
have to the world via these mechanisms. Naturalistic philosophers can put
these results to use in working out how observation operates in science
generally.
There are two general sets of questions about observation that we need
to answer.
1. To what extent is observation a reliable way of forming true beliefs about what
is going on in the world? When is observation using ordinary human senses re-
liable, and when is it not?
2. Is observation neutral between competing theories of the kind we wish to test
in science? Can people with very different theoretical commitments agree about
what has been observed? That is, does observation provide an intersubjective
basis for theory choice?
These two sets of issues are distinct, but they are connected in complicated
ways. For example, if we have reason to think that observation using ordi-
nary human senses is very reliable in normal conditions, then we can ex-
pect a wide range of people to agree when they are looking at the same
thing in normal conditions. This claim could be hedged more, but the ba-
sic idea is clear. Reliable senses shared across all normal humans can be ex-
pected to deliver consensus. But it is also possible that we could have wide
agreement without reliability; we might all be deluded in the same way.
Some philosophers have thought that color vision is like this. Colors are
not really “out there” in the world, even if we all experience them that way.
In order to assess whether observation is neutral between competing the-
ories, the kind of evidence that Fodor presents in his 1984 paper is relevant.
Although his arguments are rather convincing, the important thing here is
not whether a “modular” theory of perception is ultimately right. The im-
portant thing is to see what kind of scientiﬁc evidence is relevant for settling
the question. In order to work out whether observation in scientiﬁc com-
munities is affected by theoretical differences in a way that threatens em-
piricism, we need to work out what human perceptual mechanisms are
like, whether they tend to be similar in all normal humans, and what role
high-level scientiﬁc beliefs have in the process of observation. This kind of
160
Chapter Ten

evidence does not itself settle whether observation is a reliable way of form-
ing true beliefs about what is going on in the world. But that is something
that can be investigated systematically by psychology and psychophysics.
Note that our perceptual mechanisms might use low-level theories in a
way that makes perception reliable without the low-level theories them-
selves being true. What we are trying to assess is the reliability of observa-
tion reports themselves. We might have built into our brains something like
Euclidean geometry, which is not strictly true of our universe, but which is
used in such a way that we almost always end up with true observational
judgments. Note that the Euclidean habits we have for interpreting space
did not prevent us from revising the scientiﬁc belief that space strictly ﬁts
Euclidean geometry, as Einstein did in his theory of General Relativity.
I will ﬁnish this section by starting to sketch a version of empiricism that
follows a naturalistic approach to the role of observation. This will be a re-
curring theme in the rest of the book.
We ask, What is the role of observation in science? To answer this, we
need ﬁrst to understand the actual role of observation in the sociological
patterns of scientiﬁc activity. How is observation used as a resource in sci-
ence? How is it used in the settlement of controversies? Then we can start
to feed in results from the scientiﬁc study of observation. We ask, Given the
kind of connection to the world that observation provides, and given the
role of observation in science, what kind of contact does science itself have
with the world? If observation is the channel by which theory makes con-
tact with reality, what kind of channel is it? That is a question that we can
only answer by drawing on the empirical sciences that deal with observa-
tion and perception.
If empiricism about science is vindicated by the answers to these ques-
tions, it will be a form of empiricism that differs from traditional forms.
Observation is a form of physical contact between our minds and the
world. This contact is the product of evolution, and it has whatever degree
of reliability it has because of our evolutionary history and the contingent
relationships between our structure and that of our surroundings. Science
is an attempt to exploit this contact between our minds and the world, and
science is also motivated by the limitations that result from our relations
to the world; we need science because much of the world is not accessible
to ordinary observation. Science works by taking theoretical ideas and try-
ing to ﬁnd ways to expose them to observation. The scientiﬁc strategy is to
construe ideas, to embed them in surrounding conceptual frameworks,
and to develop them, in such a way that this exposure is possible even in
the case of the most general and ambitious hypotheses about the universe.
That view is a kind of empiricism, and I think we can be optimistic about
Naturalistic Philosophy in Theory and Practice
161

that kind of empiricism. This is a form of empiricism in which naturalism
is, in a sense, primary. The advantages of empiricist philosophical ideas are
not shown or established by philosophy alone.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
The history of naturalistic philosophy is discussed in Kitcher 1992. Kornblith’s
Naturalizing Epistemology (1994) is a good collection of papers on the topic, in-
cluding Quine’s classics. Dewey’s most important naturalistic work is his Experi-
ence and Nature (1929). Callebaut’s Taking the Naturalistic Turn (1993) is an un-
usual exploration of naturalism based on interviews; his idea of who is a naturalist
is also a bit unusual in some cases. For normative naturalism, see Laudan 1987. For
good examples of naturalistic work in the philosophy of mind, see Dennett 1978,
Fodor 1981, Stich 1983, and Dretske 1988.
Fodor’s 1984 paper on observation is the subject of a response in the journal
Philosophy of Science by Paul Churchland (1988). Fodor also replied in the same
issue. See also Bishop 1992. See Giere 1988 for a treatment of various other issues
in philosophy of science using a “cognitive” approach that draws on psychology.
162
Chapter Ten

163
11
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science
What is good for General Motors is not always good for the nation, but once science is
properly understood, it turns out that what is good for the individual scientist is by
and large good for science.
DAVID HULL, Science as a Process
11.1 Science as a Process
Traditional empiricism neglected the social structure of science; naturalis-
tic philosophy has tried to avoid this mistake.
David Hull’s sprawling Science as a Process (1988), the source of the
epigraph above, is the product of decades that Hull spent observing and in-
teracting with biologists, especially the community of biologists who study
systematics, the classiﬁcation of organisms.
Hull’s story begins with a fairly common-sense picture of both science
and scientists. Scientists are curious about the world, as many other people
are. Individual scientists make their way into a social structure that puts
this curiosity to work and does so via empirical testing. So far this does not
tell us much. But Hull then argues that what makes science special is an un-
usually good relationship between the motivations and goals of the indi-
vidual scientist, on one hand, and the goals of science as a whole, on the
other.
Is science a fundamentally cooperative enterprise, or is it a fundamen-
tally competitive one in which scientists are out for personal advancement?
According to Hull (and also Merton), science runs on a combination of co-
operation and competition. Neither is fundamental, and the special fea-
tures of science are due to an interaction between the two. This interaction
arises from the reward system found in science and the context in which
the reward system operates.

Hull argues that the main professional motivation for individual scien-
tists is the desire for recognition. And one kind of recognition is most rel-
evant: use. Scientists want other scientists to use their work, giving credit
when they do so. Clearly Hull is close to Merton here, as he acknowledges.
As we saw in chapter 8, Merton argued that recognition is the basic reward
in science. There might be some differences, however. Hull stresses the de-
sire to have one’s ideas used; Merton stresses being recognized as the ﬁrst to
come up with an idea. Often these will go together, but not always. In Hull’s
view but not Merton’s, if a scientist’s version of an idea is used because it is
especially convenient, even though it was not the ﬁrst, that counts as a real
reward. For Hull, being used and cited matters more than anything else.
What generates the distinctive features of science, as Hull sees it, is this
reward system operating in a special context. Each scientist inherits the
ideas and methods of her or his ﬁeld from earlier workers. Of course, an
individual might revolutionize the ﬁeld, but even revolutionary work starts
out from an inherited context. Individual scientists cannot do anything sig-
niﬁcant without entering a system of cooperation and trust. You can’t
make a contribution of your own without using the work of others. And in
order to use the work of others in ways that provide support for what you
are doing, you need to give citations. So the desire to do work that is used
requires using, and citing, the work of others. Scientists trade credit for
support, and they do so in the hope that others will do the same for them.
This reciprocation is not primarily a matter of goodwill (although that can
be a factor); it results from a special kind of self-interest.
Traditional descriptions of science often stress the replicability of re-
sults. A result is not trustworthy if only one lab seems able to produce it.
But as Hull emphasizes, no one has the time to do much of this replication
and checking. The checking that actually occurs is a consequence of the de-
sire to have one’s work used. In order to do work that others will use, you
need to ensure that the work that you rely on can be trusted. So those who
check and attempt to replicate results will often be those who need to know
whether they can rely on those ideas. Another kind of person who will be
motivated to engage in rigorous checking will be someone whose own
work is either discredited or made less important by a piece of new work.
Hull also argues that the reason why fraud in science is so much more se-
rious a crime than theft, even in cases where public well-being is not af-
fected, has to do with these sorts of factors. In a case of theft or plagiarism,
the only person harmed is the one stolen from. But when a case of fraud is
discovered, all the scientists who used the fraudulent work will ﬁnd their
work on that topic deemed unreliable, and their work will not be used.
164
Chapter Eleven

So the desire to have one’s work used generates many other features of
science—the elaborate networks of citation, the real but selective checking
of others’ results, the relative seriousness of fraud and theft. And Hull ar-
gues that although this system malfunctions on occasion, the general result
is a harmonious relationship between the behavior of individual workers
and the goals of science as a whole. Cooperation and teamwork is com-
mon. Hypotheses are scrutinized closely. Idle speculation and shoddy work
are discouraged. Ideas are shared freely (though not before they are in pub-
lishable form). Work produced by those who are low on the totem pole is
taken seriously (especially by those whose own projects might be helped or
harmed).
A number of philosophers and scientists have been attracted to a picture
of science as a dialogue between an imaginative voice and a critical voice,
between the speculative and the hard-headed. Popper is an example. This
is an appealing picture, but why should this dialogue actually occur? Hull
aims to give us a mechanism. And a key part of the mechanism is the dis-
tribution of roles across different people. In contrast to Popper, Hull ar-
gues that there is no need for individual scientists to take a cautious and
skeptical attitude toward their own work; others will do this for them.
Back in chapter 6, I discussed the “invisible hand” structure of Kuhn’s
account of science. I made an analogy to Adam Smith’s famous defense of
market economies, which argued that a collection of selﬁsh individuals in-
teracting in a market tends to produce a good outcome for everyone. Kuhn’s
analysis of science sees a degree of individual-level dogmatism as con-
tributing to openness at the level of science as a whole. In Smith and Kuhn
we have a surprising explanatory relationship between individual-level prop-
erties and the properties of the whole. Hull’s picture of science has some
similarity to these cases, but as he says, the hand is not really hidden or “in-
visible” in the story he tells. The relationship between individual and group-
level properties is not so unexpected.
So far we have looked at the consequences of the structure of reward
and motivation in science. But why do scientists want to have their work
used in the way Hull describes? This question is related to another: why has
the social structure that Hull describes arisen so rarely, across the range of
different communities that have wanted to understand the world?
Hull says that he assumes that both curiosity and a desire for recogni-
tion are fairly basic human motivations. But, I suggest, a desire for the spe-
ciﬁc kind of credit found in science is surely more unusual. What we seem
to have is a situation in which a basic human desire for credit is shaped by
the internal culture of science into a very speciﬁc desire for recognition in
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science
165

the form of use. More accurately, we should expect both some shaping and
some selection here; individuals who do not ﬁnd the scientiﬁc reward sys-
tem satisfying might never ﬁnish graduate school.
Hull and Merton both look at possible roles for broader cultural features
here. Modern science developed in European societies that were comfort-
able with the ideas of individual competition and credit. The reward sys-
tem found in science was a fairly early invention. When the French Acad-
emy was founded in the seventeenth century, its members initially tried to
handle credit in a communal way, but this did not work, so they switched
quickly to a more individualistic approach. The Royal Society of London,
under its skillful ﬁrst secretary, Henry Oldenburg, used rapid publication
in the Proceedings to allocate credit and to encourage people to share their
ideas. Oldenburg’s system, which also included anonymous refereeing of
papers, is basically what has come down to us today.
In this outline of Hull’s ideas, I have not yet mentioned one of his main
arguments. Hull tries to describe scientiﬁc change as an evolutionary pro-
cess, in a sense derived from biology. Science changes via processes of vari-
ation and selection, just as biological populations do. Individual ideas in
science are replicated in something like the way that genes are. And the dif-
ferent rates with which ideas are replicated are consequences of their man-
ifestations in the brains and the public representational systems (books,
journals, computers) of the scientiﬁc community. Scientiﬁc change is a pro-
cess in which some ideas outcompete others in a struggle for replication.
The idea of understanding scientiﬁc change via an explicit analogy with
biological processes of variation and selection has been tried out by a num-
ber of writers (Toulmin 1972; Campbell 1974; Dennett 1995). As we saw
in chapter 4, Popper’s view of science also has an analogy with evolution
by natural selection, although Popper did not start out with this analogy
in mind.
Though the analogy between science and Darwinian evolution is some-
thing that people keep coming back to, the analogy has not yielded a lot of
new insights so far. We ﬁnd the same result in many other attempts to de-
scribe cultural change as an evolutionary system; a wide variety of pro-
cesses can be described in a way that borrows from evolutionary biology,
but usually this exercise does not teach us anything about those cultural
processes that we did not know before. Biological populations have special
features that make the abstract concepts of evolutionary theory helpful in
trying to understand them. Other systems, which lack these features, can
be described in evolutionary terms with a bit of shoehorning, but we do not
seem to gain much from doing so.
That does not keep the analogy between evolution and scientiﬁc change
166
Chapter Eleven

from being an interesting one. The analogy can be interesting without be-
ing a basis for a new theory of science.
11.2 Kitcher and the Division of Scientiﬁc Labor
I move to a second example of naturalistic work on the social structure of
science, this one from the work of Philip Kitcher.
In chapter 7 I discussed Lakatos’s and Laudan’s views about competi-
tion between research programs. Both presented a picture of science based
on competition between teams of workers developing rival theories and
perhaps defending rival methods. This picture seems to cover some parts of
science rather well. Both Lakatos and Laudan were interested in giving
normative rules for scientiﬁc behavior in this situation. But as I said back
then, there is a gap in their treatment of the issue. They were thinking of ra-
tional choices by individuals. We can also look at the situation from the
point of view of the scientiﬁc community, and we can ask, What is the best
distribution of workers across rival research programs, for the community
as a whole?
Kitcher takes up this issue in detail (1990, 1993). He starts by asking
this question: suppose you ruled science “from above” and had to allocate
resources to rival research programs. In a particular scientiﬁc ﬁeld, you ﬁnd
two different approaches being taken to the same problem. Research pro-
gram 1 looks more promising than research program 2, but no one knows
which approach will ultimately work. However, it is clear that either one
will succeed while the other fails, or both will fail. How should you allocate
resources, to maximize the chance that the scientiﬁc problem will be solved?
The answer will depend on the details of the case, obviously. But it seems
clear that in a wide variety of situations, the best approach will not be to
allocate all resources to one option and none to the other. Some degree of
“bet-hedging” will often be advisable, even in cases where one program is
obviously more promising than the other. A wise “ruler of science” would
often allocate most of the resources to the better research program but
some resources to the alternative.
To say more than this, we need to represent the situation mathematically,
and that is what Kitcher does. The crucial features of the situation will be
the degree to which one program is more promising than the other and the
mathematical functions that describe how each research program responds
to the addition of more resources. Here is a simple case. Suppose that both
research programs become more and more likely to succeed as more work-
ers are added to them, but in both cases there is a “decreasing marginal re-
turn.” As more workers are added to a program, each additional worker
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science
167

makes less and less difference to the chances of success. We can then see
why an optimal allocation of resources will often not put every worker on
one program. After a certain point, adding more workers to a program has
almost no effect, and these people would be better put to work on the al-
ternative. Unless the total pool of workers is small and the overall differ-
ence in promise is big, the best distribution of workers will allocate some
to one program and some to the other.
That is what we would want if the allocation of resources could be con-
trolled from above. But of course, this is not how things usually work. Now
suppose that individual scientists are making their own choices about
which program to work on. The next question Kitcher asks is, What kind
of individual reward system in science will tend to produce distributions of
workers that beneﬁt science as a whole? What kind of reward system will
tend to produce the same distribution of workers that the “ruler from
above” would want?
One option that would not work well would be to give a ﬁxed reward to
everyone who works on the program that eventually succeeds, regardless of
how many workers there are. That system would induce everyone to choose
the more promising program, and the community would have all its eggs in
one basket. Another approach would be to reward individuals for making
choices that produce the maximum beneﬁt in terms of the overall chance
that the community will solve the problem. This would work in principle,
but it does not seem a realistic reward system for actual scientiﬁc commu-
nities. So here is a third option: we reward only the individuals who work
on the research program that succeeds, but we divide the “pie” equally be-
tween all the workers who chose that program. So the reward that an indi-
vidual gets will depend not just on their own choice but on how many other
individuals chose the same program.
This third reward system, Kitcher argues, will produce a good distribu-
tion of workers across the two options. We can see why that is. Once one
research program becomes crowded, an individual has little incentive to join
that program because, if it does pay off, the pie is being divided among too
many people. Although the other program is less likely to succeed, if it does
succeed, there will be fewer workers sharing the reward. So an individual
who wants to maximize his or her “expected payoff” will often have reason
to choose the less promising program. In this way, selﬁsh individual choices
will produce a good outcome for the whole community. And Kitcher sug-
gests that this reward system is fairly close (with simpliﬁcations) to what
we actually ﬁnd in science. The “pie” here is not cash but prestige.
Kitcher’s story has a deﬁnite “invisible hand” structure. We have selﬁsh
individual behaviors combining to produce a good outcome for the com-
168
Chapter Eleven

munity. This outcome might be one that the individuals are uninterested in
or even unaware of.
Kitcher’s work has recently been followed up by Michael Strevens
(2003). Strevens shows that Kitcher was too optimistic about the reward
system in which a ﬁxed pie is shared equally by all workers on a successful
program. Although this reward scheme will tend to produce a fairly good
distribution of workers from the point of view of the community, it often
will not produce the best distribution. Suppose you are making the choice
of which program to join. There are cases where you will do best to join
the more promising program even though your joining makes little or no
difference to its chance of success. Others have given the program a good
chance of success, and your joining gives you a good chance of an equal
share of the pie, though your efforts would have been more productive if
you had joined the alternative program. Had you joined the alternative,
you could have made a real difference to the community’s overall chance of
solving the problem. So a kind of “free riding” is encouraged in Kitcher’s
reward scheme.
Strevens argues that another reward scheme is both better for the com-
munity and closer to the actual situation in science. This scheme allocates
rewards to an individual that are proportional to the contribution he
makes to the particular research program that he joins. The payoff is given
only if a research program solves the scientiﬁc problem, and the pie is
shared unequally among those working on the successful program. Work-
ers who joined early and made a big difference to the program’s chance of
success get more than workers who joined late and made little difference.
There is obviously a great deal more detail that could be added here; I
have just introduced the simplest part of a complicated model. The overall
picture is clear, though. Hull, Kitcher, Strevens, and others are looking at
the relationship between individual incentive and community-level success
in science. The argument—made most bluntly by Hull but endorsed by oth-
ers—is that science has hit on a particularly effective way of coordinating
individual energies to yield good outcomes for the community as a whole.
11.3 Social Structure and Empiricism
At the end of the previous chapter, I began to sketch a version of empiricism
based on a naturalistic approach to philosophy. Science attempts to exploit
the contact with the world that humans have via experience, using this con-
tact to explore and assess hypotheses about the world. In this sense, we
might think of science as a strategy for answering questions and working
out what to believe. To a very limited extent, this strategy can be followed
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science
169

by a lone individual, but what results is something that has few of the dis-
tinctive features of science. The power of science is seen in the cumulative
and coordinated nature of scientiﬁc work; each generation in science builds
on the work of workers who came before, and each generation organizes
its energies via collaboration and public discussion. This social organiza-
tion permits the scientiﬁc strategy to function at the level of social groups;
the dialogue between the speculative voice and the critical voice can liter-
ally be a dialogue, rather than something internalized in the mind-set of the
individual scientist. These social groups can include some individuals who
are not especially open-minded—who are very wedded to their own ideas—
provided that the group as a whole retains ﬂexibility and responsiveness to
evidence.
So how do we get a community of individuals to behave in this sort of
way? We need a suitable reward system and also various external supports.
Some of what is needed is obvious; scientists need to be able to make a liv-
ing, unless we intend to leave it all to rich amateurs. The society as a whole
must allow questioning and open-ended inquiry. Though these factors are
obvious, other needs are probably more subtle. The work of people like
Merton and Hull suggests that science may need a speciﬁc kind of internal
culture and reward system; the delicate balance between competition and
cooperation is not easily achieved. But there are many unanswered ques-
tions here. Might science work just as well, or better, with a slightly differ-
ent reward system from what we ﬁnd today? Do we really need the intense
and often egoistic competition found in the science of Western market-
based societies? Those who like competitive, individualist societies will be
inclined to say yes; they will think that nothing else can generate the pre-
cious patterns of scientiﬁc social behavior. Those who dislike individual-
ism and competition, who prefer a more communitarian or socialist soci-
ety, might say no; they will hope that we could do as well or better with a
different reward system and a less competitive atmosphere.
This is a point where some feminist discussions of science are relevant.
Some feminists hold that the competitive and individualist culture of sci-
ence is more in tune with the temperaments of men than of women. This
affects the ability of many women to ﬂourish within the culture of main-
stream science. If it is real, this exclusion may have epistemological conse-
quences. Suppose it is also true that women bring a different “style” of
thought and investigation to science and that science beneﬁts from diver-
sity of this kind. In that case (and there are a lot of “ifs” here), the com-
petitive culture of science will tend to produce subtle kinds of uniformity
in scientiﬁc thinking and will reduce the frequency of a valuable kind of in-
put into scientiﬁc discussion.
170
Chapter Eleven

So we see that there are several ways in which Hull’s blunt assertion of
the harmony between individual-level and group-level beneﬁt in science
might be overstated. One of Hull’s own examples is interesting here. Hull
discusses, and extends, work by sociologists on the temperament and lead-
ership styles of successful scientists. The data suggest that an aggressive
faith in one’s own ideas, the pushiness of a “true believer,” can be useful in
at least some ﬁelds. Hull refers to a sociological study in which a detailed
survey of students and colleagues was used to investigate the temperaments
of some famous twentieth-century psychologists in the United States. One
contrast is especially interesting, that between B. F. Skinner and E. C. Tol-
man. Both Skinner and Tolman were in the “behaviorist” tradition in psy-
chology; they wanted psychology to be experimental, quantitative, and
closely focused on behavior. But Skinner’s version of this approach was al-
most absurdly strict, while Tolman’s was more ﬂexible. Tolman was also a
modest, open-minded, considerate sort of person; Skinner was dogmatic
and pushy. And Skinner, with his crusading zeal, had much more inﬂuence
than Tolman. We cannot know for sure what role temperament had in ex-
plaining this difference in success, of course, but the data are suggestive
(and Hull found similar results in a smaller study of his own).
So suppose that pushiness and zeal work well for individuals. Does this
tend to result in good outcomes for science? In this case, a good argument
could be made for the opposite view. I conjecture, and many psychologists
would agree, that if Tolman had dominated mid-twentieth-century psy-
chology rather than Skinner, it would have been far better for the ﬁeld.
(Some of Tolman’s ideas are currently being revived [Roberts 1998].) I sus-
pect that Hull might reply that the possible problems raised by the feminist
objection just above, and those illustrated by the case of Skinner and Tol-
man, are a small price to pay for the beneﬁts gained from the present bal-
ance of competition and cooperation in science.
We must also bear in mind that the internal culture of science is not
something ﬁxed and unchangeable. The ideas of people like Merton, Kuhn,
Hull, and Kitcher might describe science from the seventeenth to the twen-
tieth centuries, but change may well be in the air (Ziman 2000). Scientists
have usually not hoped to become rich through their work; recognition, es-
pecially by their peers, has been an alternative form of reward. But a num-
ber of commentators have noted that big ﬁnancial rewards have now
started to become a far more visible feature of the life of the scientist, es-
pecially in areas like biotechnology. Kuhn warned that the insulation of sci-
ence from pushes and pulls deriving from external political and economic
life was a key source of science’s strength. We do not know how fragile the
social structure of science might be.
Naturalism and the Social Structure of Science
171

In any case, this chapter and the previous one have introduced some of
the main themes in naturalistic philosophy of science. Naturalists hope
that by combining philosophical analysis with input from other disciplines,
we will eventually get a complete picture of how science works and what
sort of connection it gives us to the world. This last issue—the connection
that science gives us to the real world we inhabit—has often been mishan-
dled by sociology of science and Science Studies. That is the topic of the
next chapter.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
For assessments of Hull’s theory of science, see the reviews in Biology and Philos-
ophy, volume 3 (1988). Also see Sterelny 1994.
Kitcher’s main work here is The Advancement of Science (1993). The model dis-
cussed in this chapter is presented in a simpler form in Kitcher 1990. Solomon
(2001) defends a “social empiricism” in detail, with many examples from the his-
tory of science.
For a more general discussion of social structure and epistemology, see Gold-
man 1999. Downes (1993) argues that some naturalists do not take the social na-
ture of science seriously enough. Sulloway 1996 is a very adventurous discussion of
the role of personality and temperament in scientiﬁc revolutions.
172
Chapter Eleven

173
12
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Scientiﬁc Realism
12.1 Strange Debates
What does science try to describe? The world, of course. Which world is
that? Our world, the world we all live in and interact with. Unless we have
made some very surprising mistakes in our current science, the world we
now live in is a world of electrons, chemical elements, and genes, among
other things. Was the world of one thousand years ago a world of electrons,
chemical elements, and genes? Yes, although nobody knew it back then.
But the concept of an electron is the product of debates and experiments
that took place in a speciﬁc historical context. If someone said the word
“electron” in 1000 a.d., it would have meant nothing—or at least cer-
tainly not what it means now. So how can we say that the world of 1000
a.d. was a world of electrons? We cannot; we must instead regard the ex-
istence of electrons as dependent on our conceptualization of the world.
Those two paragraphs summarize one part of an argument about sci-
ence that has gone on constantly for the last ﬁfty years, and which stretches
much deeper into the history of philosophy. For some people, the claims
made in the ﬁrst paragraph are so obvious that only a tremendously con-
fused person could deny them. The world is one thing, and our ideas about
it are another! For other people, the arguments in the second paragraph
show that there is something badly wrong with the simple-looking claims
in the ﬁrst paragraph. The idea that our theories describe a real world that
exists wholly independently of thought and perception is a mistake, a naive
philosophical view linked to other mistakes about the history of science
and the place of science in society.
These problems have arisen several times in this book. In chapter 6 we
looked at Kuhn’s claim that when paradigms change, the world changes too.
In chapter 8 we found Latour suggesting that nature is the “product” of the
settlement of scientiﬁc controversy. I criticized those claims, but now it is
time to give a more detailed account of how theory and reality are connected.

12.2 Approaching Scientiﬁc Realism
The position defended in this book is a version of scientiﬁc realism. A sci-
entiﬁc realist thinks it does make sense to say that science aims at describ-
ing the real structure of the world we live in. Does the scientiﬁc realist think
that science succeeds in this aim? That is a more complicated issue.
Formulating scientiﬁc realism in a precise way will take a while. And the
best way to start is to ignore science for the moment and look ﬁrst for a
more general description of “realist” attitudes.
The term “realism” gets used in a huge variety of ways in philosophy;
this is a term to be very cautious about. One tradition of dispute has to do
with what our basic attitude should be toward the world that we seem to
inhabit. The simple, common-sense view is that the world is out there
around us, existing regardless of what we think about it. But this simple
idea has been challenged over and over again. One line of argument holds
that we could never know anything about a world of that kind. This debate
has carried over into the philosophy of science.
How might we give a more precise formulation of the “common-sense”
realist position? The usual starting point is the idea that reality is “inde-
pendent” of thought and language (Devitt 1997). This idea is on the right
track, but it has to be understood carefully. People’s thoughts and words
are, of course, real parts of the world, not extra things ﬂoating somehow
above it. And thought and language have a crucial causal role in the world.
One of the main reasons for thinking, talking, and theorizing is to work
out how to affect and transform things around us. Every bridge or light
bulb is an example of this phenomenon. So a realist statement about the
independence of the world from thought must have some qualiﬁcations.
Here is my formulation:
Common-sense Realism: We all inhabit a common reality, which has a structure that
exists independently of what people think and say about it, except insofar as real-
ity is comprised of, or is causally affected by, thoughts, theories, and other symbols.
The realist accepts that we may all have different views about the world and
different perspectives on it. Despite that, we are all here living in and inter-
acting with the same world. Let us now return to issues involving science.
12.3 A Statement of Scientiﬁc Realism
How should scientiﬁc realism be formulated? One possibility is to see the
scientiﬁc realist as asserting that the world really is the way it is described
174
Chapter Twelve

by our best-established scientiﬁc theories. We might say: there really are
electrons, chemical elements, genes, and so on. The world as described by
science is the real world. Michael Devitt is an example of a scientiﬁc real-
ist who expresses his position in this way (1997).
My approach will be different. I agree with Bas van Fraassen, and oth-
ers, who argue that it is a mistake to express the scientiﬁc realist position
in a way that depends on the accuracy of our current scientiﬁc theories. If
we express scientiﬁc realism by asserting the real existence of the entities
recognized by science now, then if our current theories turn out to be false,
scientiﬁc realism will be false too.
Should we worry about the possibility that our best-established theories
will turn out to be wrong? Devitt thinks that so long as we do not commit
ourselves to realism about speculative ideas at the frontiers of science, we
need not worry. Others think that this conﬁdence shows disregard for the
historical record; we should always recognize the genuine possibility that
well-established parts of science will run into trouble in the future.
How do we decide this massive question about the right level of conﬁ-
dence to have in current science? My suggestion is that we don’t decide it
here. Instead we should separate this question from the question of scien-
tiﬁc realism. A scientiﬁc realist position is compatible with a variety of dif-
ferent attitudes about the reliability of our current theories. We want a for-
mulation of scientiﬁc realism that is expressed as a claim about the enterprise
of science as a whole.
One complication comes from the following question: must the scientiﬁc
realist also be a common-sense realist? Is it possible—in principle—that
science could tell us that common-sense realism is false? The problem is
made vivid by puzzles with quantum mechanics, one of the basic theories
in modern physics. According to quantum mechanics, the state of a physi-
cal system is partially determined by the act of measurement. Some inter-
pretations of quantum mechanics see this as causing problems for common-
sense realist ideas about the relation between human thought and physical
reality. These interpretations of quantum mechanics are very controversial.
Like a lot of other philosophers, I have been quietly hoping that further
work will eventually show them to be completely mistaken. But that is not
the point that matters here. The point is this: should we allow for the pos-
sibility that science could conﬂict with common-sense realism? If we say
that scientiﬁc realism does assume common-sense realism, we seem to be
committed to holding on to an everyday, unreﬂective picture of the world,
regardless of what science ends up saying. But if we sever scientiﬁc realism
from common-sense realism, it becomes hard to formulate a general claim
about how the aim of science is to describe the real world.
Scientiﬁc Realism
175

My response to the problem is to modify common-sense realism so that
it allows for the possibility of unexpected, uncommonsensical relations be-
tween thought and reality at large. Common-sense realism as previously
formulated allowed for the possibility of causal links between thought and
the rest of reality. It is often hard to tell whether a connection posited by
science is a causal connection or not. So let us widen the class of relations
between thought and the world that realism accepts; science might add
new cases. Because we are modifying common-sense realism to make it
more responsive to science, this is a naturalistic modiﬁcation.
Common-sense Realism Naturalized: We all inhabit a common reality, which has a
structure that exists independently of what people think and say about it, except in-
sofar as reality is comprised of thoughts, theories, and other symbols, and except
insofar as reality is dependent on thoughts, theories, and other symbols in ways that
might be uncovered by science.
Once we have made this modiﬁcation, it is reasonable to include common-
sense realism as part of scientiﬁc realism. Here is my preferred statement
of scientiﬁc realism:
Scientiﬁc Realism:
1. Common-sense realism naturalized.
2. One actual and reasonable aim of science is to give us accurate descriptions (and
other representations) of what reality is like. This project includes giving us ac-
curate representations of aspects of reality that are unobservable.
In this sense, I am a scientiﬁc realist.
Several comments on this formulation are needed. First, clause 2 says
that one aim of science is to represent the structure of the world. Nothing
implies here that this is the only aim of science. There might be other aims
as well. And some particular theories—even whole research programs—
might be developed in a way intended to serve other purposes.
Second, I said “actual and reasonable aim.” The ﬁrst part of this is a
claim about the goals behind at least a good proportion of actual scientiﬁc
work. The second part claims that scientists are not deluded or irrational
in making this their goal. They can reasonably hope to succeed at least some
of the time.
But I do not say how often they succeed. No part of my statement of sci-
entiﬁc realism endorses our current particular scientiﬁc theories. In some
areas of science, it’s hard to imagine that we could be badly wrong in our
current views; it’s hard to imagine that we could be wrong in believing that
176
Chapter Twelve

tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium and that chemical bonding occurs via
the interactions of outer-shell electrons in atoms. Still, my statement of
scientiﬁc realism is intended to capture the possibility of both optimistic
and pessimistic versions. An optimistic scientiﬁc realist thinks we can be
conﬁdent that science is succeeding in uncovering the basic structure of
the world and how it works. The pessimistic option is more cautious,
even slightly skeptical. A pessimistic scientiﬁc realist might be someone
who thinks that it is very hard for our feeble minds to get to the right the-
ories, that evidence is often misleading, and that we tend to get too conﬁ-
dent too quickly.
So there is a range of possible attitudes within scientiﬁc realism toward
our chances of really understanding how the world works. Although there
is a range, there is also a limit. My statement of scientiﬁc realism says that
giving us accurate representations of the world is a reasonable aim of sci-
ence. If someone thought it was just about impossible for us to get to the
right theories, then it is hard to see how it could be a reasonable aim of sci-
ence to try to do so. So there is a limit to the pessimism that is compatible
with scientiﬁc realism as I understand it; extreme pessimism is not com-
patible. I think of Popper as someone who is getting close to this limit but
who does not actually reach it.
Although Kuhn’s most famous discussions of realism are his notorious
claims about how the world changes when paradigms change, at other
times he seems more like a pessimistic scientiﬁc realist. These are passages
where Kuhn seems to think that the world is just so complicated that our
theories will always run into trouble in the end—and this is a fact about
the world that is independent of paradigms. We try to “force” nature into
“boxes,” but nature resists. All paradigms are doomed to fail eventually.
This skeptical realist view is more coherent and more interesting than
Kuhn’s “changing worlds” position.
Much of the recent philosophical debate under the heading “scientiﬁc
realism” has really been discussion of whether we should be optimistic or
pessimistic about the aspirations of science to represent the world accu-
rately (Psillos 1999). Some hold that fundamental ideas have changed so
often within science—especially within physics—that we should always
expect our current views to turn out to be wrong. Sometimes this argument
is called the “pessimistic meta-induction.” The preﬁx “meta” is misleading
here, because the argument is not an induction about inductions; it’s more
like an induction about explanatory inferences. So let’s call it “the pes-
simistic induction from the history of science.” The pessimists give long
lists of previously posited theoretical entities like phlogiston and caloric
that we now think do not exist (Laudan 1981). Optimists reply with long
Scientiﬁc Realism
177

lists of theoretical entities that once were questionable but which we now
think deﬁnitely do exist—like atoms, germs, and genes.
These debates only have the ability to threaten scientiﬁc realism of the
kind defended here it if they threaten to establish extreme pessimism. They
do not support extreme pessimism. But the debates are interesting in their
own right. What level of conﬁdence should we have in our current theories,
given the dramatic history of change in science? We should not think that
this question is one to be settled solely by the historical track record. We
might have reason to believe that our methods of hypothesizing and test-
ing theories have improved over the years. But history will certainly give us
interesting data on the question.
We might ﬁnd good reason to have different levels of conﬁdence, and
also different kinds of conﬁdence, in different domains of science. Ernan
McMullin (1984) has rightly urged that we not think of the parts of physics
that deal with the ultimate structure of reality as a model for all of science.
Basic physics is where we deal with the most inaccessible entities, those fur-
thest from the domain our minds are adapted to dealing with. In basic
physics we often ﬁnd ourselves with powerful mathematical formalisms
that are hard to interpret. These facts give us grounds for caution. And
where we are optimistic, we might have grounds for optimism about some
features of our theories and not others. McMullin and also John Worrall
(1989) have developed versions of the idea that the conﬁdence we should
have about basic physics is conﬁdence that low-level structural features of
the world have been captured reliably by our models and equations. That
is a special kind of conﬁdence.
All those factors that are relevant in the case of fundamental physics do
not apply in the case of molecular biology. There we deal with entities that
are far from the lowest levels, entities that we have a variety of kinds of ac-
cess to. We do not ﬁnd ourselves with powerful mathematical formalisms
that are hard to interpret. The history of this ﬁeld also supports a view hold-
ing that we are steadily accumulating knowledge of how biological mole-
cules work and how they operate in the processes of life. So trying to work
out the right attitude to have toward molecular biology is not the same as
trying to work out the right attitude toward theoretical physics.
Realists sometimes claim that there is a general argument from the suc-
cess of scientiﬁc theories to their truth. It is sometimes claimed that real-
ism is the only philosophy of science that does not make the success of sci-
ence into a miracle (Smart 1968; Putnam 1978). This line of argument has
been unimpressive as a defense of realism. The real world will deﬁnitely
have some role in affecting the success and failure of theories. Theories will
do well or badly partly because of their relations to the world in which they
178
Chapter Twelve

are used and investigated. But there are many kinds of ways in which the
link between theory and reality can generate success, especially in the short
or medium term. Accurate representation of the world is not the only way.
Theories can contain errors that compensate for each other. And theories
can be successful despite being very wrong about the kinds of things they
posit, provided they have the right structure in crucial places. Here is a
simple example used by Laudan: Sadi Carnot thought that heat was a ﬂuid,
but he worked out some of the basic ideas of thermodynamics accurately
despite this. The ﬂow of a ﬂuid was similar enough to patterns in the trans-
fer of kinetic energy between molecules for his mistake not to matter much.
Realists need to give up the idea that success in science points directly or
unambiguously toward the truth of theories.
I hope my reasons for setting things up in the way I have are becoming
clear. Much of the literature has held that scientiﬁc realists must be opti-
mistic about current theories and about the history of science. I resisted
that formulation of the issue. There is no point in arguing too much about
the term “scientiﬁc realism,” but there are beneﬁts from organizing the is-
sues in the way I have. What I call scientiﬁc realism is a fairly deﬁnite yes-
or-no choice. (Fairly deﬁnite; see section 12.7.) This is also a choice about
fundamental philosophical issues. The question about the right level of op-
timism to have about well-established scientiﬁc theories is not a question
that has a simple answer that can be easily summarized. There we need to
distinguish between different scientiﬁc ﬁelds, different kinds of theories,
different kinds of success, and different kinds of optimism. In many cases
we surely have good reason to be optimistic, but simple slogans should not
be trusted.
One more comment on my formulation of scientiﬁc realism is needed. I
said that science aims to give us “accurate descriptions and other represen-
tations of what reality is like.” This is meant to be very broad, because there
are lots of different kinds of representation used by different sciences. Some
philosophers think that the main goal for a realist is truth; a good theory
is a true theory. So they might want to formulate realism by saying that sci-
ence aims to give us true theories. But the concepts of truth and falsity are
only easy to apply in cases where a representation is in the form of language.
In addition to linguistic representations, science often uses mathematical
models, and other kinds of models, to describe phenomena. A scientiﬁc
claim might also be expressed using a diagram. So I use the term “accurate
representation” in a broad way to include true linguistic descriptions, pic-
tures and diagrams that resemble reality in the way they are supposed to,
models that have the right structural similarity to aspects of the world, and
so on. I will return to these issues in the ﬁnal section of this chapter.
Scientiﬁc Realism
179

12.4 Challenges from Traditional Empiricism
Scientiﬁc realism is now a popular position, but it has faced constant crit-
icisms and challenges. Many of the most inﬂuential philosophers have
thought that there is at least something wrong with scientiﬁc realism of the
kind described in the previous section. Let’s do a quick survey of the
philosophers discussed so far in this book. Logical positivism was mostly
opposed to scientiﬁc realism. Kuhn was vague and not always consistent,
but he mostly opposed it. Many sociologists of science have certainly op-
posed it, including Latour. Goodman, the inventor of the “new riddle of in-
duction,” was opposed to it. Van Fraassen, who inﬂuenced my statement
of what scientiﬁc realism is, rejects the view. So does Laudan. Feyerabend
is hard to assess. Popper is in favor of scientiﬁc realism. Many of the natu-
ralists discussed in the two previous chapters are scientiﬁc realists (includ-
ing Fodor, Hull, and Kitcher), but not all are.
The critics listed above do not agree on what is wrong with scientiﬁc re-
alism. I will divide the various forms of opposition into three broad fami-
lies. Critics of realism differ among themselves just as much as they differ
from the realists.
First, scientiﬁc realism has often been challenged by traditional forms
of empiricism. In this book I will defend both scientiﬁc realism and a kind
of empiricism, but this is not always an easy alliance. Indeed, one side of
the debate about realism is often referred to as a debate between realism
and empiricism.
Traditional empiricists tend to worry about both common sense and sci-
entiﬁc realism, and they often worry for reasons having to do with knowl-
edge. If there was a real world existing beyond our thoughts and sensa-
tions, how could we ever know anything about it? Empiricists believe that
our senses provide us with our only source of factual knowledge. Many
empiricists have thought that sensory evidence is not good enough for us
to regard ourselves as having access to a “real world” of the kind the real-
ist is committed to. And it seems strange (though not absurd, I think) to be
in a position where you simultaneously say that a real world exists and also
say we can never have any knowledge about it whatsoever.
The logical positivists recast these issues in terms of their theory of lan-
guage. In the heyday of logical positivism, traditional philosophical ques-
tions about the “reality of the external world” were regarded as meaning-
less and empty. So the logical positivist attitude to most discussions of the
“relation between science and reality” is that no side of the debate is say-
ing anything meaningful and the whole discussion is a waste of time.
Some versions of logical positivism were also committed to the “phe-
180
Chapter Twelve

nomenalist” idea that all meaningful sentences can be translated into sen-
tences that refer only to sensations. If phenomenalism is true, then when
we seem to make claims about real external objects, all we are talking
about are patterns in our sensations. Some more holistic empiricist views
about language, of the kind associated with logical empiricism, have the
same consequence. Even if translations are not possible, the nature of lan-
guage prevents us from hoping to describe the structure of a world beyond
our senses. Language and thought just cannot “reach” that far. I believe
that a lot of twentieth-century empiricism held onto a version of this view
(though some commentators on this book have objected to this claim).
In recent years the tension between realism and empiricism has often
been debated under the topic of the “underdetermination of theory by ev-
idence.” Empiricists argue that there will always be a range of alternative
theories compatible with all our actual evidence, and maybe a range of al-
ternative theories compatible with all our possible evidence. So we never
have good empirical grounds for choosing one of these theories over others
and regarding it as representing how the world really is. This takes us back
to the discussion in the previous section about the right level of optimism
we should have about our scientiﬁc theories. I expressed scientiﬁc realism
in a way compatible with a fair degree of pessimism, but the problem of
underdetermination is important in its own right (see also sections 15.2
and 15.3).
12.5 Metaphysical Constructivism
I use the term “metaphysical constructivism” for a family of views includ-
ing those of Kuhn and Latour. These views hold that, in some sense, we
have to regard the world as created or constructed by scientiﬁc theorizing.
Kuhn expressed this claim by saying that when paradigms change, the
world changes too. Latour expresses the view by saying that nature (the
real world) is the product of the decisions made by scientists in the settle-
ment of controversies. Nelson Goodman is another example; he argues
that when we invent new languages and theories, we create new “worlds”
as well (1978). For a metaphysical constructivist, it is not even possible for
a scientiﬁc theory to describe the world as it exists independent of thought,
because reality itself is dependent on what people say and think.
These views are always hard to interpret, because they look so strange
when interpreted literally. How could we possibly make the world just by
making up a new theory? Maybe Kuhn, Latour, and Goodman are just us-
ing a metaphor of some kind? Perhaps. Kuhn sometimes expressed a dif-
ferent view on the question, a kind of skeptical realism, and he struggled
Scientiﬁc Realism
181

to make his position clear. But when writers such as Goodman have been
asked about this, they have generally insisted that their claims are not just
metaphorical (Goodman 1996, 145). They think there is something quite
wrong with scientiﬁc realism of the kind I described in section 12.3. They
accept that it’s hard to describe a good alternative, but they think we
should use the concept of “construction,” or something like it, to express
the relationship between theories and reality.
Some of these ideas can be seen as modiﬁed versions of the view of Im-
manuel Kant ([1781] 1998). Kant distinguished the “noumenal” world
from the “phenomenal” world. The noumenal world is the world as it is in
itself. This is a world we are bound to believe in, but which we can never
know anything about. The phenomenal world is the world as it appears to
us. The phenomenal world is knowable, but it is partly our creation. It does
not exist independently of the structure of our minds.
This kind of picture has often seemed appealing to philosophers who
want to deny scientiﬁc realism but do so in a moderate way. Hoyningen-
Huene (1993) has argued that we should interpret Kuhn’s views as similar
to Kant’s. In Michael Devitt’s analysis of the realism debates (1997), a wide
range of philosophers are seen as either deliberately or inadvertently fol-
lowing the Kantian pattern. According to Devitt, constructivist antirealism
works by combining the Kantian picture with a kind of relativism, with the
idea that different people or communities create different “phenomenal
worlds” via the imposition of their different concepts on experience. This
relativist idea was not part of Kant’s original view; for Kant all humans ap-
ply the same basic conceptual framework and have no choice in the matter.
The Kantian picture is sometimes seen as a way of holding onto the idea
that there is a real world constraining what we believe but doing so in a way
that does not permit our knowing or representing this world. This move is
often tempting, but the resulting views are unhelpful. Understanding our
access to reality is difﬁcult, but adding an extra layer called “the phenom-
enal world” in between us and the real world achieves nothing.
The term “social constructivism” is often used for roughly the same kind
of view that I am calling metaphysical constructivism. But “social construc-
tivism” is also used for more moderate ideas as well. If someone argues
that we make or construct our theories, or our classiﬁcations of objects,
that claim is not opposed to scientiﬁc realism. We do indeed “construct”
our ideas and classiﬁcations. Nature does not hand them to us on a plat-
ter. But a scientiﬁc realist insists that beyond ideas and theories there is also
the rest of reality.
In ﬁelds like sociology of science, as we saw in chapter 8, there is an un-
fortunate tradition of not explicitly distinguishing between the construc-
182
Chapter Twelve

tion of ideas and the construction of reality. What is it about these ﬁelds
that has encouraged such strange-sounding formulations of ideas? There
are various reasons, but I will venture some meta-sociology here—sociol-
ogy of the sociology of science. A lot of work in these ﬁelds has been or-
ganized around the desire to oppose a particular Bad View that is seen as
completely wrong. The Bad View holds that reality determines thought by
stamping itself on the passive mind; reality acts on scientiﬁc belief with
“unmediated compulsory force” (Shapin 1982, 163). That picture is to be
avoided at all costs; it is often seen as not only false but even politically
harmful, because it suggests a passive, inactive view of human thought.
Many traditional philosophical theories are interpreted as implicitly com-
mitted to this Bad View. This is one source for descriptions of logical pos-
itivism as reactionary, helpful to oppressors, and so on.
What results from this is a tendency for people to go as far as possible
away from the Bad View. This encourages people to assert simple reversals
of the Bad View’s relationship between mind and world. Thus we reach the
idea that theories construct reality.
Some explicitly embrace the idea of an “inversion” of the traditional
picture (Woolgar 1988, 65), while others leave things more ambiguous.
But there is little pressure within the ﬁeld to discourage people from going
too far in these statements. (Bloor 1999 is an interesting exception.) In-
deed, those who express more moderate denials of the Bad View leave
themselves vulnerable to criticism from within the ﬁeld. The result is a lit-
erature in which one error—the view that reality stamps itself on the pas-
sive mind—is exchanged for another error, the view that thought or the-
ory constructs reality.
12.6 Van Fraassen’s View
The last form of opposition to scientiﬁc realism that I will discuss is a more
moderate and careful form; this is the position of Bas van Fraassen (1980).
Van Fraassen’s ideas lie within the empiricist tradition, but they are not
based on a linguistic or psychological theory. Instead, van Fraassen con-
fronts realism on the proper aims of science. So his antirealism is a direct
denial of the kind of scientiﬁc realism defended in this chapter. This is no
accident, since my formulation of scientiﬁc realism was inﬂuenced by his.
In discussions of realism, the term “instrumentalism” is used to refer to
a variety of antirealist views. Sometimes it is used for traditional empiricist
positions of the kind discussed earlier. But sometimes it is used in a differ-
ent way, which I think is more appropriate. According to instrumentalism
in this sense, we should think of scientiﬁc theories as devices for helping us
Scientiﬁc Realism
183

deal with experience. Rather than saying that describing the real world is
impossible, an instrumentalist will urge us not to worry about whether a
theory is a true description of the world, or whether electrons “really, re-
ally exist.” If a theory enables us to make good predictions, what more can
we ask? If we have a theory that gives us the right answers with respect to
what we can observe, we might occasionally ﬁnd ourselves wondering if
these right answers result from some deeper “match” between the theory
and the world. But we can never expect to know the answer to this ques-
tion, so what relevance does it have to science? Quite a few scientists have
expressed instrumentalist views, especially in physics. The idea that we
should ignore questions about the “real reality” of theoretical entities be-
cause these questions have no practical relevance is also linked to one
strand of the pragmatist tradition in philosophy (Rorty 1982).
A detailed version of this kind of position has been worked out by van
Fraassen (1980). Van Fraassen does not use the term “instrumentalist” to
describe his view; he calls it “constructive empiricism.” The term “con-
structive” is used by so many people that it often seems to have no mean-
ing at all, so I have reserved it for the views discussed in section 12.5. I see
van Fraassen’s view as a version of the instrumentalist approach, but it does
not matter much what we call it.
Van Fraassen suggests that all we should ask of theories is that they ac-
curately describe the observable parts of the world. Theories that do this
are “empirically adequate.” An empirically adequate theory might also de-
scribe the hidden structure of reality, but whether or not it does so is of no
interest to science. For van Fraassen, when a theory passes a lot of tests and
becomes well established, the right attitude to have toward the theory is to
“accept” it, in a special sense. To accept a theory is to (1) believe (provi-
sionally) that the theory is empirically adequate, and to (2) use the con-
cepts the theory provides when thinking about further problems and when
trying to extend and reﬁne the theory.
Regarding point 1, for a theory to be empirically adequate, it must de-
scribe all the observable phenomena that come within its domain, includ-
ing those we have not yet investigated. Some of the familiar problems of in-
duction and conﬁrmation appear here. Regarding point 2, van Fraassen
wants to recognize that scientists do come to “live inside” their theories;
they make use of the theory’s picture of the world when exploring new phe-
nomena. Some versions of instrumentalism struggle to make sense of this
fact. But van Fraassen says a scientist can “live inside” a theory while re-
maining agnostic about whether the theory is true.
How can we decide between van Fraassen’s view and the version of sci-
entiﬁc realism that I outlined earlier?
184
Chapter Twelve

First we need to be sure that the two positions conﬂict. I said that one
aim of science is to give us accurate representations of the world, including
the unobservable parts. Van Fraassen says “science aims to give us theories
which are empirically adequate” (1980, 12). So far, our views seem com-
patible. In some cases science could aim only at empirical adequacy, but in
other cases it could aim at representing the hidden structure of the world
as well.
And this is the right attitude for a realist to have. For various reasons
and in various situations, it might make sense for a scientist to be cautious,
or unconcerned, about the application of a theory to the unobserved struc-
ture of the world, even when he or she is becoming conﬁdent about empir-
ical adequacy.
So van Fraassen has described an attitude that scientists can reasonably
have toward some theories in some circumstances. But van Fraassen thinks
that science should aim at no more than empirical adequacy.
As many have argued, one place where van Fraassen’s view runs into
trouble is the distinction between observable and unobservable parts of the
world. Realists have argued that there is a continuum, rather than a sharp
boundary, between the observable and the unobservable (Maxwell 1962).
Some things can be observed with the naked eye, like trees. Other things,
like the smallest subatomic particles, are unobservable and can only have
their presence inferred from their effects on the behavior of observable
things. But between the clear cases we have lots of unclear ones. Is it ob-
servation if you use a telescope? How about a light microscope? An X-ray
machine? An MRI scan? An electron microscope? The realist thinks that
the distinction between the observable and unobservable is vague, and not
of the right kind to support general conclusions about what science aims
to represent.
Van Fraassen accepts that the distinction between the observable and
the unobservable is vague, and he accepts that there is nothing “unreal”
about the unobservable. He also accepts that we learn about the boundary
from science itself. Still, he argues, science is only concerned with empiri-
cal adequacy—making true claims about the observable part of the world.
But this view cannot be defended. Van Fraassen is saying it’s never reason-
able for science to aim at describing the structure of the world beyond this
particular boundary. Suppose we describe a slightly different boundary,
based on a concept a bit broader than “observation.” Let’s say that some-
thing is detectable if either it is observable or its presence can be very reli-
ably inferred from what is observable. As with van Fraassen’s concept of
observability, science itself tells us which things are detectable. In this sense,
the chemical structures of various important molecules like sugars and
Scientiﬁc Realism
185

DNA are detectable although not observable. So why shouldn’t science aim
at giving us accurate representations of the detectable features of the world
as well as the observable features? Why shouldn’t science aim to tell us what
the molecular structure of complex sugars is like?
Perhaps our beliefs about the detectable structures are not as reliable as
our beliefs about the observable structures. If so, we need to be more cau-
tious when we take theories to be telling us what the detectable structure
of the world is like. But that is no problem; we often need to be cautious.
What is so special about the “detectable”? Nothing, of course. We could
deﬁne an even broader category of objects and structures, which includes
the detectable things plus those that can have their presence inferred from
observations with moderate reliability. Why should science stop before try-
ing to work out what lies beyond this boundary? We might need to be even
more careful with our beliefs about those features of the world, but that is
no problem.
You can see how the argument is going. From the realist point of view,
there is no boundary that marks the distinction between features of the
world that science can reasonably aim to tell us about and features that sci-
ence cannot reasonably aim to tell us about. As we learn about the world,
we also learn more and more about which parts of the world we can expect
to have reliable information about. And there is no reason why science
should not try to describe all the aspects of the world that we can hope to
gain reliable information about. As we move from one area to another, we
must often adjust our level of conﬁdence. Sometimes, especially in areas
such as theoretical physics, which are fraught with strange puzzles, we
might have reason to adopt something like van Fraassen’s attitude, at least
temporarily. But it is a mistake to think that empirical adequacy of van
Fraassen’s kind is the aim of science.
12.7 Representation, Models, and Truth (Optional Section)
I will ﬁnish the chapter with further discussion of an issue introduced in
section 12.3. I formulated scientiﬁc realism by saying that science tries to
give us “accurate representations” of the world. Most discussion of this
topic in twentieth-century philosophy treated theories as linguistic entities,
as collections of sentences. So when people tried to work out what sorts of
relationships theories have with reality, they drew on concepts from the
philosophy of language. In particular, the concepts of truth and reference
were emphasized. A good scientiﬁc theory is a true theory; how can we de-
termine which theories are true? Electrons exist if the word “electron”
refers to them; how do we decide whether a term in a scientiﬁc theory refers
186
Chapter Twelve

to anything? A range of problems came to be addressed via the concepts of
truth and reference.
This emphasis might be a bad idea. There are several issues to consider.
One has to do with the “representational vehicles,” or representational me-
dia, used by science. Science does express hypotheses about the world using
sentences in language, either ordinary language or technical extensions of
ordinary language. But in other cases, science uses representational vehicles
of a different kind. Many hypotheses in science are expressed using models.
Consider the case of mathematical models. These are abstract mathemati-
cal structures that are supposed to represent key features of real systems in
the world. But in thinking about how a mathematical model might succeed
in representing the world, the linguistic concepts of truth, falsity, reference,
and so forth do not seem to be useful. Models have a different kind of rep-
resentational relationship with the world from that found in language. A
good model is one that has some kind of similarity relationship, probably
of an abstract kind, with the system that the model is “targeted” at (Giere
1988). It is hard to work out the details of this idea.
The role of models in science did become an important topic in late-
twentieth-century philosophy (Suppe 1977). Some argued that we should
use the idea of a model to give a different description of how all theories
work in science. But it is a mistake to think that all of science uses the same
“vehicles” to represent the world. We should not replace a language-based
analysis of all science with a model-based analysis. What we ﬁnd in science
is a range of different representational vehicles.
Consider Darwin’s Origin of Species. Darwin’s book contained a set of
hypotheses about the world, supported with elaborate arguments, expressed
using rather ordinary language. But not all science is like this. Even the top-
ics that Darwin was addressing are now treated differently. Recent discus-
sions of how natural selection changes biological populations tend to be
expressed in the form of mathematical models. These models are written
down, of course. They are formulated using mathematical symbolism, and
they have to be supplemented with a commentary telling us (for example)
which phenomena in the real world are being represented by the model.
But we should not expect an analysis of how mathematical models relate
to the world to use the same concepts as an analysis of how hypotheses ex-
pressed in ordinary language relate to the world.
Not all models in science are mathematical. More generally, we might
think of a model as a structure that is intended to represent another struc-
ture by virtue of an abstract similarity relationship between them. Some-
times the aim might be to understand the unfamiliar by modeling it on the
familiar (as in Bohr’s early “solar system” model of the atom). But this
Scientiﬁc Realism
187

is not always what is going on. Abstract mathematical models might be
thought of as attempts to use a general-purpose and precise framework to
represent dependence relationships that might exist between the parts of
real systems. A mathematical model will treat one variable as a function of
others, which in turn are functions of others, and so on. In this way, a com-
plicated network of dependence structures can be represented. And then,
via a commentary, the dependence structure in the model can be treated as
representing the dependence structure that might exist in a real system.
Models, whether mathematical or not, have a kind of ﬂexibility that is
important in scientiﬁc work. A variety of people can use the same model
while interpreting it differently. One person might use the model as a pre-
dictive device, something that gives an output when you plug in speciﬁc in-
puts, without caring how the inner workings of the model relate to the real
world. Another person might treat the same model as a highly detailed pic-
ture of the dependence structure inside the real system being studied. And
there is a range of possible attitudes between these two extremes; another
person might treat the model as representing some features, but only a few,
of what is going on in the real system.
The difference between models and linguistically expressed theories
may be important in understanding progress in science. Many old scientiﬁc
theories, now superseded, can look like failures when we ask whether much
of the theory was true, and whether the terms in the theory referred to any-
thing. But sometimes, if we recast the old theory as a model, we ﬁnd that
the model had some of the right structure, from the point of view of our
current theories. Worrall (1989) uses the case of various “ether” theories
from nineteenth-century physics; they had good structural features even
though the ether does not exist.
In criticizing the emphasis on truth and reference in philosophy of sci-
ence, I have stressed the role of representational vehicles that require a dif-
ferent kind of analysis. Some would add that even when we are dealing with
language, the concepts of truth and reference might be bad ones to use.
Some philosophers think that to call a theory true is to assert that it has
a special connection to the world. Traditionally, this has been described as
a correspondence relationship. That term can be misleading, as it suggests
a kind of “picturing,” which is not what modern theories of truth propose.
But this ﬁrst option holds that there is some kind of special and valuable
relationship between true theories and the world. If this is so, we can use
the concept of truth when analyzing scientiﬁc language and its relations to
reality. Others argue that the concept of truth is not suitable for this kind
of use. The word “true” is one that we use to signal our agreement or dis-
agreement with others, not to describe real connections between language
188
Chapter Twelve

and the world (Horwich 1990). In sociology of science, Bloor (1999) has
defended a position of this kind.
In this chapter I have been cautious about truth. I used a broad concept
of “accurate representation” to describe a goal that science has for its the-
ories. Some argue that even the idea of representation as a genuine rela-
tionship between symbols and the world is mistaken, whether the symbols
are in language, models, thought, or whatever. That will sound like a rad-
ical position, and so it is. (This is one claim made by postmodernists, for
example.) But it is hard to work out which theories about symbols retain
the familiar idea of representation, and which do not.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Key works in the resurgence of scientiﬁc realism include Jack Smart’s Philosophy
and Scientiﬁc Realism (1963) and various papers collected in Hilary Putnam’s Mind,
Language, and Reality (1975). See also Maxwell 1962.
Leplin, Scientiﬁc Realism (1984), is a very good collection on the problem.
Boyd’s paper in that book is a useful survey of the options, with key differences from
the one given here. Boyd also gives an inﬂuential defense of scientiﬁc realism. De-
vitt, Realism and Truth (1997), defends both common-sense and scientiﬁc realism.
Psillos 1999 is a very detailed treatment of the debate.
For further discussion of the relations between realism and success, see Stanford
2000. On the problems raised by quantum physics, see Albert 1992. For a more de-
tailed discussion of how avoidance of the “Bad View” has shaped sociology of sci-
ence, see Godfrey-Smith 1996, chapter 5.
Churchland and Hooker, Images of Science (1985), is a good collection on van
Fraassen.
Kitcher (1978) battles with the problems of meaning and reference for scientiﬁc
language and their consequences for realism. See also Bishop and Stich 1998 on this
problem. Lynch 2001 is a recent collection on the problem of truth.
There is a large literature on the role of models in science (Suppe 1977). Con-
fusion sometimes arises because the usual sense of the word “model” in philosophy
is different from that found in science itself (see the glossary). So different people
wanting to “analyze science in terms of models” often have very different tasks in
mind (Downes 1992). One useful and interesting treatment of the issue is in Giere’s
Explaining Science (1988, chapter 3). Hesse 1966 is a famous early discussion, fo-
cused, however, on yet another sense of “model.”
Fine 1984 and Hacking 1983 are inﬂuential works on scientiﬁc realism that de-
fend rather different views from those discussed here.
Scientiﬁc Realism
189

190
13
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Explanation
13.1 Knowing Why
What does science do for us? In chapter 12 I argued for a version of scien-
tiﬁc realism, according to which one aim of science is describing the real
structure of the world. Science aims to tell us, and often succeeds in telling
us, what the world is like. But it is also common to think that science tells
us why things happen; we learn from science not just what goes on but why
it does. Science apparently seeks to explain as well as describe. So we seem
to face a new question. What is it for a scientiﬁc theory to explain some-
thing? In what sense does science give us an understanding of phenomena,
as opposed to mere descriptions of what there is and what happens?
The idea that science aims at explanations of why things happen has
sometimes aroused suspicion in philosophers, and it has also done so in sci-
entists themselves. Such distrust is reasonably common within strong em-
piricist views. Empiricists have often seen science, most fundamentally, as
a system of rules for predicting experience. When explanation is put for-
ward as an extra goal for scientiﬁc theories, empiricists get nervous.
There is a complicated relationship between this problem of explana-
tion and the problem of analyzing conﬁrmation and evidence (chapters 3,
14). The hope has often been to treat these problems separately. Under-
standing evidence is problem 1; this is the problem of analyzing what it is
to have evidence to believe that a scientiﬁc theory is true. Understanding
explanation is problem 2; here we assume that we have already chosen our
scientiﬁc theories, at least for now. We want to work out how our theories
provide explanations. In principle, we can make a distinction of this kind.
But there is a close connection between the issues. The solution to problem
2 may affect how we solve problem 1. Theories are often preferred by sci-
entists because they seem to yield good explanations of puzzling phenom-
ena. In chapter 3, explanatory inference was deﬁned as inference from a set
of data to a hypothesis about a structure or process that would explain the

data. This seems much more common in science than the traditional philo-
sophical idea of inductive inference (inference from particular cases to gen-
eralizations). This suggests that there is a close relation between the prob-
lem of analyzing explanation and the problem of analyzing evidence.
There is a very large literature on explanation, but these issues will get
a whirlwind treatment in this book. One reason for this is that I think the
philosophy of science has approached the problem of explanation in a mis-
taken way. To some extent, that is true of many topics in this book; there
have been plenty of wrong turns in the philosophy of science. But in the
case of explanation, I think the error has been fairly clear; I will describe it
in section 13.3. So some of the views presented in this chapter are rather
unorthodox.
13.2 The Rise and Fall of the Covering Law Theory of Explanation
Empiricist philosophers, I said above, have sometimes been distrustful of
the idea that science explains things. Logical positivism is an example. The
idea of explanation was sometimes associated by the positivists with the
idea of achieving deep metaphysical insight into the world—an idea they
would have nothing to do with. But the logical positivists and logical em-
piricists did make peace with the idea that science explains. They did this
by construing “explanation” in a low-key way that ﬁtted into their em-
piricist picture.
The result was the covering law theory of explanation. This was the
dominant philosophical theory about scientiﬁc explanation for a good part
of the twentieth century. The view is now dead, but its rise and fall are in-
structive.
The covering law theory of explanation was ﬁrst developed in detail by
Carl Hempel and Paul Oppenheim in a paper (1948) that became a center-
piece of logical empiricist philosophy. Let us begin with some terminology.
In talking about how explanation works, the explanandum is whatever is
being explained. The explanans is the thing that is doing the explaining. If
we ask “why X?” then X is the explanandum. If we answer “because Y,”
then Y is the explanans.
The basic ideas of the covering law theory are simple. Most fundamen-
tally, to explain something is to show how to derive it in a logical argument.
The explanandum will be the conclusion of the argument, and the premises
are the explanans. A good explanation must ﬁrst of all be a good logical ar-
gument, but in addition, the premises must contain at least one statement
of a law of nature. The law must make a real contribution to the argument;
it cannot be something merely tacked on. (Of course, for an explanation to
Explanation
191

be a good one in the fullest sense, the premises must also be true. But the
ﬁrst task here is to describe what sort of statements would give us a good
explanation of a phenomenon, if the statements were true.)
Some explanations (both in science and in everyday life) are of particu-
lar events, while others are directed at general phenomena or regularities.
For example, we might try to explain the particular fact that the U.S. stock
market crashed in 1929, in terms of economic laws operating against the
background conditions of the day. And we can also explain patterns; New-
ton is often seen as giving an explanation of Kepler’s laws of planetary mo-
tion in terms of more basic laws of mechanics in combination with as-
sumptions about the layout of the solar system. In both cases, the covering
law theory sees these explanations as expressible in terms of arguments
from premises to conclusions. Some of the arguments that express expla-
nations will be deductively valid, but this is not required in all cases. The
covering law theory was intended to allow that some good explanations
could be expressed as nondeductive arguments (“inductive” arguments, in
the logical empiricists’ broad sense of the term). If we can take a particular
phenomenon and embed it within an argument in which the premises in-
clude a law and bestow high probability on the conclusion, this yields a
good explanation of the phenomenon.
There were many problems of detail encountered in attempts to formu-
late the covering law theory precisely (Salmon 1989). The problems were
more difﬁcult in the case of nondeductive arguments, and also in the case
of explaining patterns rather than particular events. I won’t worry about
the technicalities here. The basic idea of the covering law theory is simple
and clear: to explain something is to show how to derive it in a logical ar-
gument of a kind that makes use of a law in the premises. To explain some-
thing is to show that it is to be expected, to show that it is not surprising,
given our knowledge of the laws of nature.
For the covering law theory, there is not much difference between ex-
planation and prediction. To predict something, we put together an argu-
ment and try to show that it is to be expected, though we don’t know for
sure yet whether it is going to happen. When we explain something, we
know that it has happened already, and we show that it could have been
predicted, using an argument containing a law. You might be wondering at
this point what a “law of nature” is supposed to be. This was a troubling
topic for logical empiricism and has continued to be troubling for every-
one else. But a “law of nature” was not supposed to be something very
grandiose. It was supposed to be a kind of basic regularity, a basic pattern,
in the ﬂow of events. (I return to this question in section 13.4.)
Though I use the phrase “covering law theory” here, another name for the
192
Chapter Thirteen

theory is the “D-N theory,” or “D-N model,” of explanation. “D-N” stands
for “deductive-nomological,” where the word “nomological” is from the
Greek word for law, nomos. The term “D-N” can be confusing because, as I
said, the argument in a good explanation need not be deductive. So “D-N”
really only refers to some covering law explanations, the deductive ones.
That concludes my sketch of the covering law theory. I now move on to
what is wrong with it. This is a case where we have something close to a
knockdown argument. Although there are many famous problems with the
covering law theory, the most convincing problem is usually called the
asymmetry problem. And the most famous illustration of the asymmetry
problem is the case of the ﬂagpole and the shadow.
Suppose we have a ﬂagpole casting a shadow on a sunny day. Someone
asks: why is the shadow X meters long? According to the covering law the-
ory, we can give a good explanation of the shadow by deducing the length of
the shadow from the height of the ﬂagpole, the position of the sun, the laws
of optics, and some basic trigonometry. We can show why that length of
shadow was to be expected, given the laws and the circumstances. The ar-
gument can even be made deductively valid. So far, so good. The problem is
that we can run just as good an argument in another direction. Just as we can
deduce the length of the shadow from the height of the pole (plus optics and
trigonometry), we can deduce the height of the pole from the length of the
shadow (and the same laws). An equally good argument, logically speak-
ing, can be run in both directions; either can give information about the
other. But it seems that we cannot run an equally good explanation in both
directions, though the covering law theory says we can. It is ﬁne to explain
the length of the shadow in terms of the ﬂagpole and the sun, but it is not
ﬁne to explain the length of the ﬂagpole in terms of the shadow and the sun.
(At least, it is not ﬁne unless this is a very unusual ﬂagpole—perhaps one
that is designed to regulate its own length to maintain a particular shadow.)
What we ﬁnd here is that explanations have a kind of directionality. Some
arguments (though not all) can be reversed and remain good as arguments.
But explanations cannot be reversed in this way (except in some special
cases). So not all good arguments that contain laws are good explanations.
This objection to the covering law theory was famously given (using a
slightly different example) by Sylvain Bromberger (1966).
Once this point is seen, it becomes obvious and devastating. The cover-
ing law theory sees explanation as very similar to prediction; the only differ-
ence is what you know and what you don’t know. But this is a mistake. Con-
sider the concept of a symptom. Symptoms can be used to predict, but they
cannot be used to explain. Yet a symptom can often be used in a good log-
ical argument, along with a law, to show that something is to be expected.
Explanation
193

If you know that only disease D produces symptom S, then you can make
inferences from S to D. You might in some cases be able to make predic-
tions from D to S, too. But you cannot explain a disease in terms of a symp-
tom. Explanation only runs one way, from D to S, no matter how many dif-
ferent kinds of inferences can be made in other directions. And, further, it
seems that good explanations of S can be given in terms of D even if S is not
a very reliable symptom of D, even if S is not always to be expected when
someone has D. This is a separate problem for the covering law theory, of-
ten discussed using the example of some unreliable but unpleasant symp-
toms of syphilis.
In some of these cases, the covering law theory can engage in fancy foot-
work to evade the problem. But other cases, including the original ﬂagpole
case, seem immune to footwork. Hempel’s own attitude to the issue was
puzzling. He actually anticipated the problem, but dismissed it (Hempel
1965, 352–54). His strategy was to accept that if his theory allowed ex-
planations to run in two directions in cases where it seems that explana-
tion only runs in one direction, then both directions must really be OK.
In some actual scientiﬁc cases this reply seems reasonable; there are cases
in physics where it is hard to tell which direction(s) the explanation(s) are
running in. But in other cases the direction seems completely clear. In the
case of the ﬂagpole and the shadow, this reply seems hopeless.
There are other good arguments against the covering law theory (Salmon
1989), but the asymmetry problem is the killer. It also seems to be point-
ing us toward a better account of explanation.
13.3 Causation, Uniﬁcation, and More
What is it about the ﬂagpole’s height that makes it a good explanation for
the length of the shadow, and not vice versa? The answer seems straight-
forward. The shadow is caused by the interaction between sunlight and the
ﬂagpole. That is the direction of causation in this case, and that is the di-
rection of explanation also. So we seem to get an immediate suggestion
from the ﬂagpole case for how to build a better theory: to explain some-
thing is to describe what caused it. Why did the dinosaurs become extinct
65 million years ago? Here again, our request for an explanation seems to
amount to a request for information about what caused the extinction.
Although that conclusion seems compelling, it has not been universally
accepted, and it raises many further problems. The biggest question raised
at this point is, What is causation? We conﬁdently used the idea of causa-
tion to resolve the ﬂagpole case, but the whole idea of causation and causal
connection is extremely controversial in philosophy. For many philoso-
194
Chapter Thirteen

phers, causation is a suspicious metaphysical concept that we do best to
avoid when trying to understand science. This suspicion is, again, common
within the empiricist tradition. It derives from the work of Hume. The sus-
picion is directed especially at the idea of causation as a sort of hidden con-
nection between things, unobservable but essential to the operation of the
universe. Empiricists have often tried to understand science without sup-
posing that science concerns itself with alleged hidden connections of that
kind. The rise of scientiﬁc realism in the latter part of the twentieth century
led to some easing of this anxiety. But many philosophers would be pleased
to see an adequate account of science that did not get entangled with issues
about causation.
Despite this unease, toward the end of the twentieth century, the main
proposal about explanation being discussed, in different ways, was the idea
that explaining something is giving information about how it was caused.
Some sophisticated analyses were developed that sought to use probability
theory to clarify this basic idea (Salmon 1984; Suppes 1984). It might seem
initially that this view of explanation is most directly applied to explana-
tions of particular events (like the extinction of the dinosaurs), but it can
also be applied to the explanation of patterns. We can ask, Why does in-
breeding produce an increase in birth defects? The explanation will de-
scribe a general kind of causal process that is involved in producing the
phenomenon (a process involving an increased chance that two copies of a
recessive gene will be brought together in a single individual).
Claiming that causation is the key to explanation does not settle all the
issues about explanation. We need to know what kind of information about
causes is needed for a good explanation. One way to think of the situation
is to imagine an idealized “complete” explanation that contains everything
in the causal history of the event to be explained, speciﬁed in total detail
(Railton 1981). No one ever wants to be told the complete explanation for
a phenomenon, and we never know these complete explanations. Instead,
in any context of discussion in which a request for an explanation is made,
some piece or pieces of the complete explanation will be relevant. We are
often able to know, and describe, these relevant pieces of a total causal
structure. To give a good explanation in actual practice, all that is required
is a description of these relevant pieces of the whole.
One main alternative to the analysis of explanation in terms of causa-
tion was developed in the years after the demise of the covering law theory.
This was the idea that explanation should be analyzed in terms of uniﬁca-
tion. This idea was developed in detail by Michael Friedman (1974) and
Philip Kitcher (1981, 1989). But as Kitcher also emphasized, the idea was
actually present all along in logical empiricism. The idea that explanation
Explanation
195

is uniﬁcation was a sort of “unofﬁcial” theory of explanation within much
logical empiricism, in contrast to the “ofﬁcial” covering law theory (see,
for example, Feigl 1943). This unofﬁcial theory is a good deal better than
the ofﬁcial theory. Often the two approaches were mixed in together; to
show the connection between particular events and a general law is, after
all, to achieve a kind of uniﬁcation. Why not develop a theory of uniﬁca-
tion in science that is not tied to the idea of deriving phenomena from laws?
So the uniﬁcationist theory holds that explanation in science is a mat-
ter of connecting a diverse set of facts by subsuming them under a set of ba-
sic patterns and principles. Science constantly strives to reduce the number
of things that we must accept as fundamental. We try to develop general
explanatory schemata (explanatory schemes) that can be applied as widely
as possible. This proposal certainly makes a lot of sense of how scientists
operate. Indeed, it seems clear that what produces an “Aha!” reaction is of-
ten the realization that some odd-looking phenomenon is really a case of
something more general. Kitcher also argues for this view with cases from
the history of science. He argues that some very famous theories—Dar-
win’s theory of evolution and Newton’s later work on the nature of mat-
ter—were compelling to scientists in their early stages despite not making
many speciﬁc new predictions, because they promised to explain so much.
And this “explanatory promise” seems to have been the ability of those
theories to unify a great range of phenomena with a few general principles.
In Kitcher’s case, another reason for developing the uniﬁcationist the-
ory was a distrust of the idea of causation. This led Kitcher to try, for some
years, to develop a theory of explanation entirely in terms of uniﬁcation.
But what about the ﬂagpole and the shadow, and the asymmetry in which
can explain which? Kitcher argued that we do tend to describe this asym-
metry in causal terms, but this causal talk is really a loose summary of more
basic asymmetries that involve uniﬁcation (Kitcher 1989).
So we have two main proposals to replace the covering law theory: the
causal theory and the uniﬁcation theory. These have often been treated as
competitors: “Does causation win or does uniﬁcation win?” But this is
surely a mistake. We do not have to choose. Again, beware the dubious al-
lure of simplicity in philosophical theories! Much of the time, to explain
something is to describe the causal mechanisms behind it or the causal his-
tory leading up to it. That is true much of the time, but there is no need to
hold that it is true all the time. In some cases there can be pretty clear ex-
planatory relations between patterns or principles, even when causal lan-
guage is hard to apply to the situation. Often this seems to involve uniﬁca-
tion. Nothing stops us from holding that a variety of different relations can
be explanatory.
196
Chapter Thirteen

Recently, ideas similar to this have been emerging in the philosophy of
science. Wesley Salmon was for many years one of the main partisans for
the idea that causation is the key to explanation. But he eventually accepted
that uniﬁcation is also part of the story. Sometimes he seemed to think of
causation and uniﬁcation as two sides of the same explanatory coin, and
some other times as alternative explanatory projects (1989, 1998). Kitcher,
who tried for years to avoid using the idea of causation to analyze expla-
nation, instead telling the whole story in terms of uniﬁcation, has now de-
cided that this was probably a mistake and the concept of causation is not
so dubious after all (personal communication, 2002).
So what might be emerging is a kind of “pluralism” about explanation
in the philosophy of science. This is a step in the right direction, but I sug-
gest that the whole issue has been approached wrongly. (This is where I be-
come unorthodox.) The most peculiar thing about the discussion of ex-
planation by philosophers has been the assumption that explanation is the
kind of thing that requires analysis in terms of a single special relation or a
short list of special relations. It is a mistake to think there is one basic re-
lation that is the explanatory relation (as in the covering law theory, the
causal theory, and the uniﬁcation theory), and it is also a mistake to think
that there are some deﬁnite two or three such relations.
The alternative view is to recognize that the idea of explanation operates
differently within different parts of science—and differently within the same
part of science at different times. The word “explanation” is used in sci-
ence for something that is sought, and sometimes achieved, by the develop-
ment of theories, but what exactly is being sought is not constant in all
of science. And we cannot get the right analysis by claiming that within all
of science, a good explanation is something that satisﬁes either the causal
test or the uniﬁcation test (etc.). This familiar form of “pluralism” leaves out
the way that different scientiﬁc ﬁelds will establish deﬁnite criteria for what
will pass as a good explanation. The standards for a good explanation in
ﬁeld A need not sufﬁce in ﬁeld B. If an “ism” is required, the right analysis
of explanation is a kind of contextualism—a view that treats the standards
for good explanation as partially dependent on the scientiﬁc context.
Kuhn argued some years ago for a view of this kind (1977a). In a paper
about the history of physics, he claimed that different theories (or para-
digms) tend to bring with them their own standards for what counts as a
good explanation. He argued, further, that standards about whether a re-
lation counts as “causal” also depend on paradigms. The concepts of ex-
planation and causation are, to some extent at least, internal to different
scientiﬁc ﬁelds and historical periods.
In the case of causation, a philosopher might reply to Kuhn, with some
Explanation
197

justiﬁcation, that just because different people have thought differently
about what causation is does not mean that there is no fact of the matter.
Fair enough (at least for now). But in the case of explanation, I think this
reply has little force. If two scientiﬁc ﬁelds single out different relations and
call them “explanation,” there need be no factual error that one or the
other is making.
To support this claim, Kuhn focused (as he did in Structure) on the case
of Newton’s theory of gravity. Does Newton’s theory explain the falling of
objects, given that Newton’s treatment of gravity gave no intuitive mecha-
nism but only a mathematical relationship? Some answered no, but over
time it became part of Newtonianism that the right kind of mathematical
law does count as an explanation. It is Kuhn’s view that the idea of expla-
nation will evolve as our ideas about science and about the universe change.
So although the covering law theory deﬁnitely fails as a general account
of explanation in science, it would be a mistake to conclude that no ex-
planations have the form described by the covering law theory. There are
some explanations that are at least close to what Hempel had in mind. The
mistake is to apply that model to all cases.
I suggest that Kuhn was right on this point. I add that this proposal need
not lead to the radical idea that anything can count as an explanation. Sci-
entiﬁc traditions will generally have good reasons for their treatment of the
idea of explanation; views about explanation will depend on views about
what the world contains, for example. Some possible concepts of explana-
tion will embed factual errors. To use a simple example, if someone claims
that good explanations are always based on a concept of God’s will, but it
turns out that there is no God, then that conception of explanation will be
mistaken because of a factual error. Some philosophers might make the
same argument about concepts of explanation that use the idea of causa-
tion—they might argue that the traditional idea of causal connection is a
piece of mistaken metaphysics. But many possible treatments of the idea of
explanation will not be ruled out by factual errors.
This is a case where it is important to pay attention to the actual use of
the term “explain” in science. Here we ﬁnd a lot of diversity. In some ﬁelds,
there are technical senses of the word, even mathematical measurements of
“the amount of variation explained” by a given factor. In other ﬁelds,
nothing like a technical standard applies. The word “explain” also has an
almost rhetorical use. Someone might say: “your theory does accommo-
date this result, but it does not really explain it.” This might mean “your
theory can only be used to derive this result in an unnatural-looking way.”
(Often, uniﬁcation seems important in cases like this.) At other times the
word “explain” is used in a much more low-key way in science. According
198
Chapter Thirteen

to scientiﬁc realism, a lot of science is aimed at describing what is going on
in the world; often this will be a matter of describing how things work.
How does photosynthesis work? How does the replication of DNA work?
Descriptions of phenomena of this kind will often be referred to as expla-
nations, but this does not mean that something extra is going on, beyond
the description of mechanisms and processes.
At this point I should compare my view with another unorthodox po-
sition in this area, that of van Fraassen (1980). He denies, as I do, that ex-
planation is some single, special relation common to all of science. He has
developed a “pragmatic” account of explanation, in which what counts as
an explanation varies according to context. But this is very different from
my view. Van Fraassen wants to deny that explanation is something “in-
side” science at all; he denies that scientiﬁc reasoning includes the assess-
ment of the explanatory power of theories. Instead, explanation is some-
thing that people do when they take scientiﬁc theories and use them to
answer questions that are external to scientiﬁc discussion itself. In con-
trast, the view I am defending is a view in which explanation is thoroughly
internal to science, but variously so. Assessments of what explains what
are a very important part of scientiﬁc reasoning, but different ﬁelds may
use somewhat different concepts and standards of explanation.
Before leaving this topic, I should also add a comment about explana-
tory inference. Back in chapter 3, I used this term for inference from a set
of data to a hypothesis about a structure or process that would explain the
data. In chapter 14, when I look at more recent discussions of conﬁrmation
and evidence, I will return to this topic. The term “explanatory inference”
suggests that there is one kind of relationship between data and hypothe-
sis—the explanation relationship—that is involved in explanatory infer-
ence. Many philosophers would accept this. The term “inference to the best
explanation” is, in fact, a more common name for what I call explanatory
inference; that term suggests that there is some single measure of “ex-
planatory goodness” involved. But I think this is the wrong way to think
about scientiﬁc reasoning (and this is why I have avoided the term “infer-
ence to the best explanation”). I use “explanatory inference” in a broader
way that does not suppose that there is a single measure of explanatory
goodness involved, which applies to all of science. Rather, explanatory in-
ference is a matter of devising and comparing hypotheses about hidden
structures that might be responsible for data. “Explanation” is seen as
something pretty diverse.
To sum up: the covering law theory is dead, as a general account of ex-
planation in science. But we should not look for a new theory of some single
relation or pattern that is involved in all scientiﬁc explanation. Very often,
Explanation
199

causation is involved. The same goes for uniﬁcation and for deriving phe-
nomena from laws. But different ﬁelds have different concepts and stan-
dards of explanation.
13.4 Laws and Causes (Optional Section)
This short and rather abstract section is a digression from the main themes
of the book, a foray into an intersection between philosophy of science and
the controversial ﬁeld of metaphysics. The covering law theory of explana-
tion made use of the idea of a law of nature. One of the theories that re-
placed it made use of the idea of causation. But what are laws of nature?
What is causation?
In both cases, we have concepts that seem aimed at picking out a special
kind of connection between things in the world. Causation is sometimes
called, half jokingly, “the cement of the universe” (Mackie 1980; the phrase
was ﬁrst used by Hume [(1740) 1978]). In recent years, many philosophers
have been skeptical about these concepts. But generally, their attitude has
not been to reject them (“There is no such thing as causation”) but instead
to reconstrue these concepts in a very low-key way (“Yes, there is causa-
tion, but it is no more than this . . .”). In particular, philosophers have tried
to analyze both laws and causation in terms of patterns in the arrangement
of things, rather than some extra connection between things. Sometimes
this project is referred to as “Humeanism,” after David Hume, the ﬁrst
philosopher to develop a really focused suspicion about concepts of con-
nection between events in nature (see also Lewis 1986b). The present-day
Humeans do not have the same kind of empiricism as Hume, but they do
want to avoid believing in any sort of unobservable cement connecting the
universe together.
So a philosopher with Humean views will try to construe laws of nature
as no more than regularities, or basic patterns, in the arrangement of events.
To treat laws of nature in this way is to leave behind one of the familiar con-
notations of the term “law.” Usually, we see laws as directing, or guiding,
or governing in some way. It is possible (indeed traditional) to see laws of
nature as governing the ﬂow of events in the universe. Laws are seen as re-
sponsible for the regular patterns that we see, rather than being identical
with those patterns (Dretske 1977; Armstrong 1983). The Humean re-
gards this “governing” conception of laws as a seduction that must be
avoided by hard-headed philosophers. The logical empiricist attitude to-
ward laws of nature was basically Humean, in this sense.
The topic of causation has generated a similar debate. On one side we
have those who see causation as basically some special kind of regular pat-
200
Chapter Thirteen

tern in the ﬂow of events. One the other side are those who see causation
as a connection between things that is somehow responsible for the pat-
terns (see Sosa and Tooley 1993). Perhaps this connection need not be seen
as a mysterious philosophical entity; maybe it can be described by ordinary
science (Dowe 1992; Menzies 1996).
For some years philosophers tended to discuss laws and their role in sci-
ence in a way that had little contact with actual scientiﬁc work. In 1983
Nancy Cartwright delivered a wake-up call to the ﬁeld with a book called
How the Laws of Physics Lie, in which she argued that what people call
“laws of physics” do not usually describe the behavior of real systems at
all, but only describe the behavior of highly idealized ﬁctional systems. An-
other important change that resulted from a closer look at actual science is
that philosophers are no longer obsessed with natural laws as the goal of
scientiﬁc theorizing. Over many years philosophers searched ﬁelds like bi-
ology for statements of laws of nature. Philosophers thought that any gen-
uine science had to contain hypothesized laws and had to organize its ideas
via the concept of a law. In fact, most biology has little use for the concept
of a law of nature, but that does not make it any less scientiﬁc.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
Wesley Salmon’s Four Decades of Scientiﬁc Explanation (1989) is a very good sur-
vey of work on explanation between 1948 (the advent of the covering law theory)
and the late 1980s. (The only thing marring Salmon’s discussion is his rather ec-
centric theory about causation, which affects his treatment of explanation.)
A very good alternative discussion of causation and explanation can be found
in Lewis 1986a. (Lewis’s theory of causation is also eccentric. In fact, I guess every
philosopher’s theory of causation is eccentric; no two philosophers seem to agree.
Lewis’s discussion is compatible with a range of different views about causation,
though.)
For uniﬁcationist theories of explanation, see Friedman 1974 and Kitcher 1989.
These are fairly advanced papers.
Lewis discusses the Humean program in metaphysics in the preface to his 1986
Philosophical Papers, volume 2. Armstrong 1983 is a clear introduction to the more
purely philosophical side of the literature on laws of nature. Beebee 2000 is a good
discussion of the idea that laws “govern” things. Mitchell (2000) defends an inter-
esting position on laws.
Explanation
201

202
14
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
14.1 New Hope
Through much of the twentieth century, the unsolved problem of conﬁr-
mation hung over philosophy of science. What is it for an observation to
provide evidence for, or conﬁrm, a scientiﬁc theory? Back in chapter 3, I
described how this problem was tackled by logical empiricism. The logical
empiricists wanted to start from simple, obvious ideas—like the idea that
seeing many black ravens conﬁrms the hypothesis that all ravens are black—
and build from there to an “inductive logic” that would help us understand
testing in science. They failed, and we left the topic in a state of uncertainty
and frustration.
Karl Popper was one person who could enjoy this situation, since he
opposed the idea that conﬁrmation is an essential part of science. After
Popper, we launched into a discussion of historically oriented theories of
science, like Kuhn’s. These theories were not focused on the problem of
conﬁrmation in the way logical empiricism was. But the problem did not
go away. Some philosophers continued to work on it, and even when it was
not being discussed, it lurked in the background. If someone had come up
with a really convincing theory of conﬁrmation, it would have been harder
to argue for radical views of the kind discussed in chapters 7–9. The ab-
sence of such a theory put empiricist philosophers on the defensive.
The situation has now changed. Once again a large number of philoso-
phers have real hope in a theory of conﬁrmation and evidence. The new
view is called Bayesianism. The core ideas of this approach developed
slowly through the twentieth century, but eventually these ideas started to
look like they might actually solve the problem. The attitude of many is
summed up in the title of a recent book by John Earman: Bayes or Bust?
(1992). This title refers to a widespread feeling that this approach had bet-
ter work, or philosophy of science might really be in trouble again.

Although Bayesianism is the most popular approach to solving these
problems today, I am not in the Bayesian camp. Some parts of Bayesianism
are undeniably powerful, but I would cautiously put my money on some
different ideas. These will be introduced at the end of the chapter.
And before setting out on these topics, I should stress that this is the hard-
est chapter in the book. Some readers might want to jump to chapter 15.
14.2 Understanding Evidence with Probability
At this point I will shift my terminology. The term “conﬁrmation” was used
by the logical empiricists, but more recent discussions tend to focus on the
concept of evidence. From now on I will follow this usage.
Bayesianism tries to understand evidence using probability theory. This
idea is not new. It has often seemed natural to express some claims about
evidence in terms of probability. Rudolf Carnap spent decades trying to
solve the problem in this way. And outside philosophy this idea is familiar;
we say that seeing someone’s car outside a party makes it very likely that
he is at the party. The mathematical ﬁelds of statistics and data analysis use
probability theory to describe the kinds of conclusions that can be drawn
from surveys and samples. And in law courts, we have become familiar
with the description of forensic evidence, like DNA evidence, in terms of
probability.
Consequently, many philosophers have tried to understand evidence us-
ing probability. Here is an idea that lies behind many of these attempts:
when there is uncertainty about a hypothesis, observational evidence can
sometimes raise or lower the probability of the hypothesis.
Bayesianism is one version of this idea. For Bayesians, there is a formula
that is like a magic bullet for the evidence problem: Bayes’s theorem.
Thomas Bayes, an English clergyman, proved his theorem in the eighteenth
century. As a theorem—as a piece of mathematics—his idea is very simple.
But the Bayesians believe that Thomas Bayes struck gold.
Here is the magic formula in its simplest form:
(1)
P(h|e) = P(e|h)P(h)/P(e).
Here it is in a form that is more useful for showing how it works in philos-
ophy of science:
P(e|h)P(h)
(2)
P(h|e) = 
P(e|h)P(h) + P(e|not-h)P(not-h)
.
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
203

Here is how to read formulas of this kind: P(X) is the probability of X.
P(X|Y) is the probability of X conditional upon Y, or the probability of X
given Y.
How does this formula help us to understand conﬁrmation of theories?
Read “h” as a hypothesis and “e” as a piece of evidence. Then think of P(h)
as the probability of h measured without regard for evidence e. P(h|e) is the
probability of h given e, or the probability of the hypothesis in the light of
e. Bayes’s theorem tells us how to compute this latter number. As a conse-
quence, we can measure what difference evidence e makes to the probabil-
ity of h. So we can say that evidence e conﬁrms h if P(h|e) > P(h). That is, e
conﬁrms h if it makes h more probable than it would otherwise be.
Picture someone changing her beliefs as evidence comes in. She starts
out with P(h) as her assessment of the probability of h. If she observes e,
what should her new view be about the probability of h? It seems that her
new view of the probability of h should be given by P(h|e), which Bayes’s
theorem tells us how to compute. So Bayes’s theorem tells us how to up-
date probabilities in the light of evidence. (More on this updating later.)
Those are two central ideas in Bayesianism: the idea that e conﬁrms h if
e raises the probability of h, and the idea that probabilities should be up-
dated in a way dictated by Bayes’s theorem.
Bayes’s theorem expresses P(h|e) as a function of two different kinds of
probability. Probabilities of hypotheses of the form P(h) are called prior
probabilities. Looking at formula 2, we see P(h) and P(not-h); these are the
prior probability of h and the prior probability of the negation of h. These
two numbers must add up to one. Probabilities of the form P(e|h) are often
called “likelihoods,” or the likelihoods of evidence on theory. In formula 2
we see two different likelihoods, P(e|h) and P(e|not-h). (These need not add
up to any particular value.) Finally, P(h|e) is the “posterior probability” of h.
Suppose that all these probabilities make sense and can be known; let’s
see what Bayes’s theorem can do. Imagine you are unsure about whether
someone is at a party. The hypothesis that he is at the party is h. Then you
see his car outside. This is evidence e. Suppose that before seeing the car,
you think the probability of his going to the party is 0.5. And the proba-
bility of his car’s being outside if he is at the party is 0.8, because he usu-
ally drives to such events, while the probability of his car’s being outside if
he is not at the party is only 0.1. Then we can work out the probability that
he is at the party given that his car is outside. Plugging the numbers into
Bayes’s theorem, we get P(h|e) = (.5)(.8)/[(.5)(.8) + (.5)(.1)], which is almost
0.9. So seeing the car raises the probability of h from 0.5 to about 0.9; see-
ing the car strongly conﬁrms the hypothesis that the person is at the party.
204
Chapter Fourteen

This all seems to be working well. We can do a lot with Bayes’s theorem,
if it makes sense to talk about probabilities in these ways. It is common to
think that it is not too hard to interpret probabilities of the form P(e|h), the
likelihoods. Scientiﬁc theories are supposed to tell us what we are likely to
see. Some Bayesians underestimate the problems that can arise with this
idea, but there is no need to pursue that yet. The probabilities that are more
controversial are the prior probabilities of hypotheses, like P(h). What could
this number possibly be measuring? And the posterior probability of h can
only be computed if we have its prior probability. So although it would be
good to use Bayes’s theorem to discuss evidence, many interpretations of
probability will not allow this because they cannot make sense of prior
probabilities of theories. If we want to use Bayes’s theorem, we need an in-
terpretation of probability that will allow us to talk about prior probabili-
ties. And that is what Bayesians have developed. This interpretation of
probability is called the subjectivist interpretation.
14.3 The Subjectivist Interpretation of Probability
Most attempts to analyze probability have taken probabilities to measure
some real and “objective” feature of events. A probability value is seen as
measuring the chance of an event happening, where this chance is some-
how a feature of the event itself and its location in the world. That is how
we usually speak about the probabilities of horses winning races, for ex-
ample. But according to the subjectivist interpretation, probabilities are de-
grees of belief. A probability measures a person’s degree of conﬁdence in
the truth of some proposition. So if someone says that the probability the
horse “Tom B” will win its race tomorrow is 0.4, he is saying something
about his degree of conﬁdence that the horse will win.
The subjectivist approach to probability was pioneered (independently)
by two philosopher-mathematicians, Frank Ramsey and Bruno de Finetti, in
the 1920s and 1930s. This interpretation of probability is not only impor-
tant in philosophy; it is central to decision theory, which has great impor-
tance in the social sciences (especially economics). The majority of philoso-
phers who want to use Bayes’s theorem to understand evidence hold a
subjectivist view of probability—at least for applications of probability
theory to this set of problems, and sometimes more generally. Some are sub-
jectivists because they feel they have to be in order to use Bayes’s theorem;
others think that subjectivism is the only interpretation of probability that
makes sense anyway. The philosophical debates about Bayesianism also
connect to debates about probability within mathematical statistics itself.
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
205

So let us look more closely at subjectivism about probability and how it
relates to Bayesianism. The details of this topic are ferociously technical,
but the main ideas are not too difﬁcult.
Subjectivism sees probabilities as degrees of belief in propositions or hy-
potheses about the world. To ﬁnd out what someone’s degree of belief in a
proposition is, we do not ask him or look inside his mind. Instead, we see
his degrees of belief as revealed in his gambling behavior, both actual and
possible. Your degrees of belief are revealed in which bets you would ac-
cept and which you would reject. Real people may be averse to gambling,
even when they think the odds are good, or they may be prone to it even
when the odds are bad. Here and in other places, Bayesianism seems to be
treating not actual people but idealized people. But let us not worry too
much about that. To read off a person’s degrees of belief from his gambling
behavior, we look for the odds on a given bet such that the person would
be equally willing to take either side of the bet. Call these odds the person’s
subjectively fair odds for that bet. If we know a person’s subjectively fair
odds for a bet, we can read off his degree of belief in the proposition that
the bet is about.
For example, suppose you think that 3:1 is fair for a bet on the truth of
h. That is, a person who bets that h is true wins $1 if she is right and loses
$3 if she is wrong. More generally, let us say that to bet on h at odds of X:1
is to be willing to risk losing $X if h is false, in return for a gain of $1 if h
is true. So a large X corresponds to a lot of conﬁdence in h. And if your
subjectively fair odds for a bet on h are X:1, then your degree of belief in h
is X/(X + 1).
So far we have just considered one proposition, h. But your degree of be-
lief for h will be related to your degrees of belief for other propositions as
well. You will have a degree of belief for h&j as well, and for not-h, and so
on. To ﬁnd your subjective probability for h&j, we ﬁnd your subjectively
fair odds for a bet on h&j. So a person’s belief system at a particular time
can be described as a network of subjective probabilities. These subjective
probabilities work in concert with the person’s preferences (“utilities”) to
generate his or her behavior. From the Bayesian point of view, all of life is
a series of gambles, in which our behavior manifests our bets about what
the world is like.
Bayesians claim to give a theory of when a person’s total network of de-
grees of belief is “coherent,” or rational. They argue that a coherent set of
degrees of belief has to follow the standard rules of the mathematics of
probability.
Here is a quick sketch of these more technical ideas. Modern treatments
of probability start from a set of axioms (most basic principles) ﬁrst devel-
206
Chapter Fourteen

oped by the Russian mathematician Kolmogorov. Here is a version of those
axioms that is used by subjectivists.
Axiom 1: All probabilities are numbers between 0 and 1 (inclusive).
Axiom 2: If a proposition is a tautology (trivially or analytically true), then it has a
probability of 1.
Axiom 3: If h and h* are exclusive alternatives (they cannot both be true), then 
P(h-or-h*) = P(h) + P(h*).
Axiom 4: P(h|j) = P(h& j)/P(j), provided that P(j) > 0.
(Bayes’s theorem is a consequence of axiom 4. P(h&j) can be broken down
both as P(h|j)P(j) and as P(j|h)P(h). So these are equal to each other and
Bayes’s theorem follows trivially.)
Why should your degrees of belief follow these rules? Subjectivists ar-
gue for this with a famous form of argument called a “Dutch book.” (My
apologies to any readers who are Dutch.)
The argument is as follows: if your degrees of belief do not conform to
the principles of the probability calculus, there are possible gambling situ-
ations in which you are guaranteed to lose money, no matter how things
turn out. How can there be a guarantee? Because these situations are ones
in which you are betting on both sides of a proposition (or betting on all the
horses in the race), at various different odds. In these situations, if the de-
grees of belief you have do not conform to the probability calculus, and you
are willing to accept any bet that ﬁts with your degrees of belief, then you
will be willing to accept combinations of bets that guarantee you a loss.
Here is a simple example involving a coin toss. Suppose your degree of
belief that the toss will come out heads is 0.6 and your degree of belief that
the toss will come out tails is 0.6. Then you have violated the probability
calculus because, by axiom 3, P(heads or tails) = 1.2, which axiom 1 says
is impossible. But suppose you persist with these degrees of belief and are
willing to bet on them. Now suppose someone (a “Dutch bookie”) offers
you the following bets: (1) You are to bet $10 at 1.5:1 that the result will
be heads, and (2) you are to bet $10 at 1.5:1 that the result will be tails.
You should accept both bets, because your subjectively fair odds for
heads and for tails are both 1.5:1. (To go from a degree of belief p to odds
of X:1, use X = p/(1 −p).) But now you have accepted two bets that each
pay worse than even money on the only two possible outcomes. So you are
guaranteed to lose. If the coin lands heads, you win $10 on the heads bet
but lose $15 on the tails bet, so you are $5 behind. The same applies—a
net loss of $5—if the coin lands tails. You have fallen victim to a Dutch
book. If you want to ensure that no one could possibly make a Dutch book
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
207

against you, you must ensure that your degrees of belief follow the rules of
probability theory. This is a simple case, but more complex arguments of
the same kind can be used to show that any violation of the mathematical
rules of probability makes a person vulnerable to a Dutch book.
Of course, there are not very many Dutch bookies out there, and one
can avoid the threat by refusing to gamble at all. That is not the point. The
point is supposed to be that the Dutch book argument shows that anyone
who does not keep his degrees of belief in line with the probability calcu-
lus is irrational in an important sense.
Let us now connect these ideas to the problem of evidence. The ideas
about belief and probability discussed in this section so far apply to a per-
son’s beliefs at a speciﬁc time. But we can use these ideas to give a theory
of the rational updating of beliefs as evidence comes in. Bayes’s theorem
tells us about the relations between P(h) and P(h|e). Both those assignments
of probability are made before e is observed. Then suppose e is actually ob-
served. According to Bayesianism, the rational agent will update her de-
grees of belief so that her new overall conﬁdence in h is derived from her
old value of P(h|e). So the key relationship in this updating process is
(3)
Pnew(h) = Pold(h|e).
The probability Pnew(h) then becomes the agent’s new prior probability for
h, for use in assessing how to react to the next piece of evidence. So “to-
day’s posteriors are tomorrow’s priors.” A different set of Dutch book ar-
guments is used to argue that a rational agent should do her updating of
beliefs in accordance with formula 3. (Bayesianism has to make special
moves to deal with “old evidence,” evidence known before its relation to a
hypothesis is assessed, and it also has a different formula to use when evi-
dence e is itself uncertain.)
To ﬁnish this section (sigh of relief), note again that according to a sub-
jectivist interpretation of probability, there is no way that one set of degrees
of belief can be “closer to the real facts about probability” than another, so
long as both sets of degrees of belief each follow the basic rules (axioms)
of probability. At least, that is how things work according to strict subjec-
tivism. Some Bayesians would like to recognize an objective sense of prob-
ability as well as a subjective sense, but this requires extra arguments.
14.4 Assessing Bayesianism
Bayesianism is an impressive set of ideas. There is a big literature on these
topics, and I will not try to predict whether Bayesianism will work in the
208
Chapter Fourteen

end. But many of the debates have to do with the role of prior probabili-
ties, so they are worth further discussion.
In standard presentations of Bayesianism, a person is imagined to start
out with an initial set of prior probabilities for various hypotheses, which
are updated as evidence comes in. This initial set of prior probabilities is a
sort of free choice; no initial set of prior probabilities is better than another
so long as the axioms of probability are followed. This feature of Bayesian-
ism is sometimes seen as a strength and sometimes as a weakness.
It can seem to be a weakness because Bayesianism cannot criticize very
strange initial assignments of probability. And, one might think, where you
end up after updating your probabilities must depend on where you start.
But this is only true in a sense. Bayesians argue that although prior prob-
abilities are freely chosen and might be weird initially, the starting point gets
“washed out” by incoming evidence, so long as updating is done rationally.
The starting point matters less and less as more evidence is taken into account.
This idea is usually expressed as a kind of convergence. Consider two
people with very different prior probabilities for h, but the same likeli-
hoods for all possible pieces of evidence (e1, e2, e3 . . .). And suppose the
two people see all the same actual evidence. Then these two people’s prob-
ability for h will get closer and closer. It can be proved that for any amount
of initial disagreement about h, there will be some amount of evidence that
will get the two people to any speciﬁed degree of closeness in their ﬁnal
probabilities for h. That is, if having ﬁnal probabilities within (say) 0.001
of each other counts as being in close agreement, then no matter how far
apart people start out, there is some amount of evidence that will get them
within 0.001 of each other by the end. So initial disagreement is eventually
washed out by the weight of evidence.
This convergence could, however, take a very long time. These “in the
limit” proofs may not help much. As Henry Kyburg likes to put it, we must
also accept that for any amount of evidence, and any measure of agreement,
there is some initial set of priors such that this evidence will not get the two
people to agree by the end. So some Bayesians have tried to work out a way
of “constraining” the initial assignments of probability that Bayesianism
allows.
I think there is a more basic problem with the arguments about conver-
gence or the “washing out” of prior probabilities. The convergence proofs
assume that when two people start with very different priors, they nonethe-
less agree about all their likelihoods (probabilities of the form P(e1|h), etc.).
That is needed for disagreement about the priors to “wash out.” But why
should we expect this agreement about likelihoods? Why should two people
who disagree massively on many things have the same likelihoods for all
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
209

possible evidence? Why don’t their disagreements affect their views on the
relevance of possible observations? This agreement might be present, but
there is no general reason why it should be. (This is another aspect of the
problem of holism.) Presentations of Bayesianism often use simple examples
involving gambling games or sampling processes, in which it seems that
there will be agreement about likelihoods even when people have different
priors. But those cases are not typical.
This argument suggests that convergence results do not help much with
problems about theory choice in science. It’s not clear whether this is a big
problem for Bayesianism, however, as there is controversy about how im-
portant the “washing out of priors” really is to Bayesianism.
Prior probabilities are also the key to the standard Bayesian answer to
Goodman’s new riddle of induction. The riddle was introduced back in sec-
tion 3.4. Suppose we are presented with two inductive arguments made
from the same set of observations of green emeralds. One induction con-
cludes that all emeralds are green, and the other concludes that all emer-
alds are grue. Why is one induction good and the other bad?
The standard Bayesian reply is that both inductive arguments are OK.
Both hypotheses are conﬁrmed by the observations of green emeralds. How-
ever, the “All emeralds are green” hypothesis will, for most people, have a
much higher prior probability than the “All emeralds are grue” hypothesis.
Then although both hypotheses are conﬁrmed by the observations, the
green-emerald hypothesis ends up with a much higher posterior probabil-
ity than the grue-emerald hypothesis. That is the difference between the
two inductions.
This does establish a difference, but why does the grue-emerald hy-
pothesis have a low prior probability? Is anything stopping a person from
having things the other way around—having a higher prior for the grue-
emerald hypothesis? Nothing is preventing this. A person’s prior probabil-
ity for the grue-emerald hypothesis will usually be the result of much past
experience with colors, minerals, and so on. But this need not be the case.
Suppose you have never had a single thought about emeralds in your life,
and you arbitrarily decide to set a higher prior for the grue-emerald hy-
pothesis. Bayesianism offers no criticism of this decision, so long as your
probabilities are internally coherent and you update properly. Is this a bad
result, or a good one?
14.5 Scientiﬁc Realism and Theories of Evidence
Perhaps Bayesianism will win in the end. But in the rest of this chapter I will
discuss some other ideas. I should note that it is not clear which of these
210
Chapter Fourteen

ideas are really in competition with Bayesianism, as opposed to comple-
menting it. My aim will be to tie the problem of evidence to the discussions
of realism and naturalism in earlier chapters.
Let us look again at what a theory of evidence should try to analyze.
Much twentieth-century empiricism based its discussions of evidence upon
a simple picture of what scientiﬁc testing is supposed to achieve: the aim of
testing is to conﬁrm and disconﬁrm generalizations by means of observa-
tion. That is what is fundamental to science. In the case of disconﬁrmation,
deductive logic will sufﬁce. Conﬁrmation was to be analyzed using a spe-
cial inductive logic.
This view failed. It failed to connect with actual science, and it failed
even in its own terms; it could not make much sense of conﬁrmation within
the simple picture being used.
So here is a better picture of what scientiﬁc testing aims to do. Testing
in science is typically an attempt to choose between rival hypotheses about
the hidden structure of the world. These hypotheses will sometimes be ex-
pressed using mathematical models, sometimes using linguistic descrip-
tions, and sometimes in other ways. Sometimes the “hidden structures”
postulated will be causal mechanisms, sometimes they will be mathemati-
cal relationships that may be hard to interpret in terms of cause and effect,
and sometimes they will have some other form. Sometimes the aim is to
work out a whole new kind of explanation, and sometimes it is just to
work out the details (like the value of a key parameter). Sometimes the aim
is to understand general patterns, and sometimes it is to reconstruct par-
ticular events in the past; I mean to include attempts to answer questions
like “Where did HIV come from?” as well as questions like “Why do things
fall when dropped?”
Back during the Scientiﬁc Revolution, it was common to think of the
problem of evidence using the analogy of a clock. A scientist is like some-
one observing the motions of a clock from outside and trying to make in-
ferences about the clock’s inner workings (Shapin 1996). This analogy is
too restricted as a picture of how science works, but it is closer to the truth
than the picture found in much twentieth-century empiricist philosophy.
Approaching the problem of evidence with this realist orientation is a
good idea, but we should be careful not to overgeneralize. I said that test-
ing is typically an attempt to choose between hypotheses about hidden
structure. Typically does not mean always. My discussion of realism in
chapter 12 allowed that not all science is like this. Kuhn and Laudan have
both emphasized, correctly, that different theories and paradigms can bring
with them somewhat different accounts of what good scientiﬁc theories
should do. These differences are likely to show up when we try to give a
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
211

philosophical account of testing and evidence. For this reason and others,
we may need to get used to the idea of a mixed or pluralist theory of evi-
dence in science.
Once we move toward scientiﬁc realism, though, it becomes clear that
understanding explanatory inference will be crucially important in any fu-
ture account of testing. Explanatory inference, as deﬁned in chapter 3, is
inference from a set of data to a hypothesis about a structure or process
that would explain the data. This is far more important in actual science
than the philosopher’s traditional conception of induction. Indeed, it can
be argued that good inferences about what to expect, what patterns will
continue in our experience, and so on, typically are developed via infer-
ences about what the world is like and what processes are operating.
Philosophers have not made a lot of progress on understanding ex-
planatory inference yet. But one idea that was long neglected, and recently
revived, will surely turn out to be part of the answer. This is inference via
the elimination of alternatives, supporting one option by ruling out others.
I will call this “eliminative inference.” (It is sometimes called “eliminative
induction,” but that is another overly broad use of the term “induction.”)
Eliminative inference is, of course, the kind of reasoning associated
with the famous ﬁctional detective Sherlock Holmes. If we can rule out all
the suspects except one, we know who committed the crime. This approach
to evidence and testing has an odd history in twentieth-century philosophy.
It was often neglected, partly because philosophers tended to assume that
in science there is always an inﬁnite number of possible alternatives to any
given theory. If a theory has an inﬁnite number of rivals, then ruling out
any ﬁnite number of alternatives does not reduce the number of possibili-
ties remaining. This argument might not be very good, however. Maybe
there are ways of constraining the relevant alternatives to a theory being
considered, in which case we might be able to rule out most or all of the
relevant alternatives.
A chemist, John Platt, once wrote a paper in which he argued that good
science is generally based on eliminative inference (1964). His view looked
like a modiﬁed version of Popperian testing. The paper was mostly ignored
by philosophers but taken seriously by quite a few scientists. In recent
years, philosophers have begun to resurrect the idea of eliminative infer-
ence. For example, John Earman has done this within a Bayesian frame-
work (1992), and Philip Kitcher has done so without linking the idea to
Bayesianism (1993).
Eliminative inference can have a deductive or a nondeductive form. The
simplest cases are those where we are able to decisively rule out all options
except one. If we can do that, then our inference can be presented as a
212
Chapter Fourteen

deductive argument. (As always, such an argument is only as good as its
premises.) This is what Sherlock was trying to do. There are two ways in
which a nondeductive element can be introduced. First, there may be a less
decisive ruling out of alternatives; maybe we can only hope to show that all
alternatives except one are very unlikely. Second, we need to consider the
case where we are able to rule out most, but not all, of the alternatives to a
hypothesis. Maybe as we rule out more and more of the alternatives to a
given hypothesis, that hypothesis acquires a kind of partial support, even
though some doubt remains. Perhaps we can say that the theory becomes
more and more likely to be true. Clearly, in the nondeductive cases it might
make sense to embed eliminative inference within a Bayesian framework,
which enables us to handle the idea of probability in a precise way. This is
indeed a compatible relationship, since Bayesianism explicitly handles ev-
idence in a comparative manner (for one hypothesis to gain credibility, an-
other hypothesis has to lose).
One important feature of eliminative inference is this: it is clear that sci-
entists give arguments of this kind all the time; there is no possibility that
this is just a philosophical ﬁction. Elimination is also clearly important in
understanding the hardest cases for a theory of explanatory inference:
those in which whole new kinds of explanations, models, or theories were
established in science. For these often involve what were seen at the time as
head-to-head competitions: Darwin versus nineteenth-century creation-
ism, Galileo versus Aristotelian physics, Skinner’s behaviorist theory of
language versus the “cognitivist” approach of Chomsky. In fact, looking at
the history of science reminds us of the chief difﬁculty with arguments of
the eliminative form: how do we know that we have considered all the rel-
evant alternatives? It can be argued that scientists constantly tend toward
overconﬁdence on this point (Stanford 2001). Scientists often think they
have ruled out (or rendered very unlikely) all the feasible alternatives to
their preferred theory—but in hindsight we can see that in many cases they
did not do so, because we now believe a theory they did not even consider.
So a focus on eliminative inference has the potential to illuminate both the
successes and the failures found in scientiﬁc reasoning.
An emphasis on eliminative inference will probably be part of any good
future philosophical theory of testing and evidence in science. It should not
be made too central, though. The idea that supporting one option always
works by ruling out others is too narrow; there can also be more direct sup-
port of one option. An example is discussed in the next section.
I will mention one other crucial form of reasoning that we see in actual
science. This one, however, is much more philosophically perplexing than
eliminative inference. Scientists often support hypotheses via an appeal to
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
213

simplicity, or “parsimony.” This was discussed brieﬂy in chapter 3. Given two
possible explanations for the data, scientists often prefer the simpler one.
Despite various elaborate attempts, I do not think we have made much pro-
gress on understanding the operation of, or justiﬁcation for, this preference.
14.6 Procedural Naturalism (Optional Section)
In this section I will outline some of my own ideas on the topic of evidence
and testing. These ideas are intended to provide an alternative general pic-
ture to Bayesianism. But some of the ideas can be (and have sometimes
been) combined with Bayesianism. The general viewpoint described is also
supposed to be compatible with the discussion of eliminative inference just
above.
The main idea I will defend is that we should analyze evidence, conﬁr-
mation, and testing by focusing on procedures. If an observation provides
support for a theory, that will be by virtue of the procedure that the obser-
vation was embedded within. Not all procedures must be explicit, planned
tests or experiments; some can be more informal.
This procedure-oriented view goes back a fair way. One important source
is Hans Reichenbach, who did not follow standard logical positivist think-
ing about conﬁrmation. Reichenbach was also inﬂuenced by some statisti-
cal methods used in science. My version of this idea will be linked to nat-
uralism. It also uses the idea of reliability; a good procedure is one that has
the capacity to reliably answer the questions we put to it. In order to have
a simple label, I will call the view procedural naturalism.
I will illustrate this view by looking at a particular type of procedure
employed often in science: using random samples to make inferences about
the characteristics of a larger population. This is the kind of procedure in-
volved when we use a survey to ﬁnd out (for example) how many teenagers
smoke cigarettes. In a way, this is the closest thing to a scientiﬁc home for
the traditional philosophical picture of inductive inference. But it turns out
that if we approach some of the standard philosophical problems from a
procedure-based point of view, it makes a big difference. So let us look
again at the two famous puzzle cases discussed in chapter 3, the ravens
problem and Goodman’s “grue” problem.
The ravens problem was described in section 3.3. If generalizations are
conﬁrmed by their instances, and if any observation that conﬁrms H also con-
firms anything logically equivalent to H, then it seems that a white shoe con-
firms the hypothesis that all ravens are black. After all, the white shoe is a
nonblack nonraven. So it is an instance of the generalization “all nonblack
things are nonravens,” which is logically equivalent to “all ravens are black.”
214
Chapter Fourteen

In most philosophical discussions of this problem, there is little atten-
tion paid to how the observations of ravens (and shoes) are being collected.
Of course, the whole example is very unrealistic. A biologist would not try
to learn about bird color simply by generalizing from observed cases. But
let us imagine that a biologist is doing something like this. Rather than re-
lying on casual observation, though, the biologist uses a statistical method.
Let us now distinguish two questions about ravens.
The general raven question: What is the proportion of blackness among ravens?
The speciﬁc raven question: Is it the case that 100 percent of ravens are black?
Questions of this kind can be reliably answered using samples from a larger
population, if we have a sample that is random and of a reasonable size.
Statistical theory will tell us exactly how large a sample we need in order
to get an answer with a desired degree of reliability (here “size” of sample
means absolute size, not size in relation to the size of overall population).
So how might we collect an appropriate sample?
The most obvious approach is to collect a random sample of ravens and
record the birds’ colors. A sample of this kind can be used to answer both the
speciﬁc and the general raven questions, using ordinary statistical methods.
So far, so good.
But now consider a more unusual approach. Suppose we could collect
a random sample of nonblack things and record whether or not they are
ravens. This method will be useless for answering the general raven ques-
tion. Interestingly, though, it can be used to reliably answer the speciﬁc
raven question. If there are nonblack ravens, we can learn this, in principle,
by randomly sampling the nonblack things.
Now that we are imagining unusual sampling methods, there are two
others to consider: collecting a sample of black things, and collecting a
sample of nonravens. Neither of these can be used, without further as-
sumptions, to answer either of the raven questions. Knowing what pro-
portion of the black things are ravens does not tell us what proportion of
ravens are black, and a sample of nonravens is of no use either.
So far we have distinguished between some procedures that can, and
some procedures that cannot, answer our questions about ravens. Now we
can look at the role of particular observations. Consider a particular ob-
servation of a white shoe. Does it tell us anything about raven color? It de-
pends on what procedure the observation was part of. If the white shoe was
encountered as part of a random sample of nonblack things, then it is evi-
dence. It is just one data point, but it is a nonblack thing that turned out not
to be a raven. It is part of a sample that we can use to answer the speciﬁc
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
215

question (though not the general question), and work out whether there
are nonblack ravens. But if the very same white shoe is encountered in a
sample of nonravens, it tells us nothing. The observation is now part of a
procedure that cannot answer either question.
The same is true with observations of black ravens. If we see a black
raven in a random sample of ravens, it is informative. It is just one data
point, but it is part of a sample that can answer our questions. But the same
black raven tells us nothing about our two raven questions if it is encoun-
tered in a sample of black things; there is no way to use such a sample to an-
swer either question. The role of procedures is fundamental; an observa-
tion is only evidence if it is embedded in the right kind of procedure. I think
this is a very general fact about evidence and conﬁrmation; Hempel was
wrong to think that generalizations are always conﬁrmed by observations
of their instances. There is only conﬁrmation (or support) if the underlying
procedure was of the right kind. (Interestingly, this does not apply in the
case of deductive relationships. A black raven refutes the hypothesis that
no ravens are black, regardless of the procedure behind the observation.
But deduction, as always, is special.)
That concludes my sketch of a solution to the ravens problem. It is a
more elaborate version of the idea, discussed in chapter 3, that “order of
observation” is important (Horwich 1982). But what is important is not
order, but procedures.
I turn now to the grue problem (section 3.4). This is harder, because I
believe that “the grue problem” actually combines several different prob-
lems together (including the very difﬁcult problem of simplicity). But I will
present part of an answer.
Let us continue thinking about inferences made from samples, using
statistical methods. These methods can be very powerful, but they can only
be used when some assumptions hold about the testing situation. One sit-
uation where these methods cannot be used, in their simple forms, is when
the act of observing or collecting the data changes the particular objects
being observed, in a way that is relevant to the question being asked. In
some cases we might overcome the problem by taking into account the ef-
fects of our data collection and compensating for this fact. But special mea-
sures of some kind will be needed.
Now consider Goodman and his emeralds. Again, the philosophical lit-
erature has chosen a bad example here, but suppose we are making infer-
ences about all emeralds by observing a random sample. This method would
encounter a problem if the act of collecting or observing individual emer-
alds changed their color. In such a case, a simple extrapolation from the
color of the sample to the color of the unobserved emeralds would be un-
216
Chapter Fourteen

reliable. This problem is obvious. But there is a less obvious connection be-
tween this case and the grue problem.
First, I should remind you that a grue object is not one that changes
color at some special date. I am not trying to solve the grue problem by ob-
jecting to emeralds changing their color, or anything like that. A grue
object is one that was ﬁrst observed before 2010 and is green, or was not ob-
served before 2010 and is blue. With that point clear, think about a sample
of grue emeralds that we might have collected.
To keep things simple, suppose that all our previously observed emer-
alds are in the sample. So we have a big pile of emeralds, all of which are
grue. The act of putting them in the sample did not physically change them,
but something related is going on. If those particular emeralds had not
been observed before 2010, they would not have been grue. After all, those
emeralds are green, and anything green that was never observed before
2010 does not count as grue. So the grueness of an object depends, in an
odd conceptual way, on whether or not the object has been observed before
a certain date. Putting it loosely, the emeralds in the sample were affected,
with respect to their grueness, by the fact that they have been observed be-
fore now. But that means we cannot extrapolate grueness from the sampled
emeralds to the unsampled ones. We cannot do the extrapolation because
the observation process has interfered—in an odd way—with the charac-
teristics of the objects in the sample. This problem does not appear if we
want to extrapolate greenness from a sample of emeralds; it only appears
if we want to extrapolate grueness.
The grue problem (or this aspect of the grue problem) is a strange philo-
sophical version of a familiar problem in statistical methodology in sci-
ence. It is akin to what would be called a confounding variable problem.
In a way, Goodman’s term “grue” turns observation (or sampling) itself
into a confounding variable. Frank Jackson (1975) proposed a solution to
Goodman’s problem of roughly this kind, but without tying the solution to
statistical methods or the idea of a confounding variable. I follow up this
idea in more detail in Godfrey-Smith (forthcoming). The idea I want to em-
phasize here is, again, the importance of focusing on procedures in think-
ing about evidence.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Further Reading
On Bayesianism, I ﬁnd Colin Howson and Peter Urbach’s Scientiﬁc Reasoning:
The Bayesian Approach (1993) very helpful, though the book does not seem to be
popular within the Bayesian camp. John Earman, Bayes or Bust? (1992), is for the
Bayesianism and Modern Theories of Evidence
217

technically minded. Skyrms, Choice and Chance (2000), is a classic introduction to
probability and induction. Michael Resnik’s Choices (1987) is a particularly help-
ful introduction to decision theory, subjective probability, and Dutch books.
Earman (1992, chap. 7) and Kitcher (1993, chap. 7) discuss and defend elimi-
native inference. (Neither of these is easy reading.) For one of the elaborate attempts
to make sense of the scientiﬁc preference for simple theories, see Forster and Sober
1994.
The view that I call “procedural naturalism” amalgamates ideas from various
sources. Reichenbach’s main discussion is in Experience and Prediction (1938) and
is presented more accessibly in The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy (1951). Alvin
Goldman’s two big books Epistemology and Cognition (1986) and Knowledge in
a Social World (1999) give a general treatment of epistemological questions em-
phasizing the reliability of methods, rules, and procedures. The technically minded
might be interested in a recent area of work that could be seen as contributing to a
procedural naturalist approach to explanatory inference. This is work on inference
about causal structure in networks of interacting factors (Pearl 2000; Spirtes, Gly-
mour, and Sheines 1993).
218
Chapter Fourteen

219
15
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
15.1 A Muddy Paste?
We now reach the end of the tour. The tour has covered nearly a century of
argument about science, and it has visited some fairly extreme climates and
landscapes along the way. I will ﬁnish the book by trying to tie together
some of the various threads, hints, insights, and pieces of the puzzle that
have emerged in the preceding chapters. In particular, I will connect three
ideas: empiricism, naturalism, and scientiﬁc realism. These three “isms”
have each been explored and, in some form, defended. The harder question
is whether they can be combined into a package that makes sense as a
whole. We can’t just declare that we are all “empiricist naturalist realists”
or “naturalistic realist empiricists” and consider the job done.
When I wrote the proposal for this book, publishers sent it out for com-
ments. One anonymous reviewer reacted against the idea that at the end
we would have a happy three-way marriage of empiricism, naturalism, and
scientiﬁc realism. The reviewer saw these as three ideas that could each be
defended fairly well individually but which do not go well together. There
are conﬂicts between them, or at least between some of the pairs. To make
a good case for scientiﬁc realism, for example, requires being opposed to
some central ideas in the empiricist tradition. So the reviewer predicted
that when the last chapter of the book tried to put the three ideas together,
the result would be a “muddy paste.”
This is a good image. We start with three sharp and distinctive colors,
three different big ideas about science, but when we try to put them to-
gether, we get a mess. Or so the reviewer predicted. Despite this vivid warn-
ing, I will indeed try to put the three together in this chapter. Readers can
decide for themselves whether the result is mud.

15.2 The Apparent Tensions
Empiricism traditionally holds that our source of knowledge about the
world is experience. Naturalism holds that we can only hope to resolve
philosophical problems (including epistemological problems) by approach-
ing them within a scientiﬁc picture of ourselves and our place in the uni-
verse. Scientiﬁc realism holds that science can reasonably aim to describe
the real structure of the world, including its unobservable structure. So why
can’t we believe all three of these at once? Where is the problem?
Much of the problem comes from the side of empiricism. I have several
times summarized empiricism as the view that our only source of knowledge
is experience. But this is, of course, a vague and indeﬁnite idea, more a start-
ing point than a philosophical position. When people have tried to ﬁll out
this idea, the result has often been a view with troublesome consequences.
Traditional empiricism was often beguiled by a picture of the mind as
shut in behind a “veil of ideas,” or sensations. If all we have access to is our
sensory experience, what chance do we have of forming justiﬁed beliefs
about what lies beyond the veil? The most extreme forms of empiricism
have denied that it even makes sense to talk or think about what might lie
beyond experience. And even from a less extreme empiricist point of view,
it can be hard to see how experience itself could support a hypothesis about
structures lying behind experience. Hence the temptation to see science as
concerned only with patterns in experience itself, or patterns in the ob-
servable domain.
In recent years the tension between scientiﬁc realism and empiricism
has often been debated under the heading “the underdetermination of the-
ory by evidence.” Empiricists argue that there will always be a range of al-
ternative theories compatible with all our evidence. So we can never have
good empirical grounds for choosing one of these theories over others and
regarding it as representing how the world really is. If we have no empiri-
cal grounds for such a choice, then we have no grounds at all.
So much for empiricism and scientiﬁc realism. The other possible ten-
sions are not so bad, but they are still worth discussing. First, the relation
between empiricism and naturalism is not always harmonious, because em-
piricist philosophies have often had a foundationalist structure. For many
empiricists, given that we only have direct access to our ideas and experi-
ences, we must begin from that starting point when developing a philo-
sophical theory of knowledge. But according to naturalism, the idea of
“starting within the circle of our ideas and then working our way out” is a
bad mistake.
Some have thought there is a different kind of tension between naturalism
220
Chapter Fifteen

and empiricism. Sociologists of science (and others in neighboring ﬁelds) have
held that the empiricist tradition in philosophy of science has been shown
to be a collection of myths. If we look at how science actually works, we
do not ﬁnd experience acting as a neutral “arbiter” of theoretical disputes,
in the way imagined by empiricism. Arguments about the theory-ladenness
of observation (section 10.3) are often used to make this point. I tried to
defuse most of these arguments, but they do continue to be inﬂuential.
The last possibility is tension between naturalism and scientiﬁc realism.
Here we ﬁnd less of a problem. Indeed, it is hard to be a naturalistic philoso-
pher without taking science seriously as a description of the world; that sug-
gests that naturalism requires a form of scientiﬁc realism. In general, there is
indeed compatibility here, but there have also been some arguments given
along similar lines to those in the previous paragraph. Sociologists of science
have often viewed themselves as taking a properly naturalistic approach to
science, in contrast with the philosophers’ ﬂights of fancy. So sociologists
have sometimes argued that among the philosophical myths about science
that we must abandon are myths about science’s contact with reality.
So much for the possible tensions. The big one is between empiricism
and realism. In the next section I will argue that the way to overcome this
problem is via naturalistic ideas.
15.3 Empiricism Reformed
In this section I will describe a reformed version of empiricism. The argu-
ment will proceed in two steps. The ﬁrst is a general philosophical discus-
sion that has to do with epistemology in general. The second has to do with
empiricism as a view about science.
As described above, empiricists (and many others) used to operate with
a picture of the mind’s access to the world that has been called the “veil of
ideas” picture. The mind is seen as conﬁned to its own sensations and
thoughts, trying in vain to reach a hypothetical world beyond. Many
philosophers now agree that this is a misleading picture. But it is easy to
fall back into relatives of this view, both when thinking generally about the
role of experience in guiding beliefs, and also in thinking about science.
Philosophy of science has often hung onto enough of the old picture for
trouble to arise. It is easy to fall back into a picture in which we distinguish
two layers, or domains, in the world. One domain is accessible to us and
familiar—the domain of experiences, or the domain of the observable. The
other domain is inaccessible, mysterious, “theoretical,” and problematic.
So how should we describe the role of experience? The right way to pro-
ceed is to cast empiricism within a naturalistic approach to philosophy. My
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
221

version of this approach is inﬂuenced by the early-twentieth-century natu-
ralism of John Dewey (1929).
From the naturalistic point of view, humans are biological organisms
embedded in a physical world that we evolved to deal with. All our lives—
including the most elaborate outgrowths of our social and intellectual
lives—involve constant causal trafﬁc and interaction with this world in
which we are embedded. Our attempt to know about the world is just one
aspect of our causal interaction with it; much of this interaction is more
practical. Our perceptual mechanisms—eyes, ears, and so forth—are tools
that we use to coordinate our dealings with the world. These mechanisms
respond to physical stimuli caused by objects and events in our environ-
ments. From the inside, we can never establish with complete certainty
what lies behind a particular sensory input. But looking at ourselves from
“sideways-on,” from the point of view taken by biology and psychology,
we can establish regular principles concerning how our perceptual ma-
chinery responds to objects and events distant from us. We can work out
how our perceptual machinery helps us to navigate the world.
So far this is not a point about science or even about human beings in
particular. It is a claim about all the animals (and other organisms) that use
perceptual mechanisms to adapt themselves to what is going on in their en-
vironments. But this point is enough to help us avoid some philosophical
problems about our “access” to the world. We should not think in terms
of two domains in reality, one accessible and one mysterious. We are bio-
logical systems embedded in a world containing objects of all sizes and at
all different kinds of distance and remove from us. Our mechanisms of per-
ception and action give us a variety of different kinds of contact with these
objects. Our “access” to the world via thought and theory is really a com-
plicated kind of causal interaction. This access to the world is constantly
being expanded, as our technology improves. Parts of the world that must,
at one time, be the subject of indirect and speculative inferences can later
be much more directly observed, scanned, or assayed.
Think again about the problem of “underdetermination of theory by
evidence.” Empiricists have worried that there will always be rival alter-
native theories of the world that are equally compatible with our observa-
tions. Given this, how can we hope to have good knowledge of what the
unobservable part of the world is really like? In thinking about this prob-
lem, return to the simpler case of perception itself. The same kind of issue
arises here. Our perceptual mechanisms are used to form judgments about
objects in the world around us, even though these mechanisms are only di-
rectly affected by stimuli like light and sound waves. In principle, there will
always be alternative layouts of objects that could, in principle, give rise to
222
Chapter Fifteen

the same stimuli affecting our senses. There is a kind of “underdetermina-
tion” here, as psychologists themselves often say. However, we can in fact
make reliable judgments about what is around us, using perceptual mech-
anisms. And we can know that we are able to do this, by studying the op-
eration of our perceptual mechanisms scientiﬁcally. In the case of percep-
tion, we can learn what kind of reliability we have in our attempts to know
about the world.
The same sort of approach can be applied to inferences and modeling
strategies in science itself. We can ask, What sort of reliability are we actu-
ally able to achieve, using different sorts of scientiﬁc reasoning and model-
building strategies? Over time, structures and objects in the world can move
from being so inaccessible that only speculative model-building can be ap-
plied to them, to being so accessible that their study is routine. Inferences
about the genetic composition of an organism, for instance, have recently
made this transition from being very indirect and cautious to being rather
direct and routine, via DNA sequencing technologies. The constant shift-
ing of these boundaries means that we can often go back and look at mod-
els developed when a structure was inaccessible. We can then ask, How
well did we do? And more generally, Which approaches have tended to
steer us toward good models, and which have tended to steer us toward bad
ones? (Do scientiﬁc preferences for simple theories, for example, tend to
lead to good choices?) To undertake this kind of investigation requires that
we draw on work in the history of science. History tells us about actual
cases where different approaches were tried and either succeeded or failed.
Let us now focus more closely on what makes science distinctive.
Though humans all share their basic forms of contact with reality, as a con-
sequence of their shared biological nature, there are huge differences in
how different people and different intellectual cultures approach the prob-
lem of investigating and understanding the world. The fact that people all
have their brains attached to sense organs at one end and behavioral mech-
anisms at the other end does not prevent them from disagreeing profoundly
about the right way to learn about the world. One important point of dis-
agreement is in how people handle the assessment of big ideas—big theo-
ries and explanatory hypotheses about the world—as opposed to how they
handle everyday life. Maybe our shared biology is enough to make us all
fairly empirical when we are trying to get food to eat and decide how to get
home. But this does not apply to attempts to develop and justify explana-
tory theories about our overall place in the universe. Here we ﬁnd sharp
disagreements in approach, both within and across cultures.
At the end of chapter 10, I said that we might think of science as a some-
thing like a strategy. In this sense science is the strategy of subjecting even
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
223

the biggest theoretical ideas, questions, and disputes to testing by means of
observation. This strategy is not dictated to us by the nature of human lan-
guage, the fundamental rules of thought, or our biology; it is more like a
choice. The choice can be made by an individual or by a culture. The sci-
entiﬁc strategy is to construe ideas, to embed them in surrounding frame-
works, and to develop them, in such a way that exposure to experience is
sought even in the case of the most general and ambitious hypotheses about
the universe. That view of science is a kind of empiricism.
This description of science as a strategy is a start, but it needs to be made
more precise. Back in chapter 1, I noted that there is a lot of variety in how
the word “science” is used; there are very broad and very narrow uses of
the term. Here I will outline a two-part story that is related to that “broad
versus narrow” distinction. Let us distinguish the general scientiﬁc strategy
from a particular way of organizing how the strategy is carried out. The
strategy itself is the attempt to assess big ideas by exposing them to expe-
rience. In a broad sense, that is what science is all about. But the Scientiﬁc
Revolution and the work that followed it also developed a particular, so-
cially organized way of carrying out the strategy. The term “science” can
also be used, more narrowly, to refer to that social organization.
I will say a bit more about how the two parts of the story ﬁt together. I
take from the empiricist tradition the idea of assessing ideas by exposing
them to experience. An individual, all alone, can carry out a strategy of this
kind. An individual could set up a private, self-contained program of for-
mulating hypotheses and assessing them via observational testing. An in-
dividual can internalize the dialogue between the imaginative and critical
voices. Such an individual might refuse to trust others and might attempt
to get as close as possible to the old fantasy of the lone empiricist, relying
entirely on his own experience.
This is a possible way of carrying out the scientiﬁc strategy, but obvi-
ously it is very far from the usual way. If our aim is to understand what
makes the tradition of work deriving from the Scientiﬁc Revolution differ-
ent from other approaches, then we need a different kind of story. We need
to focus on the development and structure of a socially organized way of
carrying out the basic scientiﬁc strategy.
The distinctive features of science as a social structure are found along
two different dimensions. One has to do with the organization of work at
a given time. Here we ﬁnd the suggestion that science has developed a re-
ward system and an internal culture that generate an efﬁcient mixture of
competition and cooperation, and a beneﬁcial division of scientiﬁc labor
across different approaches to a problem. These ideas were discussed in
chapter 11. The general argument is that science (construed narrowly, as
224
Chapter Fifteen

involving a particular social structure) is able to coordinate the energies of
diverse individuals in an effective way.
The other dimension has to do with the relationships between different
times, and with the transmission of ideas between scientiﬁc generations.
The crucial feature we ﬁnd along this dimension is that scientiﬁc work is
cumulative. Each generation builds on the work of predecessors; current
workers “stand on the shoulders” of earlier workers, as Isaac Newton once
put it. This requires both trustworthy ways of transmitting ideas across time
and (again) a reward system that makes it worthwhile to carry on where
earlier workers left off.
With a social structure of this kind, the “dialogue between the imagi-
native and the critical voices” can become a real dialogue. We have social
mechanisms in place that reliably bring about the checking and scrutiniz-
ing of ideas. To use a phrase suggested to me by Kim Sterelny, we get an
“engine of self-correction” to accompany the speculative side of scientiﬁc
thinking. In a situation like this, we can have a true division of labor in how
the basic empiricist pattern is manifested. Some dogmatic and bloody-
minded individuals can work within the system and even play a potentially
useful role, provided that ﬂexibility and open-mindedness is found in the
community as a whole.
For several of the ﬁgures discussed in this book, the way that the em-
piricist strategy has been socially organized by modern science exhibits a
remarkable balance. Or, more accurately, we seem to ﬁnd a couple of dif-
ferent balances. One is a balance between competition and cooperation;
this is, in a sense, the message of the work by Merton, Hull, and Kitcher
discussed in chapters 8 and 11. The other is a balance between criticism
and trust. That is one of the main themes of Kuhn’s work. It is also part of
the message of Shapin’s work. Shapin would be reluctant to accept my de-
scription of the relation between criticism and trust as a “balance”; this
term suggests that the relationship is a good one. Shapin does not take a
stand on that issue. Kuhn, however, did think that the relationship between
criticism and trust found in science is a uniquely effective one.
The idea of “balance,” with its positive connotations, will make some
people suspicious about this part of the story. The suspicion is under-
standable. When we describe the relations between competition and coop-
eration, and between criticism and trust, as exhibiting “balance,” this
makes those relationships sound like precious and fragile achievements.
But why are we so sure that the present state is a good one? How do we
know that we could not do better by changing the social organization of
science? Feyerabend thought that recent science had lost its balance with
respect to the relation between imaginative and pedestrian work, as we saw
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
225

in chapter 7. In chapters 9 and 11, I also discussed the possibility of a fem-
inist criticism of Hull’s claim that the relation between competition and co-
operation in science is well balanced.
Let us also look brieﬂy at some historical issues. Once we have worked
out which features of science’s social organization are essential to our epis-
temological theory of science, we get some new historical questions to ask.
Above I distinguished two dimensions of the social organization of science:
the organization of work at a time and the organization of work across
times. Were there crucial transitions that gave us these features, or did they
evolve more gradually? Did they arise together or separately?
The cumulative structure of scientiﬁc work is something that is old in
some ﬁelds and newer in others; this is something that can be gained and
lost partially. In their historical description of the development of ideas
about the universe from the ancient period to the early part of the modern,
Toulmin and Goodﬁeld emphasize the way that a cumulative structure was
sometimes gained and then lost (1962). A sustained line of work would be
set up by a “school,” often in some particular city, and then it would fade
and be replaced by a succession of individuals working alone, often “rein-
venting the wheel” over and over again. Gradually, though, and ﬁeld by
ﬁeld, this haphazard pattern was replaced by more cumulative work.
Turning to the organization of scientiﬁc work at a time, and the relation
between cooperation and competition in science, we ﬁnd that the middle of
the seventeenth century may be crucially important. Shapin and Schaffer
(1985) emphasize the role of Robert Boyle and the Royal Society of Lon-
don in setting up a new kind of culture of controlled criticism and a new
kind of network of trust. This made possible new kinds of collaborative
work. (Again, Shapin and Schaffer do not tell this story in a way that en-
dorses this result, but many philosophers of science would want to do this.)
If we regard this new organized culture of work as absolutely crucial to sci-
ence, then the work of the “adventurers” of the earlier part of the Revolu-
tionary period, like Galileo, becomes slightly less important in the story.
The case of alchemy is also interesting here. Alchemy was the precursor
to chemistry, and it was inﬂuential through the end of the seventeenth cen-
tury. (Newton was very interested in it.) Alchemy was a combination of prac-
tical work based on detailed recipes and an amazingly strange set of ac-
companying theories. (Rocks were seen as growing, in a quasi-biological
sense, in the earth; chemical reactions were signiﬁed in astrological rela-
tionships between planets.) Alchemy was quite empirical in some ways—
very results-oriented—but the work of alchemists was organized in a way
that contrasts strikingly with modern science. Alchemy was often intensely
secretive; rather than wide, accessible publication of results, there was a
226
Chapter Fifteen

culture of private and restricted communication. This was partly because
of the semi-mystical nature of the ﬁeld, and partly because of the hope for
massive ﬁnancial beneﬁts via ﬁnding a way to transmute other metals into
gold. As Shapin and Schaffer emphasize, Robert Boyle contrasted his open,
cooperative new scientiﬁc culture with the secrecy of the alchemists, as well
as with the emptiness and dogmatism of Scholasticism.
In chapter 1, I raised the possibility that the ﬁelds and practices that we
call “science” are too dissimilar for there to be a detailed philosophical
“theory of science.” (This possibility is one aspect of a recent discussion
about the “disunity of science” [Galison and Stump 1996; Suppes 1981]).
In several of the previous chapters, I have argued for “mixed” or “pluralist”
views on particular issues. In chapter 7 I argued that some scientiﬁc ﬁelds
might ﬁt reasonably well with Kuhn’s account of paradigm-dominated nor-
mal science (or something along the same lines), while others might ﬁt bet-
ter with the views of Laudan and Lakatos. My treatment of explanation in
chapter 13 defended a “contextualist” position, and the same possibility
arose also in my discussion of scientiﬁc realism. So the last half of this book
has taken the idea of diversity in the nature of science fairly seriously, but
this has not prevented the development of a philosophical account of those
issues. Philosophy need not always strive for the most sweeping generaliza-
tions, and this kind of recognition of diversity need not involve relativism.
Still, the account of the scientiﬁc strategy and its characteristic social struc-
ture described in this section is indeed rather general. Others might pro-
pose views that have less generality or unity than I am trying for here.
15.4 A Last Challenge
My discussion of the scientiﬁc strategy in the previous section was pre-
sented as a vindication of empiricism. But is this a misleading connection
to make? (Some commentators on this book have thought so.) Has the
story told in this book shown that empiricism was basically right all along,
or has it rejected all the central ideas of the empiricist tradition?
This challenge can be posed by thinking again about Kuhn. We can see
Kuhn as arguing that science cannot be described by any kind of simple
empiricist formula, because science is a much more complicated machine
than traditional empiricism ever imagined. Empiricist ideas are not just
vague and incomplete; they get it wrong. Empiricist views have no re-
sources to describe the complex balances found in scientiﬁc work, espe-
cially balances found in the social organization of science. Kuhn’s view of
science was the ﬁrst place in this book where we encountered the possibil-
ity of a very complex theory of science of this kind. I criticized a number
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
227

of the details of Kuhn’s theory of science, but not in a way that seems likely
to help us with that basic challenge. We seem likely to end up with just as
complicated a view of science, or something even more so.
The empiricist can reply: “OK, there is a lot of complexity, but still the
basic ideas of empiricism capture the most fundamental features of how
science works. Let us not lose the wood for the trees!” That is indeed the
reply that I propose. But we need to be aware of the objections to this po-
sition, as well as the points in its favor.
From the point of view of some of its opponents, empiricism is based on
a hopelessly simple picture of what knowledge involves. Empiricism is of-
ten summarized by saying that the only source of knowledge is experience.
But what is this talk of “sources” doing here? We ask, Is there just one
source of knowledge, or more than one? This is like asking, Is there just one
pipe leading into this tank, or more than one? But the process of learning
about the world is not like that; epistemology is not plumbing.
So the critic of empiricism that I am imagining here is someone who
thinks that the discussion of social structure, frameworks, rewards, and so
on, in the middle part of this book should replace the simple empiricist
ideas that we started out with. Suppose it can be shown that science works
via a balance between competition and cooperation, and between criticism
and trust. If that is the key to understanding science, it is not something
that was suggested or summarized by traditional empiricist ideas. It is a dif-
ferent kind of story and also a better one. Or so says the critic.
There is a connection here to the problem of “objectivity” in science.
Back in chapter 1, I noted that people often want to know whether science
is objective; this is a central concept in many philosophical and sociologi-
cal discussions of science. I said that I would avoid the term, because it is
ambiguous and tends to set up the issues in a misleading way. Why is this?
Let us look more closely at how the word is used. Sometimes people talk-
ing about objectivity have in mind a distinction, perhaps a vague one, be-
tween good and bad inﬂuences on belief. Objective inﬂuences on belief are
contrasted with subjective inﬂuences. And objectivity involves some kind
of impartiality, or lack of bias. Perhaps it is accurate to say that “objectiv-
ity” is a term used to refer to a loose family of distinctions, each of which
makes some sort of contrast between two ways of forming beliefs, one way
that is dependent on caprice, prejudice, or point of view, and one that
avoids such “subjective” inﬂuences.
At other times, the term “objectivity” is used to express a quite differ-
ent idea. Some things exist objectively and some do not. Do colors exist ob-
jectively? Do moral values exist objectively? They are said to exist objec-
228
Chapter Fifteen

tively if they exist independently of what people think of them. There is a
link here to the issues about realism discussed in chapter 12.
In some discussions of science, these different senses of objectivity are
brought together. Beliefs are said to be formed objectively when they are
caused by, or guided by, real things. Science counts as objective if it is a pro-
cess in which belief and theory change are controlled by contact with real
things in the world. So is science objective in this sense? Or rather, when
science is working properly, is it objective in this sense? Is the structure of
science one that tends to produce objectivity?
The view of science defended in this book sort of says yes to these ques-
tions. But these are not good ways to ask the key questions; the concept of
objectivity is unhelpful here. It is crude, and it tends to suggest false di-
chotomies. People ﬁnd themselves asking, Are scientiﬁc belief and theory
change controlled by real objects, or by social factors? Are scientiﬁc ideas
the products of the real world, or are they products of human creativity? Are
we responsible for what we know, or is the world responsible for it? (Shapin
and Schaffer 1985, 344). These are all bad questions; they all involve false
dichotomies. Scientiﬁc belief is not the product of us alone or of the world
alone; it is the product of an interaction between our psychological capac-
ities, our social organization, and the structure of the world. The world
does not “stamp” beliefs upon us, in science or elsewhere. Still, science is
responsive to the structure of the world, via the channel of observation.
The critic of empiricism that I am imagining here makes a similar kind
of objection. Why hold onto old empiricist slogans, when they seem to set
up the issues in such simplistic and misleading ways? Why not tell the story
in entirely new terms? There is more in science than was dreamed of in the
tired old empiricist tradition.
The critic of empiricism suspects that people like me want to hang onto
empiricist ideas because they are pleasingly simple and often rhetorically
useful. What makes science different from attempts to understand the
world based on religious fundamentalism? When questions like this are
asked, the empiricist seems able to give a simple and satisfying answer.
“Science is different because it is a process in which beliefs are shaped by
observation. Ideas are assessed not in terms of their origins, but in terms of
how they stand up to testing. Science is open-minded, anti-authoritarian,
and ﬂexible.” Nice and simple. Now suppose that these traditional empiri-
cist ideas are replaced by a much more complex story, a story about deli-
cate balances, a special reward system, moves within and between frame-
works. . . . The defender of a more complex story might still insist that
science is a superior approach to investigation. But the features that make
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
229

science different will not be obvious, simple features, as they are according
to the empiricist story. Simplicity is often attractive, but simple answers are
often false.
So I do recognize the force of the argument that empiricism has been
buried rather than reformed in the latter part of this book. Nonetheless, I
think the argument is erroneous. It does “lose the wood for the trees,” as
the saying goes. Modern science involves both a general strategy and a
complex social structure that carries out the strategy. The ﬁrst part of this
two-part account, as developed in this book, is a modiﬁed, naturalistic
form of empiricism.
15.5 The Future
What are the key issues for philosophy of science in the near future? What
should people work on? The problems grappled with in the preceding sec-
tion are certainly worth further discussion. But I will end by mentioning
three issues that follow up discussions in earlier chapters, which I think are
especially interesting at the moment.
The ﬁrst follows from the last section of chapter 7. What role do frame-
works, paradigms, and similar constructs have in our understanding of the-
ory change in science? Should we follow Kuhn and Carnap in having a
sharp distinction between two “tiers” of conceptual change? Or is this a
beguiling image that creates problems rather than solving them?
The second has to do with the reward system in science, and the rela-
tions between individual-level and community-level goals. So far the philo-
sophical treatments of this topic have tended to generalize a lot, and it has
been assumed that scientists have all internalized a similar set of motiva-
tions. Using input from sociology of science, it should be possible to tell a
much more detailed story. What differences are there between different
ﬁelds and different subcultures in science, for example? The relation be-
tween competition and cooperation in science is a fascinating topic.
The third follows from the last section of chapter 12. I used a broad con-
cept of “representation” to describe the relation that science aims to achieve
between theories and reality. I resisted the tendency to make concepts from
the philosophy of language, like reference and truth, central in this part of
the story. I also emphasized the role of models. But we do not have a good
philosophical theory of representation yet, and even the most basic issues
here are fraught with controversy. A big cloud of uncertainty still hangs
over this part of philosophy of science.
Along with these clouds of uncertainty, however, I think we can see
some fairly deﬁnite progress in the philosophy of science in recent years.
230
Chapter Fifteen

The idea that, in some way or other, all science is concerned with is the de-
scription of patterns in experience has ﬁnally been (mostly) abandoned.
Scientiﬁc realism has been developed and defended in sophisticated forms.
The ﬁeld has become less dominated by questions about language, and
proper attention is being paid to model-building as a crucial part of scien-
tiﬁc work. Theories of testing and evidence are in vastly better shape than
they were ﬁfty years ago. The very idea of looking closely at the relation be-
tween the reward structure in science and epistemological issues is a cru-
cial advance. So there has been progress, but there is still much to do.
Empiricism, Naturalism, and Scientiﬁc Realism?
231


233
Glossary
For deﬁnitions and quick discussions of other philosophical terms, I recommend Si-
mon Blackburn’s excellent book The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy. Blackburn
also gives more detail on many of the terms discussed here.
Sometimes confusion in newcomers to philosophy arises not from technicality, but
from slightly different philosophical uses of everyday language. For example, in phi-
losophy the word “strong” when applied to a view or a hypothesis does not mean ef-
fective, and it carries no positive (or negative) connotation. “Strong” means some-
thing more like extreme, bold, or tendentious. This is related to the use of the term in
logic, where a strong claim is one that has a lot of implications. “Weak” in this sense
means cautious, hedged, or moderate. Scientists sometimes uses “strong” in the same
way. So a “strong” version of a view (empiricism, realism, etc.) is not necessarily bet-
ter than a weak form. Confusingly, philosophers do sometimes say strong argument
when they mean that the argument is good, or convincing.
After discussing each term below, I indicate the chapters or sections of the book in
which the term is important. Terms in boldface have their own entry in the glossary.
There are two terms used in this book that are my own modiﬁcations of more stan-
dard terms. These are “explanatory inference” and “eliminative inference.” In both
cases I am avoiding overly broad use of the term “induction.”
Abduction. One of the many terms for explanatory inference. This one was coined by
C. S. Peirce. (3.2, 14.5)
Analytic/Synthetic Distinction. Analytic sentences are true or false simply in virtue of
the meanings of the terms within them. Synthetic sentences are true or false in virtue
of both the meanings of the words and the way the world is. Logical positivism treated
this distinction as very important. Quine argued that it does not exist. (2.3, 2.4, 2.5)
Anomaly. In Kuhn’s theory of science, an anomaly is a puzzle that resists solution by
the methods of normal science. This is close to the word’s ordinary meaning (roughly,
something out of place). (5.4)

A Priori/A Posteriori Distinction. If something is known (or knowable) a priori, it is
known (or knowable) independently of evidence gained via experience. Knowledge
that relies on evidence from experience is a posteriori knowledge. (2.3)
Bayesianism. The theory of evidence and testing that gives a central role to Bayes’s the-
orem, which is a provable result in probability theory. Bayesians treat all rational be-
lief change as a matter of updating one’s degrees of belief in propositions, in accor-
dance with the principles of probability theory. (chapter 14)
Conﬁrmation. A relationship of support between a body of evidence and a hypothesis
or theory. Conﬁrmation is not the same as proof; a theory can be highly conﬁrmed
and yet be false. Logical positivism and logical empiricism put much emphasis on the
role of this relationship in science, usually trying to analyze it with an “inductive
logic.” Their attempts were not very successful. (chapters 3, 4, 14)
Constructivism (Social Constructivism, Metaphysical Constructivism). A word with
many meanings. In the debates discussed in this book, “constructivism” usually refers
to some sort of view in which knowledge (and sometimes, reality itself) is seen as ac-
tively created by human choices and social negotiation.
People advocating constructivist views often do not distinguish carefully between
the view that theories (or classiﬁcations, or frameworks) are constructed, and the view
that the reality described by those theories is constructed. I use the term “metaphysi-
cal constructivism” for views that explicitly claim that reality is in some sense con-
structed. (12.5).
Van Fraassen also uses the term “constructive empiricism” for his view of science,
though his position has little in common with others standardly called constructivist.
(12.6)
Corroboration. Popper used this term for something that a scientiﬁc theory acquires
when it survives attempts to refute it. Sometimes this looks like another name for con-
ﬁrmation, which Popper rejected. (4.5) The term is also occasionally used (though not
by Popperians) in a way that is roughly synonymous with conﬁrmation or support.
Covering Law Theory. A theory of scientiﬁc explanation developed by the logical em-
piricists (see logical empiricism), especially Carl Hempel. The theory holds that to ex-
plain something is to show how to infer it in a good logical argument that includes a
statement of a law of nature in the premises. (13.2)
Deductive Logic. The well-developed branch of logic dealing with patterns of argu-
ment that have the following feature: if the premises of the argument are true, then the
conclusion is guaranteed to be true. This feature is called “deductive validity.”
Deductive-Nomological Theory (D-N Theory). A term sometimes used for the covering
law theory of explanation, although it only refers to some of the cases covered by that
234
Glossary

theory, the ones in which the argument used to explain something is a deductive ar-
gument.
Demarcation Problem. Popper’s term for the problem of distinguishing scientiﬁc theo-
ries from nonscientiﬁc theories. (4.2, 4.6)
Eliminative Inference. A pattern of inference in which a hypothesis is supported by rul-
ing out other alternatives. (Sometimes called “eliminative induction,” even though
these arguments can be deductively valid in some cases.) (14.5)
Empiricism. A diverse family of philosophical views, all asserting the fundamental im-
portance of experience in explaining knowledge, justiﬁcation, and rationality. A slo-
gan used for traditional empiricism in this book is “Experience is the only source of
real knowledge about the world.” Not all empiricists would like that slogan. There are
also empiricist theories of language, which connect the meanings of words with ex-
perience or some kind of observational testing. (chapters 2, 15, section 10.3)
Epistemology. The part of philosophy that deals with questions involving the nature of
knowledge, the justiﬁcation of beliefs, and rationality.
Explanandum. Whatever is being explained, in an explanation. (chapter 13).
Explanans. Whatever is doing the explaining, in an explanation. (chapter 13).
Explanatory Inference. An inference from a set of data to a hypothesis about a struc-
ture or process that would explain the data. There are many terms for this idea or
ideas like it, including “abductive inference,” “inference to the best explanation,” “ex-
planatory induction,” and “theoretical induction.”
In this book I treat this category as possibly overlapping with the category of elim-
inative inference. Some cases of explanatory inference might work via the elimination
of alternative explanations. Others would treat these as two distinct categories. (3.2,
14.5)
Falsiﬁcationism. A view of science developed by Karl Popper. The word “falsiﬁca-
tionism” can be used narrowly to refer to Popper’s proposal for how to distinguish
scientiﬁc theories from nonscientiﬁc theories (the demarcation problem). Falsiﬁca-
tionism in this sense says that a theory is scientiﬁc if it has the potential to be refuted
by some possible observation. The term is also used more broadly for Popper’s view
that all testing in science has the form of trying to refute theories by observation, and
there is no such thing as the conﬁrmation of a theory by passing observational tests.
(chapter 4)
Foundationalism. A term used for theories that approach epistemological problems
(see epistemology) by trying to show how human knowledge is built on a “foundation”
Glossary
235

of basic and completely certain beliefs. These might be beliefs about one’s own cur-
rent experiences, perhaps. (10.1, 10.2)
Holism. Holist arguments and positions can be found in many philosophical debates.
Generally, a holist is someone who thinks that you cannot understand a particular
thing without looking at its place in a larger whole. Two kinds of holism are impor-
tant in this book. Holism about testing claims that we cannot test a single hypothesis
or sentence in isolation. Instead, we can only test complex networks of claims and as-
sumptions as wholes, because only these whole networks make deﬁnite predictions
about what we should observe in a given situation. Meaning holism claims that the
meaning of any word (or other expression) depends on its connections to every other
expression in that language. (2.4, 2.5)
Hypothetico-Deductivism. This term can be used both for a method of doing science
and for a more abstract view about conﬁrmation. The hypothetico-deductive method
(H-D method) is the most common description of good scientiﬁc procedure given in
science textbooks. Versions of the method vary, but the basic steps are as follows. (1)
Gather some observations, (2) formulate a hypothesis that would account for the ob-
servations, (3) deduce some new observational predictions from the hypothesis, and
(4) see if those predictions are true. If they are true, go back to step 3. If they are false,
regard the hypothesis as falsiﬁed and go back to step 2.
Some versions omit or alter step 1. Versions also differ on whether the scientist
should regard the theory as conﬁrmed if the predictions made by the hypothesis are true.
“Hypothetico-deductivism” is also used for a view about the nature of conﬁrma-
tion, as opposed to the procedures used in testing. Here the idea is that a hypothesis
is conﬁrmed when it can be used to derive true observational predictions.
Incommensurability. An important concept in Kuhn’s and Feyerabend’s theories of sci-
ence. The basic idea is that different theories or paradigms can be hard or impossible
to compare, in a properly unbiased way. For example, incommensurability about stan-
dards is the idea that different paradigms tend to bring with them slightly different
standards for what counts as good evidence or good scientiﬁc work. If two paradigms
bring different standards with them, which set of standards do we use if we want to
choose between the two paradigms? Incommensurability about language holds that
key scientiﬁc terms (like “mass,” “force,” etc.) can have different meanings in differ-
ent paradigms. So in a sense, people within two different paradigms can be speaking
slightly different languages, even if they seem to be using the same words. (6.3)
Induction. There are many senses of this term. One old sense refers to a method
for doing science described by Francis Bacon in the seventeenth century. This
method is usually described as one in which lots of particular facts should be gathered
first, and generalizations and other hypotheses should be based on this stock of
facts. (Bacon did not think that all science should follow this simple pattern.) In
most of the discussions described in this book, this is not what “induction” means.
236
Glossary

Instead, induction is a kind of argument, or pattern of inference, rather than a method
or procedure.
I use “induction” for inferences in which particular cases are used to argue for a
generalization that goes beyond the cases observed. So these arguments are not de-
ductively valid (see deductive logic). The logical positivists and logical empiricists
tended to use the term more broadly—for any inference that is not deductively valid
but where the premises do support the conclusion to some extent. (chapters 3, 4, 14)
Instrumentalism. One kind of opposition to scientiﬁc realism. The main idea is that
scientiﬁc theories should be seen as instruments used to predict observations, rather
than as attempts to describe the real but hidden structures in the world that are re-
sponsible for the patterns found in observations. (12.4, 12.6)
Likelihoods. In Bayesianism and in statistics, “likelihood” is a technical term referring
to the probability that something (e) will be observed, given the truth of some hy-
pothesis (h). So likelihoods are probabilities of the form P(e|h).
The term “likely” is often not tied to this technical meaning, though. Sometimes
philosophers say “likely” just to mean probable and say “likelihood” just to mean
probability. (14.2, 14.3, 14.4)
Logical Empiricism. I use this term for the more moderate views about knowledge, lan-
guage, and science that derived from logical positivism and developed after World
War II, especially in the United States. The term is sometimes used for logical posi-
tivism too, however (especially by those who think that not that much changed be-
tween the earlier and later stages). Logical empiricism was a scientiﬁcally oriented ver-
sion of empiricism that emphasized the tools of formal logic. (2.5, chapter 3)
Logical Positivism. A novel, adventurous, and scientiﬁcally oriented form of empiri-
cism that developed between the two world wars in Vienna, Austria. Sometimes
known as “logical empiricism,” though I use this term for a later and more moderate
development of the ideas. Leading ﬁgures were Moritz Schlick, Otto Neurath, and
Rudolf Carnap. The view was based on developments in logic, philosophy of lan-
guage, and philosophy of mathematics. The logical positivists famously dismissed a
lot of traditional philosophy as meaningless. Early versions included the phenome-
nalist position (see phenomenalism) that all scientiﬁc claims could be translated into
claims in a special language that referred only to observations. (chapter 2, 12.4)
Metaphysics. This term is usually now used to refer to a subﬁeld within philosophy,
which looks at a particular set of questions. These are general questions about the na-
ture of reality itself, rather than (for example) how we know about this reality. Stan-
dard questions here include the nature of causation, the reality of the “external
world,” and the relation between mind and body.
The term is sometimes seen as referring to an investigation that goes beyond what
can be addressed using science. Construed that way, metaphysics is regarded by many
Glossary
237

as a mistaken enterprise. (The logical positivists regarded most traditional metaphysi-
cal discussion as meaningless.) But in most current discussion, the term “metaphysics”
refers to a set of questions and does not prejudge the right way to address them.
Model. A word with many senses, leading to frequent confusion. Sometimes “model”
is used in science and philosophy of science just to mean a deliberately simpliﬁed the-
ory. I generally follow another, narrower use of the term (especially in 12.7). In this
sense, a model is a structure (either abstract or concrete) that is used to represent some
other system. These are often, but by no means always, deliberately kept simple. The
main “abstract” cases here are mathematical models used in science. In the “concrete”
cases, one real physical system is used to represent another.
“Model” can also refer to an analogy that is used to accompany a theory and
make it more comprehensible.
The term “model” also has a technical meaning in mathematical logic; here a
model is a precise kind of interpretation of a set of sentences, one that treats the sen-
tences as all true. This third sense has been used in philosophical attempts to formally
analyze “the structure of theories,” a project not discussed in this book (and about
which I am skeptical).
Naturalism. An approach to philosophy that emphasizes the links (often, the “conti-
nuity”) between philosophy and science. Naturalism is especially popular in episte-
mology and the philosophy of mind. Naturalism is sometimes taken to imply some
sort of claim about the ultimately physical nature of everything that exists. So natu-
ralists are thought to deny the existence of, for example, nonphysical souls. In this
book I do not associate naturalism itself with any particular claims about what does
and does not exist. For me, naturalism holds that the best way to address many philo-
sophical problems is to approach them within our best current scientiﬁc picture of the
world. (chapters 10, 11, 15, sections 12.3, 14.5)
Normal Science. In Kuhn’s theory of science, normal science is the orderly form of sci-
ence guided by a paradigm. Most science, for Kuhn, is normal science. A good nor-
mal scientist applies and does not usually question the fundamental ideas supplied by
the paradigm. (5.3)
Objectivity. A term often used in a vague way to refer to beliefs or belief-forming
procedures that avoid prejudice, caprice, and bias. The contrast is usually with
“subjective” beliefs or procedures, which bear the inﬂuence of a particular point of
view.
The term is also used to refer to a way in which things can be said to exist; some-
thing exists objectively if it exists independently of thought, language, or (again) a
particular point of view.
The two meanings can be combined; objectivity in the sense of lack of bias
might be seen as achieved through making beliefs responsive to the real world. (1.3,
15.4)
238
Glossary

Operationalism (Operationism). A strongly empiricist view of science and scientiﬁc
language developed by a physicist, Percy Bridgman, partly in response to Einstein’s
work in physics. According to operationalism, all good scientiﬁc language must either
refer to observations or be deﬁnable in terms that refer only to observations. So this
view is similar to logical positivism but is more a suggestion for how language should
be used in science than a theory of meaning applied to all language. (2.3, 8.4)
Paradigm. A term made famous by Kuhn’s theory of science. He used the term in a
number of ways. I distinguish two main senses. In the narrow sense, a paradigm is an
impressive achievement that inspires and guides a tradition of further scientiﬁc
work—a tradition of normal science. In the broad sense, a paradigm is a whole “way
of doing science” that has grown up around a paradigm in the narrow sense. In this
sense, a paradigm will typically include theoretical ideas about the world, methods,
and subtle habits of mind and standards used to assess “good work” in the ﬁeld.
(chapters 5, 6, section 7.7)
Pessimistic Induction from the History of Science (Pessimistic Meta-Induction). An ar-
gument against some forms of scientiﬁc realism. The argument holds that theories
have changed so much in the history of science that we should not have much conﬁ-
dence in our current theories. In the past, scientists have often been very conﬁdent that
their theories were true, but (the argument goes) they usually turned out to be wrong.
So we should expect the same for our own current theories. The argument can also be
made speciﬁcally about the reality of entities postulated by past and present theories.
(12.3)
Phenomenalism. The view that when we seem to be talking and thinking about real
physical objects, all we are really talking and thinking about are patterns in the ﬂow
of our sensations.
The word “phenomenon” is often used far more broadly than this strict meaning
of “phenomenalism” would suggest. The word is used in much philosophy with some-
thing like its everyday meaning, that is (roughly), something that happens. In science,
the term “phenomenological law” is sometimes used to refer to a law of nature that
is, in some sense, not deeply explanatory but just describes a pattern or regularity.
Posterior Probability. In Bayesianism, a posterior probability is a probability of a hy-
pothesis (h) given some piece of evidence (e). So it is a probability of the form P(h|e).
(chapter 14)
Pragmatism. A family of unorthodox empiricist philosophical views that emphasize
the relation between thought and action. For pragmatists, the chief purpose of thought
and language is practical problem-solving. The “classical” ﬁgures in the movement
are C. S. Peirce, William James, and John Dewey. Richard Rorty is a more recent de-
fender of a form of pragmatism (but with less of a connection to empiricism). Prag-
matists reject the correspondence theory of truth. (12.6)
Glossary
239

Prior Probability. In Bayesianism, a prior probability is the initial or “unconditional”
probability of a hypothesis (h), within an application of Bayes’s theorem. So it is a
probability of the form P(h). Bayes’s theorem gives a formula for moving from the
prior probability of a hypothesis to the posterior probability, the probability given
some (usually new) piece of evidence. (chapter 14)
Rationalism. In an older usage of this term, rationalism holds that some real knowl-
edge about the world can be gained via pure reasoning of a kind that does not depend
on experience. Mathematics has been seen as an example. So in this sense, rational-
ism is opposed to empiricism.
More recently, the term has been used for vaguer ideas that do not necessarily clash
with empiricism. As a view about science, “rationalism” is often used for the idea that
theory change is guided by good reasoning and attention to evidence, as opposed to
various kinds of bias or arbitrariness. For example, Popper’s view of science, which I
classify in this book as an unorthodox kind of empiricism, is often referred to as ra-
tionalist.
Realism. A huge variety of views can be described as “realist” in some sense or other,
and debates about realism can involve many different issues and dimensions. Per-
haps the most basic idea is this: a realist about X’s is someone who thinks that X’s
exist in a way that does not depend on our thoughts, language, or point of view.
Questions about realism can be asked very broadly, perhaps about all facts, or
about ordinary objects in the physical world. They can also be asked more nar-
rowly, in which case X’s might be numbers, moral facts, colors, or some other special
category.
This type of question is often recast as a question about language or about knowl-
edge—what is the meaning of our term “X”? Is it a term that aims to designate some
entity in the world? Can we ever have any knowledge at all about the alleged X’s? A
somewhat special set of issues arise in the case of scientiﬁc realism.
Relativism. The idea that the truth or justiﬁcation of a claim, or the applicability of a
standard or principle, depends on one’s situation or point of view. Such a position can
be asserted generally (about all truth or all standards) or speciﬁcally (about some par-
ticular domain, like morality or logic). The “point of view” might be that of an indi-
vidual, a social group, the users of a particular language, or some other group. (6.3,
9.4, 9.5)
Research Program. In Lakatos’s view of science, a research program is a sequence of
scientiﬁc theories that all explore and develop the same basic theoretical ideas. Later
theories in the sequence are developed in response to problems with the earlier ones.
Some ideas in a research program—the “hard core”—are essential to the program and
cannot be changed. Science typically involves ongoing competition between rival re-
search programs in each ﬁeld. (7.2)
240
Glossary

Research Tradition. Laudan’s research traditions are similar to Lakatos’s research pro-
grams. There are some differences, however, and Laudan’s concept is probably more
useful. For example, Laudan’s research traditions include more than just theoretical
ideas about the world; they include values and methods as well. Also, for Laudan the
borderline between the fundamental ideas of a research tradition and the ever-
changing details is not necessarily ﬁxed. (7.3)
Scientiﬁc Realism. A family of positions that assert some kind of realist (see realism)
attitude toward the world as understood by science. I defend a fairly cautious kind of
scientiﬁc realism. This version holds, roughly, that there is a real world that we all in-
habit and that one reasonable goal of science is describing what the world is like.
Many other defenses of scientiﬁc realism include a general statement of conﬁdence
in our current scientiﬁc theories, or about progress in the history of science. Some also
include detailed claims about scientiﬁc language. (2.5, chapter 12)
Subjectivism (also Personalism). An interpretation of the mathematics of probability
theory, especially associated with Bayesianism. Subjectivists (at least of the strict kind)
hold that probabilities are degrees of belief rather than measures of some kind of ob-
jective “chances” that exist in the world. Less strict versions of the view allow that
there might be two kinds of probabilities, subjective ones and objective ones. (14.3)
Theory-Ladenness of Observation. A family of ideas that all claim, in some way, that
observation cannot be an unbiased way to test rival theories (or larger units like par-
adigms), because observational judgments (or observation reports, or both) are af-
fected by the theoretical beliefs of the observer. (10.3)
Truth. In ordinary discussion, a true claim or sentence is one that describes how things
really are; a false claim is one that misrepresents the world. Some, but not all, philo-
sophical treatments of truth follow this familiar idea.
“Correspondence” theories of truth hold that true statements are those that have
some deﬁnite “matching” relationship to the world (so they obviously agree with the
familiar, everyday view above). The term “correspondence” suggests a picturing of
some kind, but this is not usually what is meant. It has been extremely difﬁcult to say
anything plausible about what this special relationship is. (I said “matching” just now,
but that does not seem to help much either.) Other theories have tried to treat truth as
depending only on what sort of evidence lies behind a claim or what sort of useful-
ness the claim has. More recently, some philosophers have argued that we should not
think of truth as a special relationship to the world or a feature of a representation at
all. Instead, we should think of the word “true” as a tool used in discussion to express
agreement and to make some other harmless linguistic moves. (12.7)
Veriﬁcationism. A theory of meaning associated with logical positivism. Veriﬁcation-
ism is often summarized with the claim that the meaning of a sentence is its method
Glossary
241

of veriﬁcation. “Veriﬁcation” here is a less appropriate word than “testing.” Perhaps
a better way to express the view is to say that to know the meaning of a sentence is the
same thing as knowing how, in principle, to test it. The theory only applies to those
parts of language that purport to describe the world (as opposed to expressing emo-
tion, expressing commands, etc.). (2.3, 2.4)
242
Glossary

243
References
Albert, David Z. 1992. Quantum Mechanics and Experience. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Alvarez, Luis W., Walter Alvarez, Frank Asaro, and Helen V. Michel. 1980. Extrater-
restrial Cause for the Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction. Science 208:1095–1108.
Armstrong, David M. 1983. What Is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
———. 1989. Universals: An Opinionated Introduction. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Ayer, Alfred J. 1936. Language, Truth, and Logic. London: V. Gollancz.
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds. 1992. The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Barnes, Barry, and David Bloor. 1982. Relativism, Rationalism, and the Sociology of
Knowledge. In Rationality and Relativism, edited by Martin Hollis and Steven
Lukes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barnes, Barry, David Bloor, and John Henry. 1996. Scientiﬁc Knowledge: A Sociolog-
ical Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Beebee, Helen. 2000. The Non-Governing Conception of Laws of Nature. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 61:571–94.
Biagioli, Mario, ed. 1999. The Science Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.
Bishop, Michael A. 1992. Theory-Ladenness of Perception Arguments. In PSA 1992,
vol. 1., edited by David Hull, Micky Forbes, and Kathleen Okruhlik, 287–99. East
Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association.
Bishop, Michael A., and Stephen P. Stich. 1998. The Flight to Reference, or How Not
to Make Progress in the Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Science 65:33–49.
Bloor, David. 1976. Knowledge and Social Imagery. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
———. 1983. Wittgenstein: A Social Theory of Knowledge. London: Macmillan.
———. 1999. Anti-Latour. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 30:81–
112.
Bridgman, Percy. 1927. The Operational Character of Scientiﬁc Concepts. In The
Logic of Modern Physics. New York: Macmillan. Reprinted in The Philosophy of

Science, edited by Richard Boyd, Philip Gasper, and J. D. Trout (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1991).
Bromberger, Sylvain. 1966. Why-Questions. In Mind and Cosmos, edited by R. Co-
lodny. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Callebaut, Werner. 1993. Taking the Naturalistic Turn, or, How Real Philosophy of
Science Is Done. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, Donald T. 1974. Evolutionary Epistemology. In The Philosophy of Karl
Popper, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Carnap, Rudolf. 1937. The Logical Syntax of Language. Translated by A. Smeaton.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
———. 1950. Logical Foundations of Probability. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
———. 1956. Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology. In Meaning and Necessity: A
Study in Semantics and Modal Logic, by Rudolf Carnap. 2d ed. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
———. 1995. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science. Edited by M. Gardner.
New York: Dover.
Carnap, Rudolf, Hans Hahn, and Otto Neurath. [1929] 1973. The Scientiﬁc Con-
ception of the World: The Vienna Circle. In Empiricism and Sociology, edited by
M. Neurath and R. S. Cohen. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Cartwright, Nancy. 1983. How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, Alan F. 1999. What Is This Thing Called Science? 3d ed. Indianapolis:
Hackett.
Churchland, Paul M. 1988. Perceptual Plasticity and Theoretical Neutrality: A Reply
to Jerry Fodor. Philosophy of Science 55:167–87.
Churchland, Paul M., and C. A. Hooker. 1985. Images of Science: Essays on Realism
and Empiricism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cohen, I. Bernard. 1985. The Birth of a New Physics. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cohen, Robert Sonné, Paul K. Feyerabend, and Marx W. Wartofsky, eds. 1976. Es-
says in Memory of Imre Lakatos. Vol. 39 in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Copernicus, Nicolaus. [1543] 1992. On the Revolutions. Translated by E. Rosen. Bal-
timore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Darwin, Charles. [1859] 1964. On the Origin of Species. Edited by E. Mayr. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Davidson, Donald. 1984. On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme. In Inquiries into
Truth and Interpretation, by Donald Davidson. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dear, Peter. 2001. Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambi-
tions, 1500–1700. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1978. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychol-
ogy. Montgomery, VT: Bradford Books.
———. 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
244
References

Devitt, Michael. 1997. Realism and Truth. 2d ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Dewey, John. 1929. Experience and Nature. Rev. ed. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
———. 1938. Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. New York: H. Holt.
Doppelt, Gerald. 1978. Kuhn’s Epistemological Relativism: An Interpretation and
Defense. Inquiry 21:33–86.
Dowe, Philip. 1992. Process Causality and Asymmetry. Erkenntnis 37:179–96.
Downes, Stephen M. 1992. The Importance of Models in Theorizing: A Deﬂationary
Semantic View. In PSA 1992, vol. 1., edited by David Hull, Micky Forbes, and
Kathleen Okruhlik, 142–53. East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association.
———. 1993. Socializing Naturalized Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Science
60:452–68.
Dretske, Fred I. 1977. Laws of Nature. Philosophy of Science 44:248–68.
———. 1988. Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Dupré, John. 1993. The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of the Dis-
unity of Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Earman, John. 1992. Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian Conﬁrma-
tion Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edmonds, David, and John Eidinow. 2001. Wittgenstein’s Poker: The Story of a Ten-
Minute Argument between Two Great Philosophers. New York: ECCO.
Eldredge, Niles, and Stephen J. Gould. 1972. Punctuated Equilibria: An Alternative
to Phyletic Gradualism. In Models in Paleobiology, edited by T. J. Schopf. San
Francisco: Freeman.
Feder, Kenneth L. 1996. Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in
Archaeology. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld Publishers.
Feigl, Herbert. 1943. Logical Empiricism. In Twentieth Century Philosophy, edited
by D. D. Runes. New York: Philosophical Library.
———. 1970. The “Orthodox” View of Theories: Remarks in Defense As Well As
Critique. In Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology, edited by Michael
Radner and Stephen Winokur. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 4. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Feyerabend, Paul K. 1970. Consolations for the Specialist. In Criticism and the Growth
of Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
———. 1975. Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. At-
lantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
———. 1978. Science in a Free Society. London: New Left Books.
———. 1981. Philosophical Papers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fine, Arthur. 1984. The Natural Ontological Attitude. In Scientiﬁc Realism, edited by
Jarrett Leplin. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1981. Representations: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 1983. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
References
245

———. 1984. Observation Reconsidered. Philosophy of Science 51:23–43.
Fodor, Jerry A., and Ernest LePore. 1992. Holism: A Shopper’s Guide. Oxford: Black-
well.
Forster, Malcolm R., and Elliott Sober. 1994. How to Tell When Simpler, More Uni-
ﬁed, or Less Ad Hoc Theories Will Provide More Accurate Predictions. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 45:1–35.
Friedman, Michael. 1974. Explanation and Scientiﬁc Understanding. Journal of Phi-
losophy 71:5–19.
———. 1999. Reconsidering Logical Positivism. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 2000. A Parting of the Ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger. Chicago:
Open Court.
———. 2001. Dynamics of Reason, Stanford Kant Lectures. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Futuyma, Douglas J. 1998. Evolutionary Biology. 3d ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates.
Galileo Galilei. [1623] 1990. The Assayer. In Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo,
translated by Stillman Drake. New York: Anchor Books.
———. [1632] 1967. Dialogue concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Ptolemaic
& Copernican. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Galison, Peter. 1990. Aufbau/Bauhaus: Logical Positivism and Architectural Mod-
ernism. Critical Inquiry 16:709–52.
———. 1997. Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Galison, Peter, and David J. Stump, eds. 1996. The Disunity of Science. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Garrett, Don, and Edward Barbanell. 1997. Encyclopedia of Empiricism. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
Giere, Ronald N. 1988. Explaining Science: A Cognitive Approach. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Giere, Ronald N., and Alan W. Richardson, eds. 1997. Origins of Logical Empiri-
cism. Vol. 16 in Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Glymour, Clark N. 1980. Theory and Evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter. 1996. Complexity and the Function of Mind in Nature. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. Forthcoming. Goodman’s Problem and Scientiﬁc Methodology. Journal of
Philosophy.
Goldman, Alvin I. 1986. Epistemology and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
———. 1999. Knowledge in a Social World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Good, I. J. 1967. The White Shoe Is a Red Herring. British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 17:322.
246
References

Goodman, Nelson. 1955. Fact, Fiction & Forecast. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
———. 1972. Problems and Projects. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
———. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett.
———. 1996. Starmaking. In Starmaking: Realism, Anti-Realism, and Irrealism, ed-
ited by P. McCormick. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gould, Stephen J. 1977. Eternal Metaphors of Paleontology. In Patterns of Evolution
as Illustrated by the Fossil Record, edited by A. Hallam. New York: Elsevier
Scientiﬁc.
———. 1980. Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging? Paleobiology
6:119–30.
———. 2002. The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Gregory, Richard L. 1970. The Intelligent Eye. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gross, Paul R., and N. Levitt. 1994. Higher Superstition: The Academic Left and Its
Quarrels with Science. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hacking, Ian. 1983. Representing and Intervening: Introductory Topics in the Phi-
losophy of Natural Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haraway, Donna. 1989. Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of
Modern Science. New York: Routledge.
Harding, Sandra G. 1986. The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
———. 1996. Rethinking Standpoint Epistemology: What Is “Strong Objectivity”?
In Feminism and Science, edited by E. F. Keller and H. E. Longino. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Harman, Gilbert H. 1965. Inference to the Best Explanation. Philosophical Review
74:88–95.
Harvey, David. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins
of Cultural Change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Heilbroner, John. 1999. The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Times, and Ideas of the
Great Economic Thinkers. 7th ed. New York: Touchstone Books.
Hempel, Carl G. 1958. The Theoretician’s Dilemma. In Concepts, Theories, and the
Mind-Body Problem, edited by Herbert Feigl, Michael Scriven, and Grover Max-
well. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press.
———. 1965. Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy
of Science. New York: Free Press.
———. 1966. Philosophy of Natural Science. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hempel, Carl G., and Paul Oppenheim. 1948. Studies in the Logic of Explanation.
Philosophy of Science 15:135–75.
Henry, John. 1997. The Scientiﬁc Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Hesse, Mary B. 1966. Models and Analogies in Science. Notre Dame, IN: University
of Notre Dame Press.
References
247

Hobbes, Thomas. [1660] 1996. Leviathan. Edited by J. C. A. Gaskin. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Hollis, Martin, and Steven Lukes, eds. 1982. Rationality and Relativism. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Horgan, John. 1996. The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twi-
light of the Scientiﬁc Age. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Horwich, Paul. 1982. Probability and Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 1990. Truth. Oxford: Blackwell.
———, ed. 1993. World Changes: Thomas Kuhn and the Nature of Science. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Howson, Colin, and Peter Urbach. 1993. Scientiﬁc Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach.
2d ed. Chicago: Open Court.
Hoyningen-Huene, Paul. 1993. Reconstructing Scientiﬁc Revolutions: Thomas S.
Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer. 1999. The Woman That Never Evolved. Rev. ed. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2002. Empathy, Polyandry, and the Myth of the Coy Female. In The Gender
of Science, edited by Janet A. Kourany. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hull, David L. 1988. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and
Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1999. The Use and Abuse of Sir Karl Popper. Biology and Philosophy
14:481–504.
Hume, David. [1739] 1978. A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge
and P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. [1740] 1978. An Abstract of A Treatise of Human Nature. In A Treatise of
Human Nature, edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1996. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World
Order. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Jackson, Frank. 1975. Grue. Journal of Philosophy 72:113–31.
Kant, Immanuel. [1781] 1998. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by P. Guyer and
A. W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kauffman, Stuart A. 1993. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in
Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. 1983. A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara
McClintock. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
———. 2002. A World of Difference. In The Gender of Science, edited by Janet A.
Kourany. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Keller, Evelyn Fox, and Helen E. Longino, eds. 1996. Feminism and Science. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kimura, Motoo. 1983. The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
248
References

Kitcher, Philip. 1978. Theories, Theorists, and Theoretical Change. Philosophical Re-
view 87:519–47.
———. 1981. Explanatory Uniﬁcation. Journal of Philosophy 48:507–31.
———. 1989. Explanatory Uniﬁcation and the Causal Structure of the World. In Scien-
tiﬁc Explanation, edited by Philip Kitcher and Wesley Salmon. Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 16. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
———. 1990. The Division of Cognitive Labor. Journal of Philosophy 87:5–22.
———. 1992. The Naturalists Return. Philosophical Review 101:53–114.
———. 1993. The Advancement of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2001. Science, Truth, and Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koertge, Noretta, ed. 1998. A House Built on Sand: Exposing Postmodernist Myths
about Science. New York: Oxford University Press.
Koestler, Arthur. 1968. The Sleepwalkers. New York: Macmillan.
Kornblith, Hilary. 1993. Inductive Inference and Its Natural Ground: An Essay in
Naturalistic Epistemology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———, ed. 1994. Naturalizing Epistemology. 2d ed. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kourany, Janet A., ed. 2002. The Gender of Science. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1957. The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the De-
velopment of Western Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1970. Reﬂections on My Critics. In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge,
edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 1977a. Concepts of Cause in the Development of Physics. In The Essential
Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁc Tradition and Change, by Thomas S. Kuhn.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1977b. The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁc Tradition and
Change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1977c. Objectivity, Value Judgment, and Theory Choice. In The Essential
Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁc Tradition and Change, by Thomas S. Kuhn.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1978. Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894–1912. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1996. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. 3d ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. The ﬁrst edition was published in 1962.
———. 2000. The Road since Structure: Philosophical Essays, 1970–1993, with an
Autobiographical Interview. Edited by James Conant and John Haugeland.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, Imre. 1970. Falsiﬁcation and the Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Pro-
grammes. In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and
Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1971. History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions. In PSA 1970, ed-
ited by Roger C. Buck and Robert S. Cohen, 91–136. Dordrecht: Reidel.
References
249

Lakatos, Imre, and Alan Musgrave, eds. 1970. Criticism and the Growth of Knowl-
edge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Langton, Christopher G., Charles Taylor, J. Doyne Farmer, and Steen Rasmussen, eds.
1992. Artiﬁcial Life II. Proceedings of the Workshop on Artiﬁcial Life, February
1990, Santa Fe, NM. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Latour, Bruno. 1987. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers
through Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1988. The Pasteurization of France. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
———. 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1979. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Sci-
entiﬁc Facts. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. Reprint, Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1986.
Laudan, Larry. 1977. Progress and Its Problems: Toward a Theory of Scientiﬁc
Growth. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 1981. A Confutation of Convergent Realism. Philosophy of Science 48:19–48.
———. 1987. Progress or Rationality? The Prospects for Normative Naturalism.
American Philosophical Quarterly 24:19–31.
Leplin, Jarrett, ed. 1984. Scientiﬁc Realism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Levy, Steven. 1992. Artiﬁcial Life: The Quest for a New Creation. New York: Pan-
theon Books.
Lewis, David. 1983. New Work for a Theory of Universals. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 61:343–77.
———. 1986a. Causation and Explanation. In Philosophical Papers, by David Lewis,
vol. 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1986b. Introduction to Philosophical Papers, by David Lewis, vol. 2. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lingua Franca Editors. 2000. The Sokal Hoax: The Sham That Shook the Academy.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Lipton, Peter. 1991. Inference to the Best Explanation. London: Routledge.
Lloyd, Elisabeth A. 1993. Pre-Theoretical Assumptions in Evolutionary Explanations
of Female Sexuality. Philosophical Studies 69:139–53.
———. 1997. Feyerabend, Mill, and Pluralism. Philosophy of Science 64 (4): S396–
S408.
Lloyd, Genevieve. 1984. The Man of Reason: “Male” and “Female” in Western Phi-
losophy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Longino, Helen E. 1990. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Sci-
entiﬁc Inquiry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lynch, Michael, ed. 2001. The Nature of Truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lyotard, Jean-Francois. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
Translated by Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
250
References

Mach, Ernst. 1897. Contributions to the Analysis of the Sensations. Translated by
C. M. Williams. Chicago: Open Court.
MacKenzie, Donald A. 1981. Statistics in Britain, 1865–1930: The Social Construc-
tion of Scientiﬁc Knowledge. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Mackie, J. L. 1980. The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation. 2d ed. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Masterman, Margaret. 1970. The Nature of a Paradigm. In Criticism and the Growth
of Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Maxwell, Grover. 1962. The Ontological Status of Theoretical Entities. In Scientiﬁc
Explanation, Space, and Time, edited by Herbert Feigl and Grover Maxwell. Min-
nesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 3. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
McMullin, Ernan. 1984. A Case for Scientiﬁc Realism. In Scientiﬁc Realism, edited
by Jarrett Leplin. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Menzies, Peter. 1996. Probabilistic Causality and the Pre-Emption Problem. Mind
105:85–117.
Merton, Robert K. [1957] 1973. Priorities in Scientiﬁc Discovery. In The Sociology of
Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, edited by Norman Storer.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations.
Edited by Norman Storer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mill, John Stuart. [1859] 1978. On Liberty. Edited by E. Rapaport. Indianapolis:
Hackett.
———. 1865. An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy and of the Prin-
cipal Philosophical Questions Discussed in His Writings. Boston: W. V. Spencer.
Miner, Valerie, and Helen E Longino, eds. 1987. Competition: A Feminist Taboo?
New York: Feminist Press at CUNY.
Mitchell, Sandra D. 2000. Dimensions of Scientiﬁc Law. Philosophy of Science
67:242–65.
Motterlini, Matteo, ed. 1999. For and Against Method. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Musgrave, Alan. 1976. Method or Madness. In Essays in Memory of Imre Lakatos,
edited by Robert Sonné Cohen, Paul K. Feyerabend, and Marx W. Wartofsky. Dor-
drecht: Reidel.
Newton, Isaac. [1687] 1999. The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Phi-
losophy. Translated by I. B. Cohen and A. M. Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Newton-Smith, William H. 1981. The Rationality of Science. Boston: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Passmore, John. 1966. A Hundred Years of Philosophy. 2d ed. New York: Penguin.
Pearl, Judea. 2000. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
References
251

Platt, John R. 1964. Strong Inference. Science 146:347–53.
Popper, Karl R. 1935. Logik der Forschung: Zur Erkenntnistheorie der Modernen
Naturwissenschaft. Vienna: J. Springer.
———. 1959. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. New York: Basic Books.
———. 1963. Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁc Knowledge.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
———. 1970. Normal Science and Its Dangers. In Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Porter, Roy. 1998. The Greatest Beneﬁt to Mankind: A Medical History of Human-
ity. New York: W. W. Norton.
Preston, John, Gonzalo Munévar, and David Lamb, eds. 2000. The Worst Enemy of
Science? Essays in Memory of Paul Feyerabend. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Provine, William B. 1971. The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Psillos, Stathis. 1999. Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth. New York:
Routledge.
Putnam, Hilary. 1974. The “Corroboration” of Theories. In The Philosophy of Karl
Popper, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp. The Library of Living Philosophers. La
Salle, IL: Open Court.
———. 1975. Mind, Language, and Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1978. Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Quine, Willard V. 1953. Two Dogmas of Empiricism. In From a Logical Point of
View, by Willard V. Quine. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. First published,
with slight differences, in Philosophical Review 60 (1951): 20–43.
———. 1969. Epistemology Naturalized. In Ontological Relativity and Other Es-
says. New York: Columbia University Press.
———. 1990. Pursuit of Truth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Railton, Peter. 1981. Probability, Explanation, and Information. Synthese 48:231–56.
Ray, Thomas S. 1992. An Approach to the Synthesis of Life. In Artiﬁcial Life II, ed-
ited by Christopher G. Langton, Charles Taylor, J. Doyne Farmer, and Steen Ras-
mussen. Proceedings of the Workshop on Artiﬁcial Life, February 1990, Santa Fe,
NM. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Reichenbach, Hans. 1938. Experience and Prediction: An Analysis of the Founda-
tions and the Structure of Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1951. The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Resnik, Michael D. 1987. Choices: An Introduction to Decision Theory. Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press.
Ricketts, Thomas G. 1982. Rationality, Translation, and Epistemology Naturalized.
Journal of Philosophy 79:117–35.
Roberts, William A. 1998. Principles of Animal Cognition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rorty, Richard. 1982. Consequences of Pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press.
252
References

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 1998. Ed. Edward Craig. London: Routledge.
Salmon, Wesley C. 1981. Rational Prediction. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 32:115–25.
———. 1984. Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World. Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
———. 1989. Four Decades of Scientiﬁc Explanation. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
———. 1998. Scientiﬁc Explanation: Causation and Uniﬁcation. In Causality and
Explanation, by Wesley C. Salmon. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. 1974. The Philosophy of Karl Popper. The Library of Living
Philosophers. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Schlick, Moritz. 1932–33. Positivism and Realism. Erkenntnis 3:1–31 (in German).
Translated by Peter Heath and reprinted in The Philosophy of Science, edited by
Richard Boyd, Philip Gasper, and J. D. Trout (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
Schuster, John A. 1990. The Scientiﬁc Revolution. In Companion to the History of
Modern Science, edited by R. Colby, G. N. Cantor, J. R. R. Christie, and M. J. S.
Hodge. London: Routledge.
Shapin, Steven. 1982. History of Science and Its Sociological Reconstructions. His-
tory of Science 20:157–211.
———. 1994. A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in Seventeenth-Century
England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1996. The Scientiﬁc Revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985. Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes,
Boyle, and the Experimental Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Skyrms, Brian. 2000. Choice and Chance: An Introduction to Inductive Logic. 3d ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Smart, J. J. C. 1963. Philosophy and Scientiﬁc Realism. New York: Humanities Press.
———. 1968. Between Science and Philosophy. New York: Random House.
Smith, Adam. [1776] 1976. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. Edited by R. H. Campbell and A. S. Skinner. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sobel, Dava. 1999. Galileo’s Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and
Love. New York: Walker.
Sober, Elliott. 1988. Reconstructing the Past: Parsimony, Evolution, and Inference.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. Forthcoming. Learning from Logical Positivism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sokal, Alan. 1996a. A Physicist Experiments with Cultural Studies. Lingua Franca
(May–June): 62–64.
———. 1996b. Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneu-
tics of Quantum Gravity. Social Text 14:217–52.
Solomon, Miriam. 2001. Social Empiricism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sosa, Ernest, and Michael Tooley, eds. 1993. Causation. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
References
253

Spirtes, Peter, Clark N. Glymour, and Richard Scheines. 1993. Causation, Prediction,
and Search. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stalker, Douglas Frank. 1994. Grue! The New Riddle of Induction. Chicago: Open
Court.
Stanford, P. Kyle. 2000. An Antirealist Explanation of the Success of Science. Philos-
ophy of Science 67:266–84.
———. 2001. Refusing the Devil’s Bargain: What Kind of Underdetermination
Should We Take Seriously? Philosophy of Science 68:S1–S12.
Sterelny, Kim. 1994. Science and Selection. Biology and Philosophy 9:45–62.
Stich, Stephen P. 1983. From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science: The Case against
Belief. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Strevens, Michael. 2003. The Role of the Priority Rule in Science. Journal of Philos-
ophy 100:55–79.
Sulloway, Frank J. 1996. Born to Rebel: Birth Order, Family Dynamics, and Creative
Lives. New York: Pantheon Books.
Suppe, Frederick, ed. 1977. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories. Chicago: University
of Illinois Press.
Suppes, Patrick. 1981. The Plurality of Science. In PSA 1978, vol. 2, edited by Peter D.
Asquith and Ian Hacking, 3–16. East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Associ-
ation.
———. 1984. Probabilistic Metaphysics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Toulmin, Stephen Edelston. 1972. Human Understanding. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Toulmin, Stephen Edelston, and June Goodﬁeld. 1962. The Fabric of the Heavens:
The Development of Astronomy and Dynamics. New York: Harper.
———. 1982. The Architecture of Matter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
van Fraassen, Bas C. 1980. The Scientiﬁc Image. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wason, Peter Cathcart, and Philip N. Johnson-Laird. 1972. Psychology of Reason-
ing: Structure and Content. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Westfall, Richard S. 1980. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
———. 1993. The Life of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. [1922] 1988. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Translated by
David Pears and Brian McGuinness. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
———. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. New
York: Macmillan.
Wolfe, Tom. 1998. A Man in Full: A Novel. New York: Farrar Straus & Giroux.
Woolgar, Steven. 1988. Science: The Very Idea. London: Ellis Horwood.
Worrall, John. 1989. Structural Realism: The Best of Both Worlds? Dialectica 43:99–
124.
Ziman, John M. 2000. Real Science: What It Is and What It Means. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
254
References

abductive inference, 43, 233, 235. See
also explanatory inference
absolute idealism, 23, 24, 25
acceptance of theories, 108–9
actor-network theory, 133
aesthetics, 112. See also creativity;
imagination
Against Method (Feyerabend), 111, 113
AIDS. See HIV
alchemy, 226–27
Alife, 85–86
Alvarez meteor hypothesis, 42, 44
analytic-synthetic distinction, 25–26, 27,
33, 34, 118, 233
anatomy, 16
anomalies: Kuhn on, 82–83, 84, 100,
233; Lakatos on, 104, 105
anthropology, 3, 144
a posteriori knowledge, 234
a priori knowledge, 26, 234
Aristotelian physics: Galileo and, 113,
114, 115, 213; motion in, 14, 15;
vacuums and, 130
Aristotle: feminist analysis of, 138;
Scholastic worldview and, 14
Artiﬁcial Life, 85–86
astrology, 226
astronomy: Kepler’s model, 15–16, 17,
192; Kuhn on, 97; as natural philos-
ophy, 4; Scientiﬁc Revolution and, 
14–16, 17. See also Copernican
theory
255
Index
asymmetry problem, 193–94, 196
Ayer, A. J., 25, 32
Bacon, Francis, 6, 138–39, 236
Barnes, Barry, 126
Bateson, William, 93
Bayes, Thomas, 203
Bayesianism: assessment of, 208–10;
current interest in, 202–3; deﬁned,
234; eliminative inference and, 212,
213; mathematical basis of, 203–5;
new riddle of induction and, 210; pro-
cedural naturalism and, 214; subjec-
tivism and, 205–8, 241
Bayes or Bust? (Earman), 202
Bayes’s theorem, 203–5, 207, 208
behaviorism, 80, 171, 213
belief: degrees of, 205, 206, 207–8, 234,
241; empiricism about, 220, 221;
foundationalism and, 235–36; holism
about, 33, 118, 119; Laudan’s account
of theories and, 108–9; naturalism
about, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155; ob-
jectivity and, 228, 229, 238; observa-
tion and, 156, 158, 159, 160, 161,
186, 229; relativism about, 94, 127–
28; sociology of science and, 125,
126, 132, 134–35; updating of, 204,
208, 209, 234. See also knowledge
Berkeley, George, 19, 22
biology: Aristotelian, 14; Artiﬁcial Life
and, 85; classiﬁcation of organisms,

17, 57, 163; feminist analysis of, 137,
143; Hull’s studies of, 163; Kuhn’s
philosophy and, 80–81, 84, 99; laws
of nature and, 201; mathematics in,
11–12, 73, 93; as natural history, 4;
naturalistic view of humans and, 153,
222, 223; nineteenth-century develop-
ments, 17; philosophy of mind and,
153; Popper’s ideas used in, 57; pri-
matology, 139–40, 143; research pro-
grams in, 106–7. See also evolution;
evolutionary theory; genetics; molecu-
lar biology
Biometricians, 93
biotechnology, 171. See also molecular
biology
bleen, 53
Bloor, David, 126, 134, 189
Bohr atom, 187
Boyle, Robert, 4, 16, 129–30, 131, 226,
227
Boyle’s law, 123
Bridgman, Percy, 30, 131, 239
Bromberger, Sylvain, 193
Bruno, Giordano, 15
caloric, 108, 177
Carlyle, Thomas, 3
Carnap, Rudolf: on conﬁrmation, 44,
203; Heidegger and, 24; holism and,
32; on induction, 42, 43; on linguistic
frameworks, 28, 33, 118; logical posi-
tivism of, 22, 25, 34, 36; two-process
view of, 33, 118, 120, 230
Carnot, Sadi, 108, 179
Cartwright, Nancy, 201
categories, 55
causal explanation, 194–95, 196–98,
200; Boyle’s view of, 16, 129; Kuhn
on, 93, 197–98; mechanism and, 16,
17; testing and, 211
causation: human organisms and, 222;
Kant on, 20; metaphysical concepts
of, 194–95, 196, 197–98, 200–201,
237; by thought, 174, 176
cells, 17
cellular automata, 85
change: economic, 99–100; by punctu-
ated equilibrium, 100–101. See also
evolution; scientiﬁc change
Chargaff’s rules, 43–44, 64
Chemical Revolution, 17
chemistry: alchemy and, 226–27; bond-
ing mechanism, 177; eighteenth-
century developments, 17; growth of
knowledge in, 98; natural kinds in,
55; paradigms in, 80, 81, 84; unob-
servable entities in, 173, 185–86. See
also Boyle, Robert
cholera, 9–10, 12
Chomsky, Noam, 213
citation, 164, 165
classes, 54
color vision, 160
commercialization of science, 3, 85, 171
common-sense realism, 174, 175–76, 180
common-sense view of knowledge, 153
communism, 122–23
communities, scientiﬁc: distinctive fea-
tures of, 12, 13; issues for future study,
230; Kitcher on, 167–69; Kuhn on,
90, 98; naturalism and, 155; norms
of, 122–23, 126; observational neu-
trality in, 160; Popper’s philosophy
and, 62–63; women in, 137, 139,
140, 142–44, 170. See also social
organization of science; sociology of
science
competition in science: balance with co-
operation, 13, 224, 225, 228; feminist
view of, 144, 170, 171, 226; Hull on,
163, 166, 170, 171, 226; as issue for
future study, 230; between paradigms,
110; between research programs, 102,
104, 107, 119, 167, 240; seventeenth-
century developments and, 226. See
also reward system
complex systems, 85
Comte, Auguste, 22
concepts: observation and, 34, 157; real-
ity and, 173. See also theories
256
Index
biology (continued)

conﬁrmation: classic problem of induc-
tion and, 39; deﬁned, 234; Feyerabend
on, 114; hypothetico-deductivism
about, 45, 236; in Kuhn’s normal sci-
ence, 82; logical empiricists and, 39,
40–41, 44, 45–46, 50, 51, 202, 203,
211; logical positivists and, 39, 214;
new riddle of induction and, 50–55,
210; nondeductive inference and, 43
(see also explanatory inference; in-
duction); Popper on, 58–61, 67–71,
202, 235; probability and, 44, 66,
203, 204, 210 (see also Bayesianism);
procedures and, 49, 214–17; ravens
problem and, 46–50, 202, 214–16;
selection task and, 49–50; theory-
ladenness of observation and, 157;
two-process theories and, 119. See
also evidence; testing
confounding variable, 217
conjectures and refutations: holism and,
64; in hypothetico-deductive method,
69, 70; Kuhn’s ideas and, 78, 82, 83;
Lakatos’s research programs and, 105;
observation reports and, 65; in one-
process theory, 117–18; Popper’s basic
theory of, 61–63; repeated testing
and, 67, 68
“Consolations for the Specialist” (Feyer-
abend), 112
constructive empiricism, 184–86, 234
constructivism, 134, 181–83, 234
context of discovery, 29
context of justiﬁcation, 29
contextual empiricism, 142
contextualism, about explanation, 197–
200, 227
convergence of probabilities, 209–10
cooperation in science: balance with
competition, 13, 224, 225, 228; Boyle
and, 226, 227; empiricism and, 12;
feminist view of, 144, 226; Hull on,
163, 164, 165, 170, 171, 226; as issue
for future study, 230
Copernican theory, 14–15; Galileo’s de-
fense of, 11, 15, 113–14; Kuhn’s the-
ory of change and, 89; observational
support for, 40; Scientiﬁc Revolution
and, 4, 17
correspondence theory of truth, 188–89,
239, 241
corroboration, 68, 234
covering law theory, 191–94, 196, 197,
198, 199, 200, 234
creativity: Feyerabend on, 111, 112, 113–
14, 116, 117; objectivity and, 229
Crick, Francis, 43
crisis: deﬁned, 78; Feyerabend’s ideal pic-
ture and, 115; historical issues about,
89; Kuhn’s critics and, 99, 100; Kuhn’s
trust in outcome, 106, 110; new para-
digm and, 88; transition to, 82–83, 84
critical theory, 144
criticism and trust, 225, 226, 228
cultural studies, 144
curve-ﬁtting problem, 54
Dalton, John, 17
Darwin, Charles: creationism and, 213;
Kuhn’s ideas and, 89; non-dispute
with Wallace, 123; On the Origin of
Species, 11, 187; reward system and,
123; scientiﬁc method and, 6. See also
evolutionary theory
decision theory, 205
deductive logic: covering law theory 
and, 192, 193; disconﬁrmation and,
49, 60, 67, 211, 216; in eliminative
inference, 212–13; in explanatory
inference, 43; “grue” and, 53; in
hypothetico-deductivism, 45; induc-
tive logic and, 29, 41–42, 44; of math-
ematical induction, 42; nature of, 28,
41, 51, 234
deductive-nomological theory, 193, 234–
35. See also covering law theory
de Finetti, Bruno, 205
degrees of belief, 205, 206, 207–8, 234,
241
demarcation problem, 58, 59, 63–64,
65–66, 71–74, 235
dependence relationships, 188
Index
257

Derrida, Jacques, 146
Descartes, René, 4, 6, 16, 20, 138
descriptive theories: deﬁned, 6; of Kuhn,
79, 81, 90, 112
Devitt, Michael, 175, 182
Dewey, John, 151, 153, 222, 239
Dialogue concerning the Two Chief
World Systems (Galileo), 113
dinosaurs, extinction of, 42, 194, 195
disinterestedness, norm of, 122, 123, 124
disunity of science, 227
DNA: Chargaff’s rules and, 43–44, 64;
explanation and, 126, 199; as forensic
evidence, 203; human evolution and,
73–74; molecular genetics and, 80,
81, 223; realism about, 186. See also
genetics; molecular biology
D-N theory, 193, 234–35. See also cover-
ing law theory
Duhem, Pierre, 32
Duhem-Quine thesis, 32
Dutch book, 207–8
Earman, John, 202, 212
economics: of Adam Smith, 99–100,
165; categories in, 55; decision theory
in, 205; Marxist, 71–72; as a science,
3; Science Studies and, 144
economy, appeals to, 97
Einstein, Albert: Bridgman’s operational-
ism and, 30, 239; logical positivists
and, 22, 26; non-Euclidean geometry
and, 26, 161; Popper’s view of, 62;
scientiﬁc method and, 6
Eldredge, Niles, 100
electrons, 28, 34, 36, 37, 173, 175, 184,
186
eliminative induction, 212, 235
eliminative inference, 212–13, 214, 235
emotion: gendered views of, 138; mean-
ing and, 242
empirically adequate theory, 184, 185,
186
empiricism: basic principles of, 8–10;
causation and, 195, 200; challenge to,
227–30; classical, 19–22; construc-
tive, 184–86, 234; contextual, 142;
cultural and political tendencies of,
22; deﬁned, 8, 235; explanation and,
190, 191; feminist, 141, 142; Feyer-
abend on, 113, 114; holistic version
of, 32; inductive skepticism and, 20,
40; Kuhn’s ideas and, 75, 78, 83, 227–
28; Latour’s approach vs., 133; math-
ematics and, 11, 20, 21; naturalistic
approach to, 161–62, 169–70, 219,
220–24, 230; operationalism as, 30,
131, 239; of Popper, 57, 68, 70–71;
pragmatism in, 184, 239; rationalism
and, 20, 21, 26, 240; scientiﬁc realism
and, 37, 180–81, 219, 220, 221–23;
Scientiﬁc Revolution and, 17; social
organization of science and, 12–13,
169–70, 225, 228, 230; sociology of
science and, 221; theory-ladenness of
observation and, 96, 155–56, 157,
160, 161, 221. See also logical empiri-
cism; logical positivism
The End of Science (Horgan), 87
Enlightenment values, 17, 24, 136, 147
enumerative induction, 42
epistemological anarchism, 103, 111
epistemology: common-sense view of
world and, 153; deﬁned, 235; empiri-
cism and, 221–23, 228; feminist,
137–39, 141–44, 170; foundational-
ism in, 150, 151, 220, 235–36; Kuhn’s
ideas and, 78, 98–99; naturalism and,
150–53, 154, 220, 222, 238; philos-
ophy of science and, 5; reward system
and, 231; standpoint theory in, 141–
42; value judgments in, 152, 153. See
also belief; justiﬁcation; knowledge
“Epistemology Naturalized” (Quine),
150, 151
“Eternal Metaphors in Paleontology”
(Gould), 101
ether theories, 188
Euclidean geometry, 26, 161
eugenics, 127
evidence: abstract structure of theories
and, 6; Bayesianism and, 203–5, 208,
258
Index

209; empiricism and, 211; epistemol-
ogy and, 5; explanation and, 190–91;
feminist epistemology and, 141; in-
commensurability of standards for,
92, 94, 236; Kuhn on, 78, 89–90, 92,
94; naturalism and, 152, 155, 214–
17; nondeductive inference and, 42–
43; pluralist theory of, 212; probabil-
ity and, 203–5; procedural naturalism
and, 214–17; progress in understand-
ing of, 231; relativism about, 94, 127;
scientiﬁc realism and, 210–14; truth
and, 190, 241; underdetermination of
theory by, 181, 220, 222–23. See also
conﬁrmation; experiment; observa-
tion; testing
evolution: analogy to scientiﬁc change,
63, 100, 166–67; computer simula-
tion of, 85; eugenics and, 127; of hu-
man perception, 161, 222. See also
natural selection
evolutionary psychology, 106
evolutionary theory: competing research
programs and, 107; explanatory
promise of, 196; Kuhn’s ideas and, 89,
100–101; mathematics and, 11, 12;
molecular biology and, 73–74, 107;
neutral theory in, 107; nineteenth-
century developments, 17, 105, 213;
observational support for, 40, 158;
primatology and, 140; punctuated
equilibrium in, 100–101; synthetic
theory in, 107; testability of, 72–74.
See also Darwin, Charles
exemplar, 77
existence: objectivity and, 6, 228–29,
238. See also reality
experience: a posteriori knowledge and,
234; a priori knowledge and, 26, 234;
holism and, 33, 34; Kant on, 20–21;
patterns in, 231; theory-ladenness of,
158. See also empiricism; observation;
perception
experiment: Boyle’s view of, 129, 130; as
form of life, 131; as Kuhnian exem-
plar, 77; responsiveness to world, 154;
Scientiﬁc Revolution and, 15, 16, 17.
See also evidence; testing
explanandum, 191, 235
explanans, 191, 235
explanation, 190–201; author’s contex-
tualist view of, 197–200, 227; causal
(see causal explanation); covering law
theory, 191–94, 196, 197, 198, 199,
200, 234; as description, 199; direc-
tionality of, 193–94, 196; empiricism
and, 35, 190, 191, 195–96; evidence
and, 190–91; mechanism and, 16;
pluralism about, 197; Science Studies
and, 147; sociology of science and,
126, 127; suspicion toward, 190;
symmetry principle for, 126; testing
of, 211; as uniﬁcation, 195–97, 198,
200; van Fraassen on, 199
explanatory induction, 43, 235
explanatory inference, 43–44, 177, 190–
91, 199; deﬁned, 235; eliminative,
212–13, 214, 235
explanatory schemata, 196
external world skepticism, 19, 20, 97–98
facts: Latour on construction of, 132,
134; Shapin and Schaffer on manufac-
ture of, 131; values and, 152, 153
fallibilism, 59
falsiﬁcationism: deﬁned, 235; Kuhn’s par-
adigms and, 88; objections to, 63–67;
Popper’s philosophy of, 58–61, 70,
71; theory-ladenness of observation
and, 158
Feigl, Herbert, 25, 32, 34
feminism: competition in science and,
144, 170, 171, 226; history of ideas
and, 137, 138; primatology and, 139–
40, 143; Science Studies and, 144;
sociology of science and, 125; women
in science and, 137, 139, 140, 142–
44, 170
feminist epistemology, 137–39, 141–44,
170
Feyerabend, Paul, 110–17; feminism and,
137, 142; frameworks and, 120; on
Index
259

imaginative work, 111, 112, 115,
116, 117, 120, 225–26; Lakatos and,
106, 115; realism and, 180; on
theory-ladenness of observation, 156,
157; as wild man, 102–3
Fine, Arthur, 147
ﬂagpole and shadow, 193, 194, 196
Fodor, Jerry, 158–60, 180
form of life, 130–31
foundationalism, 150, 151, 220, 235–36
frameworks, 117–21, 228, 229, 230;
Carnap on, 28, 33, 118, 120
fraud, 123–24, 164, 165
freedom, Feyerabend on, 111, 112–13
French Academy, 166
Freudianism, 58, 71, 72, 137
Friedman, Michael, 118–19, 120, 195
Futuyma, Douglas, 72
Galen, 16
Galileo: Aristotelian physics and, 15,
213; Feyerabend on, 112, 113–14,
115; ﬁghts for recognition, 123; math-
ematics and, 10–11, 15; science of
motion, 15, 17, 113–14; Scientiﬁc
Revolution and, 4, 10; social organi-
zation of science and, 226
Galison, Peter, 120
Gallo, Robert, 123
gambling behavior, 206, 207–8, 210
gender: scientiﬁc style and, 142–44. See
also feminism
genes, 34, 36, 37, 80, 81, 173, 178
genetics: Biometricians vs. Mendelians,
93; homeostasis in, 100; Kuhn’s the-
ory of change and, 89, 93; McClin-
tock’s work in, 143; Mendel’s work
in, 17, 77, 93; molecular, 80, 81, 107,
223; in synthetic theory of evolution,
107. See also DNA
germ theory of disease, 10, 17, 177, 178
Glymour, Clark, 45
Good, I. J., 47–48
Goodﬁeld, June, 226
Goodman, Nelson: new riddle of induc-
tion, 50–55, 210, 214, 216–17; on
ravens problem, 47; realism and, 180,
181–82
Gould, Stephen Jay, 100–101
gravity, 17, 93, 104, 123, 198
grue, 52–54, 210, 214, 216–17
Hahn, Hans, 36
Hanson, N. R., 156
hard core, of research program, 104,
105, 108
Harding, Sandra, 141
Harman, Gilbert, 43
Harvey, William, 16
H-D method. See hypothetico-
deductivism
Hegel, G. W. F., 23–24
Heidegger, Martin, 24, 25
Hempel, Carl: on explanation, 35, 191,
194, 198, 234; on history of medicine,
9; on inductive logic, 44; on ravens
problem, 46, 47, 49, 216; on unob-
servable structures, 35–36; Vienna
Circle and, 25, 34
history: Hegel on, 23; postmodernism
and, 145
history of science: explanation in, 196;
feminist analysis in, 137, 143; Feyer-
abend’s use of, 111, 112; Kuhn’s use
of, 78–79, 83, 108, 197; Lakatos on,
103–4; Laudan’s use of, 108; logical
empiricism and, 37; logical positivism
and, 29, 34; modeling strategies in,
223; pessimistic induction from, 
177, 178, 239; philosophy of science
and, 7, 12; priority disputes in, 123;
Science Studies and, 144, 145, 147;
social organization of science and,
226
HIV, 116–17, 123, 211
Hobbes, Thomas, 129
holism: Bayesianism and, 210; deﬁned,
236; fall of logical empiricism and,
37; falsiﬁcation and, 64–65, 72–73; in
Kuhn’s view of paradigms, 92; about
meaning, 31, 33, 34, 92, 181, 236; of
260
Index
Feyerabend, Paul (continued)

Quine, 31, 32, 33, 34, 118, 119, 120;
ravens problem and, 48; in sociology
of science, 125; about testing, 31–33,
48, 64–65, 157, 160, 236; two-
process theories and, 118–19
Hooke, Robert, 123
Horgan, John, 87
How the Laws of Physics Lie (Cart-
wright), 201
Hoyningen-Huene, Paul, 182
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer, 140
Hull, David, 163–67, 169, 170, 171,
180, 225
Hume, David: on causation, 195, 200; 
as classical empiricist, 19, 20, 22; on
induction, 20, 39–40, 59
Humeanism, 200
hypotheses: Bayesianism and, 203–5,
206, 208, 209, 213; as conjectures,
61–62; as explanatory inferences, 43,
190–91, 199, 212; falsiﬁability of, 58;
hidden structure of world and, 211; as
models, 187, 211; scientiﬁc strategy
toward, 224; simplicity of, 213–14;
testing of (see testing); theories com-
posed of, 34. See also theories
hypothetico-deductivism, 45, 69–70, 236
idealism, 23, 24, 25
illusions, perceptual, 158–59
imagination: Feyerabend on, 111, 112,
115, 116, 117, 120, 225–26; Hull’s
argument and, 165; of Latour and
Woolgar, 132; social structure of sci-
ence and, 225
incommensurability, 91–96, 111, 125,
236
induction: Chargaff’s rules and, 43–44,
64; classic problem of, 39–40; cover-
ing law theory and, 192; curve-ﬁtting
problem, 54; deﬁned, 42, 236–37;
eliminative, 212, 235; enumerative,
42; explanatory, 43, 235; vs. explana-
tory inference, 43, 212; formal theory
of, 50–53; mathematical, 42; natural
kinds and, 54, 55; new riddle of, 50–
55, 210, 214, 216–17; procedural nat-
uralism and, 214–17; simple, 42; sim-
plicity and, 54–55, 216; theoretical,
43, 235
inductive logic: conﬁrmation and, 41, 59,
202, 234; deductive logic and, 29, 41–
42, 44; fall of logical empiricism and,
37, 202, 211; logical positivists and,
29, 31; naturalism and, 155; Popper’s
criticism of, 59
inductive skepticism: of Hume, 20, 40; of
Popper, 59, 67, 68–69
inference: abductive, 43, 233, 235; elimi-
native, 212–13, 214, 235; explana-
tory, 43–44, 177, 190–91, 199, 212–
13, 214, 235; nondeductive, 41–44
(see also explanatory inference; induc-
tion); strong, 70; theoretical, 43
inference to the best explanation. See
explanatory inference
instrumentalism, 15, 183–84, 237
instrumental rationality, 152–53
“invisible hand,” 99–100, 112, 165, 
168–69
Jackson, Frank, 217
James, William, 239
justiﬁcation: context of, 29; Kuhn on, 78,
94; naturalism about, 154; relativism
and, 94, 127–28
Kant, Immanuel: on analytic-synthetic
distinction, 26; on conceptual frame-
works, 20–21, 119–20; logical posi-
tivists and, 23, 24; metaphysical con-
structivism and, 182
Kaufmann, Stuart, 85
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 139, 143
Kepler, Johannes, 4, 15–16, 17, 192
kinds, 54, 55
Kitcher, Philip: on allocation of re-
sources, 167–69; competition in sci-
ence and, 225; on eliminative infer-
ence, 212; on explanation, 195, 196,
197; realism and, 180; Science Studies
and, 147
Index
261

knowledge: a posteriori, 234; a priori,
26, 234; Bacon on, 138–39; common-
sense view of, 153; constructivism
about, 234; empiricism and, 8, 9, 10,
11, 19, 220, 228; feminist analyses of,
137–39, 141; growth of, 98; logical
positivism and, 27, 29; mathematical
route to, 11; naturalism and, 151,
154; objectivity and, 229; realism
and, 180, 240; reality and, 131–32;
relativism about, 146; scientiﬁc ap-
proach to, 4, 5, 153; two-layered view
of, 118. See also belief; epistemology
Koch, Robert, 10
Kolmogorov, A. N., 207
Kuhn, Thomas: anomalies and, 82–83,
84, 100, 233; Artiﬁcial Life and, 85–
86; on balances in scientiﬁc work,
225, 227; on distributed risk, 110;
empiricism and, 75, 78, 83, 227–28;
evidence and, 211–12; evolutionary
change and, 100–101; on explana-
tion, 197–98; feminism and, 137;
Feyerabend and, 103, 110, 111, 112,
115; Galison and, 120; Hull and, 165;
inﬂuence on broader culture, 75–76;
inﬂuence on Gould, 101; inﬂuence 
on philosophy of science, 75, 98–99;
on insulation of science, 127, 171;
“invisible hand” and, 99–100, 112,
165; Lakatos and, 102, 103, 106–7;
Laudan and, 108, 110; logical empiri-
cism and, 75, 78–79; on normal sci-
ence, 79–82, 83, 84–86; normative
claims of, 79; Popper and, 78, 81, 83,
85, 98, 101, 107–8, 117–18; on pro-
gress in science, 95; realism and, 177,
180, 181–82; responses to, 87, 102–3;
Science Studies and, 147; skeptical
realism of, 177, 181–82; skepticism 
of scientists and, 124–25; sociology of
science and, 125; terminology of, 75–
77; on theory choice, 89–90, 92–93;
on theory-ladenness of observation,
156, 158; truth and, 155; two-process
theory of, 117–19, 120, 230. See also
normal science; paradigms; revolu-
tions in science
Kyburg, Henry, 209
Laboratory Life (Latour and Woolgar),
129, 132–34
Lakatos, Imre: Feyerabend and, 106,
115; on history of science, 103–4;
Kuhn and, 102, 103, 106–7; Laudan
and, 102, 108, 109, 110, 227; life of,
103; Popper and, 103, 105, 107; on
research programs, 102, 104–7, 108,
110, 119, 167; two-process theory of,
119, 120
Langton, Chris, 85
language: analyticity and, 33; behaviorist
theory of, 213; empiricism about,
235; Feyerabend on, 111, 120; holism
about, 34, 181, 236; incommensura-
bility of theories and, 91–92, 94, 111,
236; knowledge and, 132; logical em-
piricism and, 34, 35–36, 37; logical
positivism and, 22–24, 25–28, 29, 
34, 37, 131, 157, 180–81, 237; new
riddle of induction and, 53–54; obser-
vational, 28, 34, 35–37, 157; opera-
tionalism and, 131, 239; philosophy
of science and, 231; postmodernism
and, 145; pragmatism about, 239;
realism and, 174, 180–81, 240;
representation and, 145, 179, 230;
sociology of science and, 125; theory-
ladenness of observation and, 156,
157, 158; truth and, 179, 186–87,
188–89, 241; two-layered view of,
118; Wittgenstein on, 23, 130–31. See
also meaning
language game, 131
Language, Truth, and Logic (Ayer), 25,
32
Latour, Bruno: Laboratory Life, 129,
132–34; realism and, 154, 173, 180,
181
Laudan, Larry: on Carnot, 108, 179; 
on competition, 167; evidence and,
211–12; Galilean program and, 115;
262
Index

Lakatos and, 102, 108, 109, 110,
227; normal science and, 227; norma-
tive naturalism and, 152; realism and,
180; on research traditions, 108–10,
120, 241; two-process theory of, 119,
120
Lavoisier, Antoine, 17, 97
laws of nature: explanation and, 35,
191–94, 196, 197, 198, 200, 234;
falsiﬁcation and, 60; logical empiri-
cism and, 41; metaphysics of, 200,
201; phenomenological, 239
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 20, 123
Leviathan (Hobbes), 129
Leviathan and the Air Pump (Shapin and
Schaffer), 128–32
likelihoods, 204, 205, 209–10, 237
Lingua Franca, 146
linguistic frameworks, 118
Linnaeus, Carolus, 17
literary theory, 144, 145, 146, 147
Lloyd, Elisabeth, 142
Lloyd, Genevieve, 138
Locke, John, 19, 20
logic: analytic statements and, 26, 33; of
Carnap’s frameworks, 118; deﬁned,
28; explanation and, 191–94; Kuhn’s
views on, 76; logical empiricism and,
34, 35, 45–46; logical positivism and,
28–29, 34, 35; mathematical, 7, 238;
quantum physics and, 33; structure of
scientiﬁc theories and, 6, 7. See also
deductive logic; inductive logic
Logic (Dewey), 153
logical empiricism: central ideas of, 33–
37; conﬁrmation and, 39, 40–41, 44,
45–46, 50, 51, 202, 203, 211; de-
ﬁned, 19, 22, 237; explanation and,
35, 191, 195–96; fall of, 37, 202,
211; induction and, 43, 46, 48; Kuhn
and, 75, 78–79; laws of nature and,
200; logic and, 34, 35, 45–46; Mer-
tonian sociology of science and, 125;
Popper’s criticism of, 59, 60, 68; real-
ism and, 181. See also empiricism
logical equivalence, 46–47
logical positivism: central ideas of, 25–
30; conﬁrmation and, 39, 214; de-
ﬁned, 19, 237; difﬁculties of, 30–33;
explanation and, 191; history of, 22–
25; induction and, 43; language and,
22–24, 25–28, 29, 34, 37, 131, 157,
180–81, 237; logic and, 28–29, 34,
35; metaphysics and, 238; opera-
tionalism and, 239; Popper and, 57,
58; prediction and, 37; realism and,
180–81; science and, 28, 29–30, 34;
sociology of science and, 125, 183;
theory-ladenness of observation and,
156, 157; traditional philosophy and,
27, 30, 31, 34; unobservable struc-
tures and, 36; veriﬁcationism in, 27,
31, 241–42; Wittgenstein and, 130,
131. See also logical empiricism; posi-
tivism
Longino, Helen, 141, 142, 143
Mach, Ernst, 20
MacKenzie, Donald, 127
A Man in Full (Wolfe), 76
The Man of Reason (Lloyd), 138
marketplace of ideas, 116, 142
Marxism, 58, 71–72, 136
mathematical induction, 42
mathematical logic, 7, 238. See also logic
mathematical models, 179, 187–88, 211,
238
mathematics: as analytic truth, 26; in
biology, 11–12, 73, 93; of cellular
automata, 85; experience and, 20, 21;
explanation and, 93, 198; Galileo on,
10–11; invention of calculus, 123;
logical positivism and, 22, 26; para-
digms and, 77; in physics, 3, 15, 16,
26, 161, 178; in research programs,
104–5; Scientiﬁc Revolution and, 15,
16, 17; as tool in science, 10–12. See
also probability; statistics
matter: mechanism and, 16; Newton’s
work on, 196. See also electrons
Maxwell’s equations, 77
Mbeki, Thabo, 116–17
Index
263

McClintock, Barbara, 143
McMullin, Ernan, 178
meaning: analytic-synthetic distinction
and, 25–26, 34; holistic theory of, 31,
33, 34, 92, 181, 236; incommensura-
bility of, 92; logical positivists on,
131, 180–81; postmodernism and,
145; realism and, 240; theoretical
framework and, 157; veriﬁability the-
ory of, 25, 27–28, 31, 32–33, 34,
241–42; Wittgenstein on, 131. See
also language
mechanism: vs. mathematical formalism,
93, 198; seventeenth-century theory,
16, 17
medicine: empirical tests in, 9–10, 12;
explanation in, 193–94; feminist anal-
ysis of, 137; germ theory of disease,
10, 17, 177, 178; HIV, 116–17, 123,
211; politics and, 137
Mendel, Gregor, 17, 77, 93
Mendeleyev, Dmitri, 17
Merton, Robert, 122–25; competition in
science and, 225; Hull and, 163, 164,
166, 170, 171
meta-induction, pessimistic, 177, 178,
239
metaphysical constructivism, 181–83,
234
metaphysics: Boyle’s view of, 129; of cau-
sation, 200–201, 237; deﬁned, 237–
38; Kuhn’s philosophy and, 96; in phi-
losophy of science, 5; postmodernism
and, 145
methodology. See research programs; sci-
entiﬁc method
Mill, John Stuart, 20, 22, 116, 142
mind: classical empiricism and, 19, 20,
21, 220, 221; gendered views of, 138;
idealism and, 23; Kant on, 20; mod-
ules of, 159, 160; naturalism and,
153, 161, 238. See also thought
models: Artiﬁcial Life as, 85; deﬁned,
238; important role of, 187–88, 231;
mathematical, 179, 187–88, 211,
238; reliability of, 223; representation
by, 189
molecular biology: central dogma of, 
80; conﬁdence in, 178; evolutionary
theory and, 73–74, 107; ﬁnancial
rewards of, 3, 171; growth of knowl-
edge in, 98; Kuhn’s theory of change
and, 89; Latour and Woolgar on,
132–34; scientiﬁc status of, 2–3. See
also DNA
molecular genetics: in neutral theory of
molecular evolution, 107; paradigm
of, 80, 81; technological improve-
ments in, 223. See also DNA
Montagnier, Luc, 123
Montaigne, Michel, 111
Moore, G. E., 25
moral consequences of science, 112
motion: Feyerabend on, 113–14, 157;
Galileo on, 15, 17, 113–14; Kepler’s
laws of, 15–16, 17, 192; Scientiﬁc
Revolution and, 14–16, 17. See also
physics
Müller-Lyer illusion, 158–59
natural history, 4
naturalism: author’s version of, 154;
common-sense realism and, 176; de-
ﬁned, 149–50, 238; of Dewey, 222;
empiricism and, 161–62, 169–70,
219, 220–24, 230; foundationalism
vs., 150; modern origins of, 150–51,
153; normative, 152–53; observation
and, 154–55, 156, 160–62; in philos-
ophy of mind, 153, 238; procedural,
214–17; questions for philosophy of
science in, 154–55; relations between
sciences and, 153–54; scientiﬁc real-
ism and, 180, 219, 221; social organi-
zation of science and, 163–72; sociol-
ogy of science and, 221
natural kinds, 54, 55
natural laws. See laws of nature
natural philosophy, 4
natural selection: Darwin-Wallace prior-
264
Index

ity issue, 123; Hull’s view of science
and, 166; mathematical models of,
187; vs. neutral theory of molecular
evolution, 107; in nineteenth-century
research program, 105; Popperian sci-
ence and, 63, 166; vs. punctuated
equilibrium, 100; sexual behavior
and, 140. See also evolution; evolu-
tionary theory
nature: Bacon on control of, 138–39;
femaleness and, 138–39; Latour on,
133, 134, 173, 181
Neurath, Otto, 22, 24, 28, 30, 36
neutral theory of molecular evolution,
107
new riddle of induction, 50–55, 210,
214, 216–17
Newton, Isaac: alchemy and, 226; on
cumulative feature of science, 225;
priority dispute with Hooke, 123; sci-
entiﬁc method and, 6; Scientiﬁc Revo-
lution and, 4, 17
Newtonian physics: eighteenth-century
research program of, 104; gravita-
tional theory, 17, 93, 104, 123, 198;
Kant on, 26; Kepler’s laws and, 17,
192; Kuhn on, 77, 80, 98; nature of
matter and, 196; overview of, 17; par-
tial falsiﬁcation of, 59
“nomological,” 193
nondeductive inference, 41–44. See also
explanatory inference; induction
normal science: anomalies and, 82–83,
84, 99, 100, 233; assessing hypotheses
in, 90; change within, 78, 90; deﬁned,
77, 238; Feyerabend on, 112; genetics
and, 89; Kuhn on, 79–82, 83, 84–86;
Lakatos’s research programs and, 107,
227; Popper’s criticism of, 108; recog-
nition in, 124; revolution and, 78, 
87–88, 99, 100; in two-process the-
ory, 118
normative naturalism, 152–53
normative questions, 152
normative theories: deﬁned, 6; of Kuhn,
79, 81, 90, 112; of Laudan, 109, 167;
research programs and, 107
norms of science: feminist epistemology
and, 141; sociology of science and,
122–25, 126, 128
noumenal world, 182
objectivity, 6, 156, 228–29, 238
observables: conﬁrmation and, 45; em-
piricism and, 35–37, 221; realism
and, 185–86. See also unobservable
structures
observation: empiricism and, 211, 220,
224, 229; falsiﬁcation by, 58–59, 
70, 71, 235; Feyerabend on, 111, 
114; holism and, 31–32, 34, 48;
hypothetico-deductive method and,
236; induction and, 39–40; Kuhn’s
views on, 76; language and, 239; logi-
cal positivism and, 35, 237; logical
structure of science and, 7; naturalism
about, 154–55, 156, 160–62; opera-
tionalism and, 30; order of, 48–49,
216, 217; probability of hypothesis
and, 203, 208, 210; procedures and,
49, 214, 215–17; psychology of, 111,
156, 160, 161; realism and, 185–86;
reliability of, 160, 161, 186; sociology
of science and, 125, 161; structure 
of world and, 229; technological
enhancement of, 222, 223; theory-
ladenness of, 96, 111, 155–62, 221,
241; veriﬁcation by, 27. See also con-
ﬁrmation; evidence; experiment;
perception
observational language, 28, 34, 35–37,
157
“Observation Reconsidered” (Fodor),
158
Oldenburg, Henry, 166
one-process theories, 117–21
On Liberty (Mill), 116
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 11,
187
operationalism, 30, 131, 239
Index
265

Oppenheim, Paul, 191
organized skepticism, 122, 123, 124–25
Osiander, Andreas, 15
paradigms: in biology, 80–81, 84; break-
down of, 82–83, 84; broad and nar-
row senses of, 77, 89, 239; competi-
tion between, 110; different worlds of,
88, 96–98, 173, 177, 181; evidence
and, 211–12; examples of, 80–81; ex-
planation and, 197; Feyerabend on,
112; incommensurability of, 91–96,
236; issues for future study, 230;
Kuhn’s trust in, 106; meanings of, 75–
76; in normal science, 77, 79–82, 83,
84–86, 90, 99, 227; observer bias and,
156; research programs vs., 102, 104,
106–7, 119; revolution and, 76, 77,
88, 89; two-process theory about, 118
paradigm shift, 76, 89, 90
parsimony. See simplicity
Pasteur, Louis, 10
Peirce, C. S., 43, 59, 233, 239
perception: gendered views of, 138; mod-
ular theory of, 159, 160; of motion,
113; paradigm change and, 97, 98;
psychology of, 158–59, 161, 222,
223; real structure of world and, 155;
reliability of, 65, 222–23; theory-
ladenness of, 156, 158–59, 160–61.
See also observation
personalism. See subjectivism
pessimistic meta-induction, 177, 178,
239
Pettenkofer, Max Josef von, 10
phenomenalism, 20, 180–81, 237, 239
phenomenal world, 182
phenomenological law, 239
Philosophical Investigations (Wittgen-
stein), 130
philosophical questions, 151–52, 153–54
philosophy, roles of, 154
philosophy of mind, naturalistic, 153,
238
philosophy of science: approaches to, 5–
8; fundamental problem in, 39; future
issues in, 230–31; history of science
and, 7, 12; Kuhn’s new kind of theory
in, 99; progress in, 155, 230–31; psy-
chology and, 7, 29, 34, 37, 78, 99; so-
ciology of science and, 122, 125; three
families of ideas in, 8–13. See also em-
piricism; naturalism; scientiﬁc realism
phlogiston, 177
physics: Aristotelian, 14, 15, 113, 114,
115, 130, 213; explanation in, 192,
194; Galison on change in, 120;
growth of knowledge in, 98; instru-
mentalism in, 15, 184; Kuhn on, 77,
80, 84, 98, 197; laws of, 201; models
in, 187, 188; as natural philosophy, 4;
Newtonian (see Newtonian physics);
psychophysics, 160, 161; quantum
mechanics, 33, 175; realism and, 175,
177, 178, 186; relativity theory, 26,
30, 161; scientiﬁc status of, 2–3;
Sokal hoax, 146; thermodynamics,
108, 179. See also astronomy; motion
Piltdown man, 72
plagiarism, 123, 124, 164
Plato, 36, 54, 138
Platt, John, 70, 212
point of view, 94, 128, 240
politics: of empiricists, 22; feminist, 137;
Hegel and, 23; of Heidegger, 24; of
logical positivists, 24–25, 30, 34, 183;
postmodernism and, 145; science and,
136–37; Science Wars and, 145–46;
Scientiﬁc Revolution and, 17; sociol-
ogy of science and, 183; strong pro-
gram and, 126–27, 132–33. See also
power
Popper, Karl: on conﬁrmation, 58–61,
67–71, 202, 235; on corroboration,
68, 234; demarcation problem and,
58, 59, 63–64, 65–66, 71–74, 235;
eliminative inference and, 212; falsiﬁ-
cationism of, 58–61, 63–67, 70, 71,
235; Feyerabend and, 110; on frame-
works, 120; Hull and, 165; Kuhn and,
78, 81, 83, 85, 98, 101, 107–8, 117–
18; Lakatos and, 103, 105, 107; life
266
Index

of, 57–58; objections to, on conﬁrma-
tion, 67–71; objections to, on falsiﬁ-
cation, 63–67; one-process theory of,
117–18, 120; rationalism of, 240; re-
alism and, 177, 180; riskiness of theo-
ries and, 62, 64, 70–71; on scientiﬁc
change, 61–63, 70, 78, 100, 101,
117–18; scientists’ admiration of, 57,
59, 62, 70
positivism: derived from Comte, 22; soci-
ology of science and, 125. See also
logical positivism
posterior probability, 204, 205, 208, 210,
239
postmodernism, 141, 145, 146, 189
“Postscript” (Kuhn), 89
postulates, 34
power: Bacon on knowledge and, 138;
scientiﬁc institutions and, 136. See
also politics
pragmatism, 184, 199, 239
prediction: categories for, 55; explana-
tion and, 190, 192, 193, 194, 196;
falsiﬁability and, 59–60, 61; holism
about testing and, 236; in hypothetico-
deductive method, 69–70, 236; instru-
mentalism and, 184, 237; logical em-
piricism and, 37; with models, 188;
research programs and, 105
pre-paradigm science, 79, 89
primatology, 139–40, 143
Principia (Newton), 17
prior probabilities, 204, 205, 208, 209–
10, 240
probability: axioms of, 206–7; causal
explanation and, 195; conﬁrmation
and, 44, 66, 203, 204, 210 (see also
Bayesianism); evidence and, 203–5;
falsiﬁability and, 66–67; objective,
208; subjectivist interpretation of,
205–8, 241
problem-solving power: Kuhn on, 89, 90,
95, 98; Laudan on, 109, 115; pragma-
tism and, 239
procedural naturalism, 214–17
Progress and Its Problems (Laudan), 108
progress in philosophy of science, 155,
230–31
progress in science: Feyerabend on, 111,
116; Kuhn on, 78, 88, 94–95, 98;
Lakatos on, 104; Laudan on, 109;
marketplace of ideas and, 116, 142;
models and, 188; truth and, 155, 188
progressive research program, 105
projection, 42, 43, 46
proliferation, principle of, 115–16
properties, 54, 55
protective belt, of research program,
104–5
pseudo-science, 58, 65–66. See also
alchemy
psychology: behaviorism in, 80, 171,
213; categories in, 55; evolutionary,
106; Freudian, 58, 71, 72, 137; natu-
ralized epistemology and, 151, 152; 
of observation, 111, 156, 160, 161;
paradigms in, 80, 84; of perception,
158–59, 161, 222, 223; philosophy of
mind and, 153; philosophy of science
and, 7, 29, 34, 37, 78, 99; research
programs in, 106; as a science, 3; of
scientiﬁc knowledge, 229. See also
perception
psychophysics, 160, 161
Ptolemy, 14, 15
publication by scientists, 124
punctuated equilibrium, 100–101
purpose, Aristotle on, 14
pursuit of theories, 108–9
puzzle-solving, 81, 82, 86
quantum physics, 33, 175
Quine, W. V.: holism of, 31, 32, 33, 34,
118, 119, 120; naturalism of, 150–
51, 152
Ramsey, Frank, 205
random samples, 214, 215–17
rationalism, 20, 21, 26, 240
rationality: contextual empiricism and,
142; feminist analysis of, 137–38,
142; Feyerabend on, 114–15; instru-
Index
267

mental, 152–53; Kuhn on, 78; Laudan
on, 109; relativism and, 127; Science
Studies and, 147. See also reasoning
ravens problem, 46–50, 202, 214–16
Ray, Tom, 85
realism: common-sense, 174, 175–76,
180; deﬁned, 240; objectivity and,
229; skeptical, of Kuhn, 177, 181–82.
See also scientiﬁc realism
reality: accurate representations of, 176,
179, 189, 230; constructivism about,
134, 181–83, 234; independent of
thought, 174, 181; metaphysics and,
5, 237; naturalism and, 154–55, 161;
paradigm-dependent, 96; postmod-
ernism and, 145; scientiﬁc theories
and, 6, 8, 147, 173, 174, 175, 176;
sociology of science and, 131–32,
134, 221. See also realism
reasoning: empiricism and, 10; rational-
ism and, 20; relativism about, 94. See
also rationality
recognition. See reward system
refereeing of papers, 166
reference, truth of theories and, 186–87,
188, 230
reﬂexivity, problem of, 128
refutations. See conjectures and refuta-
tions
Reichenbach, Hans, 23, 25, 34, 43, 214
relativism: applied to itself, 128; about
conceptual schemes, 120; in construc-
tivist antirealism, 182; deﬁned, 94,
240; diversity and, 227; feminist epis-
temology and, 141, 142; of Kuhn, 94–
96; postmodernism and, 145; Science
Wars and, 146; of strong program,
127–28; theory-ladenness of observa-
tion and, 156
relativity theory, 26, 30, 161. See also
Einstein, Albert
reliability: of observation, 160, 161, 186;
of perception, 65, 222–23; of proce-
dures, 214, 215, 217; of scientiﬁc
models, 223
religion: empiricism and, 22, 229; polit-
ical role of, 72; Scientiﬁc Revolution
and, 15, 16, 17
replicability, 164
representation: as important unresolved
issue, 230; by models, 187, 230; post-
modernism and, 145; by theories,
189, 230; truth and, 179, 241
research programs: deﬁned, 240; distri-
bution of researchers to, 110, 167–68,
169; Lakatos on, 102, 104–7, 108,
110, 119, 167; noncompeting, 107;
vs. paradigms, 119; vs. research tradi-
tions, 108
research traditions, 108–10, 120, 241
revolutions in science: crises leading to
(see crisis); features of, 88–91; func-
tion of, 87–88, 90–91; incommensu-
rable paradigms and, 91–96; vs. nor-
mal science, 78, 87–88, 99, 100;
paradigm replacement in, 76, 77, 88,
89; Popper’s view and, 78; world
changes associated with, 88, 96–98,
131, 173, 177, 181. See also Scientiﬁc
Revolution
reward system: epistemological issues
and, 231; Hull on, 163–64, 165–66,
170; issues for future study, 230;
Kitcher on, 168–69; Merton on, 123–
24, 125, 163, 170; recent changes in,
171; reformed empiricism and, 224,
225, 228, 229; Strevens on, 169. See
also social organization of science
Ricketts, Thomas, 119
The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy (Reichen-
bach), 23
Rorty, Richard, 239
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
24, 111
Royal Society of London, 13, 129, 166,
226
Russell, Bertrand, 22, 25
Salk Institute, 132
Salmon, Wesley, 69, 197
sampling, 214, 215–17
268
Index
rationality (continued)

Schaffer, Simon, 128–32, 226, 227
Schlick, Moritz, 22, 25, 28, 29, 30, 34
Scholastic worldview, 14, 15, 17, 227
science: commercialization of, 3, 85, 171;
cultural image of, 136; cumulative
feature of, 91, 225, 226; demarcation
of, 58, 59, 63–64, 65–66, 71–74,
235; deviant behaviors in, 123–24;
distinctive features of, 4, 63–64, 95–
96, 154, 223–27, 229–30; disunity of,
227; empiricist pro-science tradition,
8, 22; etymology and usage of word,
3–4, 224; realist aim of, 176, 185,
186, 189; scope of, 2–5; as a strategy,
223–27, 230. See also history of sci-
ence; philosophy of science; sociology
of science; theories
Science as a Process (Hull), 163
Science Studies, 144–48
Science Wars, 2, 145–46
scientiﬁc change: analogy to evolution,
63, 100, 166–67; Feyerabend on, 111;
Galison on, 120; Hull on, 166; Kuhn
on, 78, 88, 90, 99, 120; Lakatos on,
102, 104, 105–6; Laudan on, 109;
one-process and two-process theories,
117–21, 230; philosophy and, 6; Pop-
per on, 61–63, 70, 78, 100, 101, 117–
18; Science Studies and, 147; sociol-
ogy of science and, 125, 154–55. See
also change
scientiﬁc method: empiricism and, 9;
Feyerabend’s rejection of, 111, 114;
Popper’s philosophy and, 69–70; Sci-
entiﬁc Revolution and, 9, 17; tradi-
tional idea of, 6–7
scientiﬁc realism: causation and, 195;
contextualism about, 227; debates
about, 173; deﬁned, 241; empiricism
and, 37, 180–81, 219, 220, 221–23;
evidence and, 210–14; explanation
and, 199; hypothesis testing and,
211–12; instrumentalism and, 237;
metaphysical constructivism and,
181–83; naturalism and, 180, 219,
221; objectivity and, 229; pessimistic
meta-induction and, 239; recent pro-
gress in, 231; sociology of science
and, 134–35, 154–55, 180, 182–83,
221; statement of, 174–79; survey 
of philosophers’ views, 180; van
Fraassen’s opposition to, 175, 180,
183–86. See also realism; reality
Scientiﬁc Revolution: cultural and polit-
ical changes in, 17–18; distinctive na-
ture of, 4, 5, 9, 154, 224; historical
sketch of, 13–18; mathematical meth-
ods in, 10; problem of evidence dur-
ing, 211; social organization of sci-
ence and, 12, 13, 226. See also
revolutions in science
scientiﬁc societies: rise of, 13, 16; Royal
Society of London, 13, 129, 166, 226
“scientistic,” 3
scientists: Popper’s popularity with, 57,
59, 62, 70; temperaments of, 171;
women, 137, 139, 140, 142–44, 170
selection task, 49–50
semiotics, 144
Semmelweiss, Ignaz, 9
sensationalism, 19
sensations: empiricism and, 19, 180,
220, 221; logical empiricism and, 34;
logical positivism and, 27, 28, 181;
phenomenalism and, 20, 181, 239;
realism and, 180, 181
Sextus Empiricus, 111
Shapin, Steven, 12, 128–32, 225, 226,
227
Sheehan, Thomas, 24
Shimony, Abner, 147
similarity relationship, 187
simple induction, 42
simplicity: of empiricist picture, 230;
Goodman’s problem and, 54–55;
nondeductive inference and, 44; the-
ory choice and, 55, 214, 216, 223
skeptical realism, 177, 181–82
skepticism: about conﬁrmation, 59;
empiricist tendency toward, 19–20;
about external world, 19, 20, 97–98;
of Feyerabend, 111–12; inductive, 20,
Index
269

40, 59, 67, 68–69; as norm of science,
122, 123, 124–25; postmodernism
and, 145; of scientists toward others’
work, 165; theory-ladenness of obser-
vation and, 156
Skinner, B. F., 80, 171, 213
Smith, Adam, 99–100, 165
Snow, John, 9, 10, 12
Sober, Elliott, 150
social constructivism, 182–83, 234
social organization of science: alchemists’
secrecy vs., 226–27; balances in, 13,
83, 99, 225, 227, 228, 229; distinctive
features of, 224–27, 228, 229–30;
empiricism and, 12–13, 169–70, 225,
228, 230; feminist analysis of, 138,
141, 142; Hull on, 163–67, 169, 170,
171, 225; Kitcher on, 167–69, 225;
Kuhn’s philosophy and, 83, 99; natu-
ralism and, 163–72; Popper’s philos-
ophy and, 63; Shapin and Schaffer on,
129; structure of the world and, 134,
147–48. See also communities, scien-
tiﬁc; reward system
social sciences: decision theory in, 205;
feminist analysis of, 137
Social Text, 146
sociology of science, 122–35; construc-
tivism in, 134, 182–83; empiricism
and, 221; feminism and, 137; issues
for future study, 230; Kuhn’s criticism
of, 127; Laboratory Life, 129, 132–
34; Leviathan, 128–32; Mertonian,
122–25, 163, 164, 166, 170, 171,
225; naturalism and, 221; observation
and, 125, 161; philosophical ques-
tions and, 7–8, 12, 125; realism and,
134–35, 154–55, 180, 182–83, 221;
Science Studies and, 144, 147; scien-
tiﬁc theories and, 125, 126, 135, 154–
55, 189; strong program, 126–28,
129, 132, 133, 134; temperaments of
scientists and, 171; truth of theories
and, 189. See also social organization
of science
Sokal, Alan, 146–47
space: Euclidean geometry and, 161;
Kant on, 20
standpoint epistemology, 141–42
statistics: confounding variables in, 217;
falsiﬁcation and, 66–67; political con-
text of, 127; probability theory in,
203, 205; procedural naturalism and,
214, 215–17
Sterelny, Kim, 225
Storer, Norman, 124
Strevens, Michael, 169
strong inference, 70
strong program, 126–28; Latour and,
132, 133, 134; Leviathan and, 129
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
(Kuhn): on explanation, 198; impact
of, 75–76; Kuhn’s later essays and, 90,
110; meanings of “paradigm” in, 76,
77; normative element in, 79; on
progress in science, 95; responses to,
102–3; on world changes, 131. See
also Kuhn, Thomas
subjectively fair odds, 206, 207
subjectivism, 205–8, 241
symbols: postmodernism and, 145; repre-
sentation by, 145, 189
symmetry principle, 126
symptom, 193–94
synthetic sentence, 25, 26, 233. See also
analytic-synthetic distinction
systematics, 163. See also biology, classi-
ﬁcation of organisms
technology, 4, 144, 171, 222, 223
tenacity, principle of, 115
testing: eliminative inference and, 212,
213; explanatory inference and, 212;
falsiﬁcation by, 59–60, 64–65, 158,
235; holism about, 31–33, 48, 64–
65, 157, 160, 236; logical empiricism
and, 202, 211; meaning and, 27, 242;
procedural naturalism about, 214–17;
progress in understanding of, 231;
realism and, 211–12; social organiza-
tion of science and, 12; as strategy of
270
Index
skepticism (continued)

science, 224, 229; theory-ladenness 
of observation and, 241. See also con-
ﬁrmation; evidence; experiment;
observation
theoretical induction, 43, 235
theoretical inference, 43
theoretical language, 28, 34. See also un-
observable structures
“The Theoretician’s Dilemma” (Hempel),
35
theories: acceptance vs. pursuit of, 108–
9; concepts in, 34, 157, 173; conﬁ-
dence in, 178, 181, 186; conﬁrmation
of (see conﬁrmation); constructivism
about, 181–83, 234; empirically ade-
quate, 184, 185, 186; explanation by
(see explanation); falsiﬁcation of (see
falsiﬁcationism); feminist epistemol-
ogy on, 141; incommensurability of,
91–96, 111, 125, 236; instrumental-
ism about, 15, 183–84, 237; Laudan’s
account of, 108–9; likelihoods and,
205; logical empiricist view of, 34,
36–37; naturalism about, 149, 150,
154, 155; Popper on riskiness of, 62,
64, 70–71; reality and, 6, 8, 147, 
173, 174, 175, 176, 230; in research
programs, 104, 240; sociology of
science and, 125, 126, 135, 154–55,
189; success of, 178–79; truth of,
178–79, 186–87, 188–89, 230;
underdetermined by evidence, 181,
220, 222–23; unobservable structures
in, 35–37, 176, 178, 185, 220, 221,
222–23. See also hypotheses; models;
paradigms
theory choice: Bayesianism and, 210;
Feyerabend on, 115; Kuhn on, 89–90,
92–93; Lakatos’s research programs
and, 106; observation and, 155, 160;
simplicity and, 55, 214, 216, 223;
underdetermination by evidence, 220,
222–23
theory-ladenness of observation, 96, 111,
155–62, 221, 241
thermodynamics, 108, 179
thought: realism and, 174, 176; represen-
tation in, 189. See also mind
Tierra project, 85
time, Kant on, 20
Tolman, E. C., 171
Toulmin, Stephen, 226
trust and criticism, 225, 226, 228
truth: analytic-synthetic distinction and,
25–26; correspondence theory of,
188–89, 239, 241; evidence and, 
190, 241; falsiﬁability and, 59–61,
68; feminist epistemology and, 141;
hypothetico-deductive method and,
70; Kuhn on, 155; Latour on, 134;
logical, 28, 41; models and, 188; nat-
uralism and, 155; postmodernism
and, 145; realism and, 179; relativism
about, 94, 240; subjectivist probabil-
ity and, 205; of theories, 178–79,
186–87, 188–89, 230; theories of,
241; veriﬁability and, 27
“Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (Quine),
31, 33, 118
two-process theories, 117–21, 230
underdetermination of theory by evi-
dence, 181, 220, 222–23
uniﬁcationist theory, 195–97, 198, 200
universalism, 122
unobservable structures: logical empiri-
cism and, 35–37; perception and,
222–23; scientiﬁc realism and, 176,
178, 185, 220, 221
updating of beliefs, 204, 208, 209, 
234
utilities, 206
vacuum, 130, 131
validity, deductive, 41, 51, 234
values. See normative naturalism; norma-
tive theories
van Fraassen, Bas: constructive empiri-
cism of, 184–86, 234; on explanation,
199; religious beliefs of, 22; on scien-
tiﬁc realism, 175, 180, 183–86
veil of ideas, 20, 220, 221
Index
271

veriﬁcationism, 25, 27–28, 31, 32–33,
34, 241–42
veriﬁcation vs. falsiﬁcation, 60
Vesalius, Andreas, 16
Vienna Circle, 22, 23, 25, 28, 34, 57
vision: color, 160; illusions of, 158–59
Wallace, Alfred Russell, 123
Watson, James, 43
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 99
web of belief, 33, 118, 119
Wilde, Oscar, 112
Williams, Michael, 111, 117
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 23, 58, 130–31,
137
Wolfe, Tom, 75–76
Wolfram, Steven, 85
women scientists, 137, 139, 140, 142–
44, 170
Woolgar, Stephen, 129, 132
world. See external world skepticism;
reality
world changes, 88, 96–98, 131, 173,
177, 181
Worrall, John, 178, 188
272
Index


