There Are No Mathematical Explanations
Jaakko Kuorikoski*y
If ontic dependence is the basis of explanation, there cannot be mathematical explana-
tions. Accounting for the explanatory dependency between mathematical properties and
empirical phenomena poses insurmountable metaphysical and epistemic difﬁculties, and
the proposed amendments to the counterfactual theory of explanation invariably violate
core commitments of the theory. Instead, mathematical explanations are either abstract
mechanistic constitutive explanations or reconceptualizations of the explanandum phe-
nomenon in which mathematics as such does not have an explanatory role. Explanation-
like reasoning within mathematics, distinction between explanatory and nonexplanatory
proofs, and comparative judgments of mathematical depth can be fully accounted for by
a concept of formal understanding.
1. Introduction. Are there distinctively mathematical explanations of em-
piricalphenomena?No one denies thatmathematicsisexplanatoryanduseful
in most, perhaps all, ﬁelds of science, and the current philosophical literature
on scientiﬁc explanations is replete with examples of apparently noncausal
explanations referring to mathematical facts. But are there really cases in
which it is the mathematical fact that explains something in the empirical
world—that is, distinctly mathematical explanations? How can such other-
worldlythingsasmathematicalobjects,properties,orfactsexplainsomething
in our contingent, space-timey world?
In what follows, I argue that they cannot—at least not if one accepts a
broadly ontic counterfactual view of explanation. I argue that, despite recent
heroic attempts to the contrary, such views cannot accommodate distinctively
*To contact the author, please write to: Practical Philosophy, PO Box 24 (Unioninkatu 40),
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland; e-mail: jaakko.kuorikoski@helsinki.ﬁ.
yEarly versions of this article were presented at EPSA15 in Düsseldorf, Stockholm Phi-
losophy Colloquium (2017), Philosophy Research Seminar in Tampere (2017), and PoS
seminar in Helsinki (2018). I thank the audiences in these meetings for their comments. I
would especially like to thank Juha Saatsi, Markus Pantsar, and two anonymous review-
ers for their invaluable and constructive criticism and helpful suggestions.
Received April 2019; revised January 2020.
Philosophy of Science, 88 (April 2021) pp. 189–212. 0031-8248/2021/8802-0001$10.00
Copyright 2021 by the Philosophy of Science Association. All rights reserved.
189
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematical explanations. The main reason is that accounting for the explan-
atory dependency between mathematical properties and empirical phenomena
supporting the explanatory counterfactuals poses insurmountable metaphysi-
cal and epistemic difﬁculties. I argue that the proposed amendments to the
counterfactual theory, aimed at alleviating these difﬁculties, invariably end
up violating core commitments of the ontic counterfactual account. My argu-
ment is therefore strictly conditional (please excuse the somewhat overreach-
ing title), and the main conclusion is that the ‘liberal consensus’ admitting var-
ious noncausal explanations and a monist view of explanation are not as easily
reconciled as many authors have taken them to be (Reutlinger 2016; Povich
2019). Instead of explaining empirical phenomena with mathematical facts,
I argue that the central examples discussed in the literature are either highly
abstract mechanistic explanations or cases of pseudoexplanation in which
the apparent increase in understanding provided by the putative mathematical
explanation is a matter of either learning more about our representational tools
or correcting false explanatory presuppositions.
Although my primary focus is on putative distinctly mathematical expla-
nations of empirical phenomena, skepticism toward explanatory abstract de-
pendencies bleeds necessarily also into matters of explanation within mathe-
matics. In order to alleviate worries that skepticism concerning mathematical
dependencies would leadto an implausiblepicture ofmathematical practice, I
will concede that many applications of mathematics do involve explanation-
like reasoning and develop a corresponding notion of formal understanding.
The concept of formal understanding can account for the (at least practically)
indispensable role for mathematics in explanation, differences in depth of
mathematical understanding, the distinction between explanatory and nonex-
planatory proofs within mathematics, and comparative judgments of mathe-
matical depth. In the latter part of this essay, I provide reasons for why we
should nevertheless draw a sharp distinction between this formal understand-
ing and explanation proper.
2. Mathematical Explanation and Abstract Dependencies. According
to a widely accepted view, explanation is about tracking systematic patterns
of objective dependency relations (Woodward 2003; Ylikoski and Kuorikoski
2010; Pincock 2015; Reutlinger 2016; Povich 2019): explanations show what
the thing to be explained objectively depends on. This dependency is most
often understood in terms of counterfactuals: explanandum depends on the
explanans if and only if, had the explanans been different, the explanandum
would have been different as well. Explanatory information therefore has an
essential modal quality: what sets explanatory information apart from purely
‘inert’ descriptive information is that explanations provide answers to what-
if-things-had-been-different questions concerning counterfactual states of
affairs.
190
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An important aspect of this account of explanation is that the explanatory
relationships are objective and ‘ontic’: explanatory relationships do not hold
between representations, concepts, or descriptions but between the things in
the world being represented, conceptualized, and described. The counter-
factuals supported by explanations are not about what should be inferred
if we were to ﬁnd out that such and such is the case but about what the world
itself would be like if such and such were the case. Holding an ontic depen-
dency view does not mean holding an ontic view of explanation in the sense
that explanations are to be directly identiﬁed with facts about dependencies
(Pincock 2018, 50). Instead, and I think more in line with Salmon’s (1998,
320) characterization, the ontic dependency view acknowledges that expla-
nation as an activity is an epistemic practice we engage in but insists that the
explanatory information itself is about features of the world existing inde-
pendently of these practices.
Although this ontic dependency view has been developed furthest in the
case of causal explanation, many have recently proposed that the general idea
is also applicable to various noncausal forms of explanation (e.g., Huneman
2010; Kuorikoski 2012; Saatsi and Pexton 2013; Rice 2015; Jansson and
Saatsi 2019), including explanations that many take to be distinctively math-
ematical (Pincock 2015; Reutlinger 2016, 2018; Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley
2017; Povich 2019). The philosophical literature includes many examples of
putative distinctively mathematical explanations of empirical phenomena,
and some of these will be analyzed in detail below, but let us start with the
simplest one offered by Marc Lange. Why is it that a mother cannot divide
23 strawberries equally between her three children? The explanation for this
puzzling failure is, of course, that 23 is not divisible by three. This seems like
a perfectly good answer to an explanation-seeking why question. The answer
also does not make reference to any causes of the mother’s failure or any
other empirical fact for that matter. There is nothing in the world preventing
the division: it is simply something that cannot be done. Accordingly, Lange
(2013, 2017) takes the distinguishing feature of mathematical explanations
to be their modal strength: truly distinctively mathematical explanations
show how the explanandum could not have been otherwise due to mathemat-
ical necessity (which is stronger than causal or nomological necessity). Not
surprisingly, Lange (2013) originally opted for a modal conception of expla-
nation (later expanded into an independent account of explanation by con-
straint in Lange [2017]), according to which explanations show how the
explanandum was necessary, instead of an ontic dependence conception,
which he explicitly deniesas beingapplicable to such distinctively mathemat-
ical explanations. Such a modal conception of explanation has a respectable
pedigree in its own right, having been proposed before, for example, by
G. H. von Wright. Baron (2019) has put forward a theory of distinctively (or
extramathematical) mathematical explanations based on the distinctively
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
191
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

epistemic deductive-nomological model. In his deductive mathematical model,
the central idea of subsumption by a deductive argument is retained, but the
explanatory natural law is replaced with a mathematical fact. Many philoso-
phers of mathematics have suggested another epistemic view, uniﬁcation, as
the view best suited to analyze mathematical explanations, both within as well
as outside of mathematics (e.g., Lyon and Colyvan 2008; Bangu 2013).
But suppose one would not want to be a (strong) explanatory pluralist and
were convinced of the validity of the ontic dependency conception outside
the realm of distinctively mathematical explanations. It is easy to see how
mathematical necessity can provide modal information (and even answers
to certain forms of what-if-things-had-been-different questions) and how
mathematical structures can unify reasoning about otherwise disjoint phe-
nomena, but it is harder to square with the idea that explanations show what
the explanandum depends on. How can the explanandum depend on any-
thing, if it could not have been otherwise by mathematical necessity? Despite
these daunting challenges, many philosophers have recently attempted to ap-
ply the ontic dependency conception to mathematical explanations. These
accounts are the primary target of this article.1
One of the ﬁrst detailed proposals for such an account is by Pincock
(2015), who argued that there is a class of explanation that explains empirical
phenomena with the properties of abstract objects and that such explanations
work by tracing abstract dependencies. His example is the explanation of the
three laws describing the formation of soap-ﬁlm surfaces among soap bub-
bles, previously established through empirical experimentation.2 The bare
essentials of the complicated example are as follows. The explanans for
the laws can be roughly divided into three steps: (i) a connected network
1. For example, I do not address the idea that mathematical explanations are program ex-
planations (Lyon 2012; for criticism of this proposal, see Saatsi [2012]), various structural
mapping accounts, aimed mainly at exploring the indispensability argument, or Batter-
man’s (2010) argument for the importance of limits and singularities in explanation. I also
do not address such putative explanatory ontological dependencies, which are analyzed in
terms of essences rather than counterfactuals (e.g., Fine 1994), as this literature is rather
disconnected from the literature on scientiﬁc explanation. Also, Jansson and Saatsi (2019)
argue that insofar as highly abstract explanations explain, they do so by providing informa-
tion about dependence. They try to reconstruct standard examples of mathematical explana-
tions in ways that do not invoke problematic dependencies between empirical and mathe-
matical facts and remain agnostic about the metaphysics of such dependencies.
2. (1) Compound bubbles or ﬁlms suspended on a wire frame are ﬂat or smoothly curved
surfaces smoothly joined together. (2) Surfaces can meet in only two ways: three surfaces
meet along a smooth curve, or six surfaces meet at a vertex. (3) When surfaces meet along
curves or when curves and surfaces meet at points, they do so at equal angles (three sur-
faces meeting along a curve meet at angles of 120 degrees, and four curves meeting at a
point meet at angles close to 109 degrees).
192
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of surfaces is ‘soap-ﬁlm-like’ if and only if it cannot be made to have a smaller
area by any small deformation that leaves the frame in which the surfaces are
held ﬁxed (this area minimization clause in the deﬁnition is crucial for the
explanation), (ii) such surfaces can be treated as ‘solution measures’, and
(iii) such surfaces ﬁt together in conﬁgurations known as ‘almost minimal
sets’, and all such conﬁgurations must, by mathematical necessity, satisfy
the three geometric principles constituting the explanandum. In fact, being an
instance of an almost minimal set is necessary and sufﬁcient for satisfying
Plateau’s laws.
Now, the way in which soap bubbles attach to each other is clearly an em-
pirical phenomenon, and almost minimal sets are clearly abstract objects.
Pincock argues that the properties of these almost minimal sets are explanato-
rily indispensable, and a crucial step in the explanation works by tracing an
objective dependency between an abstract feature of the empirical phenome-
non and the more abstract mathematical structure, of which the explanandum
is an instance. Such relations of abstract dependence are arguably objective
matters of fact that science (or at least mathematics) investigates, itself inde-
pendent of our inferential and representational activities. It must be noted that
Pincock does not explicitly endorse a counterfactual analysis of dependence
and in fact refers approvingly to Koslicki’s (2012) noncounterfactual analysis
of ontological dependence. We will return to this issue in section 3.
In a similar fashion, Saatsi and Pexton (2013) analyzed what they call dis-
tinctively geometric explanations of regularities tracing objective relations of
dependence (understood in counterfactual terms) between empirical regular-
ities and highly abstract and general properties. Although Saatsi and Pexton
are careful not to claim that their proposed explanatory relationship would
hold between an empirical fact and a platonically understood abstract object,
I present their case here for reasons I will return to in section 6. Their example
is an explanation of Kleiber’s law, an observed regularity linking the mass of
an organism to its metabolic rate. Kleiber’s law states that the metabolic rate
of an organism (kcal/h on a logarithmic scale) is proportional to its mass to
the power of 3/4. What makes Kleiber’s law striking is that the 3/4 exponent
is remarkably accurate all the way from single-cell organisms to the biggest
mammals. Surely there has to be an explanation for why the exponent is so
stable and why it is 3/4 rather than something else.
The geometric explanation of the exponent refers to general properties of
networks. The distribution of resources (nutrients, oxygen, etc.) within the
organism is carried out by a network, and the metabolic rate is related to
the ﬂuid ﬂow through this network. If the supply of resources is assumed
to be ‘democratic’ (i.e., it serves all parts of the organism), the ﬁnal branches
of the network are size invariant, and the energy required to distribute re-
sources is minimized, then the geometry of the resource distribution network
is fractal like, and, most importantly, the scaling exponent turns out to be the
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
193
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

puzzling 3/4. Saatsi and Pexton argue that the central explanatory dependency
in this network explanation is between the dimensionality of the organism(s),
the fractality of the resource network, and the exponent. Had the dimension-
ality been different, the exponent would had been different as well—although
the dimensionality cannot be manipulated and the explanation is therefore
clearly not causal.
Alex Reutlinger generalizes the counterfactual dependence view to cover
distinctly mathematical explanations. Reutlinger (2016, 2018) simply de-
mands that the explanatory generalization supports at least one counterfac-
tual of the following form: had the initial or boundary conditions been differ-
ent from how they actually are (in at least one way deemed possible in the light
of the generalizations), then the explanandum (or its conditional probability)
would have been different as well. Reutlinger applies the generalized counter-
factual theory to Euler’s famous explanation of why no one has succeeded in
crossing all the bridges of Königsberg exactly once. Here the explanatory gen-
eralization is Euler’s theorem, and the supported counterfactuals are of the
form “if all parts of Königsberg were connected to an even number of bridges,
or if exactly two parts of town were connected to an odd number of bridges,
then people would not have failed to cross all of the bridges exactly once.”
The most developed account of the counterfactual ontic dependence view
is by Baron et al. (2017), who have recently proposed a speciﬁcally interven-
tionist dependency analysis of one of the most discussed examples of math-
ematical explanation—the North American periodical cicadas—originally
introduced into the discussion by Baker (2005). The explanandum is the cu-
rious fact that there are a number of cicada species with a particularly long lar-
val stage,andall these specieshave a periodicityofeither13or17years—both
prime numbers. In a nutshell, the putative mathematical explanation of the
curious primeness of the long cicada periods is as follows. Long life cycle
periods help cicadas avoid predation and minimize the intersection of the pe-
riod with that of other shorter periods (of possible periodical predators) and
will therefore be evolutionarily advantageous. Prime periods minimize inter-
section with other periods (a number theoretic fact). Hence, cicadas have
evolved to have these prime periods (given other biological constraints). Baron
et al. claim that there is an explanatory dependency between the number the-
oretic fact and the empirical periodicity and that this dependency can be ana-
lyzed in a similar interventionist manner as causal explanations.
And coming back to the humble explanation of the indivisible strawber-
ries, the corresponding ontic counterfactual analysis of the explanation would
be that there is an objective abstract dependency between the indivisibility of
23 by 3 and the empirical failure of the mother to divide her strawberries.
Such a view has indeed been recently proposed by Povich (2019), who, fol-
lowing Lange, wants to reserve the term ‘distinctly mathematical explanation’
for cases in which the explanandum can be construed so as to be dependent
194
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

only on a mathematical fact. If such narrowly construed distinctively mathe-
matical explanations exist, we need an account of this ontic dependency rela-
tion between abstract entities and worldly phenomena.
3. There Are No Abstract Dependencies. I will next argue that the meta-
physical and epistemological difﬁculties related to the concept of ontic math-
ematical or abstract dependence are simply insurmountable and that the pro-
posals appealing to such entities have underestimated these difﬁculties. How
could a necessary mathematical fact have been different? This really is my
argument in all its simplicity. If one accepts that all genuine explanations
trace objective ontic dependencies, then there cannot be mathematical expla-
nations because there are no suitable dependencies to trace. Note that this
does not commit one to defending a purely causal account of explanation:
there might still be perfectly objective ontic explanatory relations of depen-
dence other than causation, such as constitution and perhaps grounding.
The ﬁrst problem with abstract dependencies lies in providing truth con-
ditions for the relevant counterfactuals. As Lange noted, relations between
mathematical entities are modally stronger than relations of dependence be-
tween contingent entities in space-time. The counterfactual case in which the
explanans is different (the abstract object in question has different properties
that it in fact has) is either inconsistent or deﬁnitional of some other abstract
object. This is deeply problematic regardless of whether one entertains a re-
alist or antirealist metaphysics of abstract or mathematical entities. On the
one hand, realist metaphysics is more congenial to the idea of true ontic de-
pendence between abstract entities, but the epistemology and metaphysics of
such dependencies are murkier than the corresponding problems related to
the mere existence of abstract objects and knowledge thereof.
On the other hand, if one is a nonrealist with respect to abstract objects,
then one faces the challenge of explaining how abstract dependencies meet
the requirement of speciﬁcally ontic dependence, that is, the requirement that
explanatory relationships relate things in the world in contrast to merely ep-
istemic relations of dependence between our representations of things in the
world. This contrast is essential for the ontic view and motivates many of the
features of Woodward’s theory that are often wrongly attributed as being def-
initional of speciﬁcally causal explanation. Baron et al., Pincock, and Reut-
linger all adapt the counterfactual theory to mathematical explanation by
simply dropping some of the interventionist requirements from Woodward’s
theory. I will now focus on this line of argument and argue that all such pro-
posed generalizations end up losing the explanatory baby with the interven-
tionist bathwater.
Pincock readily admits that abstract dependencies are metaphysically cu-
rious beasts but nevertheless insists that scientiﬁc practice forces us to ac-
cept the existence of such things and that the philosophical task at hand is
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
195
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to develop a viable theory about them. In order to circumvent the taunting
problems in ﬁguring out the metaphysics and semantics of the impossible an-
tecedent in the relevant counterfactual deﬁning the explanatory dependency,
Pincock’s solution is to discard Woodward’s requirement that these counter-
factuals have to be ‘same-object counterfactuals’. It is, of course, logically
impossible that a mathematical object (such as an almost minimal set) could
really have different mathematical properties than it actually has, but if the
antecedent of the counterfactual characterizing the putative explanatory de-
pendency is allowed to ‘be about’ some other mathematical object equipped
with the appropriate contrasting mathematical property, this problem could
be avoided altogether. Pincock refers approvingly to Koslicki’s (2012) anal-
ysis of ontological dependence, which deﬁnes dependence in terms of es-
sences, rather than counterfactuals.
Pincock argues that the ‘same-object counterfactual’ requirement can be
dropped for abstract explanations because the function of the requirement in
Woodward’s theory is to distinguish between explanations of token events
and explanatory generalizations, and this distinction is not really applicable
to abstract explanations to begin with. The problem with this suggestion is
that the role of the ‘same-object counterfactual’ requirement has not so much
to do with the type-token distinction but with ensuring that the explanatory
dependency and the supported counterfactuals are appropriately ontic, not
epistemic. The requirement states that the intervention in the antecedent of
the counterfactual refers to the very object, the properties of which we are ex-
plaining. This guarantees that the counterfactual is appropriately change re-
lating, that it tracks a real dependency that is itself independent of our ways
of representing and classifying things. Without the requirement, counter-
factuals (and the corresponding what-if inferences) can easily track the infer-
ential consequences of our ways of classifying, or what would be reasonable
to believe, given counterfactual evidence that we do not in fact have. Take the
following, slightly modiﬁed, example from Woodward (2003, 279–80; orig-
inally by Lyon 1977): suppose that a museum has a policy that all and only
the Sisleys are hung in room 18. Ignorant of this rule, you ask whether an ap-
propriately Sisley-looking painting in room 17 is in fact a Sisley and are told
in response, “If this painting were in room 18, then it would be a Sisley.”3
There is certainly an intuitive epistemic sense in which the counterfactual
3. In the original example, the supported counterfactual is the converse: “If this painting
were a Sisley, it would be in room 18.” Note that there is an interpretation of this coun-
terfactual that tracks a perfectly good ontic dependency in that if a Sisley were intro-
duced into the museum, it would eventually be hung in room 18. This counterfactual
is true because of the (causal) classiﬁcatory practices of the museum, not because of
the inferential connections inherent in the classiﬁcatory practices of the evaluator of
the counterfactual.
196
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

is true in that, given the museum’s policy, being hung in room 18 would be
good reason to believe that any given painting were a Sisley. But this coun-
terfactual does not track an ontic dependency, as one cannot turn a particu-
lar painting into a Sisley by placing it into room 18. The property of being a
Sisley does not depend on the place in which it is hung but on who painted it.
The plausible counterfactual tracks a perfectly good reason for believing that
a given painting is or is not a Sisley, not what makes—and therefore ex-
plains—a painting to be a Sisley.
The same point applies to counterfactual changes in mathematical ob-
jects: if there is no difference between changing a speciﬁc property of a
mathematical object into something else and simply contemplating the prop-
erties of a different mathematical object, we lose the very distinction be-
tween explanatory and classiﬁcatory information. Hence, the counterfactual
theory cannot simply be weakened by dropping the same-object requirement
without at the same time losing the core ontic idea of what it is that makes
information explanatory. Pincock could retort to this by stipulating that
the classiﬁcatory other-object dependency is still explanatory and that an
analysis in terms of essence-based ontological dependence guarantees that
the dependence is still appropriately ‘ontic’. This, however, would mean that
Pincock owed us an alternative account of what distinguishes explanatory
from nonexplanatory information (or risk turning the question of the possi-
bility of explanatory monism purely terminological).4 An alternative ac-
count of the intuitive explanatoriness of such classiﬁcatory feats more in line
with a strict ontic explanatory monism is outlined in section 5.
The most detailed account of invariant explanatory dependencies between
mathematical facts and empirical phenomena is by Baron et al. (2017), which
is also adopted by Povich (2019). In contrast to Pincock, Baron et al. do not
shy away from the change-relating nature of explanatory dependencies and
claim that sense can be made of the idea that the properties of a mathematical
object could have been different. Their central idea is that the appropriate
explanatory dependencies between mathematical facts and empirical pheno-
mena are structure-preserving mappings (like iso- or homomorphism). Let
us, for the sake of the argument, put aside Goodmanian concerns about the
objectivity of such mappings and accept that there indeed are objective, mind-
independent structure-preserving mappings between mathematical structures
and empirical phenomena. Can these morphisms act as explanatory depen-
dencies by supporting counterfactuals with the right properties?
4. In later work, Pincock (2018) also adopts contrastive difference-making ideas in order
to make room for explanatory pluralism (different kinds of explanations can legitimately
explain different contrastive facts). Such ideas follow immediately from a counterfactual
analysis of dependence but not, at least as directly, from an essentialist understanding of
dependence.
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
197
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Baron et al. boil down the evaluation of speciﬁcally explanatory counter-
factuals into three steps: holding appropriate things ﬁxed, ﬁddling with the
explanatory factor, and tracing the ramiﬁcations of the ﬁddling, given that
some of the other factors are held ﬁxed. The role of the explanatory morphism
is that when it is held ﬁxed, “local” counterpossible ﬁddles in mathematical
explanantia ramify into counterfactual physical changes in the worldly expla-
nanda. The key question now is whether the operations of holding ﬁxed, ﬁd-
dling, and tracing ramiﬁcation can be made sense of in a way that preserves
the original rationale of the ontic counterfactual theory.
The bold claim by Baron et al. is that, although counterfactual reasoning
in mathematics may not be as familiar as that in causal reasoning, nothing
essentially different is involved and similar rules of reasoning apply. The ob-
vious problem is that any local counterfactual mathematical ‘change’ neces-
sarily leads to a contradiction, and hence it is difﬁcult to see how the tracing
of ramiﬁcations is supposed to work. Baron et al. rebut this worry by point-
ing out that all counterfactual reasoning is potentially contradictory (with
history, laws of nature, etc.)—unless the right things are held ﬁxed in the
evaluation. But what about the necessity of mathematical truths? The answer
given is that many—perhaps most—interventions characteristic of ordinary
causal counterfactuals are also impossible to carry out in practice. We cannot
intervene on the past, for example. Again, there is no in principle difference
with regard to ordinary causal counterfactuals.
The proposed procedure for locally ﬁddling with mathematical facts goes
as follows. Twiddle on the mathematical fact/property of interest and hold
some portion of the embedding mathematical structure ﬁxed. If a contradic-
tion arises, ‘release’ some more ‘nearby’ structure so that it is allowed to vary
with the twiddle, and then recheck whether new contradictions arise further
aﬁeld. Reiterate until one gets to the maximum extent to which the structure
can be kept ﬁxed without resulting in a contradiction with the introduced ‘ﬁd-
dle’ (i.e., determine the most conservative alteration to the mathematical
structure consistent with the contemplated change). Now keep the structure-
preserving mapping between the mathematical structure and the physical ex-
planandumphenomenonﬁxed(invariant),andcheckwhatthephysicalpheno-
menon would be like according to the changed mathematical structure. Thus,
we end up with a change-relating counterfactual dependency relation between
a physical and a mathematical fact. If one is worried about the semantics and
inferential properties of such counterpossible conditionals, one can take a pick
from the various proposed semantics for counterpossibilities (e.g., Brogaard
and Salerno 2013) and variants of paraconsistent logics, respectively.
This is how the procedure works in the case of the periodical cicadas. First,
twiddle with the explanatory mathematical fact: the primeness of, say, 13.
This should be done in the most conservative way. It turns out that one can
hold all of number theory ﬁxed except for the twiddle to 13, if one is prepared
198
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to change the way multiplication works; 13 now has factors 2 and 6. Of
course, one would expect that changing multiplication ends up creating in-
consistencies all over the place, but Baron et al. shrug off these looming com-
plications by pointing out that we only need to worry about those contra-
dictions that are relevant to the evaluation of the speciﬁc counterfactual (as
all counterfactuals imply contradictions somewhere). Next, we hold ﬁxed the
morphism between number theory and cicadas. This means that 13-year cica-
das would coincide with periodical predators with cycles of 2 and 6. Hence, a
periodicity of 13 would be selected against, and there would not be 13-year
cicadas.
This rather cavalier introduction of ‘local’ changes to mathematical struc-
ture is justiﬁed by Baron et al. on the basis that such selective ‘ﬁxing’ of back-
ground variables is everyday practice in the analysis of causal claims and in
causal reasoning more generally. What Baron et al. fail to appreciate, how-
ever, is that the principles for what should be held ﬁxed and what allowed
to vary in the analysis of causal counterfactuals are derived from general prop-
erties of causal structures, especially from the directionality of causal inﬂu-
ence and the generally assumed modularity of causal structures. Directionality
of causation dictates that the evaluation of causal counterfactuals should ex-
clude backtracking inferences to counterfactual values of causally upstream
variables and prohibits the ﬁxing of causally downstream variables. Indepen-
dent manipulability of distinct parts of a causal structure is widely (although
not universally) taken to be a necessary condition for the applicability of causal
reasoning. Furthermore, in the analysis of token (‘actual’) causation, selec-
tive ﬁxing of off-path variables is motivated by the assumption of spatiotem-
poral contiguity of causal processes. Mathematical structures do not, as far
as I know, possess analogous properties (directionality, modularity, let alone
spatiotemporal contiguity) that would rationalize the practice of locally ﬁxing
and varyingmathematical facts.Alsocounterfactually intervened causal struc-
tures remain causally possible, even if they do create local inconsistencies with
the actual causal history, whereas mathematical interventions lead to mathe-
matically impossible structures. The introduction of outright inconsistencies
in causal reasoning is deﬁnitely not as easily digestible as Baron et al. claim
it is.
But the fundamental problem in the generalization of interventionist rea-
soning proposed by Baron et al. is the same one that plagued Pincock’s orig-
inal suggestion for generalizing the ontic dependency account: without an
ontological rationale based on the properties of (ontic) mathematical depen-
dencies, the kinds of counterpossibilities entertained by Baron et al. fail to
distinguish ontic explanatory inferences from epistemic classiﬁcatory infer-
ences. The requirement that the antecedent of the explanatory causal counter-
factual is changed by a causal intervention guarantees that the counterfactual
tracks an objective dependency in the world, not an epistemic inference about
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
199
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

what it would have been rational to believe if the antecedent had been such
and such. In contrast, the local mathematical changes proposed by Baron et al.
cannot distinguish whether we are contemplating an alteration on a mathe-
matical structure or simply another mathematical structure altogether (mod-
ulo the added difﬁculty of this alternative structure being inconsistent). Baron
et al. foresee this objection and claim that the worry is unfounded as we can
keep the reference ﬁxed simply as a matter of stipulation—factorizable 13
would still be the same 13, because this is simply a part of the considered
counterfactual scenario—and that such stipulation is common to all forms
of counterfactual reasoning (Baron et al. 2017, 4–6). But, again, the latter
claim is much too quick. Causal counterfactuals are meaningful only under
a restricted set of contemplated counterfactual changes and, although the ex-
act nature of these restrictions is still debated (see, e.g., Woodward 2016),
they rule out, for example, simple wholesale changes in the identity of the
“bearer” of the causal variable. These restrictions are in place to ensure that
the explanatory counterfactual tracks the right things. Although Kripke claimed
that the stipulation of the stability of reference is a necessary and unproblem-
atic part oftheevaluationofcounterfactuals,explanatorycounterfactualsnev-
ertheless have to distinguish between ontic and epistemic grounds for such
evaluation—at least according to the ontic dependency view. This is why
causal and constitutive explanatory counterfactuals are about counterfactual
physical changes in the very objects in question, and the meaning of the corre-
sponding explanations becomes more precise, the better these counterfactual
changes are deﬁned in terms of detailed hypothetical experiments (Woodward
2003, 114–17). In contrast, in the mathematical case in which the identity of
the bearer of the property is merely stipulated, there seem to be no stipulation-
independent grounds for distinguishing between changing the property itself
and changing which property (and object) is under analysis and no corre-
sponding possibility of reﬁning the meaning of explanatory claims.5 Without
such a difference, there is no difference between explanatory and descriptive/
5. Furthermore, the proposal by Baron et al. is hard to reconcile with structuralist views
about the nature of numbers and other mathematical objects. More generally, my complaint
against Baron et al. and Povich could have been put in terms of not providing identity con-
ditions for mathematical objects. However, such identity conditions necessarily imply sub-
stantial commitments within philosophy of mathematics, whereas the discussion on math-
ematical explanation has mostly steered clear of such speciﬁc commitments. Note also that
a closer analogy to a causal intervention in the mathematical case would actually be an ap-
plication of an ordinary mathematical operation (such as addition) to the mathematical ob-
ject in question, not an “extramathematical” structural change proposed by Baron et al. (in-
terventions are ordinary causal processes). The fact that such an ordinary mathematical
“change” necessarily changes the identity of the object to which it is applied goes further
to show that it is nonsensical to distinguish between “ontic” and epistemic/inferential
changes in mathematics. We return to this theme in sec. 5.
200
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

classiﬁcatory information. And without this difference, it does not really make
sense to talk about explanation to begin with.
4. Dividing Strawberries and Other Best Loved Fables. If there really
are no mathematical explanations, what about the central examples used in
the literature? I now argue that most examples of noncausal mathematical ex-
planations presented in the literature (Baker’s periodical cicadas, Saatsi and
Pexton’s geometrical explanation, Pincock’s example of the Plateau’s laws
for soap ﬁlms, etc.) are best interpreted as mechanistic constitutive explana-
tions, albeit very abstract ones. The relevant explanatory dependency is that
of constitution, a suitably ontic and earthly relation between the whole and its
parts, analyzable with only minimal alterations to Woodward’s theory.
Let us start with the periodical cicadas, although we will return to the crit-
ters yet again in section 6. If we take the general gist of the primeness expla-
nation to be plausible, but the primeness of 13 and 17 to be simply unchange-
able, then the speciﬁc periodicities of 13 and 17 have to depend on something
else. In fact, suitable candidates are not hard to ﬁnd. According to the expla-
nation, periods of 13 and 17 minimize the chance that the emergence of the
brood coincides with that of a periodical predator. If the period of a speciﬁc
cicada species had been different, then that species would have been subjected
to stronger predation and hence more likely to be driven to extinction. What
could have been different are the periods and the features of the selection en-
vironment. As Saatsi (2011) has pointed out, the number theoretic fact justiﬁes
the explanatory assumption that periods of 13 and 17 minimize the coincidence
with other random periods, but no reason has been given why it would not be
the facts about intersecting periods and selection that do the explaining. Al-
thoughhighlyabstract,contrastiveclaimsaboutintersecting periodsoforgan-
isms imply contrastive claims about possible evolutionary trajectories (given
the assumption of selection environment including predators with randomly
distributed periodicities). As Lange (2017, 24–25) admits, this mathematical
explanation therefore looks very much like an ordinary causal-mechanistic
explanation—albeit an extremely abstract and sketchy one.
Next we will look at the geometric explanation of Kleiber’s law. Accord-
ing to Saatsi and Pexton, the explanation tracks an abstract dependency be-
tween the dimensionality of the organisms and the puzzlingly stable scaling
exponent. What kind of counterfactual inferences does this dependency li-
cense? If the dimensionality of the organisms had been different, the scaling
exponent would have been different as well. The antecedent of the counter-
factual is certainly not logically impossible and might, under some interpre-
tations, be even physically contingent. This explanatory dependency holds
because of the way in which resources are most efﬁciently distributed in a
fractal-like network. The explanation thus works by appealing to the functions
of the parts (the vessels transmitting resources), their mutual organization, and
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
201
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

an optimality assumption. The explanation can therefore be understood as a
mechanistic explanation, albeit an extremely general and abstract one. The
explanation applies to all efﬁcient fractal-like resource distribution networks,
but as such it is quite comparable in its level of abstraction to mechanistic net-
work explanations in other ﬁelds (see, e.g., Kuorikoski and Ylikoski 2013;
Kuorikoski and Marchionni 2014). This analysis also, arguably, applies to
Huneman’s topological explanations (although space here does not permit
a full argument). The corresponding explanatory dependency is that of con-
stitution relating worldly things, properties of the parts and their organization,
to another worldly thing, the property of the whole.6 There is no need to con-
sider worlds beyond the physically possible ones or dependencies between
objects not located in space-time.
What about the explanation of Plateau’s laws? Pincock posits that the ex-
planation refers to an abstract dependency between the properties of almost
minimal sets and surfaces of soap-like ﬁlms. What could have been other-
wise? If we do not accept that the properties of almost minimal sets really
could have been something else other than they in fact are, the explanatory
difference makers have to be found somewhere else. As Pincock emphasizes,
an essential element in the explanation is that the connecting surfaces mini-
mize their area and that, therefore, not all geometrically equivalent structures
fall under the explanation. What therefore makes the difference as to whether
the laws apply is the physics of the soap ﬁlms: if the ﬁlms did not have the
physical property of minimizing their surface area, the conﬁguration would
not (necessarily) be as described by Plateau’s laws. This is a constitutive ex-
planation of the property of the whole by the properties of the parts and their
mutual organization. Granted, this quick summarization of the complex ab-
stract explanation seems to leave out much of the intuitive ‘explanatoriness’
oftheexplanation,butwewillreturntothismissingresidualinthenextsection.
It is worth noting that the proposals above render the explanations not dis-
tinctly mathematical in the sense required by Lange and Povich, as both re-
quire that all of the empirical facts appealed to in the explanation should be
“built into” the explanans and would therefore have to stay ﬁxed in the as-
sessment of the explanatory counterfactuals. For Lange and Povich, the tar-
get of the distinctly mathematical explanation of the periodical cicadas is “in
connection with predators having periodic life cycles, cicadas with prime pe-
riods tend to suffer less from predation than cicadas with composite periods
6. In his later work, Pincock (2018) uses the term constitutive explanations in discussing
purely aggregative explanations of properties of wholes, in which the organization does
not make a difference to the explanandum and claims that the proper relation of depen-
dence underwriting abstract relations is that of instantiation. Although space does not
allow for a full analysis here, his examples of such structural explanations also fall, ar-
guably, neatly under constitutive mechanistic explanations.
202
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

do” (Lange 2017, 25). The causal-mechanistic interpretations therefore shift
the explananda from the original “narrowly” construed phenomena to some-
thing else, and thus an analysis of the original distinctly mathematical expla-
nations is still wanting. I will next argue that the “narrow” explananda are
not proper targets of explanation to begin with.
Let us return to Lange’s mathematical explanation demonstrating the
mathematical necessity of the explanandum, the impossibility of dividing
23 strawberries by three. Although Lange’s modal (constraint) account of ex-
planation is not a target of this article, an ontic dependence account should
provide some resources for analyzing this case also, and Povich claims that
a straightforwardontic analysis can be given. There is an obvious way in which
the why question can be contrastively speciﬁed so as to allow for a nonproblem-
atic answer in terms of a mundane ontic dependency: if the number of straw-
berries had been 21 rather than 23, the mother could have divided them by
three (Skow 2016, 112–13; Jansson and Saatsi 2019). This turns the explana-
tion into a causal explanation, because the number of strawberries is clearly a
variable that can be physically intervened on.7 I believe this trivializes Lange’s
puzzlement, however. As Lange (2013,497–98) himselfstates,even if the num-
ber of strawberries were considered a cause, what distinguishes such exam-
ples is that the dependency itself is mathematically necessary. But why is it
the case that 21 can be divided by three whereas 23 cannot? This time one
has to admit that it is hard to locate a highly abstract causal explanatory mech-
anism in the scenario, something that would link the persistent failure in an
even division to some other this-worldly fact in the right sort of way. Povich
insists that there is a suitable dependency between the empirical failure and
an other-worldly mathematical fact, and he suggests grounding and instan-
tiation as plausible candidates for fulﬁlling this role. Nevertheless, he does
not offer a full account of either, and, as we saw above, at least the analysis
of the relevant counterpossibles by Baron et al. adopted by Povich does not
really work.
My suggestion is that we can get by without extravagant metaphysics of
dependenciesbetweenabstract andconcrete objectsandproblematic counter-
possibles by admitting that there is no true dependence to be found. The fact
that the mother cannot divide her strawberries does not really depend on any-
thing. There quite literally is nothing keeping her from carrying out the task.
Demonstrations of mathematical impossibility simply cannot be reconciled
with the requirement of ontic dependency, and, according to a monist view,
7. The bridges of Königsberg can also be transformed (trivialized) into a causal expla-
nation by considering possible interventions on the number of bridges (Jansson and
Saatsi 2019). Also Skow proposes to defuse the strawberry example in a similar fashion
by claiming that the number of strawberries can be a cause, even though the reason why
this is so is not itself a cause but a mathematical fact (Skow 2016, 115–16).
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
203
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

they are therefore not genuine explanations. Even though a demonstration of
a mathematical impossibility is not an explanation as such, it is certainly not
an explanatorily inert achievement. I hold that in such cases, the expla-
nandum is reconceptualized in such a way as to make it explicit that there
was, in fact, nothing to be explained to begin with. Demonstration of an im-
possibility is therefore not an explanation, but a correction of a mistaken ex-
planatory presupposition.8
Consider the classic example of the regression fallacy provided by Kah-
neman (2002). Military ﬂight instructors in Israel noticed that praise given
for an exceptionally smooth landing was usually followed by a comparatively
rougher landing (and criticism for an exceptionally rough landing likewise
followed by an improved performance). This naturally led to the idea that pos-
itive praise was counterproductive and harsh criticism effective in improving
landings. In reality, neither is (at least necessarily) the case, since a better-than-
average performance is likely to be followed by a worse performance purely
due to ‘regression to the mean’. The idea that positive and negative feedback
causes, and hence explains, the differences in consecutive performances pre-
supposes that there is something in the world that causes these differences—
that the differences between subsequent landings systematically depend on
something. In reality the differences are solely due to the stochastic nature
of the process (due to noise from countless and unsystematic disturbing fac-
tors). The differences donot need explaining, andreconceptualizingtheexpla-
nandum phenomenon as a stochastic process implies that there is, in fact,
nothing to be explained.9 The explication of the stochastic nature of the pro-
cess therefore increases our understanding of the phenomenon by correcting
an explanatory presupposition that an explanation is needed.
In the same way, pointing out that 23 is not divisible by three corrects an
explanatory presupposition that the mother’s persistent failure in dividing
her strawberries requires an explanation to begin with, that there is some-
thing from which this failure depends. Once the simple mathematical fact
is grasped and the explanandum phenomenon reconceptualized accordingly,
asking for an explanation for the empirical failure does not make sense to
begin with. The mathematical fact is therefore not explanatorily inert; it just
is not an explanation.
8. In contrast, Strevens (2018) holds that such pure mathematical impossibility is still on
the continuum of abstraction and, consequently, of modal reach common to all scientiﬁc
explanations.
9. Reutlinger (2018) presents this case as an example of a noncausal statistical explanation
and that the explanandum is (the probability of ) relative improvement or decline in indi-
vidual performance. I claim (although cannot here extensively argue) that my analysis bet-
ter captures the moral of Kahneman’s anecdote. In contrast, the difference between my ac-
count and Lange’s analysis of really statistical explanations as showing the explanandum
to be “just a statistical fact of life” borders on terminological (Lange 2017, 190–96).
204
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

5. Formal Understanding. If there are no mathematical explanations, is
there no such thing as speciﬁcally mathematical understanding? The denial
of the existence of mathematical dependencies seems to rule out the possi-
bility of explanation also within mathematics. Yet, as has been repeatedly
pointed out inthe philosophy ofmathematics, mathematicians make compar-
ative judgments about the relative depth or explanatory power of proofs and
theorems. Often the mere demonstration that a mathematical fact is the case is
deemed unsatisfactory if a further argument demonstrating why it holds—in
some intuitive sense of ‘why’— is not given. Broader sets of mathematical
‘phenomena’ are sometimes said to be explained by ‘deeper’ mathematical
facts or by a novel reconceptualization of the ﬁeld in question. The deduction
of Plateau’s laws from the properties of minimal sets seems to track some-
thing and increase our overall understanding of why the world is the way it
is. Simply denying that such expert intuitions made any sense would amount
to fairly outrageous philosophical hubris. Although explanation within math-
ematics is not the main topic of this article, I will next sketch an account of
mathematical understanding that saves these intuitions in the face of the non-
existence of mathematical dependencies. I thus aim to show that the skeptical
stance toward distinctly mathematical explanations is, on balance, more pal-
atable than the metaphysical and epistemological problems implied by their
acknowledgment.
The classic account of explanatory reasoning within mathematics is Stei-
ner’s (1978) article “Mathematical Explanation,” in which Steiner analyzes
the difference between explanatory and nonexplanatory proofs. I will focus
on Steiner’s account not because it is universally accepted (it certainly is not)
but because it explicitly appeals to the problematic notion of mathematical
dependence. According to Steiner, what sets explanatory proofs apart from
nonexplanatory ones is that they appeal to the ‘characteristic property’ of the
entity or the structure bearing the property being demonstrated and then show
how the property being proved is dependent on this characteristic property.
The idea is therefore analogous to Aristotelian explanation by essence. Coun-
terfactual information is also powerfully invoked in a further requirement that
an explanatory proof is to be generalizable in that varying (‘deforming’) the
characteristic property in the proof gives rise to an array of similar theorems
of different mathematical properties.
Steiner’s original account has recently been further developed by Frans and
Weber (2014), who explicitly link the idea of dependence on a characteristic
property to a Woodwardian account of explanation. They analyze proofs of a
geometric‘butterﬂytheorem’andarguethatproofscanbeexplanatorybyshow-
ing what properties of mathematical ‘entities’ are difference makers to the ex-
planans in the theorem. At least some explanations within mathematics there-
fore provide similar answers to what-if-things-had-been-different questions
concerning the effect of counterfactual interventions as causal-mechanistic
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
205
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explanations. Their proposal is therefore very similar to the account given by
Baron et al., although Frans and Weber do not provide details about how the
local mathematical interventions are supposed to work.
Let us grant that Steiner and Frans and Weber capture legitimate intuitions
concerning differences in understanding provided by mathematical proofs.
Yet the very existence of mathematical dependencies supposedly grounding
such understanding was summarily dismissed above. Fortunately there is no
need to deny the existence of such explanation-like reasoning within math-
ematics, as analyzed by Steiner and Frans and Weber, even though, strictly
speaking, there are no explanatory mathematical dependencies. As the anal-
ysis of Frans and Weber shows, some proofs provide more grounds to answer
what-if questions than others. Proofs based on ‘characteristic properties’ that
can be ‘locally varied’ are generalizable to closely related mathematical struc-
tures and therefore increase the inferential capabilities of the mathematician
more than‘isolated’proofswithoutsuchgeneralizableimplications.‘Bruteforce’
proofs are a limiting case in that they, as such, do not provide any resources
for making further inferences beyond the speciﬁc set of mathematical facts
demonstrated and, as such, provide no understanding why these facts hold.
In the same way as the ability to answer what-if-things-had-been-different ques-
tions can be seen as constituting the understanding provided by a causal mech-
anistic explanation, the increased inferential ability to answer what-if questions
concerning the properties of related mathematical structures is constitutive of
the mathematical understanding provided by a proof—and consequently a
reasonable measure of its ‘depth’ (Ylikoski and Kuorikoski 2010). It is just
that the what-if answers do not concern counterpossible mathematical struc-
tures under interventions but analogical inferential connections between
slightly different but related systems of mathematical inference. Additional
inferences made possible by the use of analogical structures arguably cap-
ture the intuitive explanatoriness of the examples of viewing-as-explanations
offered by D’Alessandro (2020). Furthermore, and in line with Lange’s (2015)
analysis of mathematical depth, mathematical facts with many connections to
diverse areas of mathematics offer more inferential implications than more
‘isolated’ mathematical properties and are therefore, justiﬁably, judged as
having more depth and providing greater understanding.10 Similar analysis
of the explanatory quality of proofs appealing to symmetries (Lange 2014)
immediately suggests itself but is not pursued further here.
Mathematical understanding as the ability to make inferential connections
beyond the immediate property, structure, or theorem is a species of what can
10. However, sometimes “pure” proofs, which do not invoke “alien” mathematical re-
sources from neighboring ﬁelds, are judged to be more explanatory than impure ones
(Detlefsen and Arana 2011). The validity of these intuitions is an interesting question
but not pursued further here.
206
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

be called formal understanding, that is, an understanding of our systems of
reasoning and representation. Such understanding is constituted by the abil-
ities in making correct what-if inferences about systems of reasoning.11 It is
formal in that the relevant abilities concern the form of the inferences. What
would follow from special relativity if the symmetry group of space-time was
de Sitter rather than Poincaré? What would the properties of a competitive
equilibrium be if preferences were nonhomothetic? These kinds of questions
concern primarily our systems of reasoning and representation, not directly
what we are representing and reasoning about (i.e., space-time or speciﬁc
markets). The answers are nevertheless fully objective and ontic in that they
are grounded on the objective features of our representational systems—
what could justiﬁably be inferred from given assumptions if the properties
of the system of reasoning were different. This also provides a natural way
of interpreting the apparently counterfactual reasoning involved in the trac-
ing of the inferential consequences of the truth or falsity of the Riemann hy-
pothesis, used as an example of counterfactual reasoning in mathematics by
Baronetal.(2017),withouthavingtorefertoalternativecounterpossiblemath-
ematical structures. In the context of model-based explanation, Kuorikoski
and Ylikoski (2015) make a similar distinction between understanding a
model and understanding with a model. The former is evaluated in terms
of the ability to answer what-if questions concerning the consequences of
(possibly counterfactual) changes in the model, whereas the latter is evaluated
in terms of broadened abilities in answering counterfactual what-if questions
concerning the modeled system made possible by the model.
The residual explanatory contribution made by the link between almost
minimal sets and Plateau’s laws is, I argue, captured by the increase in formal
understanding. The intimate connection of being an instance of an almost
minimal set and Plateau’s laws is a genuine discovery about our representa-
tional tools. If an object can be characterized in terms of almost minimal sets,
then it follows that the object can also be characterized by Plateau’s laws.
Correcting for the explanatory presupposition in the case of the strawberries
was epistemically trivial in that the impossibility of division was transparent,
but not all such demonstrations of impossibility in terms of nonapplicability
of concepts are as transparent. But why should a difference in the cognitive
effort required forgrasping an explanation be indicative of a fundamental dif-
ference in what grounds the explanation? Think of the impossibility results in
11. If there are explanation-independent reasons for holding a realist stance toward
mathematical entities, one can readily admit that these inferences also refer to abstract
objects. As before, the account of mathematical understanding presented here aims to
be metaphysically noncommittal and should deﬁnitely not be taken as an endorsement
of a formalist philosophy of mathematics in general.
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
207
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

theoretical economics, such as Arrow’s theorem. The theorem states that it
does not make sense to apply a formal concept, an aggregate social welfare
function, to systems with particular properties. The theorem is clearly non-
trivial, and its discovery taught us important lessons about the limits of our
economic tools of reasoning. The theorem increased our formal understand-
ing, and this increase in understanding is, I suggest, easily mistaken for a spe-
cial kind of explanatoriness.
Formal understandingandthe associatedexplanatory-likereasoning within
mathematics also nicely capture, I believe, what Saatsi (2011, 2016) describes
as the thin explanatory role of mathematics. According to Saatsi, mathematics
can play an indispensable role in representation and reasoning without this
entailing any necessary ontological commitments to mathematical entities.
Mathematics is explanatorily indispensable in the articulation of explanatory
dependencies but, according to the line of argument developed here, does not
ontologically enter into these dependencies itself. As was the case with the
cicadas and the intersecting periods, Saatsi also points out that mathematics
can have a role in justifying explanatory assumptions without being explan-
atory. This is also very much in the same spirit as Strevens’s (2018) ‘represen-
tational’ view of mathematical explanations, although based on a completely
different understanding of causality and explanation.
6. Reﬂections; or, Does Any of This Matter? The argument against mathe-
matical explanation is based on a speciﬁc philosophical theory of explanation—
the ontic counterfactual dependence view. D’Alessandro, Lange, and Pincock
all demand,quite reasonably, that mathematicians’ own expert intuitionsabout
what is and what is not explanatory should not be summarily dismissed with-
out additional arguments. Moreover, these arguments should ideally be in-
dependent of one’s favorite philosophical account of explanation. As the con-
ceptofformal understanding leaves plenty of room for mathematical reasoning
being rather similar to explanatory reasoning, is the argument presented here
merely a pointless terminological crusade? What is gained by insisting that,
strictly speaking, there really are no mathematical explanations, despite con-
trary expert testimony?
First, there are the purely philosophical beneﬁts. If one wishes to remain
committedtoexplanatorymonismingeneral andto theontic dependence view
in particular, then doing away with abstract and mathematical explanations
saves one from answering a whole host of uncomfortable epistemological
and metaphysical questions concerning mathematical or abstract dependen-
cies. As I have argued, weakening the requirements for the counterfactuals
characterizing the corresponding explanatory dependencies is not as easy as
Pincock, Povich, Reutlinger, and Baron et al. have thought it to be. But, of
course, this by itself will not satisfy the requirement of theory-independent
grounds for dismissing the experts’ talk of mathematical explanations.
208
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Second, and very much related, the denial of mathematical explanations is
in line with a broadly empiricist tradition of understanding science and knowl-
edge. By insisting that mathematical facts as such can only have a thin repre-
sentational/inferential role, all explanatory progress proper remains a staunchly
empirical achievement. If the arguments above against the weakening of the
interventionist conditions for explanatory dependence are valid, then explana-
tion in fact turns out to be even more intimately connected to contingent em-
pirical matters than perhaps previously thought. This, of course, will not satisfy
anyone who is not committed to such a view to begin with, and many propo-
nents of mathematical explanations are favorably inclined toward rationalist
and Platonist views concerning the place of mathematics in science and the
world more generally. Luckily, there are also more philosophy-independent
reasons for favoring the account given here over the admittance of mathemat-
ical explanations into our cognitive arsenal.
Third, denying the existence of mathematical explanations arguably leads
to a more analytical, ﬁne-grained picture of mathematical reasoning—in sci-
ence as well as mathematics. The account given here distinguishes between
empirical (constitutive) explanations, inferentially fertile analogical reason-
ing within mathematics, and corrections of explanatory presuppositions and
distributes the epistemic achievements of the canonical examples into empir-
ical explanatory progress and to anincreased understanding ofour systems of
representation and reasoning. I believe such analytical clarity to be of value
in itself.
Fourth, and perhaps most important, denying that there are mathematical
explanations functions as a counterbalance to the seductive nature of elegant
mathematical reasoning. Let us return one more time to the mysterious peri-
odical cicadas. The mathematical explanation was that a prime periodicity
minimizes the chance that the life cycle of the cicadas will coincide with that
of a possible periodical predator. This explanation is simple and elegant and
evokes a strong sense of understanding. It is also controversial and lacking in
empirical evidence in its favor. Other live explanation candidates for the pe-
riodicity in general are that it evolved as a response to parasites or Pleistocene
climatic change or as a way to avoid the adverse effects of low population
density in mating. The primeness could simply be a coincidence. The periods
of 13 and 17 years seem to have evolved separately in the different periodical
cicada species, but this could well have resulted from a common inherited
regulatory system. Recent phylogenetic analyses suggest that the divergence
into the present (multiple) 13- and 17-year-period cicada species is associated
with climatic ﬂuctuations, thus lendingsome support to the climate hypothesis
(Sota et al. 2013; see also Saatsi [2011] for further criticism). The point here is
not to debate the empirics of this particular case but to note that the elegance
and the intellectual satisfaction provided by the mathematical explanation are
not, by themselves, evidence for its truth.
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
209
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Evocative mathematical explanations may also provide unjustiﬁed warrant
to the very existence of the explanandum. This may be the case with Kleiber’s
law, as many statistical studies have come up with an exponent of 2/3 rather
than the 3/4 putatively explained by the network explanation. An authorita-
tive review suggests strongly that the exponent seems to vary substantially
between 2/3 and 1 across taxons (Glazier 2010; see also Raerinne 2013). So,
not only are there alternative explanations for the ‘law’ available, there is con-
siderable disagreement whether there is a stable generalization to be explained
by the network explanation to begin with. Again, the point here is not to enter
the empirical debate concerning the stability of said allometries but to note
the danger of mistaking an elegant mathematical explanation for a demon-
stration of the reality of the explanandum.
Even when the mathematical explanation is true, the intellectual satisfac-
tion of the mathematical explanation may lead us to think that we have ex-
plained more than we in fact have. The powerful sense of understanding ac-
companying the grasping of a mathematical explanation may lead to thinking
that the particular abstract explanandum is the most important aspect of the
phenomenon in question. The explanation of the hexagonal shape of honey-
combs is arguably a case in point (Lyon and Colyvan 2008). Even though the
‘mathematical’ optimization explanation for the hexagonal shape is probably
on the right track, the intellectual satisfaction derived from this easily blinds us
to a quite obvious complication: what really ought to be optimized by the bees
is the volume, not the surface area, of the honeycombs. And the honeybees
actually fail in this optimization task. There are therefore important aspects
of the geometry of the honeycomb that are explained by other constraints. Dis-
tinctly mathematical explanations are therefore not only epistemologically
and metaphysically puzzling—they also present extra challenges to the eval-
uation of their explanatory merits. We may be better off without them.
REFERENCES
Baker, Alan. 2005. “Are There Genuine Mathematical Explanations of Physical Phenomena?”
Mind 114 (454): 223–38.
Bangu, Sorin. 2013. “Indispensability and Explanation.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-
ence 64:255–77.
Baron, Sam. 2019. “Mathematical Explanation by Law.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-
ence 70 (3): 683–717.
Baron, Sam, Mark Colyvan, and David Ripley. 2017. “How Mathematics Can Make a Difference.”
Philosophers’ Imprint 17 (3): 1–29.
Batterman, Robert. 2010. “On the Explanatory Role of Mathematics in Empirical Science.” British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 61 (1): 1–25.
Brogaard, Berit, and Joe Salerno. 2013. “Remarks on Counterpossibles.” Synthese 190:639–60.
D’Alessandro, William. 2020. “Viewing-As Explanations and Ontic Dependence.” Philosophical
Studies 177 (3): 769–92.
Detlefsen, Michael, and Andrew Arana. 2011. “Purity of Methods.” Philosophers’ Imprint 11 (2):
1–20.
Fine, Kit. 1994. “Ontological Dependence.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 95:269–90.
210
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Frans, Joachim, and Erik Weber. 2014. “Mechanistic Explanation and Explanatory Proofs in Math-
ematics.” Philosophia Mathematica 22:231–48.
Glazier, Douglas S. 2010. “A Unifying Explanation for Diverse Metabolic Scaling in Animals and
Plants.” Biological Reviews 85:111–38.
Huneman, Philippe. 2010. “Topological Explanations and Robustness in Biological Sciences.”
Synthese 177 (2): 213–45.
Jansson, Lena, and Juha Saatsi. 2019. ”Explanatory Abstractions.” British Journal for the Philos-
ophy of Science 70:817–44.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2002. Autobiography written for the Riksbank Memorial Prize for Alfred No-
bel. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/2002/kahneman/biographical/.
Koslicki, Kathrin. 2012. “Varieties of Ontological Dependence.” In Metaphysical Grounding: Un-
derstanding the Structure of Reality, ed. Fabrice Correira and Benjamin Schnieder, 186–213.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kuorikoski, Jaakko. 2012. “Mechanisms, Modularity and Constitutive Explanation.” Erkenntnis
77 (3): 361–80.
Kuorikoski, Jaakko, and Caterina Marchionni. 2014. “Uniﬁcation and Mechanistic Detail as Driv-
ers of Model Construction: Models of Networks in Economics and Sociology.” Studies in His-
tory and Philosophy of Science A 48:97–104.
Kuorikoski, Jaakko, and Petri Ylikoski. 2013. “How Organization Explains.” In EPSA11 Perspec-
tives and Foundational Problems in Philosophy of Science, ed. Vasillios Karakostas and Den-
nis Dieks, 69–80. Cham: Springer.
———. 2015. “External Representations and Scientiﬁc Understanding.” Synthese 192:3817–37.
Lange, Marc. 2013. “What Makes a Scientiﬁc Explanation Distinctively Mathematical?” British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 64 (3): 485–511.
———. 2014. “Aspects of Mathematical Explanation: Symmetry, Unity, and Salience.” Philosoph-
ical Review 123:485–531.
———. 2015. “Depth and Explanation in Mathematics.” Philosophia Mathematica 23:196–214.
———. 2017. Because without Cause. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lyon, Aidan. 2012. “Mathematical Explanations of Empirical Facts, and Mathematical Realism.”
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 90 (3): 559–78.
Lyon, Aidan, and Mark Colyvan. 2008. “The Explanatory Power of Phase Spaces.” Philosophia
Mathematica 16:227–43.
Lyon, Ardon. 1977. “The Immutable Laws of Nature.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
77 (1): 107–26.
Pincock, Christopher. 2015. “Abstract Explanations in Science.” British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 66:857–82.
———. 2018. “Accommodating Explanatory Pluralism.” In Explanation beyond Causation: Phil-
osophical Perspectives on Non-causal Explanations, ed. Alexander Reutlinger and Juha
Saatsi, 39–56. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Povich, Mark. 2019. “The Narrow Ontic Counterfactual Account of Distinctively Mathematical
Explanation.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps
/axz008.
Raerinne, Jani. 2013. “Explanatory, Predictive, and Heuristic Roles of Allometries and Scaling Re-
lationships.” BioScience 63 (3): 191–98.
Reutlinger, Alexander. 2016. “Is There a Monist Theory of Causal and Noncausal Explanations?
The Counterfactual Theory of Scientiﬁc Explanation.” Philosophy of Science 83 (5): 733–
45.
———. 2018. “Extending the Counterfactual Theory of Explanation.” In Explanation beyond
Causation: Philosophical Perspectives on Non-causal Explanations, ed. Alexander Reutlinger
and Juha Saatsi, 74–95. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rice, Collin. 2015. “Moving beyond Causes: Optimality Models and Scientiﬁc Explanation.” Noûs
49 (3): 589–615.
Saatsi, Juha. 2011. “The Enhanced Indispensability Argument: Representational versus Explanatory
Role of Mathematics in Science.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 62:143–54.
———. 2012. “Mathematics and Program Explanations.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 90 (3):
579–84.
———. 2016. “On the ‘Indispensable Explanatory Role’ of Mathematics.” Mind 125:1045–70.
NO MATHEMATICAL EXPLANATIONS
211
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Saatsi, Juha, and Mark Pexton. 2013. “Reassessing Woodward’s Account of Explanation: Regular-
ities, Counterfactuals, and Noncausal Explanations.” Philosophy of Science 80 (5): 613–24.
Salmon, Wesley. 1998. Causality and Explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skow, Bradford. 2016. Reasons Why. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sota, Teiji, Satoshi Yamamoto, John Cooley, Kathy Hill, Chris Simon, and Jin Yoshimura. 2013.
“Independent Divergence of 13- and 17-Y Life Cycles among Three Periodical Cicada Lin-
eages.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 110:6919–24.
Steiner, Mark. 1978. “Mathematical Explanation.” Philosophical Studies 34:135–51.
Strevens, Michael. 2018. “The Mathematical Route to Causal Understanding.” In Explanation beyond
Causation: Philosophical Perspectives on Non-causal Explanations, ed. Alexander Reutlinger
and Juha Saatsi, 96–116. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woodward, James. 2003. Making Things Happen. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2016. “The Problem of Variable Choice.” Synthese 193 (4): 1047–72.
Ylikoski, Petri, and Jaakko Kuorikoski. 2010. “Dissecting Explanatory Power.” Philosophical
Studies 148 (2): 201–19.
212
JAAKKO KUORIKOSKI
https://doi.org/10.1086/711479 Published online by Cambridge University Press

