James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
1 
 
There can be only one!  
Wandering Toward a Goal: 
How can mindless mathematical laws give rise to aims and intention? 
 
Abstract: “ĐieŶĐe does Ŷot ͞ǁaŶdeƌ͟, it is not like the proverbial drunken sailor who let go of the light 
pole that is holding him up and tries to walk away, and it certainly does not wander toward any ͚specific͛ 
goal. “ĐieŶĐe does Ŷot ͚speĐifiĐallǇ͛ kŶoǁ ǁhat haŶd Ŷatuƌe ǁill deal it iŶ the futuƌe eǆploƌatioŶs. The 
general goal, if it can be called that, is to describe nature as truthfully as possible. Science goes where 
nature and the universe lead and explains what nature and the universe present to science. Science is a 
straightforward logical process by which human thought evolves and sometimes revolutionizes how we 
view our world. In general, the only thing that could be construed as a goal in science is a complete 
understanding of how nature works and presents itself to us. In other words, science answers to nature, 
nature does not answer to science and especially not to any specific goal in the minds of scientists or 
others. Given this, once the obtuse nature of the given question is determined and the given question is 
translated into common English, the answer is just as easy as the question is ridiculous. The answer is 
simply that mathematical laws cannot give rise to aims and intentions which are normally considered 
aspects of consciousness. However, this raises the new question of why the given question is so obtuse 
in nature and needs to be translated to an answerable question, while answering this new question is 
significantly telling.  
Introduction 
There are no such things as natural mathematical laws; mathematics is based on logical mental 
systems which were originally abstracted from nature and our experiences of the external 
world. To the contrary, mathematicians have traditionally purified and distanced their subject 
from nature, physics and the natural world through a conscious progƌaŵ Đalled ͚ƌigoƌizatioŶ͛. 
There has, in fact, been an open discussion over the past few recent decades whether 
mathematics is built into nature at all or whether it is a completely human created discipline or 
way of thinking. That discussion has never been conclusively ended, while there is no reason to 
believe that rigorized mathematics should be able to explain anything and/or everything that 
occurs in nature, so mathematics could not possibly provide the final answers to the scientific 
quest to understand and explain nature.   
Our abstract mathematical systems and the theorems that describe them must be internally 
consistent and thus internally provable, but not absolutely provable. Even if mathematical laws 
did exist they would not be mindless because all of mathematics is a product of mind and/or 
the ŵiŶd͛s iŶteƌpƌetatioŶ aŶd oƌdeƌiŶg of Ŷatuƌe. The question ͞hoǁ ĐaŶ ŵiŶdless 
ŵatheŵatiĐal laǁs giǀe ƌise to aiŵs aŶd iŶteŶtioŶ͟ appears to turn nature on its head in its 
inference that consciousness (in the form of aims and intents) must either be a product of, if 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
2 
 
not emerge from, natural mathematical laws and that is just Bad Science (BS). Mathematics is 
based on provable theorems, or rather specific logical systems based on given theorems whose 
internal logiĐal ĐoŶsisteŶĐǇ is pƌoǀaďle. The giǀeŶ theoƌeŵs ĐaŶ oŶlǇ ďe ͚pƌoǀeŶ͛, aĐĐoƌdiŶg to 
Gödel͛s theoƌeŵ, ďǇ goiŶg outside of the oƌigiŶal theoƌeŵ to a laƌgeƌ aŶd ŵoƌe ĐoŵpƌeheŶsiǀe 
system. Science is instead based on explanatory hypotheses and theories that are also 
iŶteƌŶallǇ ĐoŶsisteŶt, ďut ĐaŶ Ŷeǀeƌ ďe ͚pƌoǀeŶ͛, oŶlǇ ǀeƌified ďǇ fuƌtheƌ oďseƌǀatioŶ of nature 
and experimentation.   
Mathematics, and this is far truer for advanced mathematical systems than it is for simple 
͚Ŷatuƌal͛ ŵatheŵatiĐal systems such as the counting numbers, is only a product of the mind 
and our mental interpretation of the external world around us and nothing more.  It does not 
represent some mythical or even mystical reality beyond the reality from which it evolved – our 
material reality as represented by science. Human minds interpret nature as fundamentally 
mathematical when in fact the mathematical systems originally developed from nature were 
extended beyond nature and natural boundaries of thought and are thus only expressions 
which can suggest new physical possibilities for science to investigate, not automatically create 
true physical realities.  So the question ͞How can mindless mathematical laws give rise to aims 
aŶd iŶteŶtioŶ͟ is no more than an elaborate mathematical case of mistaking the finger pointing 
at the ŵooŶ foƌ the ƌealitǇ of the ŵooŶ, ŵiǆed ǁith aŶ iŶfoƌŵatioŶal ďit of ͞puttiŶg the Đaƌt 
ďefoƌe the hoƌse͟.  
What is everyone really looking for? 
The real question being asked should ďe ͞Why would anyone try to elevate mathematics above 
physics, nature and the real substantial world of experience?͟ because such a radical change in 
science presents a direct challenge to validity of the scientific and experimental methods, both 
of which are the major pillars, like mathematics, upon which science rests. Only two valid 
reasons for this come to mind: (1) Human ego believes and even dictates that humans either 
can and/or should be able to control all facets of nature and the natural world, a statement that 
is almost religious instead of scientific in its suppositions and implications (Did God not give 
dominion over the natural world to man?); and (2) the existence of two different and seemingly 
incompatible theoretical paradigms in modern physics which have so far defied unification and 
the assumption that such a unification would be a ͚theoƌǇ of eǀeƌǇthiŶg͟, the existence of 
which is also ultimately related to human ego – as if we have already evolved enough 
consciously to know everything.  
This seeming failure has brought into question what constitutes normal science through 
observation and the scientific method and initiated a search beyond the normal methods of 
science – should we base science on mathematics instead of observation? – to develop a new 
and unique way to unify the paradigms. Some scientists have interpreted this failure to mean 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
3 
 
that nature is somehow wrong and that the science they have built upon mathematics, which is 
logically sound according to human derived logic, represents the real and an even greater truth 
of nature in spite of the reality of nature and thus feel that they must find some illusive and 
imaginary goal toward which mathematics is wandering. This is pure human ego at work, not 
science. All of this is unnecessary because unification has been completed, the people asking 
this question have just nor yet realized it.  
These two reasons lead to theiƌ oǁŶ paƌadoǆ siŶĐe huŵaŶ ego͛s goal of ĐoŶtƌolliŶg all of Ŷatuƌe 
cannot possibly work unless a unified theoƌǇ of phǇsiĐs, the hǇpothetiĐal ͚theoƌǇ of eǀeƌǇthiŶg͛, 
even if it is only a step toward the reality of such a theory, is reached and all attempts to do so 
have failed utterly over the past ten decades. It seems that some scientists have wrongly 
concluded that imagined ends justify the means, which means throwing out time and 
experience validated scientific methods. These failures can only be explained and accepted by 
human ego if our ultimate physical reality can be reduced to an illusion, bits, mathematics, a 
computer program or simulation, a hologram in the mind of some undefined being, a Super 
Intelligence or Cosmic Consciousness, the matrix, an experiment conducted by advanced 
undefined super beings, and so on. Humans always look for excuses for their failures because 
the human ego cannot comprehend the simple fact that nature rules the universe and humans 
do not rule nature (by mathematical law, physical theory or otherwise).  
George Gamow, a world renowned and respected physicist spoke on this same issue more than 
a half ĐeŶtuƌǇ ago, ďefoƌe the seaƌĐh foƌ a ŵǇthiĐal ͚theoƌǇ of eǀeƌǇthiŶg͛ ďeĐaŵe populaƌ.  
Mathematics is usually considered, especially by mathematicians, the 
Queen of all Sciences and, being a queen, it naturally tries to avoid morganatic 
relations with other branches of knowledge. Thus, for example, when David 
Hilbert, at a "Joint Congress of Pure and Applied Mathematics," was asked to 
deliver an opening speech that would help to break down the hostility that, it 
was felt, existed between the two groups of mathematicians, he began in the 
following way: 
"We are often told that pure and applied mathematics are hostile to 
each other. This is not true. Pure and applied mathematics are not hostile to 
each other. Pure and applied mathematics have never been hostile to each 
other. Pure and applied mathematics will never be hostile to each other. 
Pure and applied mathematics cannot be hostile to each other because, in 
fact, there is absolutely nothing in common between them." 
But although mathematics likes to be pure and to stand quite apart 
from other sciences, other sciences, especially physics, like mathematics, 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
4 
 
and try to "fraternize" with it as much as possible. In fact, almost every 
branch of pure mathematics is now being put to work to explain one or 
another feature of the physical universe. This includes such disciplines as 
the theory of abstract groups, non-commutable algebra, and non-Euclidian 
geometry, which have always been considered most pure and incapable of 
any application whatever. (Gamow, 1980: 24) 
Gaŵoǁ Đited the ƋuestioŶ as a diffeƌeŶĐe ďetǁeeŶ ͞puƌe aŶd applied ŵatheŵatiĐs͟ aŶd 
ĐoŶĐluded that theǇ ĐaŶŶot ďe ͞cannot be hostile to each other because, in fact, there is 
absolutelǇ ŶothiŶg iŶ ĐoŵŵoŶ ďetǁeeŶ theŵ.͟ IŶ his oǁŶ ǁaǇ, he adŵitted that aďstƌaĐt 
rigorized mathematics is a wonderful thing, but it is different from non-rigorized physical 
mathematics and need not necessarily lead to real physical situations or even be of any 
specific use in describing physical reality.  
Gamow obviously had the greatest respect for mathematics and its use as a tool in physics and 
science. Later in his book, he explained how mathematics was so powerful a tool that it could 
be used to turn a person or even a universe inside-out, so physical objects could be considered 
from different relative perspectives in the scientific search to explain them. However, he did 
not suggest and certainly did not mean to imply that everything in mathematics, especially 
advanced abstract mathematics, could or should even be used to explain reality or that 
everything in mathematics would necessarily have a true physical correlate. It should be clear 
that rigorized abstract mathematics can also lead physics and science astray in their search for 
natural truth and that includes how consciousness and the physical world interact at a 
fundamental level. It seems that mathematics, the Queen of science, should worry about 
cleaning its own house instead of trying to overthrow physics, the King of science, in an ill 
thought out ͚Đoup d͛etat.͛ We ŵaǇ disĐoǀeƌ iŶ the eŶd that Ŷatuƌe is ŵatheŵatiĐal, ďut ǁe ǁill 
never be able to show that mathematics is nature because that could not and would not be 
true.   
Mathematical rigor leads to physical Rigor Mortis 
It seems strange that anyone would even suggest that mathematical laws rule nature or are 
even more fundamental to reality than nature when everything dealing with nature has been 
stripped from abstract theoretical mathematics over the past two centuries. Throughout 
history, many scholars have succumbed to the notion that mathematical abstractions are 
themselves the reality they describe in their overly enthusiastic attempts to reduce physical 
reality to mental abstractions. This historical undercurrent in the normal advance of science is 
especially evident through the rigorization process in mathematics. Rigorization is a general 
movement to purify the discipline by stripping all references to physical reality from which 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
5 
 
ŵatheŵatiĐs oƌigiŶallǇ aƌose aŶd ďase all of ŵatheŵatiĐs oŶ a ͚ƌigoƌous͛ aŶd puƌelǇ logical 
foundation. Any relationship to or dependence upon physical reality was purposely stripped 
from mathematics during the rigorization process which began in the eighteenth century. 
Abstract non-physical concepts such as the non-commuting variables that were later adapted 
for use in quantum mechanics only emerged after the rigorization of mathematics. So 
mathematical systems based on non-commuting variables may be internally logical, but that 
neither means nor guarantees that such mathematical relationships are physically viable and/or 
complete with respect to external physical reality. 
In other words, the mathematical concept of non-commuting pairs did not evolve from either 
strictly physical knowledge or the mental interpretations of real physical processes. Therefore, 
non-commuting variables should automatically be considered non-physical and purely 
mathematical by definition. They might prove sufficient to describe specialized subsets of 
reality, but they do not necessarily describe reality in the whole. In cases where they do 
describe parts of reality, they are not reality itself but mere mental conveniences created by the 
human mind. The mere fact that they yield experimental results when applied to the physical 
world is no absolute guarantee that they alone determine a unique unchallengeable and 
complete picture of local reality, as assumed in the quantum theory, let alone all of reality. Even 
then a picture of reality is not itself reality, a mistake most scientists make when they allow 
their theories to become immutable and unvarying absolute laws of nature. Buddhists have 
always warned their followers not to mistake the finger pointing at the moon for the moon 
itself and that warning now needs to be heeded by physicists. Yet it would seem that 
ƌigoƌizatioŶ has Ŷoǁ Đoŵe to phǇsiĐs uŶdeƌ the guise of ͚ďits of iŶfoƌŵatioŶ͛. 
The story of the rigorization or purification of calculus and later of all of mathematics 
has been well documented because it has been glorified by philosophers and mathematicians 
alike. Yet what is right for the goose in not always right for the gander, as the old saying goes. 
Mathematicians and philosophers take great pride in the purified mental edifices that they 
have constructed. Of all the natural philosophers of the seventeenth century, Newton went 
fuƌtheƌ aŶd delǀed deepeƌ iŶto the fuŶdaŵeŶtal Ŷatuƌe of phǇsiĐal ͚thiŶgs͛ thaŶ aŶǇ otheƌ 
person only to have that aspect of his overall physics washed away. Even Whitrow, who has so 
ǁell doĐuŵeŶted NeǁtoŶ͛s use of tiŵe iŶ the development of his calculus of fluxions, has given 
an adequate account of the historical process of cleansing mathematics of its inherent physical 
reality as seen through the eyes of a philosopher although he quotes a mathematician (Carl B. 
Boyer) as his source.  
In direct opposition to this point of` view, it is now generally agreed by 
mathematicians that the difficulties concerning the foundations of the calculus 
first exposed by Berkeley adequately resolved until last century when Cauchy, 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
6 
 
Dedekind, Cantor, Weierstrass and others imparted a far greater precision to the 
basic concepts than had been hitherto obtained. These mathematicians all 
adhered to the formalist view of the nature of the subject. In particular, they 
rejected the Newtonian conception of calculus as a scientific description of the 
generation of magnitudes. Consequently, the gain in precision which they 
achieved was accompanied by the elimination of temporal concepts. For 
example, the modern definition which identifies the limit of an infinite sequence 
with the sequence itself has deprived the mathematical problem of whether a 
variable reaches its limit of all meaning. As a result the limit concept has been 
finally divorced from its intuitive dependence on the concept of motion. Thus, 
although the ideas of time played so central a role in the rise of the new 
mathematical analysis in the seventeenth century, two hundred years of 
discussion concerning its foundations ultimately culminated in the paradoxical 
ƌesult that ͞the ǀeƌǇ aspeĐt ǁhiĐh led to its rise was in a sense again excluded 
from mathematics with the so-Đalled ͚statiĐ͛ theoƌǇ of the ǀaƌiaďle ǁhiĐh 
Weieƌstƌass had deǀeloped.͟ [C.B. BoǇeƌ, op. Đit., p.Ϯϴϴ] ͞The ǀaƌiaďle does Ŷot 
represent a progressive passage through all of the values of an interval, but the 
disjunction assumption of any one of the values in the interval. Our vague notion 
of motion, although remarkably fruitful in having suggested the investigations 
which produced the calculus, was found, in the light of further elaboration in 
thought, to ďe Ƌuite iŶadeƋuate aŶd ŵisleadiŶg.͟  
Thus, the wheel has turned full circle and mathematical analysis is now 
characterized by its neo-PlatoŶiĐ ͚eliŵiŶatioŶ͛ of tiŵe͛. ;Whitƌoǁ, ϭϯϰͿ 
In his final sentence and conclusion, Whitrow essentiallǇ ͚hit the Ŷail oŶ the head͛ ďǇ ƌelatiŶg 
the process of stripping physics and their physical origins from the calculus and mathematics by 
the ͞eliŵiŶatioŶ of tiŵe͟ to a PlatoŶiĐ ǁoƌldǀieǁ. Although theƌe aƌe defiŶitelǇ soŵe PlatoŶiĐ 
elements in science and physic today, science tends to be more Aristotelian in its reliance on 
observations of nature and physical reality.  Unfortunately, the internal mental concept of time 
is not necessarily equal to or the same as the natural and physical reality of time in the external 
world. So this process necessarily introduces the possibility of an error into science each and 
every time that the new purified mathematics is applied to physical situations.  
 
Even then, the story of what happened to the calculus after Newton is still more 
iŶteƌestiŶg aŶd detailed thaŶ so faƌ iŵplied. LeiďŶiz͛ sǇŵďols foƌ ǀaƌious ŵatheŵatiĐal 
operations were adopted in direct step with the process whereby the basic concept of relating 
change to time was expunged completely from the calculus. Kramer takes great pride in this 
accomplishment, as do all mathematicians and logicians, but physicists and scientists should be 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
7 
 
extremely wary of this practice because it is no more than an attempt to strip nature from 
science and subsequently subject nature itself to the vagaries of the human mind and 
consciousness as already attempted by Plato and Descartes. The one point that Whitrow and 
Kramer would agree on, although they may have different views on the significance of this 
practice, is that the elimination of time and all references to physical reality from the calculus 
that dominated the development of calculus after Newton was a good thing. Neither they nor 
anyone else would see in this practice the possibility of a divergence between mathematics and 
the physical reality explained by science. This practice went even further and affected all 
mathematical systems, not just the calculus, as well as physics itself.  
Newton developed his concepts of absolute space and time to give the infinite and 
infinitesimal limits a physical reality that his intuition said existed in nature, while later 
mathematicians redefined calculus in terms of the philosophical limits, devoid of physical 
content, that they preferred. The later success of the Newtonian calculus stripped of its 
physicality convinced a whole new generation of thinkers that further abstraction was good and 
proper in mathematics and physics. The rigorization and abstraction of mathematics further 
and further away from its physical origins became a priority in the academic discipline of 
mathematics, which served to greatly accelerate progress in mathematics, but at the same time 
abstract mathematics became less likely to be used in physics or that it ever could be used in 
physics to describe the real world.  
The mistake of natural philosophers and those that followed was in thinking that 
abstraction from physical reality to a sort of logical mental reality would affect neither physics 
and mathematics nor the relationship between them adversely. The historical fact that Leibniz 
began his development of his version of the calculus from purely philosophical considerations 
after learning his mathematics from Huygens was no help as far as physics was originally 
concerned. To some thinkers the philosophical approach may have seemed to come more 
easilǇ siŵplǇ ďeĐause LeiďŶiz͛ sǇŵďols aŶd ŶoŵeŶĐlatuƌe ǁeƌe easieƌ to use, ďut iŶ ƌealitǇ it 
ǁas a fool͛s tƌap foƌ ǁhiĐh ŵodeƌŶ phǇsiĐs has had to paǇ deaƌlǇ. That attitude has now come 
back to haunt physics especially now that physics reached an impasse in the rush and 
suďseƋueŶt failuƌe to uŶifǇ phǇsiĐs ƌesultiŶg iŶ the false aŶd ͚uŶŶatuƌal͛ idea that ŵatheŵatiĐs, 
which has been so successful through rigorization, should or could lead physics, by way of 
example, into a new era of understanding and unification. Instead, rigorization has led to 
specific problems in physics. 
The arrow that time forgot 
The rigorization of calculus has ultimately led to one of the greatest mistakes in the history of 
science, which alone demonstrates that mathematics could never be equated to nature or held 
in regard to a higher reality than nature. Tiŵe held a speĐial plaĐe iŶ NeǁtoŶ͛s phǇsiĐs ǁhiĐh 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
8 
 
has gone unrecognized by later generations of scholars and scientists because time became just 
another variable in rigorized calculus, i.e., time lost its physics through the rigorization of 
calculus. In this regard, nearly all modern scholars have either implied or stated that science 
was essentially indifferent to the concept of time until the development of thermodynamics in 
the mid to late nineteenth century. Scientists merely assumed the background flow of time 
without being more specific. Yet for more than a century, comments have been made about 
the disĐoǀeƌǇ of ͚tiŵe͛s aƌƌoǁ͛, oŶe possiďle ǁay to interpret entropy in thermodynamics, as 
the first theoretical indication that time always flowed toward the future. It has been claimed 
time and time again that before the emergence of the concept of entropy the physical notion of 
time, as used in physics, could not distinguish between the forward or backward direction of 
the flow of time. Yet that so-called fact is absolutely false. NeǁtoŶ͛s seĐoŶd laǁ of ŵotioŶ is 
usually used to exemplify this claim since the applied force and the consequent acceleration 
can be either positive or negative due to their direction while time never enters that 
consideration.  
In other words, the direction of time had never, according to everyone with any knowledge of 
the suďjeĐt, ďeeŶ iŶĐluded iŶ NeǁtoŶ͛s laǁs of ŵotioŶ, ďut that Đlaiŵ is uŶtƌue. The diƌeĐtioŶ 
of tiŵe ǁas aŶ esseŶtial paƌt of NeǁtoŶ͛s ĐalĐulus of ͚fluǆioŶs͛, ďut mathematicians had so 
successfully stripped the calculus and by proxy physics itself of their connection with the 
forward flow of time that scientists no longer understood the intimate connection between 
time and motion that Newton had constructed. In the rigorized mathematics of calculus, the 
derivative, in this case the instantaneous speed, is defined as  
. 
The variable t approaches but never reaches zero although the variable x can go to zero in the 
calculus case which rigorized calculus. In pure Newtonian physics, this would have a completely 
different interpretation that would render the necessity of defining a logical limiting case 
unnecessary.  
Newton would have merely said that relative measures of x and t could both go to zero as 
necessary to define instantaneous speed, at (or through) a point in space along a continuous 
line, because behind that framework of relative time going to zero the absolute time 
framework ran on universal time which could never go to zero. So defining the limit in this 
maŶŶeƌ ǁas uŶŶeĐessaƌǇ iŶ NeǁtoŶ͛s ĐalĐulus of ͚fluǆioŶs͛. The poiŶt is that the floǁ of tiŵe 
ǁas alǁaǇs ŵoǀiŶg foƌǁaƌd ǁithiŶ the aďsolute tiŵe fƌaŵeǁoƌk iŶ NeǁtoŶ͛s oƌigiŶal phǇsiĐs of 
motion, so the belief that entropy supplied the first historical instance in physics that 
guaranteed the forward motion of time is absolutely untrue. The concept was literally built into 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
9 
 
his seĐoŶd laǁ of ŵotioŶ thƌough the ĐalĐulus of ͚fluǆioŶs͛. The ƌigoƌizatioŶ of ŵatheŵatiĐs 
invented this previously non-existent problem for physics.  
Yet NeǁtoŶ͛s speĐial ƌole iŶ ĐoŶĐeptualiziŶg tiŵe as a phǇsiĐal ƋuaŶtitǇ aŶd thus ƌeŶdeƌiŶg the 
concept an essential part of physics has still been noticed by some in the modern physics 
community, although the real significance of his action has not been noticed. 
The crucial position that time occupies in the laws of the universe was not made 
fully manifest until the work of Newton, in the late seventeenth century. Newton 
pƌefaĐed his pƌeseŶtatioŶ ǁith a faŵous defiŶitioŶ of ͞aďsolute, tƌue aŶd 
mathematical time, [which] of itself, and from its own nature, flows equably 
ǁithout ƌelatioŶ to aŶǇthiŶg eǆteƌŶal.͟ CeŶtƌal to NeǁtoŶ͛s eŶtiƌe sĐheŵe ǁas 
the hypothesis that material bodies move through space along predictable paths, 
subject to forces which accelerate them, in accordance with strict mathematical 
laws. Having discovered what these laws were, Newton was able to calculate the 
motion of the moon and planets, as well as the paths of projectiles and other 
earthly bodies. This represented a giant advance in human understanding of the 
physical world, and the beginning of scientific theory as we understand it. 
(Davies, 29-30) 
Davies account is accurate as far as it goes, but no one would normally guess it to be accurate 
giǀeŶ the otheƌ histoƌiĐal aĐĐouŶts of NeǁtoŶ͛s ǁoƌk pƌeǀiouslǇ Đited. But theŶ Daǀies is aŶ 
open-minded modern physicist who is willing to look beyond the common body of physics at 
the concepts that have been dismissed by his contemporaries.   
This would seem just a minor infraction of mathematics in history and physics except for the 
fact that this notion had a very important and significant effect on the later development of 
ŵodeƌŶ phǇsiĐs, ŶaŵelǇ iŶ the ĐoŶĐept of ͚ĐhaŶge͛ aŶd hoǁ it ǁas tƌeated iŶ the HUP. 
However, that story cannot be told without noting another important mathematical error of 
logiĐ that has adǀeƌselǇ affeĐted sĐieŶĐe aŶd phǇsiĐs, )eŶo͛s paƌadox.    
)eŶo’s paradoǆ 
The greatest error perpetrated by mathematics and mathematical thought is also one of the 
most famous cases of philosophical mischief in the history of western science – )eŶo͛s paƌadoǆ. 
This paradox represents a simple logical error that has haunted philosophy, mathematics and 
science for over two millennia and remains, except here, unsolvable. Yet mathematicians and 
philosophers keep making the same kind of logical error under the same as well as different 
circumstances while expecting their abstract mathematical systems to outwit and rule over 
nature, the real world, which need not answer to their logic. Zeno (c.490-450 BCE) defined the 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
10 
 
essential problem facing the newly developing science of his day as well as our modern era – 
how ǁe deteƌŵiŶe aŶ aďstƌaĐt ŶotioŶ of ͚spaĐe͛ ;so that it Đould ďe paƌtitioŶed iŶto distaŶĐesͿ 
and time which will allow a viable and workable definition of motion in the form of speed and 
changing speed. However, no one seems to have learned the lesson that Zeno so eloquently 
defined – simply because Zeno lied and his lie has been perpetuated for more than two 
millennia.  
It may be too harsh and even a bit cynical (as well as incorrect) to say that Zeno lied, 
because he undoubtedly did not mean to do so. Modern scholars though cannot hide behind 
such an excuse. Their sin is worse because we now know that space and time are physically 
different whereas mathematicians see space and time as just two variables in an equation. 
Zeno did not have a full comprehension of the concepts of space or motion that he needed to 
develop his arguments correctly. The simple fact that )eŶo͛s arguments are still considered as 
paradoxical today by modern philosophers and mathematicians who have not yet solved either 
the mysteries of his mistakes or their application to the modern concept of space and time only 
amplifies his mistake, whether a lie or not, and creates what is more than likely the greatest, if 
not the longest lived, fallacy in all of science and human.  
)eŶo deǀeloped a Ŷuŵďeƌ of ǀaƌious ͚paƌadoǆes͛ that deŵoŶstƌated the iŵpossiďilitǇ of 
motion. If his arguments were true, then the belief in the plurality of all things and the concept 
of ͚change͛ is grossly mistaken contrary to the evidence of our senses and experiences. Modern 
abstract mathematicians follow this same path and does not take into account our sensations 
and experience of the real world in their logical deliberations. In particular motion must be 
nothing more than an illusion. These ideas are still supported by a few scholars and 
philosopheƌs todaǇ ǁho ďelieǀe that ƌealitǇ ͚is oŶe͛ aŶd uŶĐhaŶgiŶg aŶd ǁhat ǁe eǆpeƌieŶĐe as 
ĐhaŶgiŶg ŵateƌial ƌealitǇ is just ouƌ ĐoŶsĐiousŶess iŶteƌaĐtiŶg ǁith ͚the oŶe͛ to Đƌeate the 
illusioŶ of the teŵpoƌal ǁoƌld iŶ ouƌ ŵiŶds. “iŶĐe ƌealitǇ is oŶe aŶd uŶĐhaŶgiŶg iŶ )eŶo͛s 
fundamental ideology, there neither is nor could be such a thing as a discrepancy between 
being and non-being.  
)eŶo͛s philosophiĐal ŵethodologǇ ǁas Ƌuite siŵple. He assumed the reality of motion 
then using it demonstrated that the assumption would lead to physical impossibilities. 
Therefore, his basic assumption that motion was real was false because he was actually 
defining change of position or change of time alone, depending upon which examples he used, 
without the other interacting with the former in any manner. In the end all that Zeno actually 
deŵoŶstƌated is that spaĐe aŶd tiŵe ŵust ďe ĐoŶsideƌed togetheƌ to Đƌeate ͚ĐhaŶge͛ if the 
nature of motion is to be understood. At best, Zeno and the other Greek philosophers saw 
ŵotioŶ as a puƌe uŶdiffeƌeŶtiated ͚ĐhaŶge͛ iŶ tiŵe oƌ spaĐe, ďoth of ǁhiĐh ǁeƌe eƋual ďeĐause 
theǇ had Ŷot ďeeŶ diffeƌeŶtiated ďetǁeeŶ, ƌatheƌ thaŶ a ͚ĐhaŶge iŶ ďoth siŵultaŶeouslǇ. 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
11 
 
However, this fact does not alter their culpability in differentiating change in positions in both 
space and time.  
LogiĐal aƌguŵeŶts oƌ ͚pƌoofs͛ of the tǇpe used ďǇ )eŶo aƌe kŶoǁŶ as ͚reductio ad 
absurdum͛ oƌ ͚pƌoof ďǇ ĐoŶtƌadiĐtioŶ͛ aŶd aƌe oŶlǇ as ͚tƌue͛ as the oƌigiŶal statements upon 
which the arguments are based, something like mathematical theorems. However, even though 
theǇ aƌe Đalled ͚pƌoofs͛, theǇ esseŶtiallǇ pƌoǀe oŶlǇ a siŶgle peƌsoŶ͛s oƌ gƌoup͛s ďelief ;as 
expressed by their original assumption) of what is logical aŶd ǁhat is Ŷot. These ͚pƌoofs͛ aƌe 
Ŷeitheƌ aďsolute Ŷoƌ uŶiǀeƌsal, so theǇ ŵust ďe takeŶ ͚ǁith a gƌaiŶ of salt͛. The ŵost faŵous of 
his paradoxes are deals with a race between Achilles and a tortoise, an arrow in flight and 
motion toward a fixed object. All of these represent essentially the same argument under 
different circumstances, so only explaining any one of them is enough to refute Zeno. In 
mathematics, this is similar to a limiting technique such as that by which calculus is defined: A 
derivative is the limit of an average speed as the change in time goes to, but never reaches, 
zero. A similar limit is used to define a metric-element in the Riemannian geometry of surfaces: 
The smallest measurable size of a metric-element is defined as it approaches, but does not 
reach, zero. In both cases, the abstract rigorized mathematics is not realistic because nature 
treats the zeros of size (location or localized in space) and time differently.     
The simplest of )eŶo͛s examples to picture is the movement oƌ ͚ŵotioŶ͛ of a peƌsoŶ 
toward a stationary goal or object. The reality of motion is assumed. However, before the 
person can move all of the way to the goal the person must cover half of the total distance. 
Before the person can move the rest of the way toward the object he must complete half of the 
ƌeŵaiŶiŶg distaŶĐe, aŶd so oŶ aŶd so oŶ. This ƌepetitioŶ of ͚ŵoǀeŵeŶts͛ ƌepƌeseŶts the 
͚ƌeduĐtioŶ to aďsuƌditǇ͛ iŶ )eŶo͛s logiĐal aƌguŵeŶt. LogiĐallǇ speakiŶg hoǁeǀeƌ, the peƌsoŶ 
never reaches the object or goal even though motion was assumed real because there are an 
infinite number of decreasing half-distances between the starting point and the end point of 
the journey. This result contradicts the original assumption that motion is real, so the original 
assumptioŶ ŵust ďe false aŶd ŵotioŶ is ͚pƌoǀeŶ͛ iŵpossiďle. As sillǇ as this aƌguŵeŶt is, it has 
perplexed thinkers for two and a half millennia. The modern mathematical system of calculus 
did not solve the problem until the end of the eighteenth century with the notion of a limit 
while the philosophical problem is still very real for philosophers who still debate the paradox 
today.       
Yet they are all missing the essential point of the paradoxes. Zeno lied. He cheated. He did not 
really assume motion. No solutioŶ is the solutioŶ to )eŶo͛s paƌadoǆ ďeĐause he used aŶ 
unrealistic mathematical model for motion, i.e., a mathematical model that did not conform to 
or follow nature. His arguments either made no reference to time change when distance 
change was used as an example, or to distance change when time was used as the example 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
12 
 
while true natural motion is impossible without the change in spatial position occurring over 
some interval of time. What Zeno really assumed was a simpler case of a change in position 
onlǇ, ǁhiĐh does Ŷot ĐoŶstitute ƌeal phǇsiĐal ŵotioŶ. What he ƌeallǇ ͚pƌoǀed͛ ǁas that ͚spaĐe͛ 
could not be easily subdivided ͚ad iŶfiŶituŵ͛ in a geometric sense of the word, what later came 
to called in mathematics the limit of a series. In other words, he was unable to distinguish 
whether a physical geometry of either distance or measurement should be based on the ͚points 
that make up͛ space or the ͚extended distances through͛ space. Since no one in all of history 
seems to have really understood the true meaning of his paradoxes and proofs, 
mathematicians, scientists and philosophers have consistently failed to understand the true 
meaning of the abstract concept of space that they have been using for the past two and a half 
millennia. As strange as it may seem to the modern mind, Isaac Newton came closer to 
understanding that duality than anyone else in his time or since, perhaps because spirituality 
and science were closer in his mind than in the minds of modern scientists. 
The single major fundamental problem of both modern physics and mathematics today is how 
we take account of both discrete points in space and extensions in space simultaneously and 
this was the whole point or lesson that should have been leaƌŶed fƌoŵ )eŶo͛s paƌadoǆ. 
Understanding this mistake is especially important, in fact essential, for understanding the HUP 
of modern quantum physics and the relationship between the quantum, matter and space-
time. The same fundamental problem is also a concern in Riemannian geometry which is solely 
based on extension in the form of the metric-element since Riemann specifically ignored point-
elements in his geometry of surfaces. 
These last two failures present as much of a problem in modern mathematics as in physics and 
are the main if not only reason that physics has not yet been unified by any of the scientists or 
mathematicians who have tried so desperately to do so over the past century. This 
fundamental problem is also related to consciousness in that it is the human consciousness that 
has failed to distinguish between point and extension because human consciousness has not 
yet risen to the level of understanding how they are intimately related to generate our material 
reality. In the end, the lesson to be learned from this is that rigorized mathematics and logical 
thinking can easily mislead science and has, in fact, led physics astray on many occasions, so it 
cannot and should not be used to model consciousness where such mistakes could not be 
discerned.  
One fundamental mathematical error repeated over and over again 
So what is true for mathematics is not necessarily true for physics, yet there are still specific 
and significant correspondences between the two because mathematics originally emerged and 
evolved as a method to analyze and understand nature and the physical world. For example, 
the mathematical definition upon which the mathematical system of calculus is based, the limit 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
13 
 
of ;Δǆ/ΔtͿ as Δt→Ϭ, may be mathematically possible, but it is not physically possible. Δt is 
always approaching but can never be 0, ǁhile Δǆ is ďoth appƌoaĐhiŶg Ϭ aŶd Đould eventually 
reach zero while still corresponding to Δt, even when it is not zero. We simply do not know of, 
nor have we ever observed, a real physical situatioŶ ǁheƌe Δt oƌ the sŵallest possiďle time 
duration has been zero, nor could we because the act of observation itself assumes non-zero-
time duration. Newton knew this and when he invented calculus he took that fact into 
consideration such that absolute time, where time can never go to zero duration, always 
existed in the background of relative time as used in physics where actual observed and/or 
measured time duration could go to zero at a corresponding point in space. That is why his 
physical calculus differed from purely mathematical rigorized calculus (which is based on the 
ideal philosophical concepts of Leibniz), at least philosophically, if not in reality itself, beyond 
the physicality of our natural world, that is if anything like reality beyond the physical and our 
natural world even exists.  
Newtonian calculus then morphs and evolves into the differential geometry of a surface of 
Riemann and the same fundamental problem of the difference between a zero point and a 
measurable extension raises its ugly head once again.  
Geoŵetric slope of a poiŶt oŶ a curve → derivative calculus 
derivative calculus → differeŶtial calculus 
differeŶtial calculus → differeŶtial geoŵetrǇ 
aŶd differeŶtial geoŵetrǇ → geoŵetrǇ of curved surfaces that are Ŷot flat 
In keeping with this evolution of ideas and concepts, the differential geometry of Riemann is 
based upon the concept of a metric-element (extension along a single dimensional line, two-
dimensional area, three-dimensional volume or of higher dimension) defined by Δs=;dǆn2)1/2, 
where n is the number of dimensions, iŶ the liŵitiŶg Đase ǁheƌeďǇ Δs→Ϭ.  In other words, 
Riemannian geometry addresses the concept of the shortest possible measurable extension to 
eith3er side of a non-measurable discrete point, i.e., Riemannian point-elements, but says 
nothing about the discrete point or point-element itself. This concept is then elevated to the 
overall problem of differential geometry for the case of analyzing n-dimensional surface 
curvature near and approaching the discrete point center of a surface, without actually stating 
how curvature varies through and/or at the point.  
Newton related the fact that time or time duration can never be zero and time always moved 
forward in his concept of absolute time, and while EiŶsteiŶ͛s deǀelopŵeŶt of speĐial ƌelatiǀitǇ 
got rid of absolute space in physics and science, we still, in any if not all practical instances, 
think in terms of an absolute physical time. We still think of time as continuous and always 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
14 
 
moves forward no matter how small a duration of time we are talking about, including a 
moment of zero duration. Riemannian geometry is only about spatial measurements and has 
nothing to do with time. Yet nature tells, quite simply, that motion would be impossible if time 
were to go to zero duration, so we assume in physics that it cannot, at least in relativity physics. 
The situation is different in quantum physics where time duration can go to zero and energy 
would still be expended of changed simultaneously, which is physically impossible.  
In relativity theory, this notion is evident in the concept of time dilation. Since mass can never 
go to infinity according to special relativity, i.e. it would take an infinite amount of energy to 
propel an object with non-zeƌo ŵass to the speed of light, Δt iŶ the ĐalĐulus defiŶitioŶ of 
instantaneous speed could never go to zero.  The instantaneous speed of a material object with 
non-zero mass would therefore always be finite and less than the speed of light, c, according to 
special relativity. Relative to a non-zero massive object, the speed of light would then represent 
on infinity (indefinite) of sorts with respect to speed (always approaching but never being able 
to reach that limit). This is true for relative space, but it is also true if an absolute reference 
frame were still allowable and definable, however this or any new concept of an absolute 
space, based on the infiniteness of the relative speed of light, would look different in many 
respects from the older Newtonian concept of an absolute space or time.  
If this same standard is then applied to quantum theory, then the uncertainty (certainty) of an 
eǀeŶt ĐaŶ Ŷeǀeƌ ďe Ϭ% ;ϭϬϬ%Ϳ, aŶd siŶĐe ΔEΔt≤ħ/Ϯ the uŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ iŶ eŶeƌgǇ ΔE Đould Ŷeǀeƌ ďe 
gƌeateƌ thaŶ ϭϬϬ%, oƌ ƌatheƌ ΔE Đould Ŷeǀeƌ ďe iŶfiŶite as iŵplied ďǇ ΔE≤ħ/ϮΔt. This faĐt 
changes the whole interpretation of the HUP, in fact the uncertainty could not be an 
uncertainty since an uncertainty could only range between 0 and 100%, not 0 and infinity. 
Technically, the HUP is about the statistical concept of expectancy which can range between 0 
and infinity, rather than uncertainty, and the expectancy value is proportional to the square of 
the uncertainty, which better fits the physical situation.  
Otherwise, if ΔE ĐaŶ oŶlǇ appƌoaĐh infinity, without any hope of ever reaching infinity, then the 
same must be true for the uŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ iŶ ŵoŵeŶtuŵ, Δp, siŶĐe 
E = ∫;dp/dtͿ dǆ.  
“o ΔE is at least pƌopoƌtioŶal to ∫;Δp/dtͿ dǆ foƌ aŶǇ giǀeŶ ƋuaŶtuŵ eǀeŶt. It is ƌatheƌ stƌaŶge 
that this integral contains all of the components that the HUP contains, only the HUP splits 
these components apart as if they have no physical relationship to each other when in fact they 
do. This relationship from calculus all but proves that the HUP is actually a form of anti-calculus 
which is paradoxical because calculus and other continuous mathematical methods are used to 
calculate supposed physical realities as represented to us by the HUP.  

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
15 
 
The two mathematical relationships that define the HUP can only be split apart philosophically 
and mathematically, where different standards are at play, but never in nature and thus never 
in physics as demonstrated by the above formula relating energy and momentum. Splitting 
apart of the uncertainty components in the two major formulations of the HUP is therefore 
completely unnatural. So when experiments are conducted and interpreted in terms of the 
HUP, a completely unnatural (unreal) situation is forced upon the physical reality of the 
quantum event in question, which introduces an unnatural uncertainty into the observed 
physical reality. The uncertainty is thus limited to the physically discrete point and has 
absolutely nothing to do with any measurable duration, be it position, time, momentum or 
energy, with which physics actually deals.  
This would be every bit as true for quantum theory is it is true for classical physics, which would 
mean that, consequently, position ;ΔǆͿ could never go to zero, which is not born out in physics 
because zero points of position are only necessary in physics when talking about the concepts 
of center of mass (linear motion) and center or rotation (circular motion). Otherwise, there are 
no zeros of position, or discrete points in measurable space itself and thus in physics. So while 
space and time are conceptually two completely different things, energy and momentum are 
tied together quite intimately, which means that the uncertainties in energy and momentum 
must be somehow related even if the uncertainties between location and time are not. This 
reduces the whole and complete nature of the uncertainty problem to an obfuscation of the 
original problem of logically defining instantaneous speed at the very foundations of physics.  
This causes yet another paradox between quantum theory and quantum mechanics which is 
based upon the ability to measure values which yield zeroes (and infinities) across the board in 
the uncertainties. This whole argument demonstrates that the uncertainties of quantum 
mechanics are a purely mathematical problem stemming from the purely mathematical 
interpretation of what we call physical reality rather than the physical interpretation of a real 
physical event. This mathematical interpretation does not exactly equate to physical reality 
and, in fact, introduces a mathematical uncertainty into physics which is not really there in 
physical reality. There is no uncertainty in the physical reality posed to us by nature and our 
universe.  
On the other hand, the HUP and quantum mechanics are thought to be completely non-
geometrical and non-relativistic by design, if that is even possible from a natural and realistic 
perspective, although non-relativity implies a geometry of non-relativistic discrete points such 
as that posited by a Newtonian-like absolute space. Furthermore, Newton postulated that 
absolute space is Euclidean while quantum theory defaults to a Euclidean flat geometry for 
cosmological and other practical purposes without ever calling it Euclidean. In any case, any 
absolute space would correspond to, if not be equivalent to, a collection of discrete points in a 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
16 
 
flat Euclidean three-dimensional space. So, essentially, if not for all intents and purposes, 
quantum space is just a rehash of Newtonian absolute space, at least for the case of quantum 
mechanics and the HUP.  
We know that time has points (moments) and extension (duration) from the physical point of 
view, but that is all we can say about the similarities between time and space. Space has a 
measurable (extension or extendable) geometry, but time cannot be measured in the same 
sense even though we can indirectly include it in a mathematical formula in relation to distance 
(c2t2 = x2 + y2 + z2), so we can say that it has points (moments) and extension (duration), again 
like geometry. So the space-like structure of our world is implied, but it is not guaranteed. The 
bottom line becomes the simple fact that nature is subject to interpretation by the human mind 
and consciousness even though we do not directly know or experience consciousness under 
normal circumstances. Nor do we directly know or experience mathematics, which is created by 
human mind and consciousness, so mathematics is also subject to interpretation by mind and 
consciousness when applied to nature and the real world. However, in the end, no matter how 
accurately minds and consciousness seem to interpret nature, nature itself makes the final 
decision whether our interpretation of nature is correct or not, not the human mind, 
consciousness or mathematics, which also exist at the whim and according to the rules of 
nature.  
It should be obvious that mathematics alone cannot and should not be trusted as a final arbiter 
or method for explaining either our experiential reality or the mind and consciousness 
experiencing and interpreting that reality. BetǁeeŶ )eŶo͛s paƌadoǆ, the loss of aŶy physical 
connection to mathematics through the process of rigorization, the misinterpretation of time in 
phǇsiĐs, aŶd a ĐeŶtuƌǇ of gƌoss ŵisiŶteƌpƌetatioŶs of the HUP, aŶǇ possiďle ͚ŵatheŵatiĐal laǁs͛ 
that we could discover have been totally discredited and disqualified as fundamental enough, 
within the context of our natuƌal ǁoƌld of eǆpeƌieŶĐe aŶd oďseƌǀatioŶ, to ͚giǀe ƌise to aiŵs aŶd 
iŶteŶtioŶ͛, let aloŶe the ĐoŶĐept of ĐoŶsĐiousŶess toǁaƌd ǁhiĐh ͚aiŵs aŶd iŶteŶtioŶs͛ poiŶt oƌ 
imply. However, solving the fundamental problems touched on but nor solved in these 
examples of how to simultaneously accounts for point and extension, whether disguised as 
discrete and continuous, quantum and relativity, or point-element and metric-element, does 
lead to a completely unified field theory which neutralizes the basic reason for even asking the 
giǀeŶ ƋuestioŶ ͞hoǁ ĐaŶ ŵiŶdless ŵatheŵatiĐal laǁs giǀe ƌise to aiŵs aŶd iŶteŶtioŶ?͟ Wheƌe 
then does the answer to exploring consciousness and its relation to our experienced reality lie? 
It can only be found in a true unification of physics, based on physical principles and not 
mathematics alone, whether pure and rigorized or not.  
The point-wise unification of relativity and quantum 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
17 
 
Quantum theory in the form of the HUP and quantum mechanics drives a stake directly through 
the very heart of nature and the fundamental nature of the concept of ͚change͛, so ďasiĐ to 
physics, by dividing the natural connection on between space and time upon which our physical 
reality and universe are founded. It may be logical to do this in the sense of mathematical 
rigorization and the rigorization of physics, but ti is not such a good idea and has inhibited the 
advance of physics for far too long. It does so by using matter as the pawn and plaything of 
momentum and energy. In this sense, the HUP is based solely on mathematical rigorization and 
not on true experiences and observations of nature and thus overly limits physics and nature in 
an unnatural manner. So, although there are flaws in relativity theory, under these condition 
ƋuaŶtuŵ theoƌǇ has ďeeŶ the ƌeal ͚flǇ iŶ the oiŶtŵeŶt͛ as faƌ as uŶifiĐatioŶ is ĐoŶĐeƌŶed.   
Given the different formulations of the HUP, which basically define the modern quantum 
theory, there are several ways to proceed that allow other physical models of reality to be 
included or unified with the quantum.  By setting these two equations equal, as they are equal 
to the same quantity, we get 
 
and then by simplifying 
. 
It ǁould seeŵ fƌoŵ HUP͛s eǆpƌessioŶ of uŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ that ďƌiŶgiŶg space and time together 
suppƌesses the ƋuaŶtuŵ effeĐt as eǆeŵplified ďǇ the disappeaƌaŶĐe of PlaŶĐk͛s ĐoŶstaŶt, 
rendering the event physically real for consideration by classical physics.  

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
18 
 
 
For example, when the condition that the ratio of the uncertainty in position to time is less than 
oƌ eƋual to the speed of light ;Δǆ/Δt ≤ ĐͿ, EiŶsteiŶ͛s eƋuatioŶs foƌ speĐial ƌelatiǀitǇ ĐaŶ ďe easilǇ 
(algebraically) derived. On the other hand, when that condition is relaxed and the Work-energy 
theorem applied, NeǁtoŶ͛s second law of motion (F = dp/dt) can also be derived. These 
derivations should demonstrate that quantum mechanics and classical physics are completely 
compatible as well as indicate the direction to take for their unification 
In other words, suppressing PlaŶk͛s ĐoŶstaŶt ďǇ ĐoŵďiŶiŶg the diffeƌeŶt ƋuaŶtuŵ eǆpƌessioŶs 
for space and time results in a reality described by Newtonian physics and general relativity.  
When it is suppressed in this manner, quantum theory is closed with respect to classical physics 
aŶd Đould Ŷeǀeƌ ďe deƌiǀed fƌoŵ ƌelatiǀitǇ theoƌǇ, just as PlaŶk͛s ĐoŶstaŶt Đould Ŷeǀeƌ just pop 
up out of any relativistic considerations of material reality in either three-dimensional space or 
four-dimensional space-time. This split can also be looked at from another perspective. The 
HUP splits space and time apart mathematically and tries to interpret a new unnatural mental 
͚ƌealitǇ͛ fƌoŵ this split. IŶstead it addƌesses eitheƌ spaĐe ;Δx) and a pseudo-time element of 
momentum (Δp) and/or time (Δt) and a pseudo-space element of energy (ΔE) simultaneously.  
The mental split of space from time creates uncertainty (which does not really exist in nature) 
ďǇ iŶǀokiŶg the PlaŶĐk ĐoŶstaŶt, deŵoŶstƌatiŶg that ħ is ŶothiŶg ŵoƌe thaŶ the poiŶt-by-point 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
19 
 
binding constant of time to space. This point-by-point quantum space represents an absolute 
space in the context of Einstein's relative space in special and general relativity, which also 
explains why the two have not yet been unified. The correct interpretation of the HUP is not as 
a 
ΔxΔp>ħ/2    OR    ΔEΔt>ħ/2 
situation, but instead as a 
ΔxΔp>ħ/2   AND/OR   ΔEΔt>ħ/2 
situation. Choosing OR yields quantum mechanics, but choosing AND yields classical physics 
given special conditions. From these new interpretations of the HUP, new conclusions can be 
reached that change the quantum paradigm and allow unification with relativity once the 
point/extension problem with Riemannian geometry is fixed.  
 
This fact has resulted in the false belief that relativity and quantum theories will always be 
mutually incompatible (when they are only mutually incompatible with regard to three-
dimensional space) and cannot be unified intact, while retaining the major characteristics and 
concepts of each theory. It is true that quantum indeterminism has no place in a continuous 
world, just as a discrete point cannot exist along a continuous line (it would form a 
discontinuity) or surface, yet an infinite number of discrete physical 0-D point/twist Voids make 
up a continuous space-time manifold.  
So the continuous world of relativity can remain deterministic (in its extension) while the 
quantum world of the discrete point remains indeterministic (at least inside discrete points and 
only inside discrete points) in quantum absolute space. Under these circumstances, it is safe to 
conclude that the HUP is merely a physical limiting condition, not unlike the purely 
mathematical rigorous definition of an instantaneous velocity, that applies when circumstances 
(specific physical conditions) are experimentally established to unnaturally and thus artificially 
separate changes in time and three-dimensional space. DoiŶg so ǁould iŶǀoke PlaŶĐk͛s 
constant, which means that it makes the most sense for the Planck constant to be interpreted 
as the binding constant for space and time – to yield space-time. (Beichler 1992, 1996, 2015) 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
20 
 
The quantum theory and relativity theory have now been unified, or at least the fundamental 
logical basis for their ultimate unification has been laid and this has only been made possible by 
noting the physical discrepancies that rigorized mathematics and pure mathematical thought 
has introduced into physics.  
Advancing and unifying physics 
From this point onward, all that is necessary to unify all of physics is merely noting that discrete 
points in the quantum absolute space are equivalent to 0-D point/twist Voids in the Riemannian 
relative space-time continuum. Einstein and Schrödinger had very nearly finished unification in 
the early 1950s, but they were so intent on interpreting the anti-symmetric and non-symmetric 
tensors as ultimately electromagnetic in nature, they missed the fact that they had actually 
predicted the existence of Dark Matter (Schrodinger, 1950) and calculated the effect of Dark 
Energy on material particles. (Einstein, 1952)  
 
Given the historical fact they were on the track of Dark Matter and Dark Energy rather than 
electromagnetism or the quantum, how then could they have modified this new structure to 
include the rest of physics?  
To accomplish this is quite simple. All that is needed is to reconsider the validity of Kaluza͛s 
1921 theory which was the only unification attempt that successfully unified general relativity 
and electromagnetism, although with overly restricted geometrical limitations. If a discrete 
geometrical point is equal to a Riemannian 0-D point/twist Void, theŶ EiŶsteiŶ aŶd BeƌgŵaŶŶ͛s 
(1938) interpretation of Kaluza's successful five-dimensional unification with electromagnetism 
can be extended to include a real five-dimensional macroscopically extended space-time 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
21 
 
whereby our four-dimensional double-polar spherical space-time continuum is embedded in a 
physically real five-dimensional single-polar spherical Riemannian manifold. 
 
The single field density tensor S manifests in two different ways in 4-D space by splitting 
into two parts, representing point and extension, along the fourth direction of space. The 
point manifestation is far weaker and becomes the gravito-gravnetic tensor G while four-
dimensional extension manifests as the much stronger the electromagnetic tensor F.  These 
split again into two parts when reduced to our commonly experienced 4-D space-time.  
For electromagnetism, the anti-symmetric Faraday tensor emerges and for Gravity the anti-
symmetric Schrödinger-Einstein-Cartan tensor emerges. When space and time are split apart to 
yield classical physics, these emerge as the Lorentz force for electromagnetic and Heaviside 
force for Gravity. The Faraday tensor is a primitive rank two tensor so there could be still more 
physics to emerge from the single field tensor F5-D, while the Schrödinger-Einstein anti-
symmetric tensor G5-D splits into the Einstein non-symmetric tensor (normal metric + DE) and a 
constant equal to ΛCDM. Splitting space from time yields Newtonian classical physics but also 
gives rise to the HUP if only in the realm of point-space, which represents a purely 
mathematical (and thus an unnatural mental/philosophical rather than true physical) 
interpretation of physical events at the quantum scale of reality. In other words, extension 
yields to points at the impossibly smallest level of reality invoking the possibility of considering 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
22 
 
immeasurably small variations independent of one another which manifests their (space-time) 
ďiŶdiŶg ĐoŶstaŶt ħ into observable and measurable quantities.  
Just as the single field model accounts for the quantum and relativity simultaneously as 
products of the physical nature of space-time, the Standard Model of particles is completely 
uploadable into the single field model with only a change in the definition of particles. Real 
material particle must and can only have half-spin to conform to the geometrical requirements 
of the five-dimensional space-time continuum, while other Standard Model particles (non-half-
spin) are either intermediate (between their quantum event creation and decay into real 
particles) if their existence can be verified by experiment, explained by some other means 
within the context of the single field theory or are just non-existent artifacts of the rigorized 
mathematics used for calculations in the Standard Model (gravitons, super-symmetric particles). 
Photons are the four-dimensional extensions of three-dimensional discrete points that lie along 
classical Maxwellian electromagnetic wave fronts, i.e., the quantum equivalents of wave-front 
points in Huygens Principle. Even a single complete model of the atom, consisting of both the 
nucleus and outer electronic shells, emerges based solely on the quantized curvature of a 
space-tiŵe ͚sheet͛ of iŶfiŶitesiŵallǇ thiŶ paƌallel thƌee-dimensional surfaces stacked in the 
fourth direction of space. (Beichler, 2015) From this basis a complete model of our universe 
emerges, even a physical model of life, mind and consciousness.                                                                                     
Finally, the question of consciousness 
Now, given this unification model, called the single (operational) field theory or SOFT, a new 
model of consciousness in our universe emerges from the very beginning, the Big Bang. 
According to the Big Bang model our present universe originated from a singularity that 
emerged from the absolute void about 14.3-14.6 billion years ago. The actual age of the 
universe is not important and in fact is not the given age. That age was determined from the 
original metric only geometry which is a geometry of measurements. The predicted singularity 
point, a philosophiĐal ͚Ŷo-thiŶg͛ oǀeƌ a ŵatheŵatiĐal ŶothiŶg, would have been emerging from 
the ͚Ŷo-thiŶg͛ of the oƌigiŶal aďsolute Void foƌ an infinite amount of time before it became 
mathematically infinite and discrete, a nothing over a nothing, enough within itself to become a 
0-D point Void with virtual three-dimension-ness when time and space first began as bound by 
the constant of ħ.  
That 0-D point Void would only grow large enough to have measurable although infinitesimally 
small extent, as predicted by general relativity, after another infinity of moments. In other 
words, the given or predicted age of the universe only takes into account the time when 
measurable extensions of space and time had emerged from immeasurably infinitesimally small 
0-D point Voids and moments of time. The true age of the universe, even in the Big Bang model, 
is infinite, if not in the same sense of a counting-number infinity then at least as an undefined 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
23 
 
or indefinite infinity of time. In any case, with single field theory we can now turn the tale 
around and instead of looking back in time to the singularity, we can look directly at the 
singularity and see how it could have logically expanded to become our present 
physical/material universe. 
It is logical to suppose, in the absence of any physical clues or evidence, that the singularity first 
morphed into a 0-D point Void which somehow differentiated itself from the absolute Void and 
so wanted to collapse or enfold back into that Void. It must have had some kind or type of 
primal-awareness of itself to do so, but it was virtually three-diŵeŶsioŶal so it ĐouldŶ͛t Đollapse 
or enfold back into the absolute Void. Instead, the attempt to do so caused it to duplicate itself 
as virtual torques in both directions of the fourth dimension of space characterizing new 0-D 
point Voids. This action rebounded back or unfolded into the virtual three-dimensions of space 
and created new 0-D point Voids in both directions of all three dimensions.  
This process gave the original 0-D poiŶt Void a ͚tǁist͛ ;siŵultaŶeouslǇ spiŶŶiŶg iŶ all thƌee 
dimensions) and gave the original a twist that dynamically stabilized the 0-D point/twist Voids 
and guaranteed their discrete nature relative to one another. This enfolding/unfolding process 
then duplicated itself each and every moment of time at each and every 0-D point/twist Void 
until an infinity of these discrete points yielded the first measurable three-dimensional 
extensions and measurable time. Only then did the metrics of general relativity and the 
quantum theory become valid enough to accurately describe the continuing explosive period of 
cosmic inflation.  
This explosive rate of expansion continued unabated until quantum fluctuations or weaknesses 
in the three-dimensional surfaces caused a blow-out (like a balloon expanding beyond its elastic 
limit and blowing-out). Those first quantum blow-out points became protons, no anti-protons 
were formed, which began the end of cosmic inflation and gave our universe its initial material 
characteristics. Secondary quantum fluctuations resulted in a second partial blow-out, only this 
time electrons, characterized by the maximum curvature of a surface possible without actually 
blowing out, were formed. And then a third blowout yielded neutrinos, which have the smallest 
possible amount of measurable curvature and no more. After this occurred, the duplicating 0-D 
point/twist Voids began compactifying space in all four dimensions which necessitated the 
initiation of spatial elastic constants between them. Thus the electric permittivity between 
three-dimensional points of space and the magnetic permeability between four-dimensional 
points of space were born and the first electromagnetic waves were created in the form of the 
Cosmic Microwave background.   
When the cosmic inflation ending event occurred and compactification of space began due to 
the greater part of the 0-D point/twist Void duplication process, the collective effect of all of 
the fourth dimension point-wise virtual torques yielded the single potential field out of which 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
24 
 
all of our material universe emerged. However, each individual 0-D point/twist Void was also 
characterized by an inherent semi-physical primal-awareness of itself and the collective nature 
of that primal-awareness emerged as a semi-physical pre-consciousness potential field.  
 
Over the course of eons of time, this pre-consciousness field influenced matter to form ever 
more complex systems until a sufficiently high level complexity system with special properties 
called life emerged with minimal levels of both mind and consciousness. The pre-consciousness 
field also continued and continues to act through quantum discrete points on living or animate 
matter to evolve ever more complex forms of life with higher and higher levels of mind and 
consciousness until Homo sapiens emerged as a complexity of mind with larger and more 
complex brains approximately 100-200 thousand years ago. 
Now that our best science, in the form of the latest unification of physics, has come of age and 
we are beginning to understand the reality of our world as a five-dimensional space-time 
continuum, we are approaching the evolutionary emergence of a new and even more complex 
level of consciousness. Science can no longer progress unless an understanding of the 
consciousness that observes and interprets our three-dimensional material/physical world to 
create physics is itself included in that physics as a four-dimensional spatial extension of our 
three-dimensional bodies and minds.      
Conclusion 
The simple truth is that the foundations of mathematics are in far worse condition than physics 
and that is the fault of our lack of understanding of consciousness in physical terms. Our three-
dimensional brain/body based consciousness (aims and intentions) is over restricted and 
limited when it comes to the concepts of three-dimensional discrete points and extended 
distances. When the concept of a 0-dimensional (0-D) discrete point (point-element) is adopted 
and accounted for within the context of normal Riemannian geometry, the embedding of our 
three-dimensional space in a four-dimensional manifold becomes a physical necessity. While 
our three-dimensional material space is modeled as a three-dimensional double-polar spherical 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
25 
 
surface curved in the higher dimension, the higher embedding dimension is shown to be and 
must be a single-polar spherical space.  (Beichler, 2012)  
The concept of a five-dimensional space-time continuum represents the true physical being of 
our universe in that the higher embedding dimension is not a mathematical gimmick that was 
specifically designed for the sole reason of developing a workable physical model of reality. The 
embedding space is real and necessary to give our three-dimensional material universe it the 
specific physical characteristics that we observe in nature and interpret through our minds and 
ĐoŶsĐiousŶess eǀeŶ if ouƌ ŵiŶds aŶd ĐoŶsĐiousŶess ĐaŶŶot Ǉet diƌeĐtlǇ ͚seŶse͛ the higheƌ 
dimension of space. From this perspective, which is the basis of unifying the quantum and 
relativity as well as classical electromagnetism, thermodynamics and Newtonian physics, 
(Beichler, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2106), consciousness and all of its aspects can be fully 
explained without ever having to refer to rigorized mathematics which has only served to 
mislead science due to its own shortcomings.    
However, not all is lost. In reality, the false interpretation established by the forcing of the HUP 
upon natural events at the quantum level can also be used to indicate the extent to which 
physical reality can allow the separation of simultaneous spatial and temporal measurements of 
the fundamental processes of natural reality. When this is taken into consideration, relativity 
and the quantum theory can be shown to be completely compatible and thus unifiable. Then, 
as the Riemannian metric geometry that is used in general relativity is expanded to account for 
the point-elements (discrete geometrical points on surfaces that Riemann purposely ignored) in 
conjunction and coordination with his metric-elements (extensions of lines, areas and volumes), 
a newly enhanced Riemannian geometry can completely account for the quantum and the 
unification of the quantum and relativity. (Beichler, 2012) 
In otheƌ ǁoƌds, EiŶsteiŶ͛s uŶified field theoƌǇ has ďeeŶ Đoŵpleted and it is far closer to a 
͚theoƌǇ of eǀeƌǇthiŶg͛ thaŶ aŶǇ otheƌ theoƌǇ iŶ the histoƌǇ of phǇsiĐs. IŶ faĐt, it iŶĐludes a Ŷeǁ 
model of physical evolution which incorporates the biological evolution of life, mind and 
consciousness, that is based on thermodynamics rather than the guesswork and speculations of 
modern physicists who have yet to see the light, have thus been unable to unify physics and 
have sought excuses to explain why they have failed. These excuses have taken the form of wild 
ideas, concepts and assumptions, for example, that their mentally derived ͚mathematical laws͛ 
rule the universe rather than simply observing the universe and letting nature show us how she 
ǁoƌks as speĐified ďǇ the ŵost ďasiĐ ǀeƌsioŶ of the ͚sĐieŶtifiĐ ŵethod͛.   
References 
Beichler, J.E. (1980, 2013) Hyperspace Continuum: The five-dimensional continuum approach to a unified 
field theory. Available online as a Kindle e-book titled Hyperspace Continuum; Part 1, Hyperspace, 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
26 
 
originally A Five-Dimensional Continuum Approach to a Unified Field Theory. Masteƌ͛s Thesis at “aŶ 
Francisco State University, December 1980. Part 2, Continuum, is an update of the hyperspace 
concept in the context of modern physics. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. ;ϭϵϵϭ, ϮϬϭϯͿ ͞Tǁist aŶd “hout.͟ DoĐtoƌal disseƌtatioŶ at the University of Maryland, 
College Park, program not completed; Published as Tǁist aŶd Shout: Clifford͛s ;Ŷot soͿ seĐret 
prograŵ for ͚SolǀiŶg the UŶiǀerse͛. Available online as an Amazon Kindle e-book. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. ;ϭϵϵϮ, ϭϵϵϲͿ.  ͞Buďďle, Buďďle, Toil aŶd Tƌouďle: A fƌesh look at ƌelatiǀitǇ, uŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ aŶd 
ĐoŵpatiďilitǇ.͟ Yggdrasil: The Journal of Paraphysics. 1996. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/7884391/BUBBLE_BUBBLE_TOIL_AND_TROUBLE_A_fresh_look_at_rel
atiǀitǇ_uŶĐeƌtaiŶtǇ_aŶd_ĐoŵpatiďilitǇ; ;ϮϬϭϲͿ ͞EP‘-ď: Buďďle, ďuďďle, toil aŶd Tƌouďle.͟ WI“E 
Journal, 5, 1, Spring 2016. Available at https://www.academia.edu/20110699/EPR-
b_Bubble_Bubble_Toil_and_Trouble. 
Beichler, J.E. ;ϮϬϭϮͿ ͞The Tie that BiŶds: The fuŶdaŵeŶtal uŶit of ͚ĐhaŶge͛ iŶ spaĐe aŶd tiŵe.͟ The 
Physics of Reality: Space, Time, Matter, Cosmos, Proceedings of the 8th Symposium Honoring 
Mathematical Physicist Jean-Pierre Vigier, edited by Richard L Amoroso, Louis H Kauffman and 
Peter Rowlands. World Scientific Publishing Company, September 18, 2013. Also Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/7708594/THE_TIE_THAT_BINDS_A_FUNDAMENTAL_UNIT_OF_CHANG
E_IN_SPACE_AND_TIME. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. ;ϮϬϭϯͿ ͞The poiŶt of uŶifiĐatioŶ iŶ theoƌetiĐal phǇsiĐs.͟ Proceedings of the NPA. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/7674017/The_point_of_unification_in_theoretical_physics.  
Beichler, J.E. (2014Ϳ. ͞CoŶsĐiousŶess of UŶifiĐatioŶ: The MiŶd-Matteƌ PhallaĐǇ ďites the Dust.͟ Vigier IX 
Symposium Proceedings, October 2015. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/7708681/CONSCIOUSNESS_OF_UNIFICATION_THE_MIND-
MATTER_PHALLACY_BITES_THE_DUST. 
Beichler, J.E. (2014Ϳ. ͞The eǀolutioŶaƌǇ iŵpeƌatiǀe of ĐoŶsĐiousŶess.͟ UŶdeƌ puďliĐatioŶ iŶ the Journal of 
Conscientology (IAC). Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/12551336/The_Evolutionary_Imperative_of_Consciousness_Full_pape
r_.  
Beichler, J.E. (2014Ϳ. ͞ModeƌŶ FǇsiĐs PhallaĐies: The ďest ǁaǇ Ŷot to uŶifǇ phǇsiĐs.͟ Vigier IX Symposium 
Proceedings, October 2015. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/7708652/MODERN_FYSICS_PHALLACIES_THE_BEST_WAY_NOT_TO_U
NIFY_PHYSICS.  
Beichler, J.E. (2015Ϳ. ͞FiŶishiŶg EiŶsteiŶ PoiŶt ďǇ PoiŶt: The uŶifiĐatioŶ of ƋuaŶtuŵ aŶd ƌelatiǀitǇ.͟ WISE 
Journal 4, 4, 21 December 2015. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/16201568/Finishing_Einstein_Point_by_Point_The_unification_of_qua
ntum_and_relativity.  
Beichler, J.E. (2015Ϳ. ͞A phǇsiĐs of CoŶsĐiousŶess, psi aŶd suƌǀiǀal.͟ WISE Journal, 4, 2, Summer 2015. 
Available at https://www.academia.edu/10365583/A_physics_of_consciousness_psi_and_survival. 
Beichler, J.E. (2015) The Einstein Unified Field Theory Completed: A direct challenge to the basic 
assumptions, theories and direction of modern and post-modern physics (1st edition). An 
unpublished manuscript. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/12035946/The_Einstein_unified_field_theory_completed_A_direct_ch

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
27 
 
allenge_to_the_basic_assumptions_theories_and_direction_of_modern_and_post-
modern_physics_1st_Edition_. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. ;ϮϬϭϲͿ ͞IŶ the BegiŶŶiŶg eǀolutioŶ phǇsiĐs, ĐoŶsĐiousŶess aŶd ouƌ phǇsiĐal ƌealitǇ.͟ IŶ 
publication. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/29738682/In_the_Beginning_Evolution_physics_consciousness_and_o
ur_physical_reality. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. & AŶdƌeǁs, “. ;ϮϬϭϲͿ ͞IŶtuitiǀe ĐoŶsĐiousŶess aŶd the logiĐ of single field physics: A 
ĐoŶsĐious sǇŶeƌgǇ of ǁoƌldǀieǁs aŶd theoƌies͟. IŶ puďliĐatioŶ. Aǀailaďle at 
https://www.academia.edu/30247665/Intuitive_consciousness_and_the_logic_of_single_field_phy
sics_A_conscious_synergy_of_worldviews_and_theories. 
Beichler, J.E. ;ϮϬϭϳͿ ͞Quantized Space-Time Structure: The 0-D point/twist Void co-creator of the 
ĐoŶtiŶuuŵ aŶd siŶgle field͟ Proceedings of the Vigier X Symposium, In publication. Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/27167490/Quantized_space-time_structure_The_0-
D_point_twist_as_co-creator_of_the_continuum_and_single_field. 
BeiĐhleƌ, J.E. ;ϮϬϭϳͿ ͞The Emergence of Neurocosmology: Evolution physics, consciousness, physical 
ƌealitǇ aŶd ouƌ eǆpeƌieŶtial uŶiǀeƌse.͟ Proceedings of the Vigier X Symposium, In publication. 
Available at 
https://www.academia.edu/27662437/The_Emergence_of_Neurocosmology_Evolution_physics_c
onsciousness_physical_reality_and_our_experiential_universe. 
Clifford, W.K. (1878) Elements of Dynamic: An Introduction to the Study of Motion and Rest in Solid and 
Fluid Bodies, Part I: Kinematics. London: Macmillan.  
Cliffoƌd, W.K. ;ϭϴϳϯͿ ͞PƌeliŵiŶaƌǇ “ketĐh of BiƋuateƌŶioŶs.͟ Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society (12 June 1873): 381-395; Reprinted in Mathematical Papers: 181-200. 
Davies, P. (1996) Aďout Tiŵe: EiŶsteiŶ͛s uŶfiŶished reǀolutioŶ. New York: Simon and Schuster.  
EiŶsteiŶ, A. ;ϭϵϮϵͿ ͞Field Theoƌies Old aŶd Neǁ.͟ New York Times, 3 February, 1929. Reprinted New 
York; Readex Microprint, n.d.; ;ϭϵϮϵͿ ͞The Neǁ Field theoƌǇ I, II.͟ Observatory 51: 82-87; (1929) 
͞)uƌ eiŶheitliĐheŶ Feldtheoƌie.͟ Sitzsber. Preuss. Akad. Wissen. (1929) (1): 2-7.  
EiŶsteiŶ. A. & BeƌgŵaŶŶ, P.G. ;ϭϵϯϴͿ ͞OŶ a GeŶeƌalizatioŶ of Kaluza͛s TheoƌǇ of EleĐtƌiĐitǇ.͟ Annals of 
Mathematics 39, 3: 683-701. 
EiŶsteiŶ, A. ;ϭϵϰϱͿ ͞A GeŶeƌalizatioŶ of the ‘elatiǀitǇ TheoƌǇ of GƌaǀitatioŶ.͟ Annals of Mathematics 46: 
578-ϴϰ; EiŶsteiŶ aŶd “tƌauss, E.G. ;ϭϵϰϲͿ ͞A GeŶeƌalizatioŶ of the ‘elatiǀistiĐ TheoƌǇ of GƌaǀitatioŶ 
II.͟ Annals of Mathematics 47: 731- 741; (1956) Meaning of Relativity. 6th ed. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
Einstein, A. (1956) Meaning of Relativity. 6th ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Gamow, George. (1947, 1961, 1980). OŶe, Tǁo, Three, … IŶfiŶity. Revised edition. New York: Viking 
Press. Available online at https://archive.org/details/OneTwoThreeInfinity_158. 
Heaǀiside, O. ;ϭϴϵϯͿ ͞A GƌaǀitatioŶal aŶd EleĐtƌoŵagŶetiĐ AŶalogǇ.͟ The Electrician 31: 81-82; Reprinted 
in Oleg D. Jefimenko. Causality, Electromagnetic Induction, and Gravitation: 189-202. 
Kaluza, Theodor. (1921) "Zur Unitätsproblem der Physik". Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften 54: 966-972. 

James E. Beichler 
fQXi essay competition 
March 2017 
28 
 
Klein, O. (1926) ͞QuaŶteŶtheoƌie uŶd FüŶfdiŵeŶsioŶale ‘elatiǀitätstheoƌie.͟ Zeitschrift fur Physik: 895-
906; ;ϭϵϮϲͿ ͞The AtoŵiĐitǇ of EleĐtƌiĐitǇ as a QuaŶtuŵ TheoƌǇ Laǁ.͟ Nature, 118: 516; ;ϭϵϮϳͿ ͞)uƌ 
FüŶfdiŵeŶsioŶale DaƌstelluŶg deƌ ‘elatiǀitätstheoƌie.͟ Zeitschrift fur Physik 46: 188-208. 
Kramer, Edna E. (1970) The Nature and Growth of Modern Mathematics. Greenwich, Conn.: Fawcett 
Publications. 
‘ieŵaŶŶ, B. ;ϭϴϱϰ, ϭϴϲϴ, ϭϴϳϯͿ ͞Ueďer die HypotheseŶ, ǁelĐhe der Geoŵetrie zu GruŶde liegeŶ.”  
Habilitationsschrift at Göttingen University in 1854, Abhandlungen der Königlichen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, 13; The material from Riemann's Nachlass published by Heinrich 
Weber in the 2nd edition of Bernhard Riemann's gesammelte mathematische Werke. (1861, 
Gesammelte Mathematische Werke, Zweite Auflage); (1873) ͞OŶ the hǇpotheses ǁhiĐh lie at the 
foundatioŶ of geoŵetƌǇ͟ tƌaŶslated ďǇ W.K.Cliffoƌd, Nature 8; Reprinted in Clifford's Collected 
Mathematical Papers. London: Macmillan, 1882. Available online at  
www.maths.tcd.ie/pub/HistMath/People/Riemann/Geom/WKCGeom.html. 
“ĐhƌödiŶgeƌ, E. ;ϭϵϰϰͿ ͞The AffiŶe CoŶŶeǆioŶ iŶ PhǇsiĐal Field TheoƌǇ.͟ Nature 53: 572-575. 
Schrödinger, E. (1951, 1960) Space-Time Structure. Cambridge, England: At the University Press.  
Whitrow, G.J. (1963) The Natural Philosophy of Time. New York: Harper Torchbooks.  

