
Introduction
Many people have heard by now, of Thick Black Theory.
Written in the early part of the 20th century by Li Zongwu, it imparts the 
highest strategies for personal power.
If you diligently study Thick Black Theory every day, you will become a 
modern day hero.
We offer the first and only translation of Thick Black Theory into the English 
language.
If you would like to learn more about Thick Black Theory, Hou Hei Xue Pai 
(Thick Black Theory Sect) or just get some great free material – please visit 
us at http://www.ThickBlackTheory.net
Enjoy the material herein and benefit from it.
Spread And Study Thick Black,
           
-Zhao An Xin        











THICK BLACK THEORY
Translated by Zhao An Xin and Marilyn Zhang
Copyright 2009, thickblacktheory.net

Table Of Contents:
1.  Introduction
2.  Thick and Black Theory
3.  Thick and Black Scripture
4.  Thick and Black Learning
5.  Conclusion
APPENDIX 1:  Who Was Li Zongwu?
APPENDIX 2:  The 36 Ji:  Thick Black Tactics

Introduction
When I read the history of China, I found a lot of 
flaws.  I think the judgents of the risen and fallen - 
the success and failure of the “24 histories”, are 
completely wrong.
The truth that sages spoke is not right, also.
I was surprised.  The successful people from 
ancient times must have had some secret, which 
was unseen by the sages.
I was frustrated because I tried so hard but could 
find no answer.  
Once, when I was thinking about the three 
kingdoms, I realized that the simple secret is 
nothing more than “Thick Face” and “Black 
Heart”.
Then, I read the 24 histories again.  Those four 

words are really included.  Then I wrote the book 
“Thick Black Theory” with simple words.
It had 3 parts.  They are:
Thick Black Theory
Thick Black Scripture
Spread and Study of Thick Black
In 1912, it was published by the Public Daily in 
Chengdu.  At that time, this new theory made a big 
commotion with the readers.
Before the second part was published, I stopped 
because my friend persuaded me to.  But after that, 
the 3 words “Thick Black Theory” became 
common nouns.
Every time I went somewhere, I was always asked 
to make speeches about Thick Black Theory, so I 
told all the details.
The audiences all nodded their heads and sighed – 
“I failed because I didn’t do things in a thick and 

black way” . . . 
Some said, “He was successful because he knew it 
to well.”
Sometimes, when I met some strangers, after we 
exchanged names he looked at me with an amazed 
look.  “Are you the person who invented Thick 
Black Theory?”
Or people introduced me to others as the inventor 
of Thick Black Theory.
What’s more funny, is when students write essays, 
they used it like it’s a common thing.  Then I 
realized how popular this became.
I wrote it as some kind of fun game at first, but 
didn’t expect it to become so effective.
I’m surprised myself, too.  The reason why people 
like it is a psychological reason.
Then I kept studying, I realized Thick Black 

Theory is from the “Total Depravity Theory”.  It 
has the same value as the “Total Goodness Theory” 
of Wang Yangming’s literature “To The 
Conscious”.
The ancients said “Kindheartedness and justice are 
in everyone’s nature.”  But I say “Thick Black is in 
everyone’s nature.”
Yangming said, “We knew filial piety when we met 
our fathers.  We knew honor when we met our 
brothers.  He was so sure about that.
I say “little babies grab their mothers food and put 
it in their own mouths when they see it.  The babies 
push their brothers away when they see them 
coming while they are eating.”  And I’m sure about 
that, too.
People love Yangming . . . So they love Thick 
Black Theory, too.
There was the “Total Goodness Theory” from 
Mencius, so Xunzi had his “Total Depravity 

Theory” to fight against it.
There was “To the Conscious” from Wang 
Yangming, so I have “Thick Black Theory”, too.
What are peoples natures all about?  I really want 
to figure it out.  I read so many theories from the 
Song, Yuan, Ming, and Qing Dynasty but most of 
them are disconnected, boring, and difficult to 
understand.
Then I threw the books away and tried to study 
psychology as physics, because I think they are 
connected in some way.  We can tell if human 
nature is good or bad – just like we can’t tell if fire 
and water are good or bad.
Mencius’ Total Goodness and Xunzi’s Total 
Depravity are sideways opinions, and the Thick 
Black Theory I’m talking about is more sideways, 
just like Wang Yangming’s “To the Conscious”.
If you don’t understand, no matter how thick and 
black you try to be, it would fail anyway.  You will 

understand if you read “psychology and dynamics” 
of mine.  
Even if we don’t want to be thick and black, we 
should be careful about other people being thick 
and black to us, so we have to understand the 
tricks.

Thick And Black Theory
Since I learned to read, I wanted to be a hero.  I 
searched in “four books and five scripts”, and got 
nothing.
I looked in hundreds of sorts of literary schools, 
and I still got nothing.
But I believed there must be some secret to being a 
hero.
I didn’t find out just because I was dumb.  I 
searched so hard for years, and didn’t care about 
anything except finding it.  Once, when I was 
thinking about the three kingdoms, I suddenly 
realized – all the heroes in history have nothing 
more than Thick Face and Black Heart.
Amongst the heroes during the three kingdoms, the 
first is Cao Cao.
His personality was all black heart.  He killed Lu 

Boshe, killed Kong Rong, killed Yang Xiu, Killed 
Dong Chengfuwan.  Then he killed the queen and 
the prince.  He dared to do anything.
He even said “I’d rather betray everyone in the 
world instead of others betraying me.”
His heart was so black that nobody could ever 
reach it.  That’s why he became a hero on top at 
that time.
The second one should be Liu Bei.  
It was all about thick face in his personality.  He 
depended on Cao Cao, depended on Lu Bu, 
depended on Liu Biao, depending on Cun Qan, 
depended on Yuan Shao.  He went to so many 
places, lived in other peoples houses – and didn’t 
feel ashamed about it.
And he liked crying all throughout his life.
In the stories of the three kingdoms it was 
portrayed so vividly.  He cried to everyone when he 

met problems he couldn’t solve.
Then, the failure became an achievement.  So 
people said “Liu Bei cried his kingdom up”.  It’s 
also an ability.
Cao Cao and he were absolutely on the top of thick 
and black.  They were talking about heroes while 
boiling wine.  One had the most black heart, one 
had the thickest face – but they both couldn’t help 
it.
We can see all the people around them.  They all 
were not thick and black enough.  That’s why Cao 
Cao said to Liu Bei, “There are only two heroes in 
the world.  Me and you.”
There was another one.  Sun Quan.  He was the 
confederate of Liu Bei and he was one of Liu Bei’s 
relatives.
Suddenly he killed Guan Yu and occupied Jin Zhou 
state.  His heart was almost as black as Cao Cao’s – 
They were both top heroes.

He told Cao Cao that he was Cao Cao’s minister.
His face was almost as thick as Liu Bei’s.  
He was neither black as Cao Cao nor thick as Liu 
Bei but he had the two skills, so he was one of the 
heroes, too.
They all couldn’t conquer any of the other’s 
kingdoms even if they tried their best to fight. 
That’s why the country was separated into 3 parts.
After Cao Caoa, Liu Bei, and Sun Quan all died 
one after another, Sima seized the opportunity and 
rose up.
He learned from Cao, Liu, and others and became 
the most thick and black person.
He could tease widows and orphans.  As black as 
Cao Cao.
He could take a woman’s insult.  His face was even 

thicker than Liu Bei’s.
When I read the story that Sima Yi was insulted by 
a woman, I was so surprised.
“That’s why the world was Sima’s.”  The country 
had to be united by him.  It’s a case of “The present 
being caused by little things in the past.”
Zhuge Liang was a genius in the country, but when 
he met Sima Yi he couldn’t deal with him.
He even determined to “do his best to fight until the 
end of his life.” But he didn’t get a piece of the 
land of central China until he died from vomiting 
blood.  
Even the best general of the king couldn’t defeat 
the thick and black enemy.
I studied the stories of the few great people, and 
found out the mystical secret.
A series of 24 histories can be explained with 

“Thick and Black”.
Let me show you more proof with the history of the 
Han dynasty.
Xiang Yu was a hero who could lift a mountain, 
and who could cover the sky.  Thousands of people 
died when he shouted, but why did he die in the 
east city and get laughed at by the world?
The reason why he failed – it’s like what Han Xin 
said, “Women’s kindness and men’s braveness”.  
It included everything.  Women are kind because 
they can’t take the cruel things around.   As his 
heart wasn’t black.
Men are brave because they can’t take other 
people’s insult, as his face was not thick.
In the story of the Hongmen feast, Xiang Yu and 
Liu Bang were sitting together.  Xiang Yu already 
took the sword out.  What he needed to do was just 
push it into Liu Bang – then he could be emperor 

right away.  But he hesitated and didn’t do anything 
and allowed Liu Bang to escape.
In the story of the failure in Gaixia, if he could go 
over Wujiang river, and did things right from the 
beginning, he could have been the winner.
But he said, “Eight thousand people of this land 
went over the river to the west.  Nobody came back 
today but this land and the people love me and treet 
me so well – how can I sit here and not feel guilt 
about it?”
All these talks were so wrong!  He said he couldn’t 
lose his face.  He said he was guilty for what he 
had done.
How can the heroes be right all the time?  How can 
they say they are guilty?
He didn’t realize it and said, “God wants me to die. 
It’s not because of the war.”
I’m afraid he should not have blamed God.

Let’s get deeper into Liu Bang’s stories.
In history, Xiang Yu asked Han emperor (Liu 
Bang), “The world has been a mess with wars and 
fighting for years – except us.  I’d like to challenge 
and have a fight with you.”
Han emperor smiled, “I’d rather fight with 
intelligence than fight with strength.”
Do you know why he smiled?
When Liu Bang me Li Sheng, Liu had two girls 
wash his feet.  Li Sheng blamed him for 
disrespecting his elder, then he fell on his knees 
and asked for forgiveness.
His father was in great danger, but he still wanted 
to get something from him.  
Even his own children – Xiaohui and Luyuan, 
when the army of Chu almost caught them – he 
pushed them off the carriage and then he killed Han 

Xin, and Peng Yue.
“Put up the gun after all the birds are killed.  Eat 
the hound after all the rabbits are killed” (Kill the 
helpers after you succeed).
So what on earth was Liu Bang thinking about?  
How could Xiang Yu understand, who was a man 
with “women’s kindness and men’s braveness”?
In the history book of Sima, it said Liu Bang had a 
face of a dragon (with a long nose).  Xiang Yu had 
double pupils (2 pupils in each eye), but it said 
nothing about if they have thick face or black ehart. 
It’s a pity.
Liu Bang’s face and heart were different from other 
peoples.  They can be called the saints from 
heaven.
But his heart was so black like he was born with 
black nature.  Everything he did could never depart 
from blackness and his thick face was based on 

some “diploma”.
His teacher was Zhang Liang, one of the “three 
most talented”.
Zhang Liang’s teacher was the Bridge Old Man. 
We can easily find in the historical documents 
about them teaching and learning.  In the story that 
Zhang Liang met an old man on the bridge he was 
actually teaching him to have a thick face.
Su Dongpo commented on this story and showed 
this clearly, too.
Zhang Liang was a smart person.  After he was 
given the direction he understood.
That’s why the old man expected him as a teacher 
of the emperor.  
This kind of teaching cannot be understood by the 
dumb people.  
In history, “Liang taught a lot of people, but 

nobody really learned except Liu Bang.”
Liang said Liu Bang was a “student from God”. 
We can see that this kind of ability is like “For a 
smart person, the good teachers would be scarce, 
but it’s even harder to find good students”.
When Han Xin asked to be Qi emperor, Li Bang 
almost blew his top, but his teacher Zhang Liang 
pointed him in the right direction.  Just as the 
teachers correcting the students fault in the schools 
now.
Even a person who was smart like Liu Bang could 
sometimes make mistakes.  We can imagine how 
deep this study is.
Liu Bang was smart and well-learned.  He broke 
the 5 relationship moralities – “King and the 
minister, father and son, brothers, husband and 
wife, friends” . . . He even wiped out all proprieties 
and humilities so he could root out all the heroes 
and unite the country fro the next 400 years.

The system of his family was beginning to fade out.
During the time of the Chu Han period, there was 
someone who had the thickest face, but no black 
heart.  He failed in the end.  Who is he?
It’s Han Xin.  He could crawl between someone’s 
legs – His face wasn’t thinner than Liu Bang’s.  But 
he didn’t pay much attention to the black.  When he 
was the Qi emperor, if he listened to Kuai Tong it 
would have been awesome but he was thinking 
about Liu Bang’s favor for him.
He said, “Wear his clothes, should think about his 
worries.  Eat his food, should get killed for him”.
Then his head was cut off by Liu Bang.  Even his 
family were all killed but he deserved that.  Liu 
Bang laughed about his kindness and braveness. 
He knew this rule clearly, but he didn’t follow it.
According to the studies about, Thick Black Theory 
looks simple, ut it’s subtle when you use it.

Use a little and you see a little effect.  Use a lot, 
and you’ll see a huge impact.
Liu Bang and Sima Yi learned it.  They united the 
country.
Cao Cao and Liu Bei had each of them and still 
somewhat succeeded.
Han Xin and Fang Zeng also learned one part but 
they lived in the wrong times with the thickest and 
blackest Liu Bang.  That is why they all failed.
But before they died they still became some kind of 
minister or general.  They were outstanding once 
and after they died, they were still remembered by 
people.  Then we talked about them.  We still 
respect them.  It’s the power of Thick and Black.
God gave us lives, with a face which was thick, 
with a heart which was black.  It looks normal on 
the surface but if you investigate it deeply, you 
would know that there’s no end for black and thick.

Peoples’ wealth, desires, nice clothes and cars all 
come from this.
What the creator made is fantastic.  There are so 
many dumb people who don’t know about it, but 
the dumbest people are those who know there is a 
way but don’t use it.
Thick Black Theory has 3 parts:  The 1st is “thick as 
the wall, black as the coal”.  
The skin of the face is like a piece of paper at the 
beginning, and it’s getting thicker and thicker. 
Then it becomes as thick as the wall.
The color of the heart was red.  It becomes darker 
and darker and then it’s black like coal in the end.
But it’s just the first step, because no matter how 
thick the wall is, it can still be destroyed by a 
cannon.  The coal is black, so people won’t want to 
get close to it.  So it’s just a basic skill.
The 2nd step is “thick and hard, black and bright”. 

The people who are good at being thick – no matter 
how hard you strike them, they don’t move at all.
Liu Bei was this kind of person.  Even Cao Cao 
didn’t have any way to beat him.
When people are black like a blackboard, the more 
black it is the more people will like it.
Cao Cao was like that.  He was the famous black 
heart person.  He made all the talented people want 
to join him.
If you reach the 2nd step, it could be so different 
than the 1st step, but you can still see the mark 
when you pay attention to look.  Just like we can 
see Cao Cao’s heart so clearly.
The 3rd step is “thick but no trace, Black but no 
color”.  So thick and so black.  Up to the heavens, 
down to the earth.  Nobody can see it’s thick or 
black.  It’s so hard to reach that level.  We could 
only find it amongst the saints.

People asked, “How can it be so intense?”
I said, “The moderation of confusion . . . We can 
only stop until it has no sound or smell.  The 
Buddhist can only stop until there is nothing there 
because there is nothing in the mind.  That can only 
be called success.  
“As Thick Black Theory is a deep secret theory, no 
shape and no color should be above it.”
Anyway, until now emperors, generals, premiers, 
heroes and saints – the successful people were all 
thick or black.  History has been written.  The facts 
can’t be changed.
You should search it with the directions I gave you. 
You will find the true path to success.

Thick and Black Scripture
Li Zongwu said, “it’s thick if it’s not thin.  It’s 
black if it’s not white.”
This is the true law from people in history.
I’m afraid this will be forgotten by people after a 
long time, so I wrote it down and told people.
This book talks about thick and black at first.  It 
talks about everything in the universe in the 
middle.  And talks about thick and black again in 
the end.
It can be used on everything in the universe, but 
they can be hidden behind faces and hearts.
It’s what you should learn carefully.  Those who are 
good at understanding can use and get benefit all 
their lives.
It’s called Thick and Black for destiny.  Making 

thick and black practical is called study.  Studying 
thick and black is called moralization.
People can leave thick and black any time.  If y ou 
leave it, it’s not thick and black anymore.
So men should be careful and afraid if their faces 
and hearts are not thick and black enough.
Nothing is more dangerous than a thin face and a 
good heart.  
Never showing any real expression is thick. 
Showing everything without any doubt is black.
Thick is the nature of the world.  Black is the truth 
of the world.
You have both thick and black, and the world will 
be afraid of you and you won’t fear any evil or 
good.
Li Zongwu told the secret of people in history to set 
up the issue.  He said thick and black are the nature 

that you can’t change.  
Actually thick and black are already part of people.
Then he told us the importance of being thick and 
black, and at last he talked about the great benefit 
of thick and black.
If you make the decision to study thick and black 
theory and use your own experience to feel it – to 
erase the moral stuff you have learned in your life 
so you can understand thick and black theory more 
clearly.
This is the main point of this book.  Li Zongwu’s 
words are quoted in the rest of the chapters.
Zongwu said, “The theory of thick and black is 
easy and hard.  It’s easy because normal people can 
understand it, but it’s hard because even Cao and 
Liu didn’t understand deeply.”
Zongwu said, “People say my heart is black but put 
me in the coal – they are still different.  People say 

my face is thick – but it can still be hurt with a 
knife.”
Zongwu said, “Thick and black theory can be 
tested in society.  It can be proven with the 3 
emperors stories (Yao, Shun, Yu).  It won’t be 
wrong.  It’s reasonable in the world.  It’s approved 
by the ghosts and gods.  It will still be right after 
hundreds of years.”
Zongwu said, “People work on the basic idea. 
Once the basic ideas are approved, they become the 
path.  Shouldn’t thick and black be a basic idea?”
Zongwu said, “Three people walking together . . . 
There must be one who can be my teacher.  I 
choose the thick and black one to teach and 
improve me.”
Zongwu said, “God gave me thick and black 
ability.  What can humans do to me?”
Zongwu said, “Even at a small place with ten 
families there must be someone who is thick and 

black like Li Zongwu.  They just don’t say it.”
Zongwu said, “Great people won’t leave Thick 
Black Theory even when they are having dinner. 
They will stay with thick and black no matter how 
busy they are.  No matter how bad their situations 
are.”
Zongwu said, “If there was someone with Xiang 
Yu’s talent and ability who had thick face and black 
heart – The people like Liu Bang wouldn’t even be 
worth talking about.
Zongwu said, “The thick and black people can have 
an empire with thousands of chariots.  The others 
can’t even get a bowl of rice.”
Zongwu said, “Cereals are good plants for people, 
but the raw ones are useless like weeds.  It’s 
definitely important to make thick and black ripe.”
Zongwu said, “the teachers who teach about 
Taoism are bad to our Thick Black Theory.  They 
look honest, faithful, and they do things right and 

good.  Everyone likes them and they think they are 
right.  They are not the kind of people who can talk 
about Cao Cao or Liu Bei’s things.”
Zongwu said, “it’s not strange that people are not 
thick and black!  Even the toughest plant can’t live 
after days of strong sunshine, days of freezing.  
I found that the people who talk about thick and 
black are not so many!  The good people are going 
to come up if I quit!  Who am I to a good person?  
The theory of thick and black today is not a small 
thing.  You won’t understand it until you focus on 
it.”
Li Zongwu is the person who invented Thick Black 
Theory.  If he had 2 students, one listened and 
learned very carefully.  The other one learned too, 
but he was afraid the good people would come and 
get him, so he always wanted to be a saint to other 
people.
Now we will see they are learning at the same time, 

but he can’t reach as far as the other can.  Is it 
because one is smarter?  Of course not.”
Zongwu said, “If you have failed something, smart 
people would think:  It must be because my face 
wasn’t thick enough.  After he thought, his face 
would become thicker but he still failed.  He would 
think:  It must be because my heart wasn’t black 
enough.  Then his heart would get more and more 
black.  
But he still failed.  He would say, The one who was 
always against me was just a beast!  So what’s so 
hard if I kill it with Thick Black Theory?”
Zongwu said, “the theory of thick and black – isn’t 
it deep and beautiful?  Just like walking far away, 
you should start from somewhere closer.  Climbing 
a high mountain, you should start from somewhere 
lower.  If you are not thick and black, you can’t 
make your children to be tough.  If you don’t use 
thick and black on other people, you can’t make 
your children listen to you.”

The thick and black scripture I wrote is for the 
people who just learned a bit.  It’s easier to read in 
case they forget.  But there is something really 
deep, so I wrote some explanation around the 
scripture.
Zongwu said, “You say it’s not thick – it can’t be 
ground thinner.  You say it’s not black – it can’t be 
washed white.”
I changed it into, “you say it’s not thick – the more 
you grind, the thicker it becomes.  You say it’s not 
black – the more you wash the darker it becomes.”
Someone said, there is nothing like this.  I said, The 
callus on your hands.  It can be thicker if you grind 
it more.  The coal with dirt on it.  It can only be 
darker if you wash it.
People have a thin face at the beginning.  The more 
they try in society, the thicker their face will be.
People have black hearts in the first place, but it’s 
covered with moral stuff so it doesn’t look black. 

And if we wash it, we can see the black nature.
Zongwu said, “Thick and black are not given by the 
surroundings.  Everyone has it.
The normal people are all thick or black.  It’s just 
people’s nature.”
This can be tested.  Find a random mother with a 
baby in her arms who is eating something in a 
bowl.  The baby will grab that bowl.  If the mother 
has a pie in her hand, the baby is going to grab that 
pie and even grab the part which is already in her 
mouth and eat it.  Or the baby is in the mother’s 
arms drinking milk when his brother came to him. 
He would push him away.
These are all “ability without learning, without 
thinking”.  When you try to do this no matter where 
or when, you would make a difference.
The Tang dynasty emperor Li Shimin killed his 
older brother Jiancheng and his younger brother 
Yuanji.  Even all Jiangcheng and Yuanji’s sons, and 

took all their wives for himself, and forced his 
father to give him the whole country.
He was using that kind of ability on everything. 
But normal people don’t think about using it on 
other things.  He did it, so he became a hero for the 
whole of history.
So Zongwu said, “Flavor to the mouth is called 
tasting.  Sound to the ear is called listening.  Colors 
to the eyes is called looking.
And what’s to the heart?  What has something to do 
with heart?  It’s called thick and black.  So heroes 
put it to faces and hearts.”
The theory of thick and black is so clearly shown in 
everyone’s face but many people are scared or 
persuaded by the “good people”.  
So Zongwu said, “The mountain which is used to 
farm the cows was cut by axes.  It’s not unharmed. 
The cows and sheep depend on the plants, so both 
the animals and the plants are killed.”

There are always some people in the world who are 
thick and black.  You try to stop it.  It’s just like 
when people cut the plants – thick and black will be 
gone.
So it will be extremely hard to have a hero!  People 
know there is no hero, but they don’t know it’s 
because there is no thick and black anymore.  
How dramatic it is!  If we keep it, then we will 
have thick and black in the future.  If we don’t keep 
it, it will be gone soon.”
Zongwu said, “When kids see their mothers have 
food in their mouths, they just grab it and eat it, but 
people don’t usually use it much.  That’s why 
people can’t be heroes.  That is, the great people 
always keep their real nature from their childhoods, 
and people usually give up their nature, called – 
self abandonment.”
Some people who are very smart understand the 
theory and do it without telling anyone.

And some other people who are not so smart go on 
the way already, but they don’t know what it is.  So 
Zongwu said, “Know it but don’t say it.  Do it but 
don’t know it.  For all their lives they still don’t 
know thick and black is such a common thing.”
All the theories in the world can mislead people, 
but thick and black theory never misleads you.  
Even when you don’t have anything as a beggar, 
you can still get more food than others.  So 
Zongwu said, “From a president to a beggar, Thick 
Black Theory can help you.
Thick black theory is deep and hard. If you want to 
use it really well, you have to study hard, and you 
can use it after a year.  You can do something big 
after 3 years.
So Zongwu said, “Those who want to learn Thick 
Black TGheory will understand it after months, but 
can make a difference after 3 years.”

Thick And Black Learning
Some people asked me, “You invented Thick Black 
Theory, but why did you lose doing anything? 
Why are your students a lot better than you are? 
Even until they tricked or cheated on you?”
I said, “You are wrong.  All the inventors can’t do 
very well in the thing they invent.
Confucianism was invented by Confucius.  He 
became the best about it, and all his students were 
not better than him.  They all had lower knowledge. 
That’s because the master is to good about it.
But the Western science is different.  It was simple 
a the beginning, and the more people that studied, 
the deeper and better it became.
The person who invented the steam machine – he 
only knew steam can push up the lid.  The one who 
found electricity only knew that dead frog moved 

with an electric shock.  And people after made 
more and more machines with it.  The ancestors 
never thought of it.
The thing with Western science is that the younger 
people do better than the older people.  My Thick 
Black Theory is more like Western science.  I can 
only talk about pushing up the lid and dead frogs 
moving.  A lot of theories will be discovered after 
me, and my students must be better than me.
When I meet them, I will lose for sure.  After they 
have their own students, their student swill beat 
them also.
Generation after generation Thick Black Theory 
will go on the right way!”
Some asked me, “You are talking so well about 
Thick Black Theory – Why didn’t you do 
something big?”
I said, “I have a question.  What did Confucius do? 
He talked about doing things for the government, 

for the country.  How many things did he do?
Zeng Zi wrote “Da Xue” (Great Knowledge). It 
was about how to manage the country and make it 
peaceful, but what did he do to manage the 
country?  What did he do to make it peaceful?
Zi Si wrote “Zhong Yong”.  It was about staying 
the same, trying to adapt to the environment, and 
making no difference.  Why did he say that?  Why 
didn’t you doubt it?  It’s hard to meet a teacher who 
knows something clearly.  This is “The delicate 
way that there is nothing else above it, that you 
can’t meet it no matter how many things you will 
go through”.  You doubt so much about it.  Don’t 
fool yourself.
When I published Thick Black Theory, many 
people said, “Thick Black Theory is to deep and 
hard to understand.  Please show me a shortcut.”
Then I asked them, “What do you want to do?”
He said, “I want to be a governor of something, and 

I want to do something big, and other people would 
think I’m a man who is in charge of big things.”
Then I told him the 6 true words to ask to be a 
governor or officer.  6 true words to be an officer or 
governor, and 2 good ways to do things.
The 6 true words to get a position of a governor 
or officer:
“Free, Dig, Lie, Greasiness, Threaten, Give.”
Free
It means:  One is about affairs.  The people who 
want to be a governor or officer have to put away 
everything.  No job.  No business.  No farming.  No 
trading – don’t even read or teach.  Just do one 
thing – ask to be it.
Another is about time.  People who want to be a 
governor or officer have to be patient.  No hurries. 
It didn’t work to day, so do it tomorrow.  It didn’t 
work this year, so do it next year.

Dig
The people who want to be a governor or officer 
have to dig.  Everyone knows that, but it’s hard to 
define.
Some say “Dig” means dig wherever there is a 
hole.  I say it’s just half right.  Dig means dig when 
there is a whole, and dig when there is nothing.  I 
define it as:  Dig no matter where.  Dig it deeper 
when there is a hole.  Dig a new one when there is 
nothing.
Lie
Lie to everyone you can think of.  To your boss or 
the public.  Orally or on the paoper about your 
ability and talent.
Greasiness
It means flattery.  I think everyone knows what it’s 
about.

Threaten
Threaten.  There’s no harm to talk more about it. 
Some people pay so much attention to “greasiness” 
but it still doesn’t work.  It’s because they don’t 
threaten.  
Once you are a big man, you have to be careful 
about what you are scared of.
Just a hint – they will give you whatever you want. 
You have to know that greasiness goes with 
threatening.  Other people think that every word 
you say to them is all about flattery, but actually – 
it’s also some hint to find what they’re scared of.
The people who are good at greasiness can make 
people happy even when it sounds like you are 
criticizing them.  This is something you have to 
study deeply.  What’s most important is when you 
threaten them, don’t over use it, or they are going 
to blow their top.  You can even put yourself in 
hell.  Don’t use “threaten” until you have got 

nothing else to do.
Give
It means bribes.  There are 2 kinds of bribes:  Big 
pribes, like packs of money, and small bribes, like 
some wine or little things like asking them to go to 
dinner.  There are 2 kinds of people who you need 
to bribe.  The people who have rights and power to 
use it to help, and the people who will give their 
position to you.
You will see the miracle if you have done what the 
6 words tell you.  Some big man sits there and talks 
to himself, “Someone wants to have some title.  He 
talked so much about it (here is “free), he has 
something to do with me (dig), this person is smart 
(lie), and he treats me well (greasiness).  But he is a 
bit bad.  If I don’t deal with it, he might do 
something not good for me (threaten), so now he 
turns around and sees a bunch of something lying 
on the table (give), he can say nothing more and 
asks someone to give you some position.

Now you should have gotten all that you want. 
Then take up and do what the 6 words below tell 
you.”
The 6 true words to learn to hold power as a 
governer or officer:
“Empty, Compliment, Tight, Evil, Deaf, Get.”
The meanings of the six words:
Empty
Empty means:  First is on the paper, when you 
write or sign some documents.  They should all be 
empty.  It’s hard to explain this.  You can go to all 
kinds of government offices and read the stuff on 
the wall or paper.  You will understand.  
Second is about things.  Whatever you do, you 
should make sure it either can be left or right. 
Sometimes you make it fast and strict, but there is a 
path where you can walk away.  Never make it 
have anything to do with you when it becomes 

difficult.
Compliment
Complement means bend your knees, cringe and 
smile obsequiously.  You can do it directly to your 
boss, or indirectly to the friends or family of your 
boss.
Tense
Tense is the opposite of compliment.  You do it to 
them who are lower than you.  First is your 
appearance.  Make yourself like a saint who can’t 
be offended.  Second is your talk.  You should talk 
like you are really knowledgeable.  But sometimes 
you can be obsequious to the lower people, and be 
tense to the higher.  You need to learn it by 
yourself, and make it flexible.
Evil
Do whatever you can to reach your purpose.  Kill 
himm, sell his kids.  Don’t worry about anything, 

but there is something you have to be careful about: 
You should do every evil thing with a cover of 
morality.
Deaf
Be deaf to something you don’t want to hear.  Just 
be yourself and do whatever you need to.  And it 
can also be blind.  Be blind if you don’t’ want to 
see it.
Get
It means getting money.  All the 11 words above 
are for this one.  Get compares to Give above, get 
comes after give.  But you have to get something 
done before you get.  If you can’t get it done, some 
money should be given.
The 12 words I gtalked about are just an outline. 
Most of the spirit is not told yet.  You can follow 
the outline and go study for yourself.
Two good ways of dealing with things

Arrow cutting way
Someone got shot by the arrow and went to see a 
doctor.  The doctor cut off the parts outside, then 
asked for the money.  Why didn’t he take it out? 
He said, “It’s a surgeon’s job.  Go find one.”  This 
is an old story. 
Nowadays the people in the governments and the 
offices all use these ways to deal with things.  Like 
“This situation is not a part of our job, please go to 
xx department to find someone else who is in 
charge, and get it done soon”
“Not part of our jobs” is like cutting the arrow. 
Someone else is like the surgeon.  Or when I say to 
someone who wants my help, “I totally agree with 
it, but I have to talk to someone else to make sure”. 
“Totally agree” is like cutting the arrow.  
“Someone else” is the surgeon again.  There are 
still a lot of examples you need to taste by yourself.

Pan Fixing Way 
The cooking pan is broken.  You had a pan fixer to 
fix it.  While the pan fixer is scratching the black 
dirt off the bottom of the pan, he says to you, 
“Please make some fire for me.”
When you turn your back to him, he hit the pan a 
few times, then the crack on the pan gets bigger. 
Then he tells you, “Look, the crack on this pan is 
so long.  You couldn’t see it if I didn’t scratch the 
dirt off.  Now I have to put more nails in it.”
Then you look and say, “Great!  I’m so happy I 
found you, or the pan wouldn’t work without you!” 
After it’s done the pan fixer and the pan owner are 
all happy in the end.
There are so many affairs in history that went like 
this.  Some say, “Many of the Chinese revolutions 
– they cut the good part and cured it.”
This is the “pan fixing way”.  In the Qing dynasty, 

people mostly used arrow cutting way.  After that, 
people used both arrow cutting and pan fixing way.
The 2 ways above are examples of doing things, no 
matter when and where.  It will be successful if you 
use it right, and it will fail if you don’t use it.  
Guangzhong was a great politician in Chinese 
history.  He made things in these 2 ways.  
Diren crusaded against the Qei.  Qi (empire) 
waited.  After Diren beat down Wei, Qi came out 
and said “Have to keep it even if we lose 
everything”.
This is pan fixing way.  In the war of Zhaolin, he 
didn’t blame Chu emperor about usurping him, but 
blames that he didn’t pay the tribute he had to. 
This is the arrow cutting way.
At that time, the Chu empire was so much stronger 
than Qi.  
Guangzhong asked QI Huangong to crusade against 
the Chu.  You can say he broke the pan to fix it.  

And when the Chu tried to fight, he cut the arrow 
right away.  
The war of Zhaolin started with pan fixing, and 
ended with arrow cutting.  He could fix the broken 
pan – that’s why he was called “The great genius”.
Wang Dao was the prime minister in Jin Dynasty. 
There was a traitor at that time.
Wang Dao didn’t go catch him.  Tao Kan blamed 
him, and he answered, “I’m just waiting for the 
good time to attack.”
Kan laughed and said, “He was just waiting for the 
traitor to become stronger.”
Wang Dao’s “Good time waiting” is like keeping 
the top of the arrow, and waiting for the surgeon.
Many big men were crying in Xinting.  Wang Dao 
changed colors and said, “We should get together 
and revive our empire.  Why are we crying here as 

the prisoners of Chu?”
He acted like he was doing it for justice, picked up 
the hammer and tried to fix the pan, but he just 
didn’t mean to do anything.  The two emperors, 
Huai and Min were left North, and could never 
come back again.  The arrow was never taken out.
Wnag Dao’s action is kind of like Guan Zhong. 
That’s why he was called the “Guan Zhong on the 
other side of the river (Jiang Zuo Yiwu)”.  If you 
followd what I said, you should have been a great 
politician.

Conclusion
I have said so much until now, at this moment we 
are waiting for the big melon we grew.  I have to 
tell the readers that:  While using Thick Black 
Theory we have to put some moral cover over it.
We cannot show it directly.
The reason why Wang Mang failed was because 
people knew he was black and thick to much.
If he didn’t show so much, I’m afraid he would still 
be eating cold pork in Confucius’s temple.
Hanfe Zi said, “Tell people that you dislike it, but 
use it behind their back.”  This is a necessary way 
too.
Like the book you are reading now, you should 
hide it under your pillow.  Not on the table.
And if somebody asks if you know Li Zongwu, you 

should say seriously, “That guy was the most 
terrible person!  He was talking about Thick and 
Black.  I shouldn’t have known him.”
But you should treat Li Zongwu as a master who 
“enlightens your way to success”.  I believe you 
will have a wonderful career in front of you, and 
you will be eating cold pork in Confucius’s temple. 
And every time when I hear somebody criticizing 
me, I will be glad and say, “My idea is on the 
road.”
What I said about Thick Black Theory is that:  “We 
should put some moral cover over Thick Black 
Theory”.  I mean to the moral people.
If you met somebody who studies sex, I guess it’s 
not interesting for him to talk about morality.
And now, you should put the “love is holy” cover 
on it.
If you met a friend of Marx, you should put the 
cover of “the people are everything”.  He would 

probably call you “comrade”.
Anyway, we need to put on some kind of cover, 
which is also something we need to learn. 
Anytime, anywhere, every way to success is around 
Thick Black Theory.  You should think about it 
more if you really want to learn.

Appendix 1

Who was Li Zongwu?
Nan Huaidong relates his experience of Li zongwu:
“I left Zhejiang for Chengdu.  I had just turned 20 
years old.  People in Chengdu weren’t too fond of 
people from Zhejiang, but I wanted to study Feijian 
kung-fu and fight the Japanese army. So, I often 
visited people who were famous, well educated and 
had a lot of kung-fu skill and knowledge.  
In Chengdu at the time, there were a lot of tea 
houses in Shaocheng Park.  Brew a pot of tea, sit 
for half the day or the whole day and pay when you 
left. If you had to leave at some point to run some 
errands, you could leave and just put the lid on 
your cup up-side down, the owner of the shop 
would leave it until you got back.  If you didn’t 
have any money to drink tea, that was okay too. 
When the boss asked you what you wanted, you 
just told them “I’ll have a glass.” And they would 
bring you a glass of water.  I don’t think we’ll see 
this kind of rural relaxed atmosphere ever again. 

Shaocheng Park was a the place to gather for 
many famous people and many people that still 
followed older traditions.  You could often see 
people wearing long qipaos and cloth shoes.  These 
were just the type of people I was looking for, so I 
often went there.  To the people there, I was just a 
kid.  I wore Sun-Yat Sen style suits and I was from 
Zhejiang—the place Chang Kai-Shek was from. 
People were suspicious of me at first.  Maybe I was 
sent out to Chengdu by Chang Kai-Shek.  After 
awhile, people slowly began to understand.  I was 
out there to learn.  The suspicion faded and I began 
to make friends. 
One day, I was at Chengshao Park with some 
friends drinking tea and playing chess.  A man 
walked in.  He was tall, hunched over and wearing 
a felt cap.  He had an interesting look—he looked 
like someone from ancient times.  When he came 
in, everyone nodded and said hello.  I asked my 
friend Mr. Liang who it was.  He told me that it was 
the “father of Thick Black Theory” Li Zongwu and 
that he was quite famous in Sichuan.  Then Mr. 

Liang told me Li Zongwu’s story.  I wanted to meet 
him.  So, Mr. Liang took me over there and 
introduced me.  
The father of Thick Black Theory invited us to 
sit down and have some tea and chat. Our so-called 
“chat” consisted of us sitting there and listening to 
him expound his theories of this and that, talk about 
the Japanese occupation, listen to him curse the 
Sichuan Army and listen to him talk about how this 
and that person were worthless.  This was my first 
meeting, but after I would see him often in 
Chengshao Park.  
One time he said to me, “I can see that you 
want to make a name for yourself—become a hero. 
I can teach you a way that will make it happen 
much faster.  If you want to succeed and make a 
name for yourself you should curse people, that’s 
what I did.  And you don’t need to curse a lot of 
people, just curse me.  Say ‘That Li Zongwu is a 
bastard.  He should die.’ And you’ll succeed.  But 
you need to stick a note extolling Confuscious on 
your forehead while you do so.  And in your mind 

honor me Li Zongwu as the god of Thick and 
Black.”  I didn’t take his advice and thus didn’t 
make a name for myself. 
Another time when I was talking to him, I told 
him that he doesn’t need to talk about Thick Black 
Theory anymore and he doesn’t need to curse 
people anymore.  He turned and said to me, 
“I’m not just cursing people at random.  Everyone 
has a ‘thick face.’  I’m only taking that false face 
and peeling it off.”  
I told him that he needs to be careful and that there 
are people in the central government that are 
noticing him.  There he might get taken to jail.  He 
replied, “My boy, you don’t understand.  I’m the 
same age as Einstein.  Einstein invented the Theory 
of Relativity and now he is a world famous 
scientist.  But I’m here in Sichuan, in Chengdu and 
I haven’t really made a name for myself.  I hope 
they catch me.  If they throw me in jail, then I’ll be 
world famous.”  

He was never taken to jail and he didn’t become 
world famous.  Later he said that it was bad luck. 
But that year, his book was very popular all across 
China.  A lot of people were a bit scared of him 
after that, but not me.  I still talked to him quite 
often.
  
A couple years later, a friend of mine, a monk, 
had passed away.  My friend, also a monk, and I 
wanted to go to Zilongjing to pay our respects.  We 
traveled for eight days.  When we found the 
friend’s grave, we bowed our heads and burned 
incense.  At the time, I hadn’t realized how far 
away Zilongjing was from Chengdu.  It would be 
another eight days to get back.  It dawned on me 
that I wouldn’t have enough money to get back.  I 
started to get very worried.  Then I remember that 
Li Zongwu was from Zilongjing.  And he was a 
famous person, so I was sure that anyone I asked 
would know where his house was.  We began 
walking and asked around.
His house was quite big and the front gate was 
wide open.  Before it was always like that in the 

countryside, The front gate was opened in the 
morning and not shut until night.  Not like how it is 
in the big cities these days.  We walked in and 
called his name.  He came right away and he 
seemed very happy to see me.  
“Where did you come from?  What are you doing 
out here?”
“I came to visit a friend of mine who passed away.”
“But I’m not dead yet!”
After the brief misunderstanding was cleared 
up, he arranged for dinner to be prepared.  After the 
meal and some drinks I told him that there was 
another reason I was there to see him.  I told him 
that I didn’t have enough money to get back to 
Chengdu.  He asked how much I needed and I told 
him that I needed ten dollars.  He got up and went 
to a cabinet in the living room and got and 
envelope and gave it to me.  There were twenty 
dollars in there.  I told him that I only needed ten. 
He insisted that I take twenty.  I told him that I 

didn’t know when I would be able to pay him back. 
He said to spend the money first, then figure it out. 
We chatted for a bit and he suddenly suggested 
that I don’t return to Chengdu, that I stayed there 
for awhile.  “Stay here and do what?” I asked. 
“Don’t you like kung-fu?  There is a guy named 
Master Zhao in this town who has excellent kung-
fu skills.  He was born a cripple, but his kung-fu is 
still very good, especially his soft-style.  He can put 
on a pair of new shoes and walk a mile in the snow 
and there won’t be a speck of mud on them. He 
once had a disciple that learned kung-fu pretty well 
but misused what he had learned.  One night the 
disciple crept over a wall into a families house and 
raped a woman, so Master Zhao had to kill him. 
And after that he hasn’t taken on any more 
students.  It’s a shame that someone with such good 
skills won’t pass them on to anyone.  But with my 
recommendation I think he would take you on as a 
student.  If you train with him for three years, you 
will be a master yourself.”  I told him that I would 
go back to my lodging and think about it.

Early the next morning, Li Zongwu met us at 
our lodge and continued with the idea of me 
training with Master Zhao.  He said that he would 
even pay for those three years of study for me.  But 
I had decided that three years was too long.  I went 
back to Chengdu.
Not long after, I heard news of Li Zonwu’s 
passing.  He died of natural causes.  I was quite 
sad.  I though of him lending me the money and his 
offering to pay for my kung-fu studies, this “father 
of Thick Black Theory” didn’t seem to be very 
“Thick” and “Black” at all.  He actually seemed 
quite sincere.  

Strategies When In A Superior Position
 1 Fool The Emperor To Cross The Sea
 1.1 Sky/Heaven/Emperor
 1.2 Don't Behave Suspiciously Or Hide 
 1.3 Act In The Open
 1.4 Hide Your True Intentions
 2 Besiege Wei To Rescue Zhao
 2.1 If The Opponent Is To Strong To Attack 
Directly, Attack Him At A Weak Point
 2.2 Attack What They Care About
 2.3 Everyone Has Vulnerable Points
 3 Kill With A Borrowed Sword
 3.1 If You Can't Successfully Attack An Enemy, 
Use Someone Else To Attack Him
 3.1.1 Trick One Of His Own Allies Into 
Attacking
 3.1.2 Create Traitors In His Midst
 3.1.3 Use His Own Strength Against Him
 4 Await The Exhausted Enemy At Your Ease
 4.1 You Choose The Time And Place To Fight
 4.2 Force The Opponent To Use His Energy On 
Wasted Efforts
 4.3 Conserve Your Own Energy

 4.4 When He's Exhausted And Confused Attack 
With Power And Purpose
 5 Loot A Burning House
 5.1 When Opponent Is Dealing With Internal 
Conflicts, Attack
 6 Clamor In The East, Attack In The West
 6.1 Attack Where Opponent Least Expects It
 6.1.1 Create Expectations In Opponents Mind 
Using Feints

Strategies For Confrontation
 1 Create Something From Nothing
 1.1 Use The Same Feint Twice
 1.2 Opponent Will Be Scared To React To Third 
Feint
 1.3 Third Feint Is The Actual Attack
 1.4 Catch The Enemy With His Guard Down
 2 Openly Repair The Walkway, Secretly March 
To Chencang
 2.1 Attack The Opponent With 2 Converging 
Forces
 2.2 First Attack Is Direct And Obvious
 2.3 Second Attack Is Sneaky And Unexpected
 2.3.1 Causes Him To Divide His Forces At 
The Last Minute
 3 Observe The Fire On The Opposite Shore
 3.1 Avoid Going Into Battle Until All Players 
Are Exhausted Fighting Each Other
 3.1.1 Go In Full Strength
 3.1.2 Pick Up The Pieces
 4 Hide Your Dagger Behind A Smile
 4.1 Gain The Enemies Trust
 4.2 Secretly Move Against Him

 5 Sacrifice The Plum Tree In Place Of The Peach
 5.1 Sacrifice Short Term Objectives To Obtain 
Long Term Goal
 6 Beat The Grass To Startle The Snake
 6.1 If You Can't See The Enemies Plan:
 6.1.1 Run a Short, Direct Attack
His Reaction Will Show His Strategy

Strategies For Attack
 1 Borrow A Corpse To Raise The Spirit
 1.1 Revive Something From The Past And Give 
It New Purpose Or New Meaning
 1.1.1 Old Institution
 1.1.2 Old Technology
 1.1.3 Old Method
 2 Lure The Tiger Down The Mountain
 2.1 Don't Attack Well Entrenched Opponent
 2.1.1 Lure Him From His Stronghold
 2.1.2 Seperate Him From The Source Of His 
Strength
 3 To Catch Something First Let It Go
 3.1 Cornered Opponents Will Fight Desperately
 3.2 Make Him Believe He Still Has A Chance 
For Freedom
 3.3 In The End When His Morale Is Low He Will 
Surrender Easily
 4 Throw Out A Brick To Attract Jade
 4.1 Prepare A Trap Using Bait
 4.1.1 Illusion Of Opportunity
 5 To Catch The Bandits First Capture Their Leader
 6 Steal The Firewood From Under The Pot

 6.1 Undermine Opponents Foundation
Attack The Source Of His Power

Strategies For Confused Situations
 1 Trouble The Water To Catch The Fish
 1.1 Create Confusion
 1.1.1 Weaken Opponents Perception
 1.1.2 Weaken Opponents Judgement
 1.2 Do Something Unusual, Strange Or 
Unexpected
 1.3 A Distracted Enemy Is More Vulnerable
 2 Shed Your Skin Like The Golden Cicada
 2.1 If In Danger Of Defeat Create An Illusion
 2.2 Move Your Forces Away Behind Front 
Facade
 3 Shut The Door To Catch The Thief
 3.1 Capture Enemy Quickly If Possible
 3.1.1 If They Flee Don't Pursue
 4 Befriend A Distant Enemy To Attack One 
Nearby
 4.1 Bordering Nations Become Enemies
 4.2 Distant Nations Make Good Allies
 5 Borrow The Road To Conquer Guo
 5.1 Borrow The Resources Of An Ally To Defeat 
An Opponent
 5.2 Once Enemy Is Defeated Use Resources 

Against Ally 
 6 Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
Force Opponent To React Differently Than He 
Was Trained

Strategies For Gaining Ground
 1 Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust 
Tree
 1.1 Discipline, Control Or Warn People You 
Can't Directly Confront Using Allegory And 
Inuendo
 1.1.1 If You Don't Name Names They Can't 
Respond Without Revealing Themselves 
Publically
 2 Feign Madness But Keep Your Balance
 2.1 Create Confusion About Your Intentions And 
Motivations
 2.2 Make Opponent Underestimate Your Ability
 2.3 When He Drops His Guard Attack
 3 Lure Your Enemy Onto The Roof Then Take 
Away The Ladder
 3.1 Use Baits And Tricks To Lure Your Enemy 
Onto Dangerous Ground
 3.2 Cut Off His Lines Of Communication And 
Means Of Escape
 3.3 Your Opponent Must Fight You And The 
Dangerous Ground
 4 Tie Silk Blossoms To A Dead Tree

 4.1 Make Something Of No Value Seem 
Valueable
 4.2 Make Something Of No Threat Appear 
Dangerous
 4.3 Make Something Of No Use Seem Useful
 5 Exchange The Role Of Guest For That Of Host
 5.1 Infiltrate Opponent Using:
 5.1.1 Cooperation
 5.1.2 Surrender
 5.1.3 Peace Treaties
 5.2 Discover Opponents Weakness
 5.3 Attack The Source Of Opponents Strength
 6 The Strategy Of Beautiful Women
 6.1 Send Beautiful Women To 
 6.1.1 Weaken Opponents Will
Create Discord In His Camp

Strategies For Desperate Situations
 1 The Strategy Of Open City Gates
 1.1 If You Are Going To Loose Stop Preparing To 
Fight And Act Casual
 2 The Strategy Of Sowing Discord
 2.1 Destroy Opponents Ability To Fight By 
Creating Dischord With
 2.1.1 Allies
 2.1.2 Advisors
 2.1.3 Family
 2.1.4 Commanders
 2.1.5 Soldiers
 2.1.6 People
 2.2 While He's Repairing These Relationships 
Attack
 3 The Strategy Of Injuring Yourself
 3.1 Make Your Enemy Drop His Guard
 3.2 Pretend A Mutual Enemy Injured You To Get 
Close To Him
 4 The Tactic Of Combining Tactics
 5 If All Else Fails Retreat

The 36 Ji

The Thirty Six Ji (36 Strategies)
Strategems when in a 
superior position
Stratagems  for  
confrontation
 
Stratagems  for  attack
Stratagems  for  confused  
situations
Stratagems  for  gaining  
ground
Stratagems  for  desperate  
situations

I.            勝  戰  計 Stratagems  when  in  a  
superior  position
Fool the Emperor to Cross the Sea
This Ji has often been mis-translated as fool the 
sky, or fool heaven to cross the sea.  However, the 
literal meaning is to fool the Emperor.  In ancient 
China, the emperor was regarded as the “Son of 
Heaven”.
Fooling the emperor to cross the sea simple means 
to hide your true intentions.  Don't hide your 
activity, because then you will be suspect.  Instead, 
hide your  true activities behind a feint.
Besiege Wei to Rescue Zhao
If your opponent is to strong to attack directly, 
attack him at a weak point.  Those weak points 
could be things, people or places which they care 

about.
It's important to keep in mind that every human, no 
matter how invincible they may seem has points of 
vulnerability.
Kill with a Borrowed Sword
If you can't successfully attack an enemy, use 
someone else to attack him.  
For example – Trick one of his allies into attacking 
him.  Create traitors within his midst, or use his 
own strength against him.
Await the Exhausted Enemy at Your Ease
Don't allow your opponent to chose the time or the 
place for a confrontation.  
You should choose both the space and time for 
engaging your opponent.  Force him to use  his 
energy on wasted efforts while conserving your 
own energy.
When he's exhausted and confused attack with 

power and purpose.
Loot a Burning House
When your opponent is dealing with internal 
conflict, attack.
Clamor in the East, Attack in the West
Attack where your opponent least expects it. 
Create false expectations in your opponents mind 
by using feints.

II. 敵  戰  計 Stratagems  for  
confrontation
Create Something From Nothing
In fighting, use the same feint twice.  Your 
opponent will be afraid to react to the third similar 
feint.  However, the third feint is the actual attack.
Openly Repair The Walkway, Secretly March to 
Chencang
Attack your opponent with two converging forces. 
The first attack should be direct and obvious.  The 
second attack is sneaky and unexpected, causing 
him to divide his forces at the last minute.
Observe the Fire on the Opposite Shore
Avoid going into battle until all the players are 
exhausted from fighting each other.  Go in with full 
strength and pick up the pieces.
Hide Your Dagger Behind a Smile
Gain your enemies trust while secretly moving 

against him.
Sacrifice the Plum Tree In Place of the Peach
Sacrifice short term objectives in the interest of 
obtaining long term goals.
Beat The Grass To Startle The Snake
If you can't see your enemies plan run a short, 
direct attack.  His reaction will show his strategy.

III. 攻  戰  計 Stratagems  for  attack
Borrow a Corpse to Raise the Spirit
Revive something from the past and give it a new 
purpose or new meaning.  These could include:
• old institutions
• old technology
• old methods
Lure the Tiger Down the Mountain
Don't attack a well entrenched opponent.  Lure him 
from his stronghold and seperate him from the 
source of his strength.
To Catch Something, First Let It Go
A cornered opponent will always fight more 
desperately.  Make him believe he still has a chance 
for freedom and in the end when his morale is low 
he will surrender more easily.
Toss Out A Brick To Attract Jade
Create an illusion of opportunity.

To Catch the Bandits First Capture Their 
Leader
In order to capture, weaken or destroy an 
opponents forces, focus on attacking their leader.
Steal The Firewood From Under the Pot
Undermine your opponents foundation.  Attack the 
source of his power.

IV. 混  戰  計 Stratagems  for  confused  
situations
Trouble The Water To Catch The Fish
Create confusion to weaken your opponents 
perception and judgement.  Do something unusual, 
strange or unexpected.  A distracted enemy is more 
vulnerable.
Shed Your Skin Like the Golden Cicada
If you are in danger of defeat, create an illusion. 
Move your forces away behind the facade.
Shut the Door to Catch the Thief
Capture your enemy quickly if possible.  If they 
flee, don't pursue.
Befriend a Distant Enemy to Attack One Nearby
Bordering nations often become enemies while 
distant nations make for good allies.
Borrow the Road to Conquer Guo

Borrow the resources of an ally to defeat an 
opponent.  Once your opponent is defeated, turn the 
resources back against the ally.
Replace The Beams With Rotten Timbers
Force your opponent to react differently than he 
was trained to.

V. 併  戰  計 Stratagems  for  gaining  
ground
Point At The Mulberry But Curse The Locust 
Tree
Discipline, control or warn people who you can't 
directly confront using allegory and inuendo.  If 
you don't name names they can't respond without 
revealing themselves publicly.
Feign Madness But Keep Your Balance
Create confusion about your intentions and 
motivations.  Make your opponent underestimate 
your ability.  When he drops his guard, attack.
Lure Your Enemy Onto the Roof, Then Take 
Away the Ladder
Use bait and tricks to lure your enemy onto 
dangerous ground.  Cut off his lines of 
communications and means of escape.  Your 
opponent must fight both you and the dangerous 
ground.

Tie Silk Blossoms to the Dead Tree
Make something of no value seem valuable.  Make 
something of no threat seem dangerous.  Make 
something of no use seem useful.
Exchange the Role of Guest for that of Host
Infiltrate your opponents camp using cooperation, 
surrender and peace treaties.  Discover his 
weakness and attack the source of his strength.
The Strategy of Beautiful Women
Send beautiful women to your opponent to weaken 
his will and create discord and jealousy in his 
camp.

VI. 敗  戰  計 Stratagems  for  desperate  
situations
The Strategy of Open City Gates
If you know you are going to lose stop preparing to 
fight and act casually in the hopes that you can 
trick your enemy into believing you have more 
power or are more prepared than you actually are.
The Strategy of Sowing Discord
Destroy your opponents ability to fight by creating 
dischord with his allies, advisors, family, 
commanders, soldiers, and people.  While he's 
repairing these relationships attack.
The Strategy of Injuring Yourself
Pretend to be injured to make your opponent drop 
his guard.  Pretend a mutual enemy injured you to 
get close to him.
The Tactic of Combining Tactics
Combine tactics as necessary.

If All Else Fails Retreat

An Easy and Fast Way to Dominate Could Be Yours  . . . 
"Conquer Every Part of Your Life and 
Watch Your Rivals Fade Away With the 
Power of The Athenian Arts" 
From today onwards, you will 
be able to get more power, 
more confidence and more 
respect without even having to 
try half as hard as you used to 
From: Zhao An Xin
Piece by piece, like a jigsaw puzzle, you will 
uncover the biggest secrets of Power that the 
real masters all have unearthed. 
Learning the ins and outs of Power was never more easy and unlocking your untold potential 
will never, ever, cost you less than it does with FREE membership to AthenianArts.com . . . 
Unveiling the Athenian Arts, your Key to a Brighter Future, for the First 
Time Ever!
When You Claim Your FREE Membership, You'll Get:
• Free Videos - Each Month I and other experts in the Strategy “Game” will record 
special “members only” training material for you.  
• Free Books - Want Insider information on Power that NOBODY else will ever 
see?  It's yours when you sign up.
• Free Audio - We'll Also be giving you TONS of free audio for your car, mp3 
player, or computer each month.
• The Athenian Arts Community - The ELITE underground Of Power And 
Strategy converge at AthenianArts.Com . . . 
AthenianArts.Com
Do yourself a favor and join for free right now! Unless you don’t even 
try, we guarantee that using it to will change your life!


