Thinking like a State
Embodied intelligence in the deep history of our
collective mind
Avel Guénin—Carlut
Kairos Research / Active Inference Lab
avel@
 
 kairos-
 
 research
 
 .org
 
 

Abstract
This article aims to show how the deep history of early State societies  entails the
development of a collective form of cognitive agency. It relates classical works in the
anthropology of States (in particular Scott’s  Seeing like a State) with the enactive
account of biological and cognitive organisation, thanks to the unified ontology for
self-organisation dynamics across scales offered by the Active Inference framework. 
Active  Inference  conceives  of  cognition  as  synchronisation  across  individuated
sensorimotor states. It entails that biological or sociocultural  constraints display a
minimal form of cognition by shaping the behaviour of faster dynamics in a certain
way.  When  such  constraints  collectively  define  a  basic  life  form  (an  integrated,
operationally closed system), they can therefore be said to embody adaptive knowledge
properly speaking.
The  (en)Active  Inference  account  I  articulate  here  strongly  motivates  and
methodologically grounds a holist approach in the social sciences. Indeed, it grounds
the study of human societies in the role of structural constraints, whose “meaning”
depends both on the broader system’s activity and in the historical context of their
emergence. The present account of the dynamics of early urbanisation and State
genesis aims to illustrate this approach.

0 – Introduction
The core argument of this article is that States can be (and should be) understood as
hierarchical control systems, essentially similar in their core physical architecture to
brains (Badcock et al., 2019; Hipólito, Ramstead, et al., 2021). Such control systems are
constituted by a nested ecology of (Markov-blanketed) Active Inference agents, which
synchronise with their environment in a way that allows them to  maximise the
predictibility  of  their  sensorimotor  flow,  effectively enacting  adaptive  control
(Bruineberg, Kiverstein, et al., 2018; Hipólito, Baltieri, et al., 2021; Ramstead, Kirchhoff,
et al., 2020). Importantly, this drive toward optimal grip is related (although somewhat
informally) to the maintenance and self-creation of the structural identity of the agent
(K. Friston, 2013; M. Kirchhoff et al., 2018; Kiverstein, 2020). It therefore constitutes the
grounding of an emerging multi-scale theory of adaptation in biological systems (Hesp
et al., 2019; Ramstead et al., 2018, 2019).
In his outstanding books, Against the Grain (Scott, 2017) and Seeing like a State (Scott,
2020), the social anthropologist James C. Scott has provided important insight both on
how States emerge and on how they understand the world. I argue these books
collectively provide a solid ground for a naturalist and multi-scale understanding of the
nature of States as enactive agents. Indeed, the red line permeating Scott’s work is the
deep relation between how States maintain their structural identity and how they
exert control over their (sociocultural and material) niche. This question can clearly be
reframed  in  terms  of  embodied  intelligence:  how  is the  understanding  of  reality
enacted by States grounded in their material structure? The discussion hereby will
revisit  the  anthropology  of  States  in  these  terms,  by  drawing  heavily  from  the
enactivist and  Active  Inference  (ActInf)  paradigm  to  understand  the  dynamics
underlying State constitution and cognition.
If this account is correct, then human societies display the same kind of complexity
that biological entities display – they are, in fact, biological entities as characterised by
the central criterion of operational autonomy  (Moreno & Mossio, 2015). This means
that all attempts to understand and control societies from the scale of individual agents
are just as absurd as the attempt to predict human behaviour from the activity of single
neurons.  Such  a  realisation  has  a  deep  resonance  with  the  politics  of  the  early
Anthropocene, as characterised by the urgency to build a post-carbon society before we
lock our planet in an unlivable stable state  (Steffen et al., 2018). If  the collective
intelligence is  driven  by  the  cultural  niche  it  embodies rather  than  individual
behaviour, then it is the cultural niche itself we must alter to understand how to build a
livable future (Gowdy & Krall, 2013).
The argument will proceed in three parts. First, I will expose the precise nature and
commitments  of  the  conceptual  background  I  am  recruiting  from.  Most  of  this

discussion will bear on the (enactivised) Active Inference paradigm, and how it relates
the  material structure of organisms to  capability for skilled agency – ie, how it
conceptualises embodied intelligence. Second, I will draft the dynamics underlying the
constitution of urban systems, understood as large scale settlements with high level of
economic interdependancy and political hierarchy, in human history. Third and last, I
will discuss how (enactivised) ActInf helps us reconceptualise key aspects of this
transition, and ground the study of City and States as enactive agents. This discussion
will overall demonstrate that an integrated understanding of life, minds and culture is
in our reach, and expose its core insights for the social sciences.
1 – Embodied intelligence in nested minds
The purpose of this section is to show how and why the Active Inference framework
allows embodied intelligence research to extend beyond the scope of what we would
intuitively think of as biological systems – single organisms with defined biochemical
boundaries. “Intelligence” refers to the general ability for a system to understand the
world, either in a reflexive / propositional way or as enacted in their ecological activity.
Therefore, embodied intelligence refers to the ability for understanding / adaptation
that  is  imprinted  in  an  agent’s  physical  structure  rather  than  in  some  general
computational ability. Although this idea has motivated an extremely productive line of
research in cognitive robotics  (Braitenberg, 1986; Brooks, 1991), the most integrative
research program relating mind to body in the life science has emerged from the
proposition to understand “living” and “thinking” as two complementary dimensions of
a single process of self-creation (autopoïesis) (Varela et al., 2016).
Research on autopoïesis has opened the way for a new understanding of mind and life,
which was called the enactive approach due to their accent on how cognitive agents
“enact” (rather than represent) the world they live in  (Di Paolo & Thompson, 2014).
Although they conserved the core commitment of studying life and cognition through
their  common grounding  in  the  self-creative  dynamics  enacted  by  an  organism,
enactivists and associated systems biologists have refined the somewhat esoterical
notion of autopoïesis into the much more physically grounded notion of autonomy (Di
Paolo, 2008; Di Paolo & Thompson, 2014; Montévil & Mossio, 2015a; Moreno & Mossio,
2015; Thompson, 2010). Autonomy refers to the property of operational closure under
precarious circumstances, ie to the capability  of biological systems to  continuously
maintain and recreate their own structural identity as a result of the collective activity
of their constitutive process 1.
1
A basic definition of the concept goes as following:

Interestingly, nothing in the concept of autonomy suggests that this structural identity
should be imprinted in the specific carbon-based substance which constitutes woodlice
and humans. If the network of constraints (understood as a slow physical process
orienting the flow of faster processes) constituting a system is able to regenerate and
recreate  itself  under  normal  metabolic  activity,  then  the  system  is  autonomous
(Montévil  &  Mossio,  2015a) and  should  be  understood  as  an  enactive  agent.  In
principle, this concept  could apply to patterns of fluid dynamics (as speculated in
Damasio’s fantasy novel  La Horde du Contrevent) or to the material and cultural
constraints embedded in human sociality. Yet, enactivists have mainly focused on the
sensorimotor grounding of animal life, and their rare incursions into the realm of
sociology have lacked the domain-specific knowledge to meaningfully engage with
existant litterature on sociocultural organisation beyond interpersonal synchronisation
(see eg (Dumas et al., 2014; Froese & Di Paolo, 2011)).
I hereby speculate that, beyond  the historical grounding of enactivism in the life
sciences, this fact can be explained by  its lack of formalisation of the dynamics
underlying  intelligence.  Indeed,  while  formal  criterion  for  basic  life  have  been
devolopped by enactivists and systems biologists since the 2000’s (Montévil & Mossio,
2015b; Ruiz-Mirazo & Moreno, 2004), cognition is essentially understood as an activity
grounded in adaptive behaviour and sense-making (see Froese & Di Paolo (2011)). In
the absence of a more explicit criterion for cognitivity, enactivism relies on intuitive
judgements  about  teleonomy  to  decide  whether  a  given  system  “thinks”.  Such
judgements should be expected to heavily favorise human-like entities, and conversely
overlook the potential cognitive ability of systems whose structure is not imprinted in
flesh. To fully assess the ability of enactivism to integrate the study of social systems,
we should therefore introduce a formally integrated model of what “cognition” means.
Such a model has recently emerged from  physicalist approaches to the cognitive
science, which we will  hereby call “Active Inference”.  Active Inference  constitutes a
formal ontology assimilating cognition to the process by which an agent minimises its
(expected)  variational  free  energy  (VFE),  an  information-theoretical  construct
constraining the unexpectedness of its future states under ergodic assumption  (K.
Friston, 2010, 2019). In other words, ActInf agents strive to maximise their grip on their
environment  by  continuously  anticipating  the  sensorimotor  flow  they  experience
“An autonomous system is defined as a system composed of several processes that actively
generate  and  sustain  an  identity  under  precarious  circumstances.  In  this  context,  to
generate an identity is to possess the property of operational closure. This is the property
that among the conditions affecting the operation of any constituent process in the system
there will always be one or more processes that also belong to the system. And, in addition,
every process in the system is a condition for at least one other constituent process, thus
forming a network.” (Di Paolo, 2008)

(Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014), mutually constructing their niche and the nature of their
expectation regarding said niche  (Bruineberg, Rietveld, et al., 2018; Constant et al.,
2018). In virtue of this self-evidential dynamic, any system that has individuated
sensorimotor states (a Markov Blanket, formally speaking) should be expected to revisit
the same core set of expected states, therefore resisting thermodynamic dissipation and
enabling their survival and reproduction (Constant, 2021; K. Friston, 2013).
The concept of Active Inference derives from a formal result known as the Free Energy
Principle,  which  states  that  the  synchronisation  dynamics  between  a  Markov-
blanketed system and its environment entails the minimisation of VFE (Da Costa et al.,
2021). Since VFE is a classical measure of Bayesian model fitness, this enables an
epistemic / semantical interpetation of self-organisation in cognitive systems (Constant
et al., 2021; Ramstead, Friston, et al., 2020). The attraction of the agent-niche system
toward its most probable regions can therefore be interpreted as “self-evidencing”
(Hohwy, 2016), in the sense that it constitutes an epistemical activity by which the
agent proves that their world is indeed what they expect it to be. Because this
synchronisation  drive  the  agent’s  activity  and  structure  to  incorporate  statistical
features of their niche through behavioural and evolutionary time, they come to
embody models of the world they enact  (Ramstead, Friston, et al., 2020; Ramstead,
Kirchhoff, et al., 2020; Ramstead, Hesp, Tschantz, et al., 2021). 
The relation between Active Inference and the enactive approach remains controversed,
mainly  because  it  is  grounded  in  predictive  processing  and  similar  neurocentric
approaches - as was widely noted in the discussions between enactivists and ActInf
theorists (see eg Di Paolo et al. (2021); Hohwy (2016)). The notion of prediction appears
to  suggest that an ActInf agent would mentally represent the outside world, and to
think in a way that is detached from its body (Hohwy, 2016). However, there are deep
differences  between  the  predictive  motors  of  an  ActInf  mind  and  the  kind  of
semantically  ladden,  purpose-neutral  representations  hypothesized  by  historical
cognitivists. Indeed, an ActInf agent functions by adaptively anticipating future course
of action and enacting them (Bruineberg, Kiverstein, et al., 2018; Hipólito, Baltieri, et
al., 2021), which recruit their own body and material niche as core drivers of the very
way they understand reality (Clark, 2013, 2017; Nave et al., 2020).
While this conceptual similarity between Active Inference and the enactive approach
was widely noted, the deep  complementarity between their respective formalisms
remains a somewhat underground topic. Formal models grounding enactive autonomy
are purely syntactical (ie they’re interested in the structural properties of the system
per se, see eg Aguilera & Bedia (2018); Montévil & Mossio (2015b)), while the formalism
of Active Inference shows how semantical content (ie meaning) can arise from basic
synchronisation between an organism and their niche (Ramstead, Friston, et al., 2020;
Ramstead, Hesp, Tschantz, et al., 2021). This simple feature provides a clear grip on how

agents can come to embody knowledge about their ecological niche, and leverage this
knowledge  by  enacting  a  meaningfully  integrated  reality.  In  other  words,  Active
Inference both grounds the enactive concept of meaning and explains its emergence by
showing how basic life can integrate a structural identity, which they can consequently
maintain and recreate under precarious conditions  (M. Kirchhoff et al., 2018; M. D.
Kirchhoff & Froese, 2017; Kiverstein, 2020). 
Importantly, the dynamical landscape in which Active Inference occurs is emphatically
not a statespace in the usual physical sense, ie a complete representation of all variable
relevant to the system’s evolution2. The dynamical flow  defining Active Inference
indeed stems from the agent’s Markov blanket (Da Costa et al., 2021), and therefore
corresponds to statistical properties of its eco-cognitive niche - physical reality as
perceived by the agent (Ramstead, Hesp, Tschantz, et al., 2021). This level of descripton
is not causally closed, as events outside the scope of the statespace description (eg a
novel mutation, cultural recombination, or temporary exposure to a new niche)  can
affect  the  actively  inferred  dynamical  landscape  by  creating  novel  affordances.
Conversely, biological agents may turn their subjective expectations into a physical
reality by enforcing expectations entailed by their structural identity into their material
niche  (Constant et al., 2018) - a process known  by evolutionary scientists as niche
construction (Laland et al., 2016).
Therefore,  even  though  Active  Inference  is  a  formally  conservative  framework
conceiving of agency as a perpetual return toward a characteristic non-equilibrium
steady state (Da Costa et al., 2021), it can ground our understanding of the self-creative
processes central to the enactive approach (Di Paolo et al., 2021). Indeed, a basic mind
is operationaly conceptualised as a structurally stable hierarchy of Markov Blankets
(M. Kirchhoff et al., 2018), where the non-ergodic (although conservative) dynamics at
any scale can alter the dynamical landscape both upstream and downstream. This
process is a possible explanation for the phenomenology of creative evolution, where
multiscale fluctuations enable the endogenous creation (or unfolding) of the physical
symmetries defining biological systems  (Longo & Montévil, 2013).  Active Inference
therefore draws the picture of  the biosphere as a nested  ecology of basic minds
working continuously to enact the world entailed by their structural identity (Hesp et
al., 2019; Ramstead et al., 2019), and thereby integrating meaning into  the physical
fabric of reality.
As stated previously, the network of constraints defining the structural identity of basic
life needs not be printed in flesh, it only needs to influence faster processes so as to
2
“A phase space is the space of the pertinent observables and parameters in which the
theoretical determination of the system takes place. As a result, to one point of the phase
space corresponds a complete determination of the intended object and properties that are
relevant for the analysis.” (Longo & Montévil, 2013)

continuously  recreate  itself  (Montévil  &  Mossio,  2015b).  Such  constraints  can  be
embedded in the informationally rich sociocultural niche which enable the human
ecology by affording adaptive coordination and  the development of complex skills
(Boyd et al., 2011b; P. J. Richerson & Boyd, 2020). For exemple, expectations can be
imprinted as well as retrieved into this niche through immersive participation of
individual humans in culturally patterned activites, a process formalised in Active
Inference  under the name of “thinking through other minds” (Veissière et al., 2020).
This echoes existing lines of research about the collective nature of cognition, and the
way humans societies enact through their sociocultural activity something akin to a
“collective brain” (Falandays & Smaldino, 2021; Muthukrishna & Henrich, 2017).
However, the possibility that collective cognition enacts anything beyond the activity
of individual humans has never been seriously investigated, including from an Active
Inference perspective. If there is such a thing as a collective brain, we do not know how
it is implemented, we do not know what kind of niche it entails, and we certainly do
not know what sort of biological individuality it is embeded into. We will now leverage
the broad framework we articulated above, which grounds the study of intelligence in
the way an organism maintains their structural autonomy, to formally assess  the
collective brain hypothesis. More specifically, we will discuss how the coevolution of
top-down control and cultural niche construction in the deep history of the human
species  enabled  the  emergence  of  the  City-State  complex,  how  such  collective
organisations work to maintain their structural autonomy and what is the kind of
world they enact.
2 – The deep history of cities and States
The human species is currently dominated by a very specific ecology of dense urban
settlement dominated by anonymous (often market-based or otherwise institutionaly
mediated)  interactions,  and  centrally  controlled by  hierarchical administrative
structures known as “States”. This situation is extremely recent, as it can broadly be
traced to the global takeover of Western states circa 1800 and the ongoing rise of the
capitalist economy. Although we lack archeological evidence to conclude on the precise
timing of the emergence of Statedom (Singh & Glowacki, 2021), we do not have clear
trace of their very existence before the early Holocene – approximately when climate
warming enabled the rise of large-scale agriculture (P. J. Richerson et al., 2001). We will
hereby articulate a broad picture of how and why urban systems and hierarchical
administrations came to emerge and dominate the human species, ie draft a deep
history of cities and States3.
3
The term of deep history typically refers to the history of the distant past of the human
specie, or in other word to history before history – as the discipline of history is classically

As a preliminary remark, I should mention that the goal of this discussion is specifically
not to explain the full history of how our societies came to be. Such a task would be
impossible given the complexity and ambiguity of the historical and archeological
evidence. In addition, there is no reason to believe that a more complex, nuanced
discussion would result in a better understanding of the target phenomenon  (Healy,
2017). The goal of this discussion is to expose what kind of dynamics were necessary
and sufficient to get us where we’re at, and to highlight key operational concepts that
will serve as a basis to articulate an enactivised understanding of human societies. It
will heavily draw from from Scott’s work on the influence of States on historical
patterns of cultural niche construction (Scott, 2017, 2020), as mentioned in introduction,
and will also call onto an earlier, richer synthesis of the relevant literature in cultural
evolution & historical anthropology (Guénin--Carlut, 2020).
The core dynamic resulting in the evolution of cities can be accounted for with no
references  to  agriculture,  States,  or  even  to  cities  themselves.  Indeed,  denser
settlements allow for both more economic codependency, and the development of
nested social communities (enabling the evolution of complex cultural traits (Migliano
et  al.,  2020;  Romano  et  al.,  2020)).  Consequently,  denser  settlements  enable  the
development of deeper economic/functional specialisation, which consequently allow
these settlements to develop an efficient export-oriented industry and capture central
positions  in  long  distance  trade  and  migration  flows  (Thomas,  2012) –  priming
autocatalytic  growth  in  both  size  and  power.  The  growth of  cities  was  however
constrained by the agricultural capability of the backland they relied on for food
production. As grain can be stored much longer and transported affordably over much
longer  distances than  other  staple crops  (Scott,  2017),  the  development of  cereal
monoculture essentially lifted this constraint for the early cities of the Fertile Crescent,
Indus Valley and Yellow river basin.
Scott’s Against the Grain (Scott, 2017) discusses in much more depth how agriculture
interacted with the emergence of early States. His central remark is that while cereal
cultivation  allows  for  an  unparallel  productivity  per  unit  of  land,  it shows  poor
performance in productivity per hour of human labour relative to earlier forms of
horticulture (see also (Bowles, 2011)). Cereal farmers were additionally locked into their
dense settlement due to the extreme labour intensity of field work, which (compounded
by their reliance on a main crop for subsistance) exposed them to extreme material
insecurity through epidemics and famine driven by  crop failure. Most importantly,
sedentarity of farmers, predictibility of crop harvest, and transportability/storability of
understood to refer to the study of events posterior to the invention of writing. It is here
used as a shorter, more intuitive term for what is typically referred to as histoire de temps
long, ie the study of deep structural determinants of human history typically acting at very
long time scales. The term of  cliodynamics could also be used, although it suggests a
stronger accent on dynamical systems methodology.

grain made cereal monoculture an ideal target for captation by armed outsiders. All
these properties made farming an extremely fragile niche for a tribal society to adopt,
which certainly explains why non-urban societies typically prefer to rely on hunting or
mixed horticulture.
However, those very same properties also explain why agriculture would later succeed
and even become the globally dominant mode of food production. First of all, the
sedentarity of farmers indeed make them vulnerable to famine and illness, but it also
allows much faster reproductive growth than nomads could afford. Second, the viability
of agriculture effectively depends on social institutions which could reward long term
investment  on  resources  that  would  be  easy  to  appropriate.  This  entails  the
development of efficient communal organisation for niche construction (or at the very
least for defense against outsiders), which grain farming could piggy back on over the
course of human history. Third, urban centers critically depended on cereal imports to
survive, and had ample opportunity to support the development of agriculture by trade
and - most importantly - by coercion. Scott indeed documents that early States would
routinely coerce population into providing agricultural labor, either through taxation,
corvée, deportation, or slavery.
The capability of those States to enforce anything relied on an intricate array of
material, economic, normative, and symbolic means. The concentration of resources
and population, and economic codependancy characteristic of urban systems indeed
affords a lot of ways for aspirant elites (be they rich merchants, appointed officials, or a
warrior caste) to build grip over society. They could leverage communal institutions
and control over the inflow and distribution of grain to organise rituals legitimising
their rule, build monuments to their own glory, and generally alter the urban landscape
in any way they see fit. However, these very same features meant that a general strike
or insurrection could bring the regime down in a matter of days if it tried to enforce
unpopular decisions or appeared to lose control. A key prerequisite to enforcing State
control over urban systems is consequently to build acceptation in their population
through perceived competency, wealth redistribution, or symbolic legitimacy.
It is therefore entirely unsurprising that the earliest documented form of dominant
institutions in the history of cities, the Levant temples, have seemingly emerged
around a dual economic and religious mandate. The historical role of Levant temples in
helping organise agriculture (Thomas, 2012), as well as the contemporary analogue of
Balinese  water  temples  (Lansing,  1987),  suggests  more  specifically  that  those
institutions may have emerged as a tool for building a socio-ecological niche adapted
to agriculture. Communal redistribution of the crop, added to the inscription of social
norms in a collective identity and sacred values built through religious ritual (Atran &
Norenzayan, 2004; Purzycki & Sosis, 2013; Sterelny, 2020), indeed grounds the kind of
efficient large-scale coordination necessary for landscaping cereal fields. Temples are

therefore well equipped to catalyse the growth of human settlements into urban
centers, help coordinate their more complex organisation, and to assume de facto rule
over their population without any form of coercion.
However, those same institutions that helped organise collective action could also serve
to institute coercive rule and labour extraction, and so they did. Indeed, temples were
pivotal in legitimising the secular rule of the warrior caste, although they tended to
regain domination in periods of peace (Thomas, 2012). Most importantly, they have
introduced a form of debt decoupled from interpersonal relations: lending with interest
(Graeber, 2011). Lenders could extract labour from borrowers through high interest
rates and debt slavery, and become immensely powerful due to the multiplicative effect
of lending. More importantly, the control they collectively exerted over monetary flow /
creation  canalysed economic development toward activities which could ensure a
sufficient return on investment to meet interest rates. This mechanism catalyses the
emergence  of  institutions  priorising  wealth  extraction  over  human  well-being  or
sustainability, and (when financial elites successfully infiltrate the State) drives the
development of European-style imperialism.
Debt provides a key exemple of how extractive institutions can develop in relatively
democratic societies such as early Levant City-States. As settlements grow beyond the
size where each resident roughly knows each other, their stability come to depend on
coordination at greater scale than is practical by the means of face-to-face interactions
only. This offers an opportunity for the evolution of mediating institutions capable to
generate adaptive decision-making from aggregate anonymous interactions. Therefore,
the very process of urbanisation entails the shaping of the urban niche - be it the
material infrastructure of cities, or the social norms they enforce – by supra-human
agency. Such agency can exert tyrannical rule over population as Scott suggests early
States  did,  or  can  result  from  recognisably  democratic  institutions  (Graeber  &
Wengrow, 2021). In any case, its constitutive mechanisms (or what we could call the
logic of their activity) start shaping urban development and other political decisions,
feeding back onto every level of human activity. 
However,  there  is  no  prior  warranty  that  those  mechanisms  allow  an  accurate
perception of the consequences of their own activity on human life, or on society at
large. Effectively integrating information beyond the scale afforded by interpersonal
relations entails the development of new forms of communications, which implies new
constraints  on  what  information  can  effectively  be  transmitted.  The  necessity  of
perceiving and enacting decisions at scale has repeatedly driven the development of
writing (or close analogues such as quipus) in urban systems, and of the administrative,
accounting, and legal technologies it afforded (Goody, 1986). But any information that
does$ not fit into their forms is essentially useless to any instutions that work on the
basis of adminstrative systems. The same technologies that enabled Levant temples to

keep track of debts and manage economic activites did not allow them to see concrete
living conditions in the backcountry, and understand how the threat of bankrupty
could drive the erosion of living standards, political stability, and soil productivity.
Consequently, States have historically devoted huge amounts of energy to attempt to
build a social and material environment they could manage. This process of course
includes  landscaping  for  cereal  agriculture,  and  the  construction  of  material
infrastructure (such as roads and aqueducts) underlying urban metabolism. But most
importantly, it includes attempts to engineer human societies itself from the top down,
as documented in Scott’s Seeing like a State (Scott, 2020). Indeed, States have routinely
attacked communal institutions so as to atomise society and/or bring it under the
control of State-sponsored institutions. The Bolshevik imposition of collective farming,
as well as the process of enclosure that created the worker class fueling early English
capitalism, provide two examples of how the law effectively imposed direct control of
the elite over farmers. However, this process could also retroactively shape the material
landscape of the urban system itself by physically preventing any social life outside
work and family, or displaying State power through monumental architecture.
This discussion did not highlight a typical trajectory for the development of urban
systems, because we have no reason to believe there exists one. It did however gave a
coherent (although complex) picture of what drove the development of cities and States
in human history, and what kind of transformations accompanied this process. We saw
how cultural niche construction allowed humans to alter their socio-cognitive ecology,
in a way that allowed extensive functional specialisation and the evolution of supra-
individual agency through mediating institutions. We saw how specific technologies,
mainly cereal agriculture and writing, allowed States to build their niche by enabling
the  development  and  control  of  urban  systems.  We  will  now  turn  back  to  the
(enactivised) Active Inference paradigm we articulated in the first part of this paper,
and try to understand whether human societies actually are enactive systems, and how
exactly they understand their world.
3 – From the urban metabolism to the collective mind
In this part, we’ll finally turn to the fundamental question of this article: what kind of
intelligence is displayed by City-State systems, and how is it embodied within their
structure? Answering this question in terms of (en)active inference entails revisiting
our account of the urbanisation dynamics as the results of City-States systems actively
managing to get a grip on their world - ie minimise their (expected) Variational Free
Energy. As the collective mind is effectively constituted of whatever process modulates
the  activity  of  human  sociocultural  organisation  so  as  to  sustain  its  integrity,

developping  a  principled  understanding  of  its  purpose,  mechanisms  and  material
grounding entails the study of how City-State systems actively produce their own
structural identity under precarious conditions. We will therefore turn to the basic
metabolic activity of urban systems and work our way up the nested hierarchy of
adaptive constraints to finally explain what it means exactly to be thinking like a State.
As we saw earlier, the process of urbanisation follows the polarisation of human
activites around specific settlements which manage to grab a central position in the
flows of products, cultural  traits and political power. This core dynamic  is what
simultaneously enables the developpement of mediating institutions, and the wide
cooptation  of  whichever  forms  of  organisation  manage  to  control  those  flows
efficiently. These flows of informations and ressources, collectively underlying the
activity and maintenance of urban organisation, are strongly reminiscent of metabolic
activity in carbon-based life. Basic autonomy is indeed formally defined as operational
closure, or more precisely the capability of a network of constraints to canalise faster
processes (ie metabolic flows) into maintaining and (re)creating itself  (Montévil &
Mossio, 2015a; Mossio & Moreno, 2010). Since the material and sociocultural landscape
of urban systems canalises human activities  so as to maintain itself, the process of
urbanisation clearly entails the constitution of cities as basic life.
In  fact,  the  deep  history  of  urban  systems  display  much  stronger  signs  of  the
emergence  of  cities  as  biological  individuals.  The  emergence  of  new  forms  of
individuality, commonly studied  in evolutionary transition theory  (Szathmáry, 2015),
occurs  when  a  group  of  biological  individuals  cooperate  so  closely  that  they
progressively become dependant on each other. The collective progressively becomes
an adaptive unit, where each individual fullfils a specific function as imposed by
emerging regulation  mechanisms  enacting  supra-individual  agency  within  the
collective organisation (Stewart, 2020). A full fledged evolutionary transition typically
entails the emergence of new forms of information systems mediating regulation at the
collective level and/or the heritability of collective traits (Jablonka & Lamb, 2006). The
emergence  of  City-States,  with  their  professional  classes  and  their  mediating
institutions based on writing technologies, constitute a clear case of such a transition –
especially in the case of the late agricultural civilisations (Gowdy & Krall, 2014).
To be fair, the entire history of the human species is best characterised as a continuous
process of evolutionary transition. The human ecology is indeed chararacterised, from
their early evolutionary history, by  eusocial cooperation, reliance on social learning,
and language. All these capabilities have probably emerged from a system of collective
regulation through embodied coordination, evolved so as to extend our cooperative
abilities beyond what is possible  (Dunbar, 1998; Shilton et al., 2020). They rapidly
allowed the emergence of an inheritance system orthogonal to genes, capable of
evolving adaptive knowledge (Boyd et al., 2011b) and group-level norms (Boyd et al.,

2011a), with drastic feedback on the ecology of human individuals (P. J. Richerson &
Boyd, 2020). This process enabled an explosive scaling of human cooperation (Boyd et
al., 2011a; Chudek & Henrich, 2011), and most importantly the emergence of group-
level organisational traits selected at the scale of human collectives (P. Richerson et al.,
2016; Smaldino, 2014).
In  this  sense,  urbanisation only  constitutes  a  prolongation  of  preexistant  human
tendancies,  which agriculture-driven  scaling  was  accidentally  enabled  by  the
Pleistocene-Holocene climate change (P. J. Richerson, 2001). This quantitative change
in scale however entailed a qualitative change regarding the status of human agency.
Cultural evolution in humans typically entails inter-individual synchronisation through
active inference in the collective sociocultural niche (Veissière et al., 2020). This allows
the definition of the “collective brain” (ie collectively enacted cognitive activities) as the
emerging structure of individual-level innovation and diffusion patterns of socially
acquired  cognitive  traits  such  as  language,  crafting  skills,  or  even  social  norms
(Muthukrishna & Henrich, 2017). However, the material constraints embedded in urban
systems canalyse human activities at a structural scale, and direct collectively enacted
decisions so as to maintain and (re)create their own collective structure - for exemple
by weighting for a road network fitted to a city’s interests  (Fulminante et al., 2014,
2017). 
It is worth noting here that each structural constraints developped throughout human
history effectively act as an ActInf agent. Indeed, constraints are causally effective in
virtue of shaping faster processes (Montévil & Mossio, 2015b), and therefore enforcing
specific expectations over the activity of system components. Additionally, they are
“structural” in the sense that the expectations they enact happen to directly map onto
the system structure, by helping produce its constitutive constraints. The system’s
architecture itself is therefore constituted of “nested minds”, although in a somewhat
figurative sense since simple ActInf agency does not entail cognitive abilities  (M.
Kirchhoff et al., 2018). However, if the nested hierarchy of regulation systems enables
adaptive behaviour at the system’s scale, it effectively enacts a collective mind –
regardless of whether system components retain their cognitive ability  (Sims, 2020). In
other  words,  the  process  of  evolutionary  transition  entails  the  constitution  of  a
collective mind embodied in the concrete mechanisms of its adaptive regulation.
The closest analogue of our intuitive picture of a mind in urban systems is their most
disembodied  mechanism  for  adaptive  regulation:  administration.  Indeed,  just  like
neuronal cognition, it entails the top-down regulation by a specialised population with
the help of a specific-purpose information system. Most importantly, Scott’s work has
shown that administrative systems restrict their interests to specific observables which
are informative for their specific purposes (generally resource extraction, taxation, or
drafting)  while  being  tractable  by  their  cognitive  means  (ie  standardised  written

documents)  (Scott,  2020). In other  words,  they distinctively implement a form of
predictive processing, an cognitive architecture which corresponds most directly to the
mechanical implementation of the abstract principle of active inference (K. Friston et
al., 2016). As predictive cognition is an intrisically embodied and contextual activity
(Hipólito, Baltieri, et al., 2021; Nave et al., 2020), the question of embodied intelligence
in urban systems reduces to the documentation of how constitutive traits prolong or
support the activity of administrative systems.
The deep history of urban systems we articulated above incidentally provides us with
numerous instances of administrative systems externalising their expectations, which
directly corresponds to the core theme of Scott’s Seeing like a State (Scott, 2020). An
obvious example is of course the way cities and States have worked to impose an
ecological  niche  they  knew  how  to  exploit,  both  in  the  deep  history  of  cereal
agriculture in Neolithic societies and in modern attempts to manage forest at the
advantage of military industry. But more importantly, cities themselves have been
shaped to enforce State-sponsored social organisation. Scott provides the extreme
exemple of Brazilia’s urbanism, explicitly meant to segregate family, leisure, and work,
and  therefore  promote  productivity  for  dominant  institutions  at  the  expense  of
serendipity. The same logic operates far back in time with the role of monumental
architecture in the legitimation of power and the promotion of dominant norms.
Importantly, the externalisation of admistrative expectations does not limit to the
alteration of the material niche by States. Indeed, the institution of State-sponsored
legal  codes  affords  a  way  to  directly  transcribe  administrative  expectations  into
individual minds. Because it consists of a publically available set of social norms
expected to apply to all, and to regulate decisions of the State itself, the law modulates
behaviour at a slower time scale (and independantly from) any individual executive or
judicial decision (van Rooij, 2020). Consequently, it affords top-down social engineering
by the State  4 through the  enforcement of novel sociocultural constraints  ex nihilo.
Most  importantly,  those  constraints  define  the affordances  the  State has  in  its
interaction  with  the  wider  society  –  such  as  taxation,  drafting,  or  economic
management. Rule of law is therefore a core tool by which States create their world
through building the basis of their own intelligent behaviour into their sociocultural
niche.
This discussion should have established that the normal cognitive activity of States is
prolonged in the structure of the landscapes and sociocultural constraints they interact
with.  However,  talking  of  landscapes  or  sociocultural  constraints  as  bearers  of
4
This best describes civil law systems, where State legislative institutions have the monopoly
over the definition of the law, and judges are only allowed to define it. In contrast, common
law systems recognise a legally binding role to judicial precedents, therefore allowing
individual judges to make law. As judges remain State officials, I don’t consider this
distinction to be critical here.

“embodied intelligence” implicitly entails that they are not passive recipients of an
external cognitive agent’s expectations, but constituant part of its organism. It is worth
noting here that our notion of intelligence is based on Active Inference, a scale-free
framework applying to any system with individuated boundary states. That States
define  implicit  expectations  through  their  activities  and  offload  them  onto  their
environment is therefore insufficient to make them the proper locus of urban system’s
cognitive activity. As urban systems build structural constraints into their world (like
an agricultural landscape or a civil code) and become dependant on their maintenance,
they integrate those constraints themselves into the boundaries of its operationally
closed socio-ecologic structure, and their life goes on.
We can finally turn back to our central question, what it means to think like a State. By
our  account,  the  cognitive  activity  of  States  is  defined  mechanically  by  the
standardised administrative systems they use to understand and manipulate their
world, and functionally by their drive to build and enact grip over their material and
sociocultural niche. As it ultimately relies on a form of predictive processing, their
phenomonology must consist of a “controlled hallucination” made of the expectations
they build in the course of their ecological activity (Ramstead, Hesp, Sandved-Smith, et
al., 2021). This activity is of course determined by their administrative mind, but it is
also deeply coloured and oriented by the broader cognitive and metabolic activity of
the  broader  self-producing  structure  of  the  urban  societies  they  emerge  from.
Therefore, a naturalistic account of a State’s mental activity cannot circumvent a
motivated analysis of the structural identity it participates to enact.
We have now  exposed  how the  historical development of urban  systems can  be
described  as  a  process  of (en)active  inference,  and  how  this  process  affords  the
integration of adaptive knowledge in their material and sociocultural structure. This
discussion should establish that the collective mind does not directly emerge from
interindividual interactions, but from slower evolving dynamical constraints which
supervene on (but do not reduce to) human activity. Therefore, the proper scale of
analysis of collective cognition is the integrated activity of entire urban systems, and
should more specifically be grounded in the broader processes by which they maintain
and (re)produce their structural identity – understood as an operationally closed set of
constraints  underlying  their  metabolic,  cognitive  and  ecological  activity.  This
perspective enables a unified understanding of the historical emergence of urban
societies,  where  the  progressive  evolution  of  a  basic  form  of  life  entailed  the
development of increasingly complex forms of regulation.
4 – Conclusion

We have hereby articulated an account of embodied intelligence as adaptive knowledge
integrated into an organism’s structure, and explained how this account could apply to
human societies. By recruiting a formal notion of inference as synchronisation across a
Markov Blanket, therefore applying to any scale that displays individuated boundary
states, we were able to motivate a unified understanding of the nested scales of
sociocultural evolution as a single process of active inference. Accordingly, we exposed
how urban systems infer adaptive knowledge through behavioural, developmental and
evolutionary time, and integrate this knowledge into their material and sociocultural
structure so as to effectively constrain their activity to metabolically and ecologically
viable domains. Our (en)active inference account relates in a principled manner the
subjective understanding of their world States enact to the historical development of
the objective structure that enables their activity, by showing how both processes
participate in the maintenance and (re)production of the structural identity of urban
systems.
This discussion is meant to introduce and illustrate a proposal to articulate active
inference  and  the  enactive  approach  in  a  single  framework  drawing  from  their
conceptual  and  formal  synergy.  Both  understand  cognition  as  a  fundamentally
multiscale  and  relational  process,  permeating all forms  of  biological organisation.
While the enactive approach grounds its study of cognition in the way an organism
enacts its structural identity, Active Inference formalises the relation between the
structural architecture of a cognitive system (ie what constraints define it) (Hesp et al.,
2019) and its functional architecture (ie what world it enacts) (K. J. Friston et al., 2017).
This feature allows us to understand extended intelligence as the externalisation of an
ActInf agent’s expectations as constraints in its environment. As this ActInf agent can
consequently integrate these external constraints in its structural identity, or even be a
mind acting upon its own body (rather than an individuated organism), this also
provides  us  with  an  explanatory  mechanism  for  the  emergence  of  embodied
intelligence. 
The ability of (en)ActInf agents to constantly redefine their boundaries and recreate
their structure makes it difficult to identify the proper scale of analysis for the study of
human societies. Indeed, we have showed that they display an autonomous structure,
which could either be understood in enactive terms as an operationaly closed set of
constitutive constraints, or in ActInf terms as an implicit world model they embody and
adaptively work to evidence through their activity. Both entail a multiscale approach
encompassing the whole autopoietic structure rather than a single arbitrarily chosen
trait (such as cereal agriculture) or scale (such as the activity of individual humans).
Importantly, nothing entails that a single structural identity could account for the
activity of any human society, as symbiotic multiscale integration (eg between cities
and  States,  or  individuals  and  organisations)  remains  a  distinct  possibility.  This

provides a critical argument for the necessity of importing in the social sciences the
integrative multiscale approach characteristic of the life sciences.
In particular, I argue that it is critical to adopt what is traditionally understood as a
holistic approach by replacing the study of structural traits in the context of the
broader  system’s  activity  and  of  its  historical  emergence,  as  is  standard  in  the
evolutionary science (Bateson & Laland, 2013). While I have focused my argument on
early urbanisation  dynamics,  when  the  most determinant features of later  urban
societies arguably emerged, a lot of structural traits have since disappeared from or
emerged in human societies. In particular, the modern period has been the pivotal
moment when European institutions of early capitalism and State control emerged,
and consequently took over the world. The study of its dynamics should provide key
insights  into  the  prospective  of  our  socio-political  trajectories  in  the  early
Anthropocene  era.  The  (en)active  inference  framework  I  have  hereby  introduced,
motivated, and illustrated could facilitate such an integrative historical demarch by
providing a core formal ontology for describing in a unified manner the metabolic,
behavioural, developmental, and evolutionary timescales of the system’s dynamics.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Kairos Research and the Active Inference Lab for affording a research
demarch oriented toward reflexive understanding of our sensible reality. I would like to
thank Virginia Bleu Knight, Daniel Friedman, Iona Brenac, Manon Job, and Sergi
Lozano Perez for their valuable comments.
Bibliography
Aguilera, M., & Bedia, M. G. (2018). Adaptation to criticality through organizational
invariance  in  embodied  agents.
 Scientific  Reports,
 8(1),  7723.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-25925-4

Atran, S., & Norenzayan, A. (2004). Religion’s evolutionary landscape: Counterintuition,
commitment, compassion, communion.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences,  27(6),
713–730. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X04000172
Badcock,  P.  B.,  Friston,  K.  J.,  &  Ramstead,  M.  J.  D.  (2019).  The  hierarchically
mechanistic mind: A free-energy formulation of the human psyche. Physics of
Life Reviews, 31, 104–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.10.002
Bateson, P., & Laland, K. N. (2013). Tinbergen’s four questions: An appreciation and an
update.
 Trends  in  Ecology  &  Evolution,
 28(12),  712–718.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2013.09.013
Bowles, S. (2011). Cultivation of cereals by the first farmers was not more productive
than foraging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(12), 4760–
4765. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010733108
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011a). Rapid cultural adaptation can facilitate
the evolution of large-scale cooperation. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology,
65(3), 431–444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00265-010-1100-3
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011b). The cultural niche: Why social learning
is essential for human adaptation.  Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences,
 108(Supplement
 
2),
 
10918–10925.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1100290108
Braitenberg, V. (1986). Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology. MIT Press.
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without representation.  Artificial Intelligence,  47(1),
139–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(91)90053-M

Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a
scientist: The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective.
Synthese, 195(6), 2417–2444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1
Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and
optimal grip on a field of affordances.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,  8.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599
Bruineberg, J., Rietveld, E., Parr, T., van Maanen, L., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Free-energy
minimization  in  joint  agent-environment  systems:  A  niche  construction
perspective.
 Journal
 
of
 
Theoretical
 
Biology,
 455,
 
161–178.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2018.07.002
Chudek, M., & Henrich, J. (2011). Culture–gene coevolution, norm-psychology and the
emergence of human prosociality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(5), 218–226.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.03.003
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of
cognitive  science.
 Behavioral  and  Brain  Sciences,
 36(3),  181–204.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477
Clark, A. (2017). How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket. In Philosophy and Predictive
Processing.
Constant, A. (2021). The Free-energy principle: It’s not about what it takes, it’s about what
took you there.
Constant, A., Clark, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Representation Wars: Enacting an
Armistice  Through  Active  Inference.  Frontiers  in  Psychology,  11,  3798.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733

Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., Campbell, J. O., & Friston, K. J.
(2018). A variational approach to niche construction.  Journal of The Royal
Society Interface, 15(141), 20170685. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0685
Da Costa, L., Friston, K., Heins, C., & Pavliotis, G. A. (2021). Bayesian Mechanics for
Stationary  Processes.
 ArXiv:2106.13830  [Math-Ph,  Physics:Nlin,  q-Bio].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13830
Di Paolo, E. (2008). Extended Life.  Topoi,  28(1), 9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-008-
9042-3
Di Paolo, E., & Thompson, E. (2014). The enactive approach. In The Routledge Handbook
of Embodied Cognition. Routledge.
Di  Paolo,  E.,  Thompson,  E.,  &  Beer,  R.  D.  (2021).  Laying  down  a  forking  path:
Incompatibilities  between  enaction  and  the  free  energy  principle.  PsyArXiv.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/d9v8f
Dumas, G., Kelso, S., & Nadel, J. (2014). Tackling the social cognition paradox through
multi-scale
 
approaches.
 Frontiers
 
in
 
Psychology,
 5,
 
882.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00882
Dunbar, R. (1998). Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language. Harvard University
Press.
Falandays, J. B., & Smaldino, P. E. (2021).  The Emergence of Cultural Attractors: How
Dynamic  Populations  of  Learners  Achieve  Collective  Cognitive  Alignment.
PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/v5fsr
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory?  Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787

Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it.  Journal of The Royal Society Interface,  10(86),
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K. (2019). A free energy principle for a particular physics. ArXiv:1906.10184 [q-
Bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.10184
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2016). Active
Inference:  A  Process  Theory.
 Neural  Computation,
 29(1),  1–49.
https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00912
Friston, K. J., Parr, T., & Vries, B. de. (2017). The graphical brain: Belief propagation and
active inference. Network Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1162/NETN_a_00018
Froese, T., & Di Paolo, E. (2011). The enactive approach: Theoretical sketches from cell
to
 
society.
 Pragmatics
 
&
 
Cognition,
 19(1),
 
1–36.
https://doi.org/10.1075/pc.19.1.01fro
Fulminante, F., Prignano, L., & Lozano, S. (2014). The urbanization process in Central
Italy. A network approach. Social Simulation Conference.
Fulminante, F., Prignano, L., Morer, I., & Lozano, S. (2017). Coordinated Decisions and
Unbalanced Power. How Latin Cities Shaped Their Terrestrial Transportation
Network.
 Frontiers
 
in
 
Digital
 
Humanities,
 4.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2017.00004
Goody, J. (1986).  The Logic of Writing and the Organization of Society. Cambridge
University Press.
Gowdy, J., & Krall, L. (2013). The ultrasocial origin of the Anthropocene.  Ecological
Economics, 95, 137–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2013.08.006

Gowdy, J., & Krall, L. (2014). Agriculture as a major evolutionary transition to human
ultrasociality.
 Journal
 
of
 
Bioeconomics,
 16(2),
 
179–202.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10818-013-9156-6
Graeber,  D.  (2011).
 Debt:  The  first  5000  years.  Melville  House.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debt:_The_First_5000_Years
Graeber, D., & Wengrow, D. (2021). The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Guénin--Carlut,  A.  (2020).  Beyond  State—Drafting  a  prospective  anthropology.
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/EHQJS
Healy,  K.  (2017).  Fuck  Nuance.
 Sociological  Theory,
 35(2),  118–127.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0735275117709046
Hesp, C., Ramstead, M., Constant, A., Badcock, P., Kirchhoff, M., & Friston, K. (2019). A
Multi-scale View of the Emergent Complexity of Life: A Free-Energy Proposal.
In G. Y. Georgiev, J. M. Smart, C. L. Flores Martinez, & M. E. Price (Eds.),
Evolution, Development and Complexity (pp. 195–227). Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00075-2_7
Hipólito, I., Baltieri, M., Friston, K., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Embodied skillful
performance: Where the action is. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-
02986-5
Hipólito, I., Ramstead, M. J. D., Convertino, L., Bhat, A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2021).
Markov  blankets  in  the  brain.  Neuroscience  &  Biobehavioral  Reviews.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.003
Hohwy,  J.  (2016).  The  Self-Evidencing  Brain.
 Noûs,
 50(2),  259–285.
https://doi.org/10.1111/nous.12062

Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. J. (2006). The evolution of information in the major transitions.
Journal
 
of
 
Theoretical
 
Biology,
 239(2),
 
236–246.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.08.038
Kirchhoff, M. D., & Froese, T. (2017). Where There is Life There is Mind: In Support of a
Strong
 
Life-Mind
 
Continuity
 
Thesis.
 Entropy,
 19(4),
 
169.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e19040169
Kirchhoff, M., Parr, T., Palacios, E., Friston, K., & Kiverstein, J. (2018). The Markov
blankets of life: Autonomy, active inference and the free energy principle.
Journal  of  The  Royal  Society  Interface,
 15(138),  20170792.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2017.0792
Kiverstein, J. (2020). Free Energy and the Self: An Ecological–Enactive Interpretation.
Topoi, 39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-9561-5
Laland,  K.,  Matthews,  B.,  &  Feldman,  M.  W.  (2016).  An  introduction  to  niche
construction
 
theory.
 Evolutionary
 
Ecology,
 30(2),
 
191–202.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10682-016-9821-z
Lansing, J. S. (1987). Balinese “Water Temples” and the Management of Irrigation.
American
 
Anthropologist,
 89(2),
 
326–341.
https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.1987.89.2.02a00030
Longo, G., & Montévil, M. (2013). Extended criticality, phase spaces and enablement in
biology.
 Chaos,
 
Solitons
 
&
 
Fractals,
 55,
 
64–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2013.03.008
Migliano, A. B., Battiston, F., Viguier, S., Page, A. E., Dyble, M., Schlaepfer, R., Smith, D.,
Astete, L., Ngales, M., Gomez-Gardenes, J., Latora, V., & Vinicius, L. (2020).

Hunter-gatherer multilevel sociality accelerates cumulative cultural evolution.
Science Advances, 6(9), eaax5913. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax5913
Montévil, M., & Mossio, M. (2015a). Biological organisation as closure of constraints.
Journal
 
of
 
Theoretical
 
Biology,
 372,
 
179–191.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.02.029
Montévil, M., & Mossio, M. (2015b). Biological organisation as closure of constraints.
Journal
 
of
 
Theoretical
 
Biology,
 372,
 
179–191.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.02.029
Moreno, A., & Mossio, M. (2015). Biological Autonomy. A Philosophical and Theoretical
Enquiry.
https://www.academia.edu/12363315/Biological_Autonomy_A_Philosophical_a
nd_Theoretical_Enquiry
Mossio, M., & Moreno, A. (2010). Organisational Closure in Biological Organisms.
History
 
and
 
Philosophy
 
of
 
the
 
Life
 
Sciences.
https://www.academia.edu/661020/Organisational_Closure_in_Biological_Orga
nisms
Muthukrishna, M., & Henrich, J. (2017). Innovation in the collective brain.
Nave, K., Deane, G., Miller, M., & Clark, A. (2020). Wilding the predictive brain. WIREs
Cognitive Science, 11(6), e1542. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1542
Purzycki, B. G., & Sosis, R. (2013). The extended religious phenotype and the adaptive
coupling of ritual and belief. Israel Journal of Ecology & Evolution, 59(2), 99–108.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15659801.2013.825433

Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Answering Schrödinger’s
question:  A  free-energy  formulation.  Physics  of  Life  Reviews,  24,  1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2017.09.001
Ramstead, M. J. D., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2019). Variational
ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Physics of Life Reviews, 31, 188–
205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002
Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the Free-Energy Principle a
Formal Theory of Semantics? From Variational Density Dynamics to Neural
and
 
Phenotypic
 
Representations.
 Entropy,
 22(8),
 
889.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e22080889
Ramstead, M. J. D., Hesp, C., Sandved-Smith, L., Mago, J., Lifshitz, M., Pagnoni, G.,
Smith,  R.,  Dumas,  G.,  Lutz,  A.,  Friston,  K.,  &  Constant,  A.  (2021).  From
generative  models  to  generative  passages:  A  computational  approach  to
(neuro)phenomenology. PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/k9pbn
Ramstead, M. J. D., Hesp, C., Tschantz, A., Smith, R., Constant, A., & Friston, K. J.
(2021). Neural and phenotypic representation under the free-energy principle.
Neuroscience
 
&
 
Biobehavioral
 
Reviews.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.11.024
Ramstead, M. J. D., Kirchhoff, M. D., & Friston, K. J. (2020). A tale of two densities:
Active  inference  is  enactive  inference.  Adaptive  Behavior,  28(4),  225–239.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1059712319862774
Richerson, P., Baldini, R., Bell, A. V., Demps, K., Frost, K., Hillis, V., Mathew, S., Newton,
E.  K.,  Naar,  N.,  Newson,  L.,  Ross,  C.,  Smaldino,  P.  E.,  Waring,  T.  M.,  &
Zefferman,  M.  (2016).  Cultural  group  selection  plays  an  essential  role  in

explaining human cooperation: A sketch of the evidence. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 39. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X1400106X
Richerson, P. J. (2001). Institutional Evolution in the Holocene: The Rise of Complex
Societies. British Academy, 38.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2020). The human life history is adapted to exploit the
adaptive advantages of culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, 375(1803), 20190498. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0498
Richerson, P. J., Boyd, R., & Bettinger, R. L. (2001). Was Agriculture Impossible during
the  Pleistocene  but  Mandatory  during  the  Holocene?  A  Climate  Change
Hypothesis. American Antiquity, 66(3), 387–411. https://doi.org/10.2307/2694241
Romano, V., Lozano, S., & Pablo, J. F.-L. de. (2020). A multilevel analytical framework for
studying cultural evolution in prehistoric hunter–gatherer societies. Biological
Reviews, n/a(n/a). https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12599
Ruiz-Mirazo, K., & Moreno, A. (2004). Basic Autonomy as a Fundamental Step in the
Synthesis
 
of
 
Life.
 Artificial
 
Life,
 10(3),
 
235–259.
https://doi.org/10.1162/1064546041255584
Scott, J. C. (2017). Against the Grain: A Deep History of the Earliest States. Yale University
Press.
Scott, J. C. (2020).  Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
Condition Have Failed. Yale University Press.
Shilton, D., Breski, M., Dor, D., & Jablonka, E. (2020). Human Social Evolution: Self-
Domestication  or  Self-Control?
 Frontiers  in  Psychology,
 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00134

Sims, M. (2020). How to count biological minds: Symbiosis, the free energy principle,
and reciprocal multiscale integration. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-
020-02876-w
Singh, M., & Glowacki, L. (2021). Human social organization during the Late Pleistocene:
Beyond
 
the
 
nomadic-egalitarian
 
model.
 
EcoEvoRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.32942/osf.io/vusye
Smaldino, P. E. (2014). The cultural evolution of emergent group-level traits. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 37(3), 243–254. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X13001544
Steffen, W., Rockström, J., Richardson, K., Lenton, T. M., Folke, C., Liverman, D.,
Summerhayes, C. P., Barnosky, A. D., Cornell, S. E., Crucifix, M., Donges, J. F.,
Fetzer, I., Lade, S. J., Scheffer, M., Winkelmann, R., & Schellnhuber, H. J. (2018).
Trajectories  of  the  Earth  System  in  the  Anthropocene.  Proceedings  of  the
National
 
Academy
 
of
 
Sciences,
 115(33),
 
8252–8259.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1810141115
Sterelny, K. (2020). Religion: Costs, signals, and the Neolithic transition. Religion, Brain
& Behavior, 10(3), 303–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599X.2019.1678513
Stewart, J. E. (2020). Towards a general theory of the major cooperative evolutionary
transitions.
 Biosystems,
 198,
 
104237.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2020.104237
Szathmáry, E. (2015). Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0.
Thomas, A. (2012). Urbanization before Cities: Lessons for Social Theory from the
Evolution  of  Cities.
 Journal  of  World-Systems  Research,  211–235.
https://doi.org/10.5195/jwsr.2012.479

Thompson, E. (2010). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind.
Harvard University Press.
van Rooij, B. (2020).  Homo Juridicus: Questioning Legal Assumptions About Behavior
(SSRN  Scholarly  Paper  ID  3572602).  Social  Science  Research  Network.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3572602
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (2016). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and
Human Experience. MIT Press.
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2020).
Thinking through other minds: A variational approach to cognition and culture.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001213

