
THINK
STRAIGHT
Change Your Thoughts, Change Your Life
Written and Illustrated by
 
 
Darius Foroux

Copyright © 2017 by Darius Foroux, All Rights Reserved
Published by Darius Foroux
www.dariusforoux.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including
photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without
the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses
permitted by copyright law. The author of this book does not give medical
advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for
physical, emotional or medical problems without the advice of a physician. In
the case of depression, anxiety disorder, panic disorder or any other
emotional condition, consult your physician before using the techniques
described in this book. The intent of the author is only to offer information of
a general nature to help you in your quest for better thinking. In the event you
use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author does not
assume responsibility for your actions.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents
About The Author (That’s Me)
You Become What You Think
Why Do We Need A Book On Practical Thinking?
Use What Works
Clear Thinking Requires Training
From Chaos To Clarity
A (Very) Brief History Of Thinking
Life Is Not Linear
Connect The Dots
Filter Your Thoughts
Stop “Thinking”
Inside Your Control vs Outside Your Control
Don’t Trust Your Mind
Look At Facts
True Vs UNTRUE
Take Your Time To Think
No More Quick Decisions
Release Your Mind
Draw Your Thoughts
Be Yourself (Not What You Should Be)
Take Time To Reflect
My Money Rules
Don’t Try To Think Your Way Out Of Everything
Be Unconventional

Don’t Ask Why
Think About The Details Even More
Take Thinking Out of The Equation
Don’t Live With Regrets
Never Look Back
Spend Your Time Well
Inner Calm
Think Beyond Yourself
Thank You: A Gift
Further Reading

ABOUT THE AUTHOR (THAT’S ME)
I self-published this book, so it doesn’t make sense to write this part in third
person. To be honest, I did write an ego enhancing bio at first. I thought it
looked more professional. But after I gave it more thought, I decided to do it
differently and introduce myself the same way I do at an informal event.
Anyway, I’m an entrepreneur, blogger, and podcaster. For the past two and a
half years, I’ve been sharing my thoughts about life, business, and
productivity on my blog. Until now, more than 3 million people have read my
articles. I also co-founded Vartex, a laundry technology company, with my
dad, while I was finishing my master’s degree in Marketing in 2010. For my
podcast, The Darius Foroux Show, I’ve interviewed thought leaders like
Ryan Holiday, Robert Sutton, Jimmy Soni, and more.

 
 
 
 
 
“If you can change your mind, you can change your life.”
―  William James

YOU BECOME WHAT YOU THINK
In 1869, a 27-year-old man, who had just graduated as a doctor of medicine
from Harvard, was going through a “crisis of meaning.” This was not the first
time he dealt with adversity. Throughout his six years in medical school, his
education was interrupted by different illnesses and bouts of depression. But
this time, it was worse. He even contemplated suicide for months.
The young man’s name was William James, who later became the leading
psychologist in America and one of the founders of the philosophical school
of pragmatism. It took James three years to overcome depression. Something
he did by himself. To be clear, James wasn’t just feeling down. John
McDermott, editor of The Writings of William James, wrote about the
severity of his mental state: “James spent a good part of life rationalizing his
decision not to commit suicide.”
During this time, James also had panic attacks and hallucinations. This
wasn’t new to him. His father faced the same agonizing things, years before
him. This feat made James believe that his condition was biological, and
therefore something he couldn’t overcome. But in 1870, James made a
psychological breakthrough after reading an essay by Charles Renouvier, a
French philosopher. In his journal, he wrote: “I think that yesterday was a
crisis in my life. I finished the first part of Renouvier's second Essais and see
no reason why his definition of free will — 'the sustaining of a thought
because I choose to when I might have other thoughts' — need be the
definition of an illusion. At any rate, I will assume for the present — until
next year — that it is no illusion. My first act of free will shall be to believe
in free will."

This realization is at the core of pragmatism, the school of philosophy that
James and Charles Sanders Peirce founded, years later. James realized that
we have the ability to choose one thought over the other. In other words, we
can control what we think.
However, James doesn’t say we can control our consciousness. When we sit
down and observe our thoughts for a few minutes, we will notice that a lot of
things flow through our mind. The thoughts are just “there.” Nothing we can
change about that. But since we have free will, we can decide which thoughts
we focus on. Hence, we can influence the direction of consciousness. This
realization is critical to the way we live. It’s the difference between “I can’t
help but feel this way” and “I feel this way because I decided to feel this
way.”  
The emphasis is on deciding. And that’s what this book is about: With
practice, you can get better at controlling your thoughts so you can
decide what you think.
And with better control over our thoughts, we can improve the quality of our
lives and the outcome of our careers. That’s my proposition in this book.
You have the ability to decide what you think. And since the result of your
life depends on your thoughts, I think it’s the most important thing in life.
When we improve the way we think, nothing is impossible to achieve. That
simple realization changes everything. Many great thinkers have written
about the importance of thoughts. But William James’ godfather, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, who also inspired James a great deal, put it most simply:
“You become what you think about all day long.”
I believe that’s true. But we must realize that actions follow thoughts. That
means you can’t change your actions without changing your thoughts. Let’s
start!

WHY DO WE NEED A BOOK ON
PRACTICAL THINKING?
The human brain is the most important tool we have. It’s more important than
any technology, device, or instrument. Robert Greene, the author of Mastery,
put it best: “If there is any instrument you must fall in love with and fetishize,
it is the human brain—the most miraculous, awe-inspiring, information-
processing tool devised in the known universe, with a complexity we can’t
even begin to fathom, and with dimensional powers that far outstrip any piece
of technology in sophistication and usefulness.”
However, there’s one problem. We’re born with this great tool, but we don’t
know how to use it properly. We’re highly impractical beings. We think that
we’re good thinkers, but research paints a different picture. We think we
make practical decisions that we base on logic. But that’s not the case, as Dan
Ariely, author of Predictable Irrationality, writes: “We usually think of
ourselves as sitting in the driver's seat, with ultimate control over the
decisions we made and the direction our life takes; but, alas, this perception
has more to do with our desires—with how we want to view ourselves-than
with reality.” (emphasis mine)
It’s safe to say we’re not practical thinkers! The proof of that is the list of
more than a hundred cognitive biases (or thinking errors) that scientists have
found over the last century. We often make decisions based on gut feelings,
emotions, and without having the right information. I’ve read several books
about better thinking and decision making. I liked them. But I had one
problem with all the books in this field: They weren’t practical. They do a
great job of describing why we think the way we think by sharing stories. But

I couldn’t find a practical book that explained how to change the way you
think.
That’s why I wrote this little book. It contains everything I’ve learned about
thinking. My goal is to give you at least one idea that you can use to improve
your thoughts, and consequently, your life, business, or career. That’s why I
share all my best ideas here. I wrote THINK STRAIGHT in a way that you
can read it more than once. And I hope this book serves as an anchor to you
—especially during trying times.
To keep this book practical, I combine theory, stories, and personal
experiences to share advice you can apply (or not). The first idea I want to
share is that these types of books only work if you’re open-minded. If you
think that’s not you right now, I can save you an hour of your life. Just get rid
of this book. Burn it, ask for a refund, give it away, whatever. No matter what
you do, decide clearly: Use it or leave it.

USE WHAT WORKS
I’m not a neuroscientist, psychologist, philosopher, or any type of expert on
the topic of “thinking.” I’m a person who has lived his entire life under the
impression that you can’t control your thoughts. That way of thinking didn’t
serve me well. I was happy one day, sad the next. I got angry easily. And I
couldn’t find solutions to simple challenges I faced in my career, business,
and relationships. But through experience, journaling, reading, and a lot of
introspection, I’ve found a way to get better at thinking.
How do I know I’m better at thinking than before? I’m no longer a slave to
my thoughts and I’m much happier because of it. I use my mind, and it’s no
longer the other way around. To me, that’s the definition of better thinking. It
has nothing to do with how smart you are or how many mathematical
equations you can solve. It’s about using your mind to get what you want.
I don’t pretend to have all the answers to thinking better, though. However, I
do have the answers to how I’ve used nothing but my thoughts to live a
happier, healthier, wealthier, and more meaningful life.
I’m the living proof of the “change your thoughts, change your life” idea.
Only three short years ago, I was stressed out of my mind, gave up my
entrepreneurial desires, and hated my life. I felt stuck. But I don’t want to be
too dramatic about my situation. I think we’ve all been there. And if you
haven’t felt stuck in your life, it’s only a matter of time before you will. It’s a
natural part of modern day life. I’m not trying to scare you, though. But you
know how all these self-help books go, right? “I was down and out. I lost all
my money. I was depressed. My life sucked. But then I discovered X. And
then my life changed.”

X is, of course, the idea they want to sell you. Since I'm honest with you, I’m
no different. For example, in this book, I want to sell you on the idea of
useful and useless thoughts. But there’s a difference. I’m giving you my
perspective—nothing more. It’s up to you to decide what you’re going to do
with it.
John Dewey, a pragmatist, and one of the fathers of functional psychology,
famously said: “The true is that which works.” But that doesn’t mean we
should believe everything we hear or read. That makes us delusional.
If we want to think straight at all times, we must stay grounded, look at facts,
listen to other people’s perspectives, and only then draw practical
conclusions.

CLEAR THINKING REQUIRES TRAINING
I view the mind as a muscle that requires regular training to keep strong. One
way to train your mind is by learning new things. But I always thought that
learning ends when your education ends. For some, that’s when they leave
high school, for others, it’s when they get their bachelor’s or master’s degree.
During our time in school, we learn new skills, ideas, and theories that
change the way we think and operate in the world. But once we’ve
established a way of thinking, we hardly change it. We prefer to entertain the
same thoughts because they give us a sense of familiarity. We’ve learned that
novelty is a scary thing—so we do everything to avoid it. We’re creatures of
habit who prefer relaxing our mind instead of straining it. “I need to relax
and watch something on Netflix,” is something I hear almost everyone, of all
ages, say these days. I’ve said it myself as well.
That makes me wonder what we need rest from? From the repetitive tasks we
do at work? From the familiar thought patterns we have? If you really think
about it, we hardly strain our minds unless there’s a specific reason—like a
test or exam we have to take. Otherwise, we often think, “What’s the point?”
Well, the point is to train your mind just like you train your body to keep fit.
You don’t go to the gym for four years and quit for the rest of your life. So
why don’t you exercise your mind the same way you do your body?
What’s more, the mind is the single most important tool you have. And if you
want to use that tool properly, you must train the mind. Stoic philosopher
Epictetus put it best: “The life of wisdom is a life of reason. It is important to
learn how to think clearly. Clear thinking is not a haphazard enterprise. It
requires proper training.”

The problem is that we don’t know how we must get proper training, as
Epictetus put it. For most of my life, my thoughts were out of control. I never
thought about thinking. If you asked me to draw my thoughts, it would look
something like this:
That mess you see up there is how the inside of my mind looked like. It was
pure chaos. Just a mush of positive, negative, sad, happy and, above all,
confusing thoughts. I always thought to myself, “Why can’t my brain stop?
Where’s the pause button?” Looking back, I didn’t know how to use my
brain as the wonderful tool it is.

FROM CHAOS TO CLARITY
In 2014, I moved to London from Leeuwarden, The Netherlands, the city
where I grew up. I went from a city with a hundred thousand people to a city
where seven million people live. Things were harder than I expected.
Especially when it came to finding a place to live. After doing research and
talking to my new co-workers, I learned that it was almost impossible to find
an apartment in a short period without getting ripped off. Instead, I decided to
rent a room (which was a lot easier) for three months. And I decided to
explore different areas in London that were within an hour commute by
public transportation to my work. That was my plan. And everything went
well. At first.
After two months, I found a small and affordable one-bedroom apartment in
Earlsfield, in South-West London. I had planned everything. I canceled the
lease of the room I rented, and signed the lease for the new apartment. My
parents and brother even drove over from Holland to help out. And because I
didn’t have much stuff, we could just use their car to move my things from
the old place to the new place, which were only 10 minutes apart.
In my mind, this would be the deal: I would just pack up my stuff, get the key
to the new place, hand the keys back to the old landlord, and move into the
new place, watch Netflix and relax. Also, I expected to do everything on the
same day.
Well, things didn’t go as planned after all. My new landlady changed her
mind last minute and decided not to rent out her apartment. She told me this a
day before the day I planned the move. All of a sudden, I had no place to live
and had an SUV full of my things. That night, in my parents’ hotel room, I

panicked. Big time.
“I don’t know what to do! I have no place, my stuff is in a van, I brought you
guys over from Holland, and now I’m sitting here like an idiot.”
I continued blaming myself for the rest of the day and evening. You’re
probably thinking, “Really?” Yes, looking back on this, I can’t help but think
that I may have acted a little bit too dramatic. Well, let’s just call it like it
was: I was overdramatic. And not just a little. That’s exactly why I picked out
this example because it shows how stupid I was in my thinking. I spent so
much time in my head that I had lost sight of the situation. I wasn’t thinking
clearly. And for what? Some first world problem? C’mon.
The next day, I woke up, and with the encouragements of my parents and
brother, I decided to stop feeling sorry for myself and to start finding a
solution instead. I said to myself, “THINK STRAIGHT.”
I knew I had to replace the mess with clarity. I wanted to get straight to the
point. I pictured this:
On the left: A mush of useless thoughts: Worry, stress, suffering, confusion,
not knowing what to do.

On the right: ONE straight thought that has a (single) useful purpose. I
wanted to start using my mind as a tool. In the case of my London story, I
needed to look for a solution—fast.
It turned out that was easy, once I started thinking straight. I booked an
Airbnb until I found a new place. In the end, we stayed in an Airbnb for a
week. The landlady changed her mind again and decided to rent the
apartment to me anyway.
So, all my stressing, worrying, and thinking were especially useless. How
often does that happen? We’re always so quick to judge and draw
conclusions based on our assumptions. We’re all human beings. We make
mistakes. We change our minds. And we assume things that are not true all
the time. That’s normal. What’s not normal is to let your mind go out of
control.
And after many other useless thinking episodes, I decided to change. I didn’t
have one big epiphany or super dramatic moment that forced me to change.
Life is not a Hollywood drama. People that I know only change after a
culmination of problems. At some point, we stand up and say, “Enough.”
And you know what? A lot of people never change at all. But that shouldn’t
be our concern.
After years of chaos in my mind, I just had enough of mental suffering. I
can’t make it any prettier than that. You don’t need an “all is lost” moment.
Those type of moments almost never happen.
About two years ago, I started changing my thoughts. And I’ve learned to
replace the chaos in my mind with clarity. Now, there’s peace. In the rest of
this book, I’ll share with you exactly how I did it. But first, I want to share a
brief history of thinking.

A (VERY) BRIEF HISTORY OF THINKING
Thoughts are important. But not all thoughts are equal. The quality of your
thoughts matters the most. Roman Emperor and Stoic philosopher, Marcus
Aurelius said it best: “The universe is change; our life is what our thoughts
make it.”
A quick look at our surroundings shows us that life is changing faster than
ever. Jobs disappear, smartphones turn you into a zombie, education costs
you thousands, the cost of living increases rapidly, salaries don’t, you have
less time for yourself, and so on. Life changes so fast that it seems like you
wake up in a new world every day! What do your thoughts make of that? If
you’re anything like me, these developments cause a lot of thinking, aka
worrying and uncertainty. How do I survive? How do I adapt my business to
changing markets? How do I advance my career? How do I not lose my
mind? Mastering your thoughts is challenging.
The desire to master our thoughts is as old as modern civilization. Ever since
the fifth century BC, philosophers from all ages and regions agree on one
thing: The human mind is an instrument that solves problems. And many
philosophers argue that the quality of your thoughts determine the quality of
your life. From Confucius to Socrates to Descartes to William James, they all
talk about their method of thinking—a way to view the world.
Most of us know the Socratic method of questioning everything, even
yourself. “I know one thing: That I know nothing,” is what Socrates famously
told the Oracle of Delphi when Socrates was declared the wisest man on
earth. The fact that he thinks that he knows nothing makes him wise. That’s a
way of thinking.

French philosopher René Descartes, who lived in the 17th century, took it one
step further. He questioned everything in life, even his own existence.
Because how do you know you’re not dreaming or living in The Matrix?
That’s why he famously said: “Cogito ergo sum.” Popularly translated to, “I
think, therefore I am.” Descartes concluded that he must exist because he’s
able to think.
No matter how crazy your thoughts are, it’s safe to say that you do exist. So
why not make your existence a little more practical, lighthearted, fun, and
useful?
Have you ever observed or written down your thoughts? I challenge you, try
it for a day. Every two hours or so, sit down and write about what you’re
thinking at that very moment. Just don’t get scared of yourself. Most of our
thoughts make no sense at all. We’re conflicted as a species. Descartes also
reviewed his own thoughts and found many contradictions. His most
important idea is that we should question the source of our beliefs, not the
belief itself. Because most of our beliefs are based on our or other people’s
perception.
How many of your ideas are based on what others have told you? Or based
on your first thoughts or assumptions? At the core of thinking lies our ability
to separate the truth from falsehood. What is true, what is false?
One way to look at that question is to take a pragmatic perspective. William
James describes the idea of pragmatism as follows: “The attitude of looking
away from first things, principles, 'categories,' supposed necessities; and of
looking towards last things, fruits, consequences, facts.” Thoughts should
serve a useful purpose. If they don’t, they’re useless. That’s straight
thinking.

Pragmatism is a method of thinking, not a solution. In fact, all thinking is a
method. Your thoughts serve as an instrument. But it’s a conflicting
instrument that’s very hard to use. Henry Ford said it best: “Thinking is the
hardest work there is, which is probably the reason why so few engage in it.”
Thinking is not only hard—it’s the single most important thing in life.
Remember: The quality of our thoughts determines the quality of our lives.
And our decisions are a result of our thoughts.

LIFE IS NOT LINEAR
I always thought in a linear way: A leads to B. And if B is C, A also leads to
C. I looked at appearances, first thoughts, and made a lot assumptions. But
my thoughts didn’t serve a useful purpose. In fact, they served no purpose at
all. Instead of thinking, I followed convention. I let others do the thinking for
me. Most of us are like that. For example, I thought I would never have to
worry about having a job if I got my college degree. I honestly believed that
until I was about 26 years old. I figured out the hard way that nothing is
guaranteed in life and that you have to work hard to earn money. And that
making money has nothing to do with your degrees. If I had to pick another
predictor of career success I would say it’s skills. The better you are at
something, the more value you can provide to others, and the more money
people are willing to pay in exchange for your value.
Also, achieving a goal never happens linearly. Most of us believe there’s a
straight line from where you are to where you want to be. Let’s say your goal
is to start a business so you can have more freedom in your life. That was
always my goal. I thought I would just work on it until I achieved it.

But that’s not how it worked out. I had to take a lot of detours. I worked for
many other people in between. I also started businesses that failed.
Understanding that life is not linear helps us to change the way we think.
Along the way, I got discouraged a lot and almost quit. Now, I realize that
things often don’t go according to plan. That helps me to think of backup
plans or alternative options to get closer to my goals.
Another personal goal of mine was to invest in real estate. When I lived in
London and Amsterdam, that was difficult for me because I didn’t have
enough capital to get started. So instead of putting a lot of pressure on myself
to make more money and sacrifice the quality of my life, I started looking
elsewhere. After researching growing real estate markets, I ended up in my
hometown. Prices were low, I knew a lot of people, the population was

increasing, and the city invested a lot in new businesses and education. Two
months after I decided to look elsewhere, I bought my first deal there. The
point is that there are multiple ways to achieve your goals. Also, if everyone
is doing one thing, that often means you shouldn’t.

CONNECT THE DOTS
Your brain is constantly working, even when you’re not actively thinking.
Apart from managing all the vital functions of your body, the brain also scans
every piece of information that comes in. The brain compares it with other
information that it has already stored. Your brain searches for similarities and
differences between that information. That’s how we think and use our brain
to come up with new ideas. The brain consists of many small networks of
neurons that connect to other networks, like this:
Just a basic understanding of how my brain works helps me to understand
how I can nurture it. I don’t worry about finding a direct application for

information I acquire. I feed my brain with knowledge that I’m curious about.
And that diverse information might be stored in different networks, but as
long as I connect the dots later, I’m okay with that. Like Steve Jobs said,
“You can't connect the dots looking forward; you can only connect them
looking backward. So you have to trust that the dots will somehow connect in
your future.”
If you want the dots to connect in the future, you have the make sure you
form dots in your brain. The only way you form dots is by learning, doing,
making mistakes, reflecting, or anything you can do to feed your brain with
the input it needs to give you the output you want.

FILTER YOUR THOUGHTS
There’s too much information in the world for our brain to process. So, we’re
forced to filter it. If we don’t, we go nuts! And in that filtering-process, we
develop shortcuts to ease the cognitive load of making decisions.
These shortcuts are called heuristics. A heuristic is a strategy we derive from
previous experience with a similar problem. One heuristic that everyone
knows is “trial and error,” a strategy for finding answers to problems we face.
It’s also a way of thinking. But trial and error is not always the most practical
strategy. If we would rely on trial and error to build a career, we would
probably die before achieving that goal. Life is too short for applying trial
and error to everything.  
Another heuristic that’s not practical is “social proof.” We often make
decisions based on what others do or say. And my favorite heuristic is
“familiarity.” It says that past behavior that led to good results is not a
guarantee for future results. The familiarity heuristic also explains why we
favor things and places we know over novelty. It’s one of those things we see
every day. We eat the same things, we walk the same route, we make the
same mistakes, and we complete the same tasks at work. Over and over
again. And then, we complain that our lives are stuck or boring. No wonder,
you’re making decisions based on familiarity. But who says that familiarity is
always a good thing? It’s good for certainty. But to achieve a breakthrough,
you need something different.
Making decisions based on heuristic techniques might ease the cognitive
load, but they are far from practical. And often, heuristics lead to unsatisfying
outcomes. If that’s the case, take it as a sign that you must change something.

Instead of relying on heuristics to filter information and make decisions, rely
on the main idea of pragmatism: True is what works. But don’t take it too
literally. “Taking drugs works for me,” is what a contentious friend told me
after I shared this idea with him. And he’s right—you can’t take this idea too
literally. But what can you take literally in life? Take the platitude, “Good
things come to those who wait,” for example. I don’t have to explain that it
doesn’t mean you should sit at home and wait forever until “good things”
happen.
Look at the “true is what works” idea as a filter that you can apply to all the
information that goes into your brain.
When faced with decisions, I ask myself: “Will the outcome of a decision
change the way I live?” If you ask that yourself consistently, you’ll find that

you automatically filter out useless information and only make decisions that
have an actual impact on the outcome of your life. You force yourself to use
whatever works—what’s useful. And what impacts your habits.
For example, conventional thinking says that bigger cities also bring you
bigger opportunities. I really thought that was true. That’s even the main
reason I moved to London. And yes, I did seize a big opportunity for me at
the time. But I also had bigger responsibilities and problems. Also, I don’t
like big cities. I hate crowded places, dirty air, and unreasonably high cost of
living. Clearly, living in a big city didn’t work for me. That way of thinking
had a negative impact on the way I lived. That’s why I eventually moved
back to Leeuwarden. It’s quiet, I know a lot of people here, I can work less,
make more, and I can drive anywhere in the city within ten minutes.
However, I also realize that for most people, my way of living doesn’t work.
They might find it boring or not exciting enough. So what? Do what works
for you.

STOP “THINKING”
Thinking is difficult. I never knew how to stop. It’s easy to stay inside your
head for hours, especially when you’re in bed at night. But I can confidently
say that 99% of all my thoughts in the past have been useless. I didn’t do
anything with my thoughts most of the time. I didn’t solve a problem. Nor
did I try to understand difficult ideas or concepts from books. I spent a lot of
time in my head doing this:
I called that thinking. But it was more like worrying, stressing, freaking out
— call it whatever you want. I call it a preoccupied mind. And with what?
And the list goes on:

“I wonder what my boss thinks?”
“What happens if I screw up and lose my job?”
“I think he doesn’t care about me.”
“I just keep failing.”
“Does she love me?”
“Why does my life suck?”
“Why is my life awesome, and other people’s lives are not?”
“I don’t care about my job. Is there something wrong with me?”
“I can’t finish anything. What’s wrong with me?”
“I want to quit.”
I just have one question for you: What’s the practical use of the above
thoughts?
Yes? I’m waiting. Still no answer? Exactly.
Those type of thoughts are not helping us. But we all have them. So how do
you get rid of them? Well, I’ve learned that you can’t get rid of them.
Remember? We can’t control our consciousness. We can only control what
thoughts we follow through on.
You only have to be aware of your thoughts. Acknowledge them. But never
blame yourself or say, “Why do I have these thoughts?” No one has the
answer to that. It’s better to be aware of your thoughts and decide what you
will ignore, and what you will give importance to.
For example, the thought of quitting whatever I’m doing in my life has been
on my mind as long as I remember. When I was in high school, I wanted to
quit and just find a job. When I played basketball, I wanted to quit, and later
did quit. I can go on and on until I reach the present. No matter how much I
love what I do, the thought of quitting and just walking away shows up in my
mind at least three or four times a month. In the past, those thoughts cost me

many nights of sleep.
About two years ago I had enough. I wanted to quit thinking. So, I started
becoming aware of my thoughts instead of always acting on every single
thought I had. “You don’t control me,” I would say to myself like a weirdo.
But it works. I’m much calmer and happier because of it. When I want to
quit, I still listen to it because sometimes it is a sign. But more often, it’s just
fear. And I refuse to surrender to it. And neither should you.

INSIDE YOUR CONTROL VS OUTSIDE
YOUR CONTROL
If you want to have useful thoughts, here’s a rule of thumb: Only think about
things you can control. That automatically eliminates about 99% of your
thoughts because there’s very little you control in life.
Only focus on what you control. Things like your:
Desires
Actions

Words
Intentions
What’s a useless thought? Anything out of your control and without a useful
purpose. Do you ever think about the past? That’s the perfect example of a
random thought that lacks a purpose, unless you’re reflecting on a past
decision or mistake you made. In the case of reflection, you’re doing
something useful. But other than that, every thought about the past serves no
purpose. From that point of view, it’s useless.
Ever fantasize about the future? That’s also useless. I’ve discovered two main
types of useful thoughts:
1. Thinking about how you can solve problems. A problem is just an
unanswered question. Put your brain to use and think about how you
can solve problems. There are a lot of those on this earth.
2. Understanding knowledge. That means this: Try to internalize
knowledge and think about how you can use that knowledge to
improve your life, career, work, relationships, etc.
That’s it. You can ignore every other thought. If you’re constantly thinking
without a useful purpose, it’s because you haven’t’ trained your mind yet.
You have to get out of your head. If not, you’ll go mental. Everyone will. No
exception.
Ask yourself: “Is that worth it?”
Do you really want to waste your time, energy, and life on useless thinking?
You and I both know the answer to that. Commit to stop thinking about
useless things. Start taking control of your mind. All that worrying about
the past and the future is not going to help you. It never did. And it never
will.

DON’T TRUST YOUR MIND
Have you ever made a decision that seemed illogical looking back? We’re
very illogical beings. Every person creates their own social reality. The way
you view the world is completely subjective because we all have cognitive
biases.
The concept of cognitive biases was introduced in 1972 by two
psychologists, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. A cognitive bias is a
systematic thinking error that impacts judgments, and therefore, our
decisions.
My favorite cognitive bias is the “attentional bias.” It’s scientific evidence for
the idea that your life is a result of your thoughts. The attentional bias states
that our perceptions are affected by our thoughts. And naturally, our
perceptions determine our actions and decisions, which make up our lives. If
you have negative thoughts, you also have a negative perception of life.
That’s what it says. Our mind might be illogical, but it’s also simple at the
same time.
Take one of the most well-known cognitive biases, the confirmation bias. It
explains the behavior of confirming our preconceptions. If you believe in
something, you will try hard to find information, clues, and signs to back that
up. In other words, you do everything to prove you’re not wrong. Instead of
looking at facts, you look at beliefs. And that’s what all cognitive biases do.
As of this writing, there are 106 decision-making related cognitive biases
known! I’ve read about most of them. And I’ve read several books and
studies about cognitive biases too. My conclusion is that your mind can’t be
trusted. Maybe my conclusion is also a cognitive bias. Who knows?

What it comes down to is this: Avoid making decisions based on beliefs,
obvious logic, and even science.
Scientists are also human beings. That means they have their own cognitive
biases. They are notorious for finding evidence for their preconceptions. The
solution to making better decisions is not more knowledge. Instead, I’ve
found that a pragmatic and neutral perspective leads to better-informed
decisions. Unfortunately, there’s no such thing as “the best decision.” If that
was the case, we lived in a perfect world full of people who made logical and
practical decisions. I like to look at it this way: There are only good-informed
and bad-informed decisions.
It’s very appealing to think we’ve got it all figured out because we’ve read a
few books or studies. There’s just one problem: You still can’t trust your
judgments, no matter how much knowledge you have. Being aware of that
simple thought helps you make better-informed decisions. Every time I’m
stuck in a thinking pattern, I try to break away by looking at the list of
cognitive biases. It’s free and easy. Just go to the Wikipedia for “list of
cognitive biases.” You’ll find that most biases seem like common sense. And
that’s exactly the point. Cognitive biases explain our illogical behavior.

LOOK AT FACTS
I hate assumptions. And yet, I assume things all the time. When someone
doesn’t answer my email, I assume they don’t care. When someone
apologizes, I assume it’s not genuine. When I have a headache, I assume I’m
ill. I know I’m not practical because assumptions are not facts.
If you want to think straight, you discard all assumptions, and only look at
facts. William James said it best in one of his lectures about pragmatism:
“The pragmatist clings to facts and concreteness, observes truth at its work in
particular cases, and generalizes.”
To make things simple, let’s look at two ways of making a decision. One
based on facts, and the other based on assumptions.
Does your product solve a problem? Or do you assume it does?

Are you able to raise money for your start-up? Or do you assume you
will?
Will you get a raise? Or do you assume your boss will give it to you?
Is the sale a done deal? Or do you assume your client will sign?
Do people like your art? Or do you assume they do?
I like to avoid assumptions as much as I can. I prefer to look at facts and then
draw conclusions. What if you can’t rely on facts? Well, sometimes you just
can’t find facts, or you have to make a quick decision. In those (very rare)
cases I prefer gut feeling. Whatever you do, never waste your thoughts on
other people’s ill-informed opinions and guesses.

TRUE VS UNTRUE
In the previous chapter, we talked about looking at facts. But are facts also
the truth? The answer is no. Confusing, right? It’s just like life. For example,
does God exist? I don’t know. I’ve never seen any evidence. Does that mean
God is not real? It doesn’t matter what I think. If God has an impact on the
way you live, it’s true for you no matter what scientists say.
Friedrich Nietzsche, the German philosopher who had a profound impact on
western philosophy, famously said: "There are no facts, only interpretations."
Nietzsche was a man of true self-knowledge. Sigmund Freud even said that
“he had a more penetrating knowledge of himself than any other man who
ever lived or was ever likely to live.” He was a very analytical thinker,
especially when it came to his own thoughts.
When Nietzsche said that there are no facts, he meant that we, as human
beings, ultimately rely on our interpretations of reality. There’s no way to
confirm reality objectively. That doesn’t mean nothing is real and that we’re
all living in a big dream. We just have to realize that facts are not the same
thing as the truth.
That simple thought saves you a lot of energy because it means no one can be
right or wrong. Don’t bother with convincing people with different opinions
of the “truth.” It’s just not a practical thing to do. Save your energy for other,
more useful things.

TAKE YOUR TIME TO THINK
I used to think that smart people are fast thinkers. “He thinks on his feet. He’s
really smart.” I tried it for many years. Every time I faced a problem,
discussion, or when someone asked me a question, I thought, “QUICK,
QUICK, QUICK!” Naturally, my first answers sucked.
Derek Sivers, one of my favorite thinkers, says he’s a slow thinker: “It’s a
common belief that your first reaction is the most honest, but I disagree. Your
first reaction is usually outdated. Either it’s an answer you came up with long
ago and now use instead of thinking, or it’s triggering a knee-jerk emotional
response to something that happened long ago.”
Thinking things through takes time. Every time I gave a quick answer, I
wasn’t thinking at all, I was impulsive. Derek Sivers trained himself not to
trust his first thoughts. That’s also what he did when his email consumed too
much of his time and attention. Being a public figure, Derek received a lot of
emails from his readers. Most of them contained “quick 5-minute” questions.
But as he says, if you get 100 of those questions, that adds up to 8 hours in a
day. After answering 192,000 emails between 2008 and 2016, Derek knew he
needed to do something about it. So he planned to go off the grid like a
modern-day Henry David Thoreau: “I was going to go hard-core, shut off all
email and social media, and make myself unreachable to all but a few close
friends and colleagues. It felt like the only solution.”
That was his first thought. “But then I realized I could remain reachable as
long as I don’t answer questions,” is what Derek writes on his blog
(https://sivers.org/slow). I’m glad he didn’t act on his first idea. His second
idea is much better. I’ve emailed Derek myself in the past, and I think what

he does makes a big impact on people’s lives.
What I’m trying to say is that when someone asks you a question, it’s okay to
say, “I don’t know.” You can also say that to yourself. I’ve often been too
hard on myself because I didn’t have an instant answer to my personal
problems. That doesn’t make you dumb. It makes you human.
Why are we even afraid that people think we’re stupid? It’s the perfect
example of slow thinking. Instead of following your instinct of, “I’ll prove
them!” you can take a step back and ask yourself, “Why do I even want to
come across as smart?” If you really think about it, it doesn’t matter what
others think of you. I think it’s always better to take your time to think. If
others think that makes you stupid, they are the ones who are.

NO MORE QUICK DECISIONS
“Shall we book a business trip to Thailand?”
“Are you interested in a speaking gig at company X?”
“Should we renovate the kitchen?”
“Do you think we should fire John Doe?”
“How about hiring another sales executive?”
Just a few questions others have asked me recently. And you know what?
Just as I like to take time to think deeply about my challenges, I also take
time to think “quick” decisions through. Every time I said yes to a speaking
gig, interview, or giving a seminar, I didn’t think about it for long. When
things are in the future, we’re more likely to say yes. “That trip is planned for
September. It’s now March. That’s ages from now!” And without thinking
about it, you commit to a five-day business trip or family vacation. But when
September comes, you’re either in a great professional flow, have other
(more important) commitments, or are in the middle of something else. Now,
all of a sudden, that quick yes from ‘ages’ ago is on your mind all the time.
“Should I cancel the trip? Should I go? Should I go for two days only?”
Why do we make things so complicated while we can easily solve these
things by just taking an extra day to THINK? That’s all you need. Just think
things through. Know yourself. For instance, I’m currently in a great writing
flow. I don’t feel the need to leave my city. I have a set routine every day,
and it works very well for me. I feel happy, and I enjoy my life a lot. When I
go away for even a weekend, my whole routine can be messed up. And then I
need another two weeks to get back to my ‘old’ self.
However, I don’t always have this mindset. Right now, I’m working on this

book, opening a new office, and buying a new apartment. I’m focused on a
few important things. But other times, I’m more flexible and actually do like
to travel, visit friends, business partners, and live a looser lifestyle.
That’s why I now take more time to make decisions. Instead of following my
first thought, I say, “Please give me a day or two to think about it.” That’s all
you need.

RELEASE YOUR MIND
Once I changed my perspective on life, I started straining my brain every
single day. I started reading two hours a day and taking extensive notes of the
things I learned. I also started writing articles to share the ideas I learned. In
the beginning, I felt like a new world opened up to me. I couldn’t get enough
of learning more. I bought new books every week and devoured every piece
of new knowledge I could get my hands on.
But after a few weeks, I had a mental breakdown. All of a sudden, my mind
froze up. I felt blocked. I couldn’t think, read, or write. My head hurt all day
long. That went on for a few days, almost a week. I felt ill and I didn’t
understand why. I couldn’t even think about why. And when I felt better, I
just picked up where I left off. This time, I went on for longer, about two
months before I hit another wall. But this time it was different again. No
matter what I tried, I didn’t feel like I was improving or learning new things.
But I kept going and pushing through the difficulty.
After this pattern occurred a few times, I finally understood what was going
on. Training your mind happens in stages—and before you can move on to
the next phase of your learning development, you have to get through a wall.
I believe that both learning skills and developing yourself happen in stages.
At the beginning of a new stage, things are easy to learn because everything
is new. But the closer you get to the end of a stage, things get more difficult.
In my case, I got headaches. But I wasn’t near the end yet because, after a
short setback, I got back at it again.
At some point, you hit a big wall. That’s the mental breakdown. It’s also a
point at which you want to give up whatever you’re trying to achieve:

Writing a book, starting a business, changing your career or leading a group
of people. When you hit a wall, everything stops. The book all of a sudden
seems useless, the business seems to fail, the career you want seems
unreachable, and the people have stopped taking you seriously. All is lost.
I’ve learned to train my brain to take this as a positive moment. When I reach
a wall, I know I’m close to the next stage of my development. Instead of
giving up, I’m happy. All I need to do, is to take a break, rejuvenate, and let
my mind recover. I hang out with my friends. Play some table tennis with my
brother at our office. Listen to my favorite artist like Jay-Z, Bob Dylan,
Kendrick Lamar, or Bon Iver. Watch movies (a lot of them). I just take some
time to relax and let my brain get stronger while I’m not thinking or working
on anything. And then, I get back to where I left off. I use my energy to break

through the wall. And it always works.

DRAW YOUR THOUGHTS
Before we invented language, we communicated and thought in images. But
for many centuries, words have been our primary way to communicate. And
that’s why we also think in words. When I think, I talk to myself. And when I
take notes, I also talk to myself.
“Create a chapter about drawing your thoughts,” is what I wrote in my
notebook when I came up with the idea for this chapter. I find that
fascinating. One of the best-known thinkers of all time, Leonardo da Vinci,
thought visually. How do I know this? I took a look at his notebooks, which
you can easily find if you Google them. Here’s an example:

Now, we don’t have to become this great at drawing, but I think we can still
learn something. Drawing frees your mind from the constant verbalization. I
started drawing the images for my blog posts over a year ago. My drawing
skills haven’t improved, but my articles have. And one of the reasons is that I
take time to think about how I can visually share my idea. I want readers to
immediately “get” what I’m trying to share in the article by looking at my
drawings.
That’s why I think a lot about visualizing an idea. Sometimes I draw a graph,
sometimes I emphasize a sentence or word, and I even make simple cartoons.

After I make the drawing, I often edit my article to make my idea clearer.
And some articles even start with a drawing.
This book also started with a drawing. It’s the drawing I used in the From
Chaos To Clarity chapter. Here it is again:
I made that drawing without a purpose. I was just visualizing some of my
ideas. One of my ideas is that it used to be chaos in my mind, until I found a
way to overcome it. As a result, I think clearly. That’s the whole drawing.
And now it’s a book.

BE YOURSELF (NOT WHAT YOU SHOULD
BE)
“Conquer yourself rather than the world.”
― René Descartes
I’d like to ask you a few questions:
What are you good at?
What are you bad at?
How do you learn new things?
What are you passionate about?
What do you dislike?
In other words: Who are you? What’s your DNA? Sure, biologically we’re all
more or less the same. We all have organs, bones, blood, nerves. We also all
die.
Why is self-knowledge important? I never had a clue. In all my years in
school, no one ever talked about knowing yourself and why it matters. But it
turns out that a lack of self-knowledge is the reason why I made the wrong
decisions in my life.
The jobs I had.
The girls I dated.
The things I chased.
The decisions I made.
The people I spent time with.
It didn’t match with my strengths, values, skills, and desires. My ex-girlfriend

wanted to travel the world and live in different countries. I hate that idea. I
want to stay close to my family and best friends. I don’t feel like I’m missing
out on something if I don’t live in other countries. Having a home is what
makes me happy. When you’re in a relationship with someone who has
different values, it’s a zero-sum game. One person always loses something.
We broke up.
I’ve worked in boiler rooms, selling foolish products to people who didn’t
need them. Why did I have a job that made me feel bad about myself? I don’t
know. My best guess is that I wanted the money. I thought that’s what you
do. But I didn’t know myself.
Today, I know myself better than I did ten years ago. And in ten years from
now, I’ll know myself better than I do today. Knowing yourself is step one.
Step two is acting on that knowledge.
Sometimes opportunities come my way and I feel like saying yes too quickly.
But I have to take a step back. And ask myself: Is this really me? Very often,
the answer is no. I’ve found that most things in life are not for me. Most jobs,
opportunities, countries, people, parties, lifestyles, books—they’re all not for
me. It’s about finding the things that are for me. Believe it or not, that’s a
very small list.

TAKE TIME TO REFLECT
We live busy lives. And sometimes there’s no time for thinking. When
thinking is not a priority, make it one. If you don’t, you’ll end up like me a
few years ago. I didn’t reflect on anything between 2012 and 2015. Result?
All of a sudden, I felt overwhelmed and didn’t know what to do with my life.
I had a true internal crisis on my hands. Since I had no idea what to do, I
started reading more books. And I noticed that many smart and happy people
kept journals. They also reflected more on their life. More specifically, they
reflected on the things they learned, mistakes they made, and the goals they
achieved.
When I started daily journaling, I began with writing my own autobiography.
It’s not meant for publication. It’s meant for reflection and learning. If you
don’t know what to write about—write your life story. I’m sure you’ll learn
more about yourself with every paragraph you write.
I journal and make sure to read my notes once a week. That’s all I mean
when I talk about reflecting. I do it for three reasons:
1. 
It helps me to uncover my mistakes so I can avoid them in the
future.
2. 
It helps me to value my progress when I read my past achievements.
3. 
To get my thoughts in order so I can second guess myself. That
helps me to make better decisions. 
In short, I journal and reflect because it’s useful.

MY MONEY RULES
One of my friends told me he hates his job. I asked him why he didn’t take
any action. “I need the money,” he said. I automatically knew that he
assumed that the only option for him is to quit. The reason is that we become
too dependent on something when we give it too much importance.
There’s a simple solution to devalue the value of money. I live by these five
rules:

That’s what I’ve done for the past three years. And I haven’t had a single
thought about money. Actually, that’s not true. I still think about money.
Everybody does. But as soon as I think, “I have enough money in my savings
account,” I stop thinking about money. No matter what happens, if you have
enough money to survive for six months, you’ll figure it out.
There’s only one condition: Invest in your skills. It’s naïve to think we’ll
always be able to find a job or make money. It takes effort. But since when is

that a surprise?
I just make sure I invest my money instead of spending it. Investing money is
not only about investing in the stock market or in real estate. I have no
problem paying three grand for a new laptop because it’s a tool I use to do
my job, and that makes me money. Also, I’m never cheap when it comes to
buying important things. I’d rather buy a good jacket that lasts years than buy
a cheap one that I have to replace next year.
Simply put, I don’t buy things I don’t need. I don’t need a new iPhone every
year. I also don’t need five thousand dollar shoes. But that doesn’t mean I
own only one pair of shoes. I simply don’t buy everything I like. Buying stuff
in excess is not practical because I don’t have enough space. Plus, I like to
train myself to resist things to improve my self-discipline.
Remember: Money is a replaceable resource. When you’re out of it, you can
earn it back. You can’t say the same for time. Don’t spend too much time
thinking about money.

DON’T TRY TO THINK YOUR WAY OUT OF
EVERYTHING
This doesn’t make sense at first sight, but when you think too hard, you often
come up with bad ideas. That’s because you can’t actively think your way out
of everything. We’ve all had good ideas while taking a shower. That’s
because we’re not actively thinking.
It’s good to let your attention wander and stop thinking. This is also a part of
controlling your mind. You have the ability to decide when you want to let go
of your thoughts. Similar to relaxing your muscles when you lay on the couch
after a tough day, you can let loose of your thoughts.
You can do that in many different ways. Some like to take a yoga class.
Others prefer to meditate every day. The medium doesn’t matter. I’ve learned
that there are many ways to relax. However, only one thing is critical: You
don’t need anything to relax but yourself. You don’t need yoga, exercise,
meditation, music, scents, or whatever it is you think you need. Let go of
everything. You can escape your outside world and go inside your mind to
find peace. If you can’t do that right now, train yourself. Become aware of
your thoughts, observe them, and let them go. That’s the whole process. You
can do that anytime, anyplace. You don’t need a different scenery or class to
do those things. Let go and relax. And do it as often as you think is necessary.
You’ll find that the moments you’re not thinking are just as important as the
times you are actively thinking.

BE UNCONVENTIONAL
I’ve grown to hate conventional thinking. Not because I want to be different
but because conventional thinking gives you conventional results. I don’t like
that. And if you liked conventional results, you wouldn’t be reading this
book.
Let’s examine decision making for a second. The most conventional method
for decision making is to create a pros and cons list. Benjamin Franklin is the
first who documented this method. He wrote about it to his friend, Joseph
Priestley, in a letter to him in 1772.  And today, we create these lists all the
time.
What are the pros and cons of…
“Quitting my job?”
“Breaking up with my boyfriend?”
“Taking this job offer?”
“Buying a new car?”
“Starting a business?”
And then, we take a sheet of paper, draw a line in the middle of it, and start
listing the pros on the left, and the cons on the right (or vice versa).
Even though I like the simplicity of this method, I stopped using it after one
of my friends recommended me to create one of these lists when my first
relationship hit a rough patch. I actually made a pros and cons list for
breaking up with my then-girlfriend! When I think about it now, I’m
ashamed. And it didn’t even make any sense because there are always factors
that, by themselves, outweigh all of the other factors. Nearly all pros and

cons lists for relationships are the same.
Pros of staying in a relationship: Having someone to share
everything with, you can have sex, go on holidays, etc.
Cons of staying in a relationship: Less free time for myself, getting in
fights, going to in-laws, etc.
It’s always the same. And it’s not useful. The same is true for quitting a job
you hate. The pro is that you’re free from a bad job. The con is that there’s a
lot of uncertainty.
It’s time to break free from this conventional thinking. Instead of binary
thinking, start thinking more abundantly. It’s not this or that in life. You
can have this and that. I always thought I had to either quit my business or
take a job. Also, many of my friends think you should quit your job to start a
business. Who ever said these things?
When my business wasn’t growing a few years ago, I just took a job at a
large IT research firm. I did both things. I ran my business in the evenings
and weekends (and sometimes during the day), and the rest of my time, I did
my work for the firm. Also, you can start a business while you still have a
job. That’s what I mean when I talk about thinking outside of the box.
We always limit ourselves by narrow and conventional thinking. We always
want to stay within a box. That’s because we never take a step back to look at
the larger picture. Take a look at the drawing below.

If you’re standing inside the maze, you’ll probably start walking towards the
middle, right? That’s what you should do when you’re in a maze. However,
this maze is different. The prize is not in the middle, it’s outside the maze.
But you can only see the goal if you take a helicopter view. It’s impossible to
see the goal from within the maze. And yet, that’s how most of us live. We
do things conventionally because that’s “how it’s done.”
When you stop doing things the way they’re done, you’ll start doing things
how you get it done.

DON’T ASK WHY
I’m a fool with sending emails. Especially when it comes to selecting the
recipient. I always type the first letter of a name and hit enter. I trust the
computer and never check whether the address I’ve selected is actually the
person I want to mail. I’m lazy. Often, it doesn’t matter and I get funny
responses back from people.
But one time this simple mistake cost me $150K in business. I was working
with two companies on a multi-year consulting deal. Both of my contacts had
the same name, let’s call them Wim. One Wim was an existing client, let’s
call him Wim A, and the other was a prospect, Wim B. Both guys wanted the
same type of consulting for their companies. But I gave Wim A a better rate
because he was a loyal customer. However, instead of sending the contract to
Wim A, I sent the contract to Wim B.
This time, it wasn’t an innocent mistake. Wim B previously had seen my
proposal, which had a higher total price. But when he saw that Wim A got a
lower rate, he was upset. “Why does he get a lower rate? Is that how you do
business?” He decided not to do business with us.
I learned three things.
1. Always double check.
2. Small things can become big things.
3. And don’t play favors.
There’s no use in asking why I made a mistake. Or why I was always lazy
with email. I just was. And I was wrong. There’s no way to justify my
mistake. Never brush important details off and say, “It doesn’t matter.”

Maybe it doesn’t matter that you hit snooze every single day, or that you
ignore the details of your book, report, or movie.
The point is that not striving for perfection becomes a habit. Don’t worry
about being a perfectionist—there’s no such thing. More often than not,
people are the opposite. Perfectionism is merely an excuse. In reality, we’re
scared of what people think of our work.
Either way, there’s no point in asking “why” when you deal with obstacles,
challenges, or mistakes. Instead, think about what you can do to overcome or
prevent the things that are holding you back.

THINK ABOUT THE DETAILS EVEN MORE
I overlooked a small detail, and it cost me a lot. But the lesson I learned was
more valuable than the business I could gain. Details are probably the most
important thing in business, work, sports, art, and life in general. “The devil
is in the detail.” It’s one of my favorite platitudes. But I never followed the
advice in the past. The main reason was my impatience. I always tried to
hurry everything: Sending emails, making calls, writing reports, assignments,
essays, you name it. I thought that it mattered that I got the work done. But I
was wrong. Because things often seem easy from the outside. Until you start
doing them.
This book took me 15 months to write. I spent countless hours researching
the topic. I also spent hours on writing, editing, cutting, writing more, and
editing it again. And then, again. I also changed the title three times, and the
subtitle even more than that.
My first title was The Art Of Practicality. I initially liked it a lot because it
sounded familiar. But as I started writing a book about thinking, I also
applied the methods to my own book. So I thought, “What does the art of
even mean?” I didn’t have a good answer. I took that as a sign that I needed
to change the title. You know what’s funny?
My second title was The Power Of Pragmatic Thinking. Like a genius, I
came up with another generic title (which was even longer than the previous
one)! Do you know how many books start with The Power Of? A quick book
titles search on Goodreads with “the power of” gave me 83895 results. That’s
a lot of books with those words in the title or subtitle. One of the things I’ve
learned about writing books is that you must stand out somehow. No one

cares about a better book on thinking. Instead, it’s likely that you picked up
this book because you expected something different. But with the previous
titles that I had drafted, I knew no one would think it’d be different.
Two weeks before I published THINK STRAIGHT, I started promoting it on
my site and social media. And quickly, my readers became excited. Soon,
emails like these came pouring in:
“Can’t wait for the book! Well done.”
“I am so excited to read your new book!!”
“What a determined person you are! I look forward to Think Straight.”
I love my readers. That’s why I put in a lot of time to get the title right. At
that time, no one had read the book. But based on the title, readers were
already excited. And that was my goal. To everyone who emailed me before
the launch: I hope I delivered ;)
Thinking about details is nothing more than doing your job. If you’re a
writer, your job is to write the best book you possibly can. If you’re a
designer, your job is to create the best design you can. You’re not here to
write one book and call it quits. Or to design one product and retire. If you
want to grow—financially, spiritually, mentally—you must revisit the details
all the time.
Never underestimate or overlook details if you want to do a job right. And if
you don’t, it’s better not to do it at all.

TAKE THINKING OUT OF THE EQUATION
I don’t want to become someone who only thinks and never acts. In fact, the
only reason I think is that I want to do more with my life. I like to get more
out of it because it gives me satisfaction. That’s why I don’t like to think on
an average day. Sounds paradoxical, right? “You say you should think better,
but now you’re saying you’re thinking less yourself.”
That’s exactly what I’m saying. Improve the quality of your thoughts, so you
improve the quality of your actions. And always have an imbalance.
Action > Thinking
The best way to make sure you act more is to rely on habits. Take exercise.
I’ve struggled with staying in shape for all my life. And I was overweight for
years. I always played mind games with myself about exercise and diet.
“Should I go for a run or go to the gym?”
“I’ll have this bag of chips and hit the gym tomorrow.”
“What days should I exercise? Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays? Or
maybe Tuesdays and Thursdays?”
That’s too much useless thinking. Instead, I’ve made a few basic rules:
Exercise at least 30 minutes a day (every day)
Don’t burn yourself out (don’t go all out)
Eat healthy (no junk-food)
Don’t consume more calories than you burn
Keep track of what you eat and how much you exercise
When you combine a few rules, you have a system. And a system helps you
to take the thinking part out of the equation. The only thinking you need to do

is when your system doesn’t give you the results you want. If my system
would make me feel bad or gain weight, I would rethink it. And even if it
works, a system is never perfect. That’s why I regularly think about what I
can change or how I can improve my systems.

DON’T LIVE WITH REGRETS
Growing up, my grandmother was always around. She was a very kind
person. Maybe too kind because she made many sacrifices in her life. For her
parents, brothers and sisters, husband, and later on, her children. That’s also a
part of life. You can’t live together and build a strong family without giving.
But the biggest sacrifice she made was to live in The Netherlands for the last
part of her life instead of her home country of Iran. As long as I remember,
she always talked about the past. Always. And especially during the last few
years of her life, she almost cried every day because of regret.
Fortunately, my mother, father, brother and I visited her often and cheered
her up. But through the laughs, I could see the regret. It was always present.
I’ve learned many lessons from my grandmother. Mostly about kindness and
the importance of having strong family values. But the most important
lesson I’ve learned was that you don’t regret what you did in life, you
regret what you didn’t do. And when my grandmother passed away in
January 2015, I decided to live by that lesson no matter what.
For example, I always thought I wanted to travel the world and live in
different cities. I know, it’s not an original goal. I speak to a lot of people
who love that idea of freedom and exploration. Why is that? I think a lot of it
comes from pop culture. A lot of people idolize people like Jack Kerouac and
Ernest Hemingway, who were famous for their travels. And young folks now
are inspired by social media personalities who also travel the world and share
it on their Instagram feed. The medium might have changed, but the desire to
travel to others and share your experiences with others has not. However, that
lifestyle is not for everyone.

But I didn’t know that before I actually started traveling. How could I? Some
things in life you must experience to know what they’re like in reality. No
one can truly feel how it is to be an entrepreneur unless they start doing it.
You can read all the business books you want, and watch as many videos
about entrepreneurship as you want, but they will not make you an
entrepreneur. Ever. You will only end up living someone else’s life.
I’d rather eat rice and beans so I can do the things that I love instead of
having a job that makes me miserable, but pays well. At the end of the day,
this is your life and the only way you can live with yourself is to follow your
strongest desires. Just make sure you think straight so you eventually act on
those thoughts.

NEVER LOOK BACK
I hardly look back on life. I never daydream of the past. I don’t look at old
photos all day long. I don’t even think about taking pictures because I’m too
involved in the present. Sometimes, I feel like most people are stuck in the
past. They live their life in the past tense. Instead of enjoying a moment, they
grab their phone and take a picture of it. Instead of living life through a lens, I
prefer to be present at all times. Now, I must be honest that I fail to be 100%
present.
However, I intend to live now. And I know I’m successful because I never
have the urge to relive the past. I’m too busy enjoying now. That doesn’t
mean I never stop to take a family picture. I just don’t go around snapping
millions of pictures that I will never look at again. Think about it, when do
you have the time to take a look at all your memories? How many pictures
and videos do you have? How many old documents, old diplomas,
memorabilia, and other physical things do you have stored that remind you of
the past?
If you’re having a hard time letting go of the past, let me make it easier for
you. You’ll never going to…
Use your first iPhone that you’ve kept in your desk drawer for years
Edit that video from the weekend trip you took with friends
Look at your old school papers, essays, and grades
Wear those old clothes you have in storage
Do anything with the object that reminds you of your first date
When we hold on to a lot of things in the past, they form an obstacle to living
in the present.

The only useful purpose I can think of for looking back is to learn. You can
draw many lessons from looking at your past. That’s why I like to journal. I
regularly go back to my journal entries to understand my thought process at
the time. Especially when something doesn’t work out the way I want, I go
back and try to understand why.
For example, in 2017, after two years of regular blogging, and building up a
newsletter with more than 22.000 members, I decided to start a paid
membership site. Before I started the membership site, I contemplated it
excessively. “If I get 1000 readers to support me with $5 a month, I can make
a living off writing, training, and helping others. The paid members will get
exclusive content from me. That’s a good value proposition.” That was my
thinking process. I came up with the number 1000 because of Kevin Kelly’s
seminal article, 1000 True Fans. I also studied how other bloggers started
their membership sites. Everything looked good on paper. And I had sold
hundreds of online courses before that, so I knew people valued my work.
But things didn’t turn out as I expected. After a month, 78 people signed up.
After six weeks, I pulled the plug on the membership site. Many of my
friends, colleagues, and even paid members told me I stopped too quickly.
Maybe so. However, I’m not the type to quit when things are hard. I’ve
thought about quitting education many times during my 6,5 years when I was
getting two degrees. I also thought about quitting my family business many
times because it’s very hard to make a living. But that’s never going to
change. No, instead, I quit my membership site because I thought straight:
“At this rate, it takes me more than 12 months to get 1000 paid members.
Plus, within the first month, half a dozen people canceled. So if I take
cancellations into account, it will take me even longer. Also, during the past
six weeks, I’ve felt an obligation to provide exclusive content to my paid
members. I want them to get something out of the membership. That pressure

costs me a lot of time that I could spend on growing our family business or
my coaching practice. All in all—a membership site is not the right strategy
for me.”
Instead of making a simple calculation of 1000/78, I thought further than that.
How can you get people to stay? How much work does it take you? And what
are alternative ways of achieving my goals? There are many other ways I can
help others. There are also many other ways for me to make a living. That’s
why I decided to pull the plug on my membership site after only six weeks. If
things don’t work out, it’s not the end of the world. Make a decision. Stand
by it. Move on. And only look back to learn.
When I look back on my experiment with starting a membership site, I
could’ve easily prevented myself from wasting a lot of time. It took me about
three months to create the membership area, create content, write copy, etc.
Before I started, I knew that it would take time to run a membership site.
Remember the chapter about details? If you want to do a job, do it right or
not at all. In this case, I should have done nothing at all. Why? Because I
spend too much time on running my family business, writing articles, books,
creating courses, and consulting. From looking back, I’ve learned that I can
only take on one big project per every aspect of my life.
So yes, look back, but don’t stare for too long. Life happens now.

SPEND YOUR TIME WELL
Time is limited. Sooner or later we all figure that out. And once we do, we
start being more conscious of the way we spend our time. Thinking is a
double-edged sword. It can help you. But it can also destroy you. The
outcome depends on how you use your thoughts. Your mind is an instrument
—nothing more, nothing less. In this book, I shared how I’ve learned to use
my brain more effectively. Sometimes you have to think differently, and
there are times you must stop thinking altogether. It’s up to you to decide
when you should deploy which method. But no matter what you do, don’t
spend too much time in thought because that’s a waste of life. At the end of
the day, thinking by itself is useless without action. But like we talked about
earlier, action follows thought.
Effective thoughts? Effective actions.
To clarify what I mean, I’ve made a list of what I think are effective thoughts:
Making your life better
Growing your career and business
Visualizing your future
Thinking of new ideas
Solving problems
Coming up with fun things to do with your partner, family, or friends
It’s really not that complicated. However, sticking with this way of thinking
is very hard and takes work. Don’t expect to become a practical thinker after
reading this book only once. Like any skill, better thinking requires daily
practice. I do that by looking at everything that happens in my life as an
exercise for thinking better.

Because if I don’t, I start wasting my time on useless things like complaining,
feeling sorry for myself, and not enjoying my life.
We’re collectively thinking so much we’re missing out on life. And it has
nothing to do with fancy things other people do. We all know that the beauty
of life lies in the small things. Did you notice the sunshine this morning when
you woke up? Or the raindrops? Did you notice the smell of your coffee? Did
you feel the texture of your cereals?
If your answer is no, you definitely need to get out of your head.
Stop thinking and start feeling.

INNER CALM
There’s only one end goal to all of this: Inner calm. No matter what you
experience in life, and no matter what happens to you, your mind should stay
calm under all circumstances.
That’s the ultimate prize in life. Mastery of the mind means that we control
our mind. Remember: You can only achieve that through daily practice.
Some people call it meditation and others might call it mindfulness. No
matter what you call “finding inner calm,” please don’t overcomplicate it.
You don’t need a ten-thousand-dollar course to learn how to find some peace
inside your head.
Just sit down, be one with your thoughts, observe them, and then, ignore
them. That’s all there is to meditation.
I “meditate” all the time—when I walk, exercise, write, wait, sit, lay,
whatever. I can always find the time and energy to go within myself to find
peace. I don’t need anything to do it. That’s important to realize. I’ve said it
before. But it’s so important that I’ll say it again: You don’t need a yoga mat,
music, or teacher to help you control your thoughts. You can go within
yourself to find calm anytime you want. You also don’t need a holiday, new
shoes, or a drink.
How do I know this?
I control my mind.
I decide what it does.
So can you.

THINK BEYOND YOURSELF
Many of the ideas I shared in this book come from the philosophy of
pragmatism. If you Google ‘pragmatism’, you’ll probably read that the
philosophical movement was founded by Charles Sanders Peirce, a former
professor at Johns Hopkins University. But if you look closer into the story
behind the philosophy, you’ll find that it was William James who actually
credited Peirce as the founder in 1898.
Even though Charles Sanders Peirce was a well-respected academic during
the 1880s, he had fallen from grace by the end of the 19th century. James and
Peirce got to know each other during the 1860s when they were both students
at the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. Peirce, once considered as a
prodigy of mathematics and logic, went on to become a professor at Johns
Hopkins University. But he lost his position in 1884 due to a scandal
involving his re-marriage. It’s truly a sad story.
Peirce’s first wife left him in 1875 and shortly after that, he became involved
with another woman, while still being legally married. However, his divorce
became final eight years later. During those eight years, he lived with a
woman he was not married to. Apparently, Simon Newcomb, who was
Peirce’s colleague, told on him. Consequently, he was let go in what became
a public scandal. Sadly, Peirce never found academic employment again and
lived in poverty for years after he was fired. Peirce even lived and slept on
the streets of New York City for years.
No one helped him, except for his old friend William James. After James
overcame his depression in 1870, he started building a body of work that,
more than a century later, remains relevant. James became a Harvard

professor and an academic celebrity due to the publication of his book,
Principles of Psychology. A book that took him twelve years to write and was
published in 1890. In contrast to his friend, James’ career was on the rise for
years.
And out of nowhere, in 1898, William James credited “the principle of
pragmatism” to the forgotten Charles Sanders Peirce, in a lecture called
“Philosophical Conceptions and Practical Results.”
Pragmatism means that one must look at the practical value of ideas. James
believed scientists wasted their time on abstract ideas and theories that had no
impact on people’s lives. Would you change the way you lived if a scientist
proved how the earth was created? Louis Menand, author of Pragmatism: A
Reader, says of the principle of pragmatism that, “We can never hope for
absolute proof of anything. All our decisions are bets on what the universe is
today, and what it will do tomorrow.”
Regardless of what people think of pragmatism, one thing is sure: William
James did a favor to Peirce by crediting the philosophy to him. And that is
exactly what makes James great. He didn’t strive to take credit for something
that he created. Because without James’ actions and promotion of
pragmatism, the philosophy wouldn’t exist and Peirce would be forgotten.
By that act, James did something meaningful—he helped a friend. Peirce
gained some respect and even wrote several papers in his last years. And
from all the wisdom of James, that’s the most important thing I’ve learned.
William James himself once said: “The greatest use of a life is to spend it on
something that will outlast it.”
Practically speaking, there’s no purpose to doing something that outlasts you.
You won’t be there to see it anyway. But that’s not the point. If we live our

lives every day with that idea in mind—that we should strive for
doing/creating useful things that matter to others—we end up spending our
time on things that actually make a difference. When you do that, life
automatically has meaning—to everyone.

THANK YOU: A GIFT
Thank you for going on this journey with me. My goal was to take you inside
my thinking process. I hope that this book serves as an anchor to you and that
you read it more than once. Especially during trying times.
I appreciate that you took the time to finish THINK STRAIGHT. Deciding to
read one book over the other might seem small to a reader who has millions
of options, but to me, the author, it means everything.
So, thank you.
To show you my gratitude, I want to offer you something in return: A bonus
eBook with a behind the scenes look at my personal journal entries. In the
bonus eBook for THINK STRAIGHT, I take you one step deeper into the
creative journey.
If you enjoyed this book, and want to know how it was made, go to
DariusForoux.com/THINK-STRAIGHT-BONUS to subscribe to my
newsletter and download the bonus for free.
I hope we can continue this conversation about how to think better.
Therefore, I invite you to share your story with me, personally or on my site’s
community page, where other readers share theirs.
I like to build real relationships with my readers. That’s why I always ask
people to stay in touch.
My desire is to see other people do well in life.
So, please, go out there, and make good shit happen. And then, let me know
about it!

Take care,
Darius

FURTHER READING
Pragmatists like William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, and John Dewey
didn’t view themselves as philosophers. In fact, they believed that most of
philosophy was useless. Even though we might call them philosophers today,
they had other professions. Throughout history, pragmatic thinkers had
occupations like judges, educators, politicians, and poets.
Instead of talking endlessly about which philosophy is best, they used the
ideas of pragmatism to live a better life. And to live a good life, you don’t
need endless study of philosophy. Instead, we must act! That’s why I’ve kept
the further reading of this books short.
If you want to read more about pragmatic thinking, I recommend reading
William James’ work. He is by far my favorite pragmatic thinker. The
biography of James by Ralph Barton is also a great view inside his practical
mind, and contains his journal entries.
If you just want to read one book on pragmatism in general, I recommend
Louis Menand’s book, which contains several important texts from the most
important pragmatist philosophers. In his book, Menand also shares an
insightful introduction that reveals more about the core ideas of pragmatism.
Enjoy!
Pragmatism and Other Writings by William James
The Thought And Character Of William by Ralph Barton Perry
Pragmatism: A Reader by Louis Menand

