Technology and Investment, 2012, 3, 13-17 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ti.2012.31003 Published Online February 2012 (http://www.SciRP.org/journal/ti) 
Privacy Negotiation in Socio-Technical Systems 
Murthy Rallapalli1, Dinesh Verma1,2 
1Systems Engineering, IBM, Atlanta, USA  
2Systems Engineering, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, USA 
Email: mr@us.ibm.com 
 
Received October 30, 2011; revised November 30, 2011; accepted December 7, 2011 
ABSTRACT 
A socio-technical system (STS) is an approach to complex organizational work design that recognizes the interaction 
between people and technology in workplaces. The term also refers to the interaction between society’s complex infra-
structures and human behavior. In this sense, society itself, and most of its substructures, are complex socio-technical 
systems. This paper addresses a class of socio-technical systems, represented by web services in a number of domains 
and attempts to understand the possibility of empowering the web users and consumers to have a say in the develop-
ment of privacy agreements. This paper examines the likelihood of the web users and consumers leveraging such a ca-
pability, should it exist. This should improve the way privacy agreements are handled that benefits both the service pro-
viders and the web users. 
 
Keywords: Privacy; Socio-Technical System; Framework; Privacy Framework; Negotiating Protocol; Web Services 
1. Introduction 
A socio-technical system is defined as a mixture of peo-
ple and technology. Depending upon what the system is 
addressing, it can become very complex. The actors in a 
STS context diagram could include hardware elements, 
software elements, actual physical surroundings, people, 
procedures, laws & regulations, data sources and data 
structures. It is configurable meaning that particular com- 
ponents in the STS can change or adjust in response to 
new requirements over time. For instance, an e-com- 
merce website may introduce payments by PayPal in ad- 
dition to a credit card by changing the way customers can 
make payments. But this change may also be reflected in 
changes in procedure (e.g. criterion for accepting from 
PayPal) and people (credit history). 
The commonly used web services represent a class of 
socio-technical system that modern society has become 
increasingly dependent on. The proliferation of such web 
services, along with the increase in consumer awareness 
regarding data privacy and corresponding increases in 
regulatory and legal requirements for personal privacy 
have resulted in a heightened focus on the need to protect 
the personal privacy of web service users. While millions 
of web users leverage web services, a cohesive approach 
to tackle data privacy has not kept pace with this usage. 
In the following sections, this paper will examine the 
elements of the STS associated with e-commerce trans-
actions including the web consumer, the service provider, 
and the web services themselves. This is the first in the 
series of three papers examining the aspects of the pri-
vacy negotiation STS and ways to improve how the sys-
tem operates. 
This paper is organized in the following sections: Sec-
tion 2 is a discussion on web users & privacy. Section 3 
discusses the concept of privacy negotiation. Section 4 
describes a model for privacy constraints negotiation. 
Section 5 includes conclusions and future work. 
Literature Review 
In the recent Web services research area, there are in-
creasing discussions about automated privacy technolo-
gies for supporting privacy data of web user. For exam-
ple, Yee and Korba’s research [1] (“Privacy Policy 
Compliance for Web Services”) focuses on privacy com-
pliance of web services, the primary research examines 
privacy legislation to derive requirements for privacy 
compliance systems. This research proposes architecture 
for a privacy policy compliance system that satisfies the 
requirements and discusses the strengths and weaknesses 
of the proposed architecture. The research further dis-
cusses the strengths and weaknesses of the architecture 
for Privacy Policy Compliance Systems (PPCS). Wei Xu 
[2] introduced a framework that addresses consumer pri-
vacy concerns in the context of highly customizable 
composite Web services. Wei’s approach is based on cer- 
tain automated techniques to check for compliance of 
consumer privacy policies to realize customizable pri-
vacy conscious composite services. In this framework, 
privacy obligations are respected when the code for the 
service is executed. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                   TI 

M. RALLAPALLI  ET  AL. 
14 
Carminati’s [3] design proposes a model titled pub-
lish-find-bind. In this model, the approach is based on 
service requestors discovering the published web ser-
vices by the service creators. Privacy control measures 
are concerned with what happens to data after individuals 
have released it to organizations for particular purposes. 
With each of these solutions is the absence of a trusted 
third party within their web services architecture. While 
the reviewed studies do include a model or architecture, 
this paper proposes a unique model that includes a third 
party in the architecture that can broker a negotiated pri-
vacy agreement between the web user and the service 
provider. None of the other related research addresses the 
privacy aspect of an e-commerce transaction. The pro-
posed framework addresses the protection of privacy 
information in a harmonized e-commerce transaction. 
Applying a third party approach to the Generic Frame-
work model makes the current work unique in compari-
son to reviewed research studies. This current framework 
proposal may lead to a new type of e-commerce on the 
Internet, where in service providers are segregated on the 
basis of their privacy data handling. 
In addition, there is no indication that any of the prin-
ciple researchers cited below focused on protecting the 
consumer’s privacy data rather than the “sale” itself. This 
research has more focus on protecting the consumer’s 
privacy data rather than the “sale” itself. It promotes a 
harmonized framework to protect the privacy data, obvi-
ating the service provider from protecting the privacy 
data. 
2. Web Users & Privacy 
As Web services become more prevalent in SOA based 
applications, the protection of privacy data of web ser-
vice users is becoming an increasingly important concern. 
Lack of awareness on the web user’s side gives rise to 
monopolistic attitudes on behalf of service providers re-
garding how to treat web user privacy data. Two-thirds 
of the people surveyed by the UK privacy watchdog (UK 
Information Commissioner’s Office) organization want 
marketing opt-outs to be clearer, while 62% want a 
clearer explanation of how personal information will 
actually be used. The survey found that 71% did not read 
or understand privacy policies [4]. When the web users 
are not serious or care about their privacy data, there is 
little incentive for the service provider to tighten up pri-
vacy policies. 
In the prevailing state of web services, privacy con-
straints and the associated agreement definitions is the 
responsibility of the service provider. The web user is 
limited to either accepting or declining this agreement. 
This is reflected in Figure 1. 
This current environment offers us the opportunity to 
consider the following questions: 
 
Figure 1. Privacy agreement by a service provider. 
 
• Should the web user have an ability to negotiate the 
privacy agreement with the service provider? 
• Should such ability exist, will it help get web service 
users and consumers to care more about their privacy 
and engage in the negotiating process? 
• Is it possible to develop a generic framework to fa-
cilitate the above? 
Figure 1 is an example of a typical privacy agreement 
provided by the service provider. Choices for the web 
user are limited to either “Accept” or “Decline”. This 
indicates the upper hand the service provider has in dictat-
ing the privacy terms. 
3. Privacy Negotiation 
3.1. Need for the Web Users to Negotiate 
Before proposing any new privacy framework, let’s ex-
amine the following: “Is there a need for a web user to 
read the privacy terms presented in the privacy agree-
ment by the service provider?” Currently, it is the service 
provider who provides the terms of the privacy agree-
ment including how privacy data of the web consumer is 
managed. However, these service providers of trust are 
not foolproof as shown below: 
Example 1: Facebook has, in two separate instances, 
significantly abused the trust of its members by sharing 
personal information unilaterally without letting the 
members know in advance [5]. First, when Facebook 
started providing updates about changes in member 
profiles, and second, when it broadcasted members’ 
purchases on other websites to their friends. Facebook 
is not alone in abusing the members’ personal privacy 
data [6]. 
Example 2: ChoicePoint, a Georgia-based Company, 
sells information in three markets-insurance, business 
and government, and marketing. According to a 2010 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                   TI 

M. RALLAPALLI  ET  AL. 
15
quarterly statement filed at the Security and Exchange 
Commission, ChoicePoint sells: “claims history data, 
motor vehicle records, police records, credit information 
and modeling services, employment background screen-
ings and drug testing administration services, public re-
cord searches, vital record services, credential verifica-
tion, due diligence information, Uniform Commercial 
Code searches and filings, DNA identification services, 
authentication services and people and shareholder loca-
tor information searches, print fulfillment, database and 
campaign management services etc.” [7]. 
An April 13, 2001 article in the Wall Street Journal 
reported that profiling company ChoicePoint provided 
personal information to at least thirty-five government 
agencies [5]. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is 
conducting an investigation of ChoicePoint on the com-
plaint of giving businesses, private investigators, and law 
enforcement access to data that previously had been sub-
jected to Fair Information Practices. In February 2005, 
ChoicePoint announced that the company sold personal 
information of at least 145,000 Americans to a criminal 
ring engaged in identity theft. California police have re-
ported that the criminals used the ChoicePoint data to 
make unauthorized address changes on at least 750 peo-
ple, and investigators believe that personal private in-
formation of up to 400,000 people in the United States 
may have been compromised [8].  
Example 3: On February 20th, 2009, one of the largest 
payment card transaction processing companies in the 
United States reported a security breach. Information 
about the incident emerged slowly and few realized the 
magnitude and extent of the resulting impact. The final 
tallies proved shocking: over 100 million card accounts 
and 100,000 merchants impacted. The company’s stock 
plunged by 75 percent within six weeks. Stunning as it 
may be, this incident is merely one in a growing trend of 
evermore sophisticated, continually ongoing data com-
promises [9]. These are not one time data breaches either. 
Data breaches happen more often than reported in the 
press. With the advent of globalization, number of data 
breaches globally is increasing and global breaches are 
not systematically reported as they are in the US. Table 1 
provides a partial list of all the data breaches in 2007. 
What these incidents indicate is that the privacy agree-
ments provided by the service providers are not being 
strictly enforced either by accident or by negligence.  
As socio-technical systems networks evolve into the 
next generation single window of communication chan-
nels for the vast majority of netizens, it is highly likely 
that users will become more sophisticated about de-
manding control of their personal information. 
A 2009 survey conducted by Ponemon Institute shows 
that organizations spent an average of $6.6 million per 
incident and more than $200 per compromised record 
Table 1. Partial list of data breaches in 2005. 
Date 
Name 
Biz Type 
Breach Type
1/12/2007
MoneyGram 
Biz 
Hack 
1/13/2007
North Carolina Dept. of 
 Revenue 
Gov 
Stolen Laptop
1/17/2007
TJX Companies Inc. 
Biz 
Hack 
1/18/2007
Talvest Mutual Funds 
Biz 
Lost Media
1/22/2007
Chicago Board of Election 
Gov 
Snail Mail 
 
[10]. According to Privacy Rights Clearinghouse website 
542,214,290 data records were breached from 2711 data 
beaches made public since 2005 [11]. These incidents 
highlight the dangers of putting personal sensitive data in 
the hands of profit-making business. 
3.2. Motivation for the Service Provider to 
Negotiate 
In the prevailing state of web services, privacy con-
straints and the associated agreement is provided by the 
service provider. What is covered in the agreement is at 
the discretion of the service provider very often wrapped 
in language hard to understand by the user. It may appear 
that the service provider has little motivation to partici-
pate in the privacy negotiation with the web user. It is not 
only beneficial for the service provider; in reality it is in 
their best interests to consider a negotiation process. Pri-
vacy negotiations present the opportunity to develop a 
more systematic approach for handling web users’ pri-
vacy data on the web. Using privacy constraints negotia-
tion, certified privacy practices can be represented in the 
form of digital credentials or a predefined framework 
that can be disclosed in response to user policies that 
require certain privacy practice guarantees. By automat-
ing the privacy negotiation practices in a framework ap-
proach provides the service provider to commit to certain 
privacy practices that could lessen the privacy liabilities 
on data. 
4. Privacy Constraints Negotiation 
4.1. Privacy Negotiations between Service Users 
and Web Users 
The negotiation itself can be real-time, online transac-
tions going and back forth until an agreement is reached. 
The negotiation sequence is depicted in the Figure 2. 
The trigger point for the negotiation starts when a pri-
vacy agreement is displayed by the service provider. The 
web user can further negotiate on the terms provided in 
the privacy agreement presented. For example, the web 
user can negotiate to restrict the service provider to keep 
credit card data for no more than 20 days. The service 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                   TI 

M. RALLAPALLI  ET  AL. 
16 
 
Figure 2. Privacy negotiation between a service provider 
and web user. 
 
provider, in turn, can counter this to extend the credit 
card retention period to 30 days citing a regulatory re-
quirement. 
When a privacy agreement P contains sensitive infor-
mation like Pa, Pb … Pn, where, P1...n are privacy terms 
such as credit card, SSN, Home address etc., then P itself 
requires a trusted protection in the form of an agreement 
for access to P. For example, a client interacting with an 
unfamiliar web service provider may request to see the 
exact privacy terms on Pa, Pb that attest to the server’s 
handling of private information. This situation requires 
that trust be established through mutual negotiation on 
individual privacy constraints gradually leading to an 
agreed upon P, so that sensitive credentials are not dis-
closed to anyone outside of the defined P. 
In the Figure 2, the service provider first throws the 
privacy agreement at the web user. The web user then 
chooses to negotiate the privacy terms provided in the 
privacy agreement. In theory, this negotiation can include 
several items of different domains, for the sake simplicity, 
this paper limits the scope to privacy terms such as So-
cial Security Number (SSN) and Credit Card number. In 
the above example, service provider terms specify the 
intention of holding web user’s credit card info for 15 
days and SSN for 10 days after the transaction is exe-
cuted. There can be several legal, infrastructural, and tech- 
nology reasons for service provider choosing the number 
of days. However, the web user, as shown in Figure 2, 
may choose to negotiate to limit credit card data for 10 
days and SSN for 5 days. Eventually, the service pro-
vider and the web user would reach an agreement. These 
agreed upon terms can then be part of the updated pri-
vacy agreement presented to the web user for approval.  
If the web user and the service provider could not reach 
an agreement, then the web user has an option of declin-
ing the privacy agreement and not to go ahead with the 
transaction. Alternately, the web user may accept the 
privacy agreement provided by the service provider and 
go ahead with the transaction. 
The overwhelming question that taunts web users is 
that, just because a negotiate privacy agreement is rea- 
ched with the service provider, does that guarantee pro-
tection of the privacy terms contained in privacy agree-
ment (P)? 
4.2. Third Party Trusted Agency 
According to Pew research center, 86% of Internet users 
want to prohibit online companies from disclosing their 
personal information without permission [12]. That leads 
to the question of ensuring that service providers are liv-
ing up to their responsibilities as agreed upon in any ne-
gotiated privacy agreement. Web users want control over 
what information they disclose to service providers, and 
they want verifiable assurances about what those sites 
will do with the information once it is disclosed to them. 
However, control over personal information on line is 
handled in a self regulatory fashion today, particularly, in 
a B2C environment. Trust negotiation presents the op-
portunity to develop more systematic approaches and 
matured privacy frameworks that web sites can adhere to 
when handling privacy practices on the web. Current 
solutions include the web site privacy logos such as 
TRUSTe (http://www.truste.org) and BBBOnline (http:// 
www.bbbonline.org ) both of which offer privacy seals to 
a web site that publishes its policy for privacy handling. 
However, the seal itself can be forged, and the mere 
presence of seal guarantees nothing concerning the de-
tails of the service providers’ privacy policies. One solu-
tion to this is to introduce a third party trusted agency 
that is acceptable to both web users as well to the service 
provider community. There are several certificate auth- 
orities in existence that act as third party certificate issu-
ers trusted by senders and receivers. The idea is to let the 
third party trusted agency handle the privacy data as per 
the negotiated privacy agreement as shown in Figure 3. 
In current scenarios the service provider maintains the 
privacy data of the web user. In the proposed model, the 
service provider has minimal responsibility of managing 
the privacy data, as it is handled by the third party trusted 
agency. Upon completion of the privacy term, it is the 
third party trusted agency that purges the data as per the 
privacy agreement. There are big advantages in this 
model for the service provider. The service providers are 
relieved of any privacy liability risks from handling the 
web users’ privacy data giving them the opportunity to 
focus more on fulfilling its core business rather than pri-
vacy management. For the web user, it is a definitive 
state that the privacy data is now out of the service pro-
vider’s domain, handled by the third party trusted ag- 
ency. 
5. Conclusion 
Clearly, data privacy is an important topic and each web 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                   TI 

M. RALLAPALLI  ET  AL. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes.                                                                                   TI 
17
 
Negotiated Privacy agreement (P) 
Third Party Trusted Agency 
Web user 
Service Provider
Privacy Terms 
Enforcement 
Web user 
Service Provider
Web user privacy data 
Shopping cart data
 
Figure 3. An example of a third party trusted agency acting 
as an intermediary between web user and service provider. 
 
site’s information security system should enforce stated 
privacy policy. Organizations should explore embedding 
privacy enhancing technologies such as privacy frame- 
works in their data privacy mechanisms to assure certi- 
fied privacy practices in the form of digital credentials. 
This paper proposes two key privacy concepts—privacy 
terms negotiation framework and a trusted third party 
agency. Since privacy vulnerabilities exist when policy 
disclosures take place, the approach presented in this 
paper describes an environment to experiment with the 
proposed framework solution to the privacy problem. 
This should lead to a more formal definition of a generic 
privacy framework adaptable by e-commerce websites 
with relative ease of use. At this point, the physical im- 
plementation of the third party trusted agency along with 
physical and logical architecture is left to future articles 
work efforts. 
6. Acknowledgements 
Thanks for helpful discussions with Catherine Rickleman, 
e-learning architect at IBM, who patiently reviewed the 
paper for formatting as well as provided content sugges- 
tions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Yee and L. Korba, “Privacy Policy Compliance for 
Web Services,” IEEE International Conference on Web 
Services (ICWS’04), San Diego, 6-9 June 2004, pp. 158- 
165. doi:10.1109/ICWS.2004.1314735  
[2] 
W. Xu, R. Sekar, I. V. Ramakrishna and V. N. Venka-
takrishnan, “A Framework for Building Privacy-Con- 
scious Composite Web Services,” IEEE International 
Conference on Web Services (ICWS’06), Chicago, 18-22 
September 2006, pp. 655-662. doi:10.1109/ICWS.2006.4  
[3] 
B. Carminati, E. Ferrari and P. C. K. Hung, “Exploring 
Privacy Issues in Web Services Discovery Agencies,” 
IEEE Security and Privacy, Vol. 3, No. 5, 2005, pp. 14- 
21. doi:10.1109/MSP.2005.121  
[4] 
OUT-LAW News, “Regulators Demand Clearer Privacy 
Policies,” 2009. 
http://www.out-law.com//default.aspx?page=9795  
[5] 
A. Figueroa, “Privacy Issues Hit Facebook Again,” 2010.  
http://www.csmonitor.com/Business/new-economy/2010/
0730/Privacy-issues-hit-Facebook-again 
[6] 
Nick O’Neill, “10 Privacy Settings Every Facebook User 
Should Know,” 2009.  
http://www.allfacebook.com/facebook-privacy-2009-02 
[7] 
Federal Trade Commission, “ChoicePoint Settles Data Se- 
curity Breach Charges; to Pay $10 Million in Civil Penal-
ties, $5 Million for Consumer Redress,” 2011. 
http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2006/01/choicepoint.shtm  
[8] 
EPIC Staff Publication, “Choice Point: Introduction and 
Background,” 2001.  
http://epic.org/privacy/choicepoint/  
[9] 
K. Tedder, “Don’t Wait for a Data Compromise,” 2010. 
https://www.firstdata.com/downloads/thought-leadership/
fd-data-compromise-wp.pdf  
[10] Ponemon Institute, “Ponemon Institute Research,” 2010. 
http://www.ponemon.org/about-ponemon-research  
[11] PrivacyRights Group Compilation, “Chronology of Data 
Breaches Security Breaches 2005 to Present,” 2011. 
http://www.privacyrights.org/data-breach  
[12] Pew Research Center Report, “Internet & American Life 
Project,”. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Press-Releases/2000/86-of-In
te-
net-Users-Want-to-Prohibit-Online-Companies-From-Dis
closing-Their-Personal-Inf.aspx 
 
 

