Build  
inventions,  
structures, and 
works of art
Meet  
the people 
whose ideas 
changed  
the world
explore  
the history of 
Roman civilization 
with hands-on 
activities
learn  
how the discoveries  
of ancient Rome  
affect us today
 Hands-On 
Activities 
15
Ancient
Ancient
Romans
Romans
Rachel Dickinson
Tools of the
Tools of the
A Kid’s Guide to the History & Science of Life in Ancient Rome

Ancient
Romans
Tools of the
A Kid’s Guide to the History & Science of Life in Ancient Rome
Rachel dickinson
nomad press

Cover image: Boris Kolomytsev, Toy Soldiers of Kolobob.
All illustrations by Shawn Braley
Photos: Scipio, courtesy of www.tu-berlin.de; Hannibal, courtesy of www.barca.fsnet.co.uk; Cato 
and Tiberius, courtesy of wikipedia.org; map of ancient Rome, courtesy of www.theaterofpompey.
com; Shakespeare, courtesy of www.shakespeare.org.nz; other images courtesy of Planet Art
 
Nomad Press
A division of Nomad Communications
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Copyright © 2006 by Nomad Press
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher, 
except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a review. The trademark “Nomad Press” and the 
Nomad Press logo are trademarks of Nomad Communications, Inc. Printed in the United States.
ISBN: 0-9749344-5-3
Questions regarding the ordering of this book should be addressed to 
Independent Publishers Group
814 N. Franklin St.
Chicago, IL 60610
www.ipgbook.com
Nomad Press
2456 Christian St.
White River Junction, VT 05001
www.nomadpress.net

 Introduction: Romans All Around Us................................................1
 
1. Fantastic Beginnings.............................................................3
 2. The Roman Republic—Democracy Rules . . . or does it?.........13
 3. Expanding the Roman Republic...........................................23
 4. The Demise of the Republic................................................33
 5. Remarkable Feats in Engineering and Technology.................46
 6. Birth of an Empire..............................................................59
 
7. Roman Society—Everyday Life............................................67
 8. The Mighty Roman Army...................................................86
 9. The Next Two Hundred Years..............................................94
 10. That’s Entertainment........................................................105
 11. The Rise of the Empire, Again........................................... 113
 12. Gods and Goddesses........................................................ 118
 13. The End of the Roman Empire & Rome's Legacy.................127
Bibliography  134      Glossary  135      Index  138
Contents 

iv
Timeline
 
753 BCE: The city of Rome is founded by Romulus on the banks of the Tiber River.
 
507 BCE: The Roman Republic begins after the Romans overthrow the Etruscan kings.
 
450 BCE: The first Roman code of law, called the Twelve Tables, is published.
 
387 BCE: The Gauls, from what is now France, attack and plunder Rome. This may 
have driven the Romans to expand north to protect themselves from future 
invasions.
 
201 BCE: Rome defeats Carthage in the Second Punic War, giving Rome control over 
the western Mediterranean.
 
44 BCE: Julius Caesar declares himself “dictator for life.” A large group of his fellow 
Senators aren’t happy with that and have him assassinated, plunging Rome 
into chaos.
 
31 BCE: Octavian, Caesar’s adopted son, defeats Mark Antony and Cleopatra at 
Actium, clearing the way for him to take the throne. Octavian takes the 
name Augustus. The Roman Empire, when Rome is ruled by emperors, 
begins.
 30 BCE–180 CE: This period of time is often called Pax Romana or Roman Peace, because 
the empire enjoys relative peace and prosperity.
 
98–117 CE: Emperor Trajan rules the empire, which reaches its greatest size and power.
 
180–284 CE: With the death of Emperor Marcus Aurelius, the Roman Empire begins 
a steady slide into economic and political crisis. This period is sometimes 
called the “century of crisis.”
 
284 CE: Diocletian becomes emperor and restructures the empire.
 
307–337 CE: Emperor Constantine I moves the capital of the Roman Empire from Rome 
to the city of Constantinople and makes Christianity the state religion.
 
370 CE: The Goths and other “barbarians” push into the northern Roman provinces 
when the Huns from Central Asia sweep into Eastern Europe, beginning a 
long period of invasions.
 
410 CE: The Visgoths, led by Alaric, sack the city of Rome.
 
476 CE: Odoacer, a German-born general, deposes the last Roman emperor, 
Romulus Augustulus, and becomes the first barbarian king. This is viewed 
as the end of the Roman Empire. The eastern half of the Roman Empire 
survived for another thousand years as the Byzantine Empire.
Tools of the Ancient Romans

hy study the Roman Empire? Because its 
 
influence lies all around you. From architecture and lan-
guage to law and government, the Romans have influenced 
virtually every aspect of modern life. 
Whenever you admire a beautiful classical public building—one with 
columns holding up a big triangular-shaped “pediment”—you’re 
admiring Roman-inspired architecture. 
Wonderful feats of engineering like the 
development of the arch and the dome 
come directly from Rome. If you have 
been to Europe you may have actu-
ally driven on roads or traveled over 
bridges built two thousand years ago by 
Romans—bridges and roads that have 
withstood two thousand years of wind, 
rain, snow, war, and traffic.
Romans All  
Around Us

introduction

Latin, the original language of ancient Rome, is now used for the offi-
cial names of plants and animals and diseases—and it’s also used in 
several legal terms. The real name for “chicken pox,” for example, is the 
Latin word varicella. As far as modern legal terms go, alibi (“ala-bye”), 
subpoena (“su-peena”), and affidavit (“aff-ee-day-vit”) are just a few 
 . . . Still having a hard time believing that the language of ancient Rome 
is being used today? Look at the back of a nickel: the phrase: E pluribus 
Unum is Latin for “Out of many, one.”
The founders of the United States turned to ancient Rome, 
particularly the writings of Cicero, when developing the 
new nation. In many ways, our government is structured 
much like the Roman Republic.
In Tools of the Ancient Romans: A Kid’s Guide to the History 
and Science of Life in Ancient Rome you’ll learn the impor-
tance and relevance of ancient Rome to our everyday 
lives. You’ll also learn what life was like for all types 
of Romans in a world of gladiators and gods and god-
desses, extreme poverty and great wealth, and momentous discovery. 
This book will give you a taste and feel of this world through activities 
that transport you back in time. So get your imagination ready and see 
what it was like to be a Roman kid, adult, senator, 
or slave. When you come 
back to the present day 
and look around you, 
you’ll see that ancient 
Rome has been with 
you all along.

Tools of the Ancient Romans

he Roman Empire seems very distant and foreign to 
us today, but at its greatest strength, almost 2,000 years ago, it was the 
mightiest empire in the world. Nearly 60 million people lived under 
Roman rule in lands stretching from Asia Minor and Africa to Britain, 
about the same size as the United States. How did such a huge empire 
begin? It all starts with the humble 
and mysterious origin of Rome, the 
mighty city that sits on the banks of 
the Tiber River. The history of Rome 
is a fascinating mix of fact and fic-
tion, combining archeological and 
scientific discoveries with ancient 
stories about gods and goddesses, 
mortals and murders, cruel kings 
and lost civilizations. 
Fantastic 
Beginnings
Learn the story 
of the founding  
of Rome
Explore the  
history of 
the earliest 
Roman tribes
Uncover your 
own family  
history

Chapter1

Location, Location, Location 
Geographically speaking, Rome was perfectly sited to become a great city-
state. If you look at a map of modern Italy, you'll find Rome on the west 
coast of the peninsula that juts smack dab into the Mediterranean Sea. 
Its location at the mouth of the Tiber River meant that the ancient city of 
Rome controlled the port there and was able to trade with both northern 
and southern neighbors, as well as regions to the 
west. The Tiber River also provided a convenient 
place from which to launch a navy, enhancing the 
military might of the Romans. The mountain range 
to the north (today the Alps of northern Italy) effec-
tively cut the Romans off from invaders north of 
the peninsula in the days before planes, trains, and 
automobiles. Today, Rome is spread over seven 
hills nestled beside the banks of the Tiber River, but 
in ancient times, when the city was smaller, people 
lived on the hilltops. Those hills provided a military 
advantage—allowing Romans to see and protect 
themselves from their enemies as they approached 
from below.
How It All Began: The Story of Romulus and Remus
Rome, the ancient Romans maintain, was founded by Romulus, who 
became its first king in 753 BCE. But in order to understand where Romulus 
fits in, you have to push the beginnings of Rome back even further—back 
to the destruction of the city-state of Troy in about 1200 BCE. (Archeologists 
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Know your ANCIENT Roman Geography 
Asia Minor: 
A peninsula of western Asia between the Black Sea, the Aegean Sea, and 
the Mediterranean Sea. In ancient times, it was where most Eastern and 
Western civilizations intersected.



have uncovered the remains of an 
ancient city in modern Turkey that 
they believe was Troy.) The Roman 
poet, Virgil, described the destruc-
tion of Troy in the most famous 
poem of the Roman era, Aeneid. In 
the poem, Aeneas, the son of the 
Roman goddess Venus and a mortal 
man, fights against the Greeks in the 
Trojan Wars. When the great city of 
Troy falls, Aeneas flees and escapes 
with his life. After a long journey, he 
lands in Latium, a city on the banks 
of the Tiber River. Through a series 
of fantastic events, Aeneas marries a beautiful princess 
and becomes an ally of the neighboring Etruscans.
Virgil’s poem goes on to tell the story of Aeneas’s family 
over the course of hundreds of years, including the birth of 
the twins Romulus and Remus, in the eighth century BCE. 
Their mother is the beautiful Rhea Silvia, a descendent of 
Aeneas, and their father is the god Mars. Poor Rhea Silvia is thrown into 
the river by an angry uncle and the 
baby twins set adrift in the Tiber 
River in a reed basket. The basket 
becomes caught on a fig branch 
and the twins end up in the care of 
a she-wolf. Eventually, a shepherd 
finds the boys and raises them as his sons.
When the boys grow older, they decide to 
return to where they were rescued from 
Chapter 1    Fantastic Beginnings
The Trojan Horse
The Greek army left a hollow horse, filled 
with Greek soldiers, outside the gate of 
the city of Troy. Thinking the horse was a 
gift from the gods, the Trojans brought 
the horse into the city. That night the 
Greek soldiers came out and 
opened the city gates to 
the entire Greek army. 
After years of trying to 
break into the city the 
Greeks won the 
war by tricking 
the Trojans.
The she-wolf nursing Romulus 
and Remus.

the river, because they want to create a city on that spot. By read-
ing the omens told in the flights of birds (more on omens later), they 
decide to build their city on Palatine Hill—one of the seven hills of 
Rome—and that Romulus will be king. Remus is not thrilled about 
this because he also wants to be king. As Romulus is marking out 
the city’s boundaries, Remus teases him, making him angry. In a 
fit of temper, Romulus kills his brother and builds the city himself. 
This new little city, called Rome after Romulus, has almost no women 
in it, so Romulus invites the neighboring tribe, the Sabines, to a har-
vest festival. He then kidnaps 600 young Sabine women and sends the 
Sabine men packing. According to the story, when the Sabine men come 
back to recapture their women, the women tell them they want to stay 
and persuade the Romans and the Sabines to work together. 
Tools of the Ancient Romans

B.C.
A.D.
How the Years Work 
BCE refers to the time “before the common era,” and it is used as a non-religious replace-
ment for BC, which means “before the birth of Christ.” The Romans were Christians and 
invented our calendar, which uses the birth of Christ as the major landmark of time. 
Around 545 CE, a Roman monk named Dionysius Exiguus, wanted to improve the reckon-
ing of the date of Easter, and came up with the present system of identifying a date from 
the time of the birth of Jesus. The numbers for the years before the common era are like 
a countdown toward the birth of Jesus. For example, if someone was born in 120 BCE and 
died at age 45, the year of death would be 75 BCE. The year 120 BCE occurred before the 
year 75 BCE, and the fifth century BCE comes before the fourth century BCE.
After the birth of Christ the years are called CE for “common era.” This is also a non-reli-
gious substitute for AD, which stands for anno Domini, “in the year of our Lord.” In CE, 
as the years pass, the numbers get higher. For example, 1910 occurred 30 years before 
1940. And the third century CE comes before the fourth century CE.
Today, it is becoming more common to use the more modern and non-religious names of 
BCE and CE for BC and AD.

you should know
names
While this is a good story, it is probably not true. 
We do know, however, that the people we know 
as the ancient Romans were a mix of many dif-
ferent ethnic and cultural groups.
How the Archeologists Tell the Story
Virgil’s version of the founding of Rome is one 
of the most famous stories in ancient litera-
ture, and art and architecture throughout 
Rome pay tribute to the twins Romulus 
and Remus. Parts of Virgil’s story may 
be based on fact, but it’s pretty unlike-
ly that Romulus and Remus were the 
sons of gods or that they were raised by 
wolves. What archeologists have discov-
ered, though, is evidence that by the late 600s 
BCE, large private houses, public buildings, and 
even public-works projects were being built in 
the area of Rome. Romans were remarkably 
good at building things like baths, aqueducts, 
sewers, monuments, buildings, and roads, and 
when archeologists dig down to uncover the 
past they find many 
things left behind by the builders of this 
great empire.
Chapter 1    Fantastic Beginnings
A Person’s Trash is an 
Archeologist’s Treasure
Archeologists can learn an enormous 
amount about ancient cultures by 
digging through the trash they left 
behind. Think about what you could 
tell about an area if you dug a pit 
in your backyard and uncovered 
parts of old toys, pieces of 
dishes, perhaps some old 
bottles, some bricks, or 
maybe even a piece 
of a foundation. As an 
archeologist you would 
carefully document where 
you found each item and 
then try to “read” what the items 
told you. What did the pattern on 
the broken dish tell you about when 
it was made? Was the toy made 
from plastic or metal? What kind of 
cement was used in the foundation? 
These are the types of clues archeol-
ogists use to piece together the past.
Virgil [Publius Vergilius Maro] (70–19 BCE) 
Famous Roman poet 
who wrote the history of the founding of Rome, called Aeneid.


One of the most remarkable structures archaeologists 
have uncovered is the Cloaca Maxima, which was 
a big pipe that drained the marshy areas around the 
Roman Forum. This pipe ran 
to the Tiber River and was built 
in the sixth century BCE. During this time period, the 
city of Rome was developing from a place of straw-roofed 
huts to a city of substantial buildings with tiled roofs, monuments, and 
a paved marketplace in the area of the Forum. How do we know all 
this? Archeologists have dug down below the modern-day Forum and 
uncovered the foundations of some of these earlier structures.
Rome as a Melting Pot
So who were these early builders and shapers of 
what was to become the most powerful city 
in the world? In the sixth century BCE, the 
Italian penisula was populated by a number 

Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Etruscans
Today the Etruscans are a mysterious, ancient civilization. We know what some of their build-
ings, monuments, and elaborate burial tombs looked like through archeological excavations, 
and from this we can guess that they were, at some point, successful seafaring traders and 
merchants. We also know that they didn’t speak Latin, the language of the Romans, but that’s 
about it. Very few examples of Etruscan writing exist today—                           —mainly just 
inscriptions on gravestones. The area the Etruscans once occupied in the north of Italy is today 
called Tuscany, which comes from the Latin name for the Etruscans—Tursci.
Although there were times when the Etruscans and Romans found themselves allies against a 
common enemy, the overthrow of Tarquin the Proud signaled the beginning of the end of the 
Etruscan civilization. The Etruscans had been responsible for creating many public institutions 
and buildings in Rome, but they found themselves constantly at war with the great city they 
once controlled. By the first century CE, the Etruscan civilization completely disappeared as 
Rome exerted its control over the entire Italian peninsula.
What language did
Romans speak?
Q:
The Cloaca
Maxima is
used as a
sewer today.

of different tribes of people. Some 
tribes, like the Etruscans, the 
Carthaginians, and the Greeks, 
controlled great expanses of land: the Etruscans controlled the north, 
the Carthaginians ruled the lands to the west in Africa, and the Greeks 
controlled the lands to the south. The Latins, the tribe from which the 
Romans came, lived between the Etruscans and the Greeks. Other tribes 
included people known as Sabines (whose women starred in Virgil’s 
story of the founding of Rome) and Sammites, who had very small 
tracts of land.
All of these tribes contributed to the rise of the city of Rome, much the 
way immigrants from around the world have contributed to the success 
of the United States. Early Rome was very much a melting pot of cul-
tures. Many of the biggest early building projects in Rome, including the 
Cloaca Maxima, were built by the Etruscans, who also gave Rome many 
of its early kings. To the south, the Greeks were creating settlements, 
bringing Romans into contact with some fundamental skills like read-
ing and writing, and more complicated and sophisticated ideas about 
architecture, art, and mythology. 
Early Rome and the Reign of Kings
After Romulus, the first king, a series of seven kings 
ruled Rome. Some of these kings may be fictional 
characters and some may be real, but all of them are 
part of the traditional story of Rome’s beginning. Several 
kings after Romulus’s reign were responsible for enlarging the city, 
building religious temples, and calming down the neighboring Sabines 
(who were apparently still upset over their women being stolen at that 
harvest festival). The fourth king, Tullus Hostilius (673–642 BCE) is 
believed to have built Rome’s senate house, which later became very 
important. The sixth, seventh, and eighth kings were all Etruscans. They 

Chapter 1    Fantastic Beginnings
Who built the
Cloaca Maxima?
Q:
Who were Romulus 
and Remus?

10
Tools of the Ancient Romans
These could be stories about how great-uncle 
Matt was a horse thief in Montana, or how 
grandmother Elsie saved the family jewels by 
sewing them into the hem of her coat when 
she got on a boat to come to America. Think 
about how stories are often passed down by 
word of mouth and consider the fact that 
along the way they might have gained a few 
interesting details.  
 In this activity you'll uncover some of the fact 
and fiction of your own family history. The 
goal is to learn something about your family 
that you didn't know before, and then to write 
it down. 
1	First, make a list of all your 
living relatives.
2	Now choose at least six people to inter-
view. You can concentrate on one side of 
the family (your mother's people or your 
father's people) or do both. You are the 
combination of both sides of the family 
and get to inherit all the stories! Interview 
older relatives like grandparents and 
great-aunts and uncles if you can.
 
3	Make up a list of questions to ask when 
you interview. Here are some ideas: 
• What is your full name and when and 
where were you born? 
• If married, when and where did you get 
married and what is the name of your 
spouse? 
• If you have children, what are the full 
names of your children and when and 
where were they born? 
• Tell me one story from your childhood. 
• Tell me one family story that your 
parents or grandparents told you when 
you were a child. 
• Are there any family stories you've 
heard that you think are particularly 
interesting?
Like the stories surrounding the beginnings of Rome, most families have stories that 
have been passed down from generation to generation that may or may not be 
completely true.
activity: Uncovering Your  

relatives 
pad of paper
pen or pencil
tape recorder
tapes
supplies

Chapter 1    Fantastic Beginnings
4	Conduct your interviews. Make sure to tape record them 
if you can. If you're unsure of the spelling of a 
name, ask the person to spell it for you. 
 
Have fun! Family stories are so 
interesting and you're bound to learn 
a lot of things you never knew before.
5 Compare the stories of different 
relatives. If you 
interviewed several 
relatives from the same 
side of the family, there 
are bound to be some 
stories that come up 
several times. 
6 Once you've heard a 
story from one person 
ask others about it. It's 
interesting when you get 
different versions, sometimes 
really different versions. See if 
you can figure out which stories seem  
more like fiction than fact. 
— Fact and Fiction 
Family History 
Dad
ME
Grandma
11

made a lot of improvements to the little city. In addition to the Cloaca 
Maxima, they built temples and a fortification wall around the city, 
called the Servian wall after King Servius Tullius (578–535 BCE). 
The eighth and last Roman king was Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, or 
Tarquin the Proud (535–509 BCE). He became king through treachery 
and ruled cruelly. Tarquin’s wife, the daughter of King Servius, con-
vinced her husband to have her father assassinated so that Tarquin 
could be king. Tarquin was an arrogant man who had a rotten son 
named Sextus. Sextus raped his cousin’s wife, Lucretia, who then killed 
herself. Another cousin, Brutus (not the famous Brutus we learn about 
later), heard about this horrible act and got together enough people to 
start a rebellion to drive the Tarquins from power. He succeeded and 
that was the end of the reign of kings in Rome. 
12
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Who was the last
king of Rome?
Q:
Know your Roman Architecture 
aqueduct: a pipe or channel that carries water from its source to a city.
Cloaca Maxima: a huge pipe, built in the sixth century to drain the Roman marshlands 
as well as public toilets, bathhouses, and other public buildings. 
Roman forum: 
the main meeting place in a Roman city; surrounded by government 
buildings, courts, and temples. 
Servian wall: 
a fortification wall built around Rome in the fourth century BCE, named 
after the Etruscan King Servius Tullius (578–535 BCE).

fter the last king, Tarquin the Proud, was driven 
from office, Rome became a republic, which means a govern-
ment of elected representatives. It was governed by the Senate, 
the Centuriate Assembly, and two consuls, who in some 
ways replaced the king. The consuls 
were elected every year by the assem-
bly. They had the power to declare 
war and enforce laws. This power 
was called imperium. The Senate was 
a group of advisors that had existed 
before the republic, during the time 
of the kings. The king could choose 
to listen to the senators, but he was 
under no legal obligation to take their 
advice. 
The Roman Republic 
—Democracy Rules  
. . . or does it?
13
Chapter2
Learn the 
structure of 
the early 
Republican 
government
See how 
wealth 
determined a 
Roman's rights
Glimpse the 
plight of slaves 
and the life 
they endured

14
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The word republic comes from the Latin word res publica, which means 
“commonwealth” or “state.” But just because Rome was called a repub-
lic doesn’t mean that it was a democratic government the way we think 
of one today. Most Romans did not go to vote and elect people to rep-
resent them in government. As you’ll see, it was a complicated system, 
but it worked. 
Three Separate Classes
To understand the system of government in Rome, it helps to first 
understand Roman class structure. Roman citizens were born into one 
of three classes. 
Romans from wealthy families who had been in Rome for a long time 
were called patricians (after the word patres, which meant “fathers”). 
Accordingly, they were considered father figures, or leaders, of Rome. 
Patricians thought themselves superior to people who didn’t have a 
lot of money. For many years, only the patricians could serve in the 
Senate.
Beneath the patricians on the social ladder were the equites. Equites did 
not have as much money as the patricians. Originally knights, they were 
the businessmen of the day—merchants and bankers—and today we 
would probably characterize them as Rome’s middle class. The name 
14
Know your ANCIENT Roman Government 
republic:  a form of government with elected representatives. 
Senate:  a group of wealthy men who made laws when Rome was a republic, and advised the king or 
emperor when Rome was a monarchy and empire.
Centuriate Assembly: a branch of the Roman Senate that included both patricians and plebians, 
though only the wealthy members’ votes counted.
consul:  one of two head magistrates of Rome elected every year—consuls held imperium.
imperium:  the power to declare war and enforce laws.

15
Chapter 2    The Roman Republic—Democracy Rules . . . or does it?
equite comes from the Latin word equis for horse. In order to be an 
equite, you needed to have enough money to buy a horse. 
The lowest class of Roman citizen was the plebeian class. They 
were freeborn citizens who worked hard but didn’t have 
a lot of money. Some of them even had to beg for food 
to survive. If plebeians lived in the city, and were lucky 
enough to have a job, they might do something 
like sell food at one of the many food stalls, 
or run a small shop. Plebeians who lived 
in the country might live on a small 
farm where they made little money but 
grew enough food to feed their family. 
Women, no matter what class they fell into, were 
not allowed to participate in politics at all during 
the early days of the republic. A woman had to do 
whatever her paterfamilias (male head of household) 
said. If a woman was married, her paterfamilias was 
her husband, otherwise it was her father or the old-
est man in her immediate family. Although Roman 
women were citizens under Roman law (unless they 
were slaves), Roman law was not very fair to them: 
women were not allowed to vote and men in government 
believed that women should be absolutely under male control. Even the 
most respectable of women were expected to remain in their homes, out 
of the public eye. Their duty was to keep or 
manage the home. 
As time went on, though, things began to change. With thousands of 
husbands killed in war or away on military campaigns, many women 
were forced to take up their missing husband’s roles. They inherited and 
15
Name the three classes of  
Roman citizens.
Q:

16
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Slave Markets
Rome relied heavily on slavery. Aside from the labor slaves provided for large agricultural 
estates, as well as in mines and households, they also held many different jobs in the ever-
growing city of Rome. 
Huge numbers of war prisoners periodically added to the slave population, including 30,000 
from a victory against Tarentum in 209 BCE, and 50,000 from Carthage as a result of the 
First Punic War in 146 BCE. But war prisoners didn’t supply enough to satisfy the demand for 
slaves, so slave markets were set up. The slave trade developed into a big business as adults 
and children were kidnapped throughout the Mediterranean world and sold into slavery. At 
one market, over 10,000 slaves were sold every day.
took control of their husbands’ money—a responsibility that required 
they leave the house and assert themselves in public. They met with 
other women—and men—to discuss their affairs, attended lectures, 
and began to host their own guests. While this movement gained 
momentum, women began to appear as the main subjects in works of 
art. More attention of every kind resulted in more rights and freedoms 
for women. 
Then There Were the Slaves
The final group of people in Rome were the slaves. While some 
slaves were better off than some plebeians because they had a roof 
over their head and food to eat, they were not considered citizens 
(plebeians were) so 
they were not pro-
tected by Roman law 
if they were beaten or 
abused by their master. Slavery was a fact of life 2,000 years ago. 
Some wealthy Romans owned hundreds or even thousands of slaves. 
Historians have estimated that slaves may have made up as much 
as one-third of the total population on the Italian peninsula.
Why did women begin to 
have rights and freedom?
Q:

17
Chapter 2    The Roman Republic—Democracy Rules . . . or does it?
Who were the slaves? Romans who didn’t pay their debts, prisoners 
of war, descendents of slaves, or children who’d been abandoned by 
families too poor to feed them. Slaves were not considered people—
they were considered property. 
The Roman Government
Now that you understand how people were divided up in the Roman 
republic, you can learn how the government worked. The most domi-
nant branch of government was the Senate, which was first made 
up of 100 patricians (later 300, then 600) from the richest and oldest 
families of Rome. Even if equites and plebeians had been permitted 
to become senators, they wouldn’t have had enough money to do so, 
because senators were not allowed to have jobs on the side. The duty 
of the senator was to debate and recommend policy, and to decide 
which territories should be made provinces and come under Roman 
law. They kept their eye on the big picture. 
Roman Citizens
Being a citizen in ancient Rome was a big deal because it meant you had rights 
under the laws. Originally, to be a Roman citizen, both your parents had 
to be Roman. Sometimes, the Senate granted citizenship to individuals or 
foreigners as a special legislative act (this was particularly true if the foreign-
ers were bringing a lot of money or influence with them to Rome).
Roman citizens were expected to pay taxes and serve in the army. 
In return, they had the right to vote for representatives, could form 
contracts, had the protection of the courts, and could be eligible to hold 
office. 
As the years went on, being a Roman citizen gave a man a great deal of 
protection both in Rome and throughout the empire. Citizens were entitled 
to return to Rome to stand trial. For example, a man named Paul, an early 
Christian who is credited with organizing the Catholic Church, was about to 
be executed in Jerusalem. He stated, civis Romanus sum—“I am a Roman citi-
zen”—and was returned to Rome for trial. 

18
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Centuriate Assembly, on the other hand, ran the day-to-day busi-
ness of the republic. They chose all the magistrates that were in charge 
of the different parts of the republic. Initially, members of this assembly 
were elected by those with lots of money. As a result, the laws they 
passed, and the magistrates they chose, favored the rich people. 
Consuls were the chief magistrates appointed by 
the Centuriate Assembly. For most of the Roman 
Republic, only patricians could be consuls. With 
their power of imperium they could order executions and floggings, draft 
citizens into the military, and command armies on military campaigns. 
The Romans didn’t have professional generals, so the consuls were in 
charge of the armies. The reason the Romans elected two consuls was to 
ensure that no one man held absolute power, but the problem was that 
there were times when the two consuls didn’t agree. These occasions led 
to breakdowns in the power structure and chaos. 
Over the years, the Centuriate Assembly added several magistrate posi-
tions to help run the republic, including censors, praetors, aediles, and 
quaestors. Censors took an annual census of citizens (counting all the 
citizens), praetors were the judges, aediles were the administrators, and 
the quaestors kept track of the money. They made sure everything was 
running smoothly in the city of Rome while the consuls were out com-
manding the armies and the Senate was debating the big picture.
civis Romanus sum
 
 
“I am a Roman citizen”
Know your ancient Roman People 
patricians: wealthy Romans
equites: 
knights, later businessmen and 
merchants
plebians: poor Romans
slaves: 
people who were owned 
by wealthy Romans

19
Chapter 2    The Roman Republic—Democracy Rules . . . or does it?
The Twelve Tables
Roman law was passed down through word of mouth over the years, 
but between the years 451 and 449 BCE, the laws of Rome were finally 
published as the Twelve Tables on bronze plaques that were posted in the 
Forum. These laws applied to everyone. For centuries afterward, every 
Roman boy memorized the laws in the Twelve Tables as part of his educa-
tion. We don’t even know how many laws were written on the Twelve Tables 
because the original tablets were destroyed by the Gauls when they sacked 
Rome in the fourth century BCE. However, some snippets survived through 
oral tradition. Here are a couple of the more unusual laws:
If a thief broke into your house at night you could kill him. However, if 
he tried to rob your house during the day, you couldn’t kill him unless he 
resisted you with weapons.
You are forbidden to put gold in a 
funeral pyre. However, if a person’s 
teeth had been held in place by 
gold bridgework, it was not neces-
sary to remove it before cremation.
Anyone caught singing or circulat-
ing insulting songs about someone 
could be clubbed to death (this law 
must have been amended when 
the form of entertainment known 
as satire came into being).
If a father gives up his son for sale 
three times, the son shall be free.
How did a slave 
become a slave?
Q:

20
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Educated Romans used wax writing tablets that could be used over and over.  
All they had to do was smooth their old message over to start again. 
1	Measure and cut three pieces of foamboard that 
are 10 inches by 8 inches. USE YOUR XACTO KNIFE 
WITH CAUTION!
2	Take one of the foamboard 
rectangles and measure 11⁄2 inches all 
the way around the edge. Now cut out the 
middle. You should end up with something 
that looks like a picture frame.
3	Place the frame on one of the solid  
rectangles and glue it in place.
foamboard 
(at least 1⁄4 inch thick)
ruler
Xacto knife
glue
pen
string or leather thong, two pieces 
about 6 inches long each
Play-doh (the kind that stays soft)
bamboo skewer
markers
supplies
activity: Writing Tablet
} 1 1/2 inches
Glue “frame” 
onto solid sheet 
of foam board

21
Chapter 2    The Roman Republic—Democracy Rules . . . or does it?
4	Measure in 1⁄2 inch from the left long edge 
and make a dot two inches from the top 
and the bottom on both the single piece 
of foam board and the one that’s been 
glued. You’re going to make holes here 
so you can attach the front cover to your 
writing tablet.
5	
Make a hole by pushing the pen carefully through 
the foamboard and twisting.
6	
Attach the cover to the tablet and tie with the string.
7	Take the Play-doh and carefully fill the area between 
the frame and the back cover. You should end up 
with a smooth surface.
8	You can write on your tablet with the bamboo skewer 
and then smooth it over when you’re finished.
9	Decorate the cover of your writing tablet  
with markers to make it your own!
Measure 1/2 inch from left edge and 2 inches from 
top and bottom, and make holes
t 
Dear Caesar
Dear Caesar
Tie cover on
Fill with Play-doh

22
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The early years of the republic were dominated by 
arguments between the patricians and the 
plebeians, known as the Struggle of the 
Orders. The plebeians, known as plebs 
(“ple-ebs”) for short, wanted some 
political and economic power in Rome. 
In the late fifth century BCE the plebs 
organized themselves into their own 
assembly where they could talk about 
political action that would help them. The 
Plebeian Assembly elected tribunes—rep-
resentatives who interacted with the city’s 
magistrates on their behalf. 
It took 200 years, but eventually, the Ple-
beian Assembly gained the respect of 
Rome’s magistrates, the Centuriate Assembly, and even the Senate, and 
it became recognized as a legitimate branch of the Roman government. 
When this happened, the tribunes the Plebeian Assembly elected were 
given the right of veto, meaning they could say, “I forbid this,” to laws 
or acts that went against the interests of the plebeians. The laws passed 
were imposed upon all Roman citizens—not just the plebs.
The triumph of the Plebeian Assembly 
contributed to the expanding rights of 
plebeians throughout Rome. Initially, a 
tribune was the highest office a pleb could hold, but by the third cen-
tury BCE, the wealthiest plebeians were gaining seats in the Centuriate 
Assembly. As the years of the republic wore on, the plebeians—and 
even the equites—demanded and gained more power from the patri-
cians. They accomplished this peacefully, which freed the Romans to 
concentrate on conquering new territories and expanding its borders.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Fasces
Fasces are bundles of wooden rods tied around 
a double axe with a red ribbon. Punishment is 
represented by the rods and execution by the 
axe. These were the symbols of imperium   
held by the consuls.
What was the 
Struggle of the Orders?
Q:

UCH OF THE HISTORY OF ANCIENT ROME IS ABOUT  
military conquest. Right from the founding of the ancient 
city, the leaders seemed to have an unstoppable need 
to conquer and control more 
and more territory and people (remember 
what Romulus did when he wanted women 
for his city—he kidnapped them). The con-
quest began with the land surrounding the 
city of Rome.
Rome was the northernmost city in Latium, 
which is what the land in the central western 
part of the Italian peninsula was called. Latium 
contained about 30 communities, which band-
ed together to create the Latin League. This 
Expanding the 
Roman Republic
Follow Rome's 
expanding roads 
as the republic 
grows
See why Rome 
made friends 
of conquered 
enemies
Learn about 
the elephants 
that marched 
on Rome
23
Chapter3
The Roman Republic, 338 BCE.

24
Tools of the Ancient Romans
organization was a way for the communities to 
provide military protection for each other. But 
right from the start, Rome tried to dominate the 
league.
Rome Takes Over
During the fifth and fourth centuries BCE, the 
Romans conquered huge parts of the central 
section of the Italian peninsula, which made their Latin 
League neighbors pretty nervous. And, as they feared, 
by 338 BCE, Rome had become strong and threatening 
enough that they annexed most of the Latin League 
communities. This means that they took control over 
everyone around them. The league was abolished and 
its communities came under the rule of the Roman Republic. People liv-
ing in these communities had to abandon their local Latin dialects and 
adopt the Roman dialect, which became the surviving form of Latin. 
The leaders of Rome were smart about this annexation. They made the 
wealthy citizens from the newly acquired towns part of Roman nobility, 
which allowed them to hold political offices. Because of this political 
involvement, the Latins from the annexed communities soon became 
Rome’s strongest allies.
It wasn’t long before Rome conquered the rest of 
Italy and set up treaties with all the new territories. 
The way these treaties worked was pretty clever. Rome allowed 
these annexed territories to keep control over a lot of what was hap-
pening in their own communities, even though they officially became 
territories of Rome. The Roman territories sent money to Rome—because 
everyone was taxed by Rome—and they also supplied men for the 
military. This is kind of like our system of state and federal government. 
Each American state makes laws that govern what happens in each 
What was the Latin 
League?
Q:
Roads
You might 
have heard 
the saying, 
“All roads lead 
to Rome.” 
Well, during 
the Roman 
republic and empire this was 
literally true. All the roads 
in Roman territory, which at 
one time was most of Europe, 
were somehow linked to the 
city of Rome.

25
Chapter 3    Expanding the Roman Republic
state, yet the federal government gets 
to make laws that affect everyone in 
the country (and they also collect taxes 
from everyone!). 
Wherever Romans went, they tried to 
“Romanize” the locals. How did they do this? 
Roman citizens were sent to live in outposts, or Roman 
communities, in the new territories. Many 
of these outposts were near Roman mili-
tary bases, which offered protection to 
the people living there. Roads were built 
to connect the city of Rome to the territo-
ries. The roads helped bring the empire 
together and helped maintain order 
(because the Roman army could travel 
quickly to any trouble spots). They also 
served as “highways” to help spread the 
Roman language and culture. Eventually, 
Roman roads connected every corner of 
the vast Roman empire.
Soon the Roman Republic 
reached beyond the Italian pen-
insula in their search for new 
territories to conquer. Raiding 
foreign towns and enslaving the 
population became a very profit-
able activity for wealthy Roman 
military officers. Remember, 
elected consuls headed mili-
tary campaigns, and they made 
The Via Appia
The first Roman road was the Via Appia, 
which connected Rome with Capua and 
southern Italy. Built in 312 BCE by Appius 
Claudius Caecus, this road was 132 miles 
long. This was the most famous road in the 
Roman Republic, and by the end of the 
second century BCE, it was paved. If you go 
to Italy you can drive on a 2,000-year-old 
road because parts of the Via Appia, which 
is also known as the Appian Way, are still 
visible and in use today!
How did Rome win over the 
towns they conquered?

26
Tools of the Ancient Romans
  
activity: Toga
Togas were the classic garb of every Roman man.  
It was both dress-up and everyday wear.
1	Buy four yards of fabric at a fabric store. 
(or cut a bedsheet in half.) If you want to 
be authentic, buy some off-white muslin 
fabric.
2	Put on shorts and a T-shirt. Place three-
quarters of the fabric over your left 
shoulder so it hangs down to your ankles 
or so in the front.
3	Pull the longer end of the fabric loosely 
across your back and under your right 
arm, then drape it over your left shoulder.
4	Take the shorter end of the fabric (the 
piece that hangs to your ankles in front) 
and pin it to the fabric under your right 
arm. It sounds more complicated than 
it is—just try it. The key is to keep your 
right arm free.
5	Pin your brooch (see 
next activity) through 
the fabric on your left 
shoulder to hold it all 
in place.
6 Yards
2 Yards
piece of fabric 
4 or 5 yards long
safety pins
brooch
supplies

27
Chapter 3    Expanding the Roman Republic
1	Soften pieces of the 
clay by kneading it 
with your fingers.
activity: Brooch
fimo or sculpy clay 
(four or five colors)
plastic knife or wooden 
tools for clay
glue
pin backs 
(available at a craft store)
supplies
Romans, both men and women, used brooches 
to pin their togas at the left shoulder. These 
are really fun to make—you’re only limited by 
your imagination.
about 1/4 inch 
2	Make a ball of clay in your hand, then 
mush it down on a flat surface to make 
either an oval or round shape. Flatten 
it so that it’s about 1⁄4 inch thick. This is 
the base for your pin.
3	Soften up pieces of clay from all the 
different colors you have. Now make 
your design on your base. You could 
make leaves by flattening out a piece 
of green clay and cutting the shapes 
with a plastic knife. A simple flower 
can be made by rolling pieces of clay 
into little balls and then 
flattening them 
slightly on the 
base. You can 
do landscapes, 
portraits, designs. 
Go nuts!
4	Bake your brooch in the oven on a 
cookie tin for about 30 minutes at 
265 degrees (follow the directions on 
the back of the clay package). 
5	Let your brooch cool and 
glue on a pin back.

28
Tools of the Ancient Romans
money and gained political power by conquering new territories. You’ve 
probably heard the phrase, “To the victor goes the spoils.” In this case it 
was very true. Money from selling slaves and raiding towns went right 
into the pockets of the consuls. But the consuls had to keep a careful 
balance. It was important that they didn't inflict too much damage to 
the communities they raided. If people in the new territories were too 
unhappy, they might become rebellious and make it difficult for Rome 
to rule them. 
A balance would also have to be struck between 
conquering more and more territory and then 
having the manpower—both the army and the 
administrators—to control the new lands. The 
system of setting up newly acquired territories 
as self-governing provinces who paid taxes to 
Rome in return for military protection worked 
pretty well until the Roman army became 
stretched so thin they couldn’t offer the neces-
sary protection.
The Punic Wars
Between 264 and 146 BCE, the Roman military 
fought the three Punic Wars against Carthage, a 
major city on the Mediterranean coast of Africa. 
For many years, Carthage was Rome’s greatest 
rival on the Mediterranean Sea. The Carthaginians were fantastic sail-
ors and controlled most of the sea trade and many of the islands in the 
Mediterranean. The Romans were fierce warriors and fantastic soldiers 
on land, but were not good sailors—all their conquests and trading was 
via land. The First Punic War (264–251 BCE)—fought throughout the 
Mediterranean Sea—lasted 13 years. The Romans had to learn how to 
The Roman Republic before the Punic Wars.
“To the victor goes the spoils”

29
Chapter 3    Expanding the Roman Republic
build boats and then sail them, but they 
finally beat the Carthaginians. After this 
war, Rome controlled Sicily, Sardinia, and 
Corsica—all islands in the Mediterranean Sea that 
were previously under the control of Carthage. 
During the Second Punic War (218–202 BCE), the Romans fought against 
the Carthaginian general Hannibal, known as one of the greatest gener-
als of all time. Spain had been defeated by Carthage in the 220s BCE, 
which allowed Hannibal and his army to go through Spain and across 
the Alps, approaching Italy by land from the north. Hannibal sent word 
ahead, hoping to get help from the Italian communities that had been 
conquered and annexed by Rome. Some communities—like Syracuse 
in Sicily and a few of the southern Italian cities—offered to help in 
Hannibal's attempt to defeat the Roman army, but most didn’t want to 
get involved. 
Although Hannibal had many victories, he struggled to win the war. 
Eventually Rome invaded Africa, and Hannibal headed back to help 
protect his homeland. He was defeated at Zama, near Carthage, in 
202 BCE by the Roman general, Publius Cornelius Scipio. The victory 
earned Scipio the surname Africanus. He is known as Scipio Africanus 
the Elder. As part of a fifty-year negotiated peace, Carthage 
had to give all their colonies to Rome and pay the 
Romans a huge fine.
In 146 BCE, after the 50-year peace expired, 
Rome invaded Carthage again and 
destroyed it in what is known as the Third 
Punic War. Carthaginians who didn't die 
Interesting Tidbit: Punic
The word Punic comes from the word 
Phoenician. The Carthaginians were a 
branch of the Phoenician family. The 
Romans used the term Punic to refer 
specifically to Carthaginians, the people 
who lived in Carthage.
Who built the Via Appia? 
How long was it?
Q:

30
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Hannibal Crosses the Alps
When Hannibal set out from New Carthage, now Cartegena, 
Spain, to cross the Alps and enter Italy in 218 BCE, it was with 
a strange cast of characters. He brought elephants, possibly 
camels, Africans, Celts, Moors, Spaniards, and Carthaginians 
with him. Because of the terribly rugged terrain, Hannibal 
lost both people and animals while crossing the 
Alps—perhaps as many as half of the people and 
animals died—but Hannibal was relying on the 
element of surprise. When Hannibal met up 
with the Roman army commanded by Publius 
Cornelius Scipio at the River Trebia, he beat 
the Romans badly. Imagine being a Roman 
soldier in northern Italy and coming face to 
face with an African elephant!
in the war were sold into slavery. 
At war's end, the Roman army 
set the entire city of Carthage on 
fire and let it burn for 17 days. Then they knocked over anything that 
was left standing and, according to legend,  plowed salt into the earth 
so that nothing would grow. Ever. They wanted no further trouble from 
Carthage.
To the East, in Greece
Meanwhile, to the east, the Romans fought war after war with Greece. 
Let’s set the scene. After the Greek leader Alexander the Great died in 
323 BCE, his empire was split between his generals. Three dynasties 
emerged—one in Macedonia, one in Asia Minor and the Near East, 
and one in Egypt. The Romans defeated armies in Macedonia and Asia 
Minor in the second century BCE but didn’t annex the territories. They 
gave these territories a lot of freedom in governing themselves. Then 
the Romans found themselves fighting in Macedonia again just 30 years 

31
Chapter 3    Expanding the Roman Republic
later. This time they seized Macedonia as a province, abolished the king-
dom, and divided the territory into four republics. 
The Beginning of the End
What did conquering all the land around the Medi-
terranean Sea mean for Rome? In a word, the 
beginning of the end. First, there weren’t enough 
Roman administrators—or praetors—to oversee 
and manage the new territories or provinces. As 
happened with Macedonia, the Roman army found 
itself having to defend Roman rule in territories it 
had conquered just a few years earlier. This led to 
problems within the military, which had a hard time 
recruiting enough soldiers to fill the ranks. As the 
Roman empire got larger, the Roman army had to 
cover much more territory. By this time, the major-
ity of the men serving in the army were from small 
farms. They joined the army because they weren’t making any money 
on their farms. The small farms couldn’t compete economically with 
the large estates, which were being run with slave labor. Imagine the 
problems this caused Rome, depending on an army made up of men 
forced off their land by rich landowners. 
So, Rome looked beyond the small farmers to recruit new soldiers. Who 
did they turn to? Their Italian allies. Soon the allies were 
providing enough soldiers to make up about half of 
you should know
Alexander the Great (356–323 BCE)
A great Macedonian king and brilliant military commander who conquered 
Egypt and Asia Minor for Greece before he died at the young age of 33.
names
Cato the Elder
“It is my opinion that Carthage 
must be destroyed.” Cato the 
Elder, a famous orator and 
member of the Senate in the 150s 
BCE, ended every single opinion 
he gave with 
this statement, 
whether or not 
it had anything 
to do with the 
discussion.

32
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Rome’s army. At first Rome offered less pay to the Italian recruits than 
they offered Roman citizens who served in the army. But when the 
new soldiers found out they were receiving less pay for equal service, 
they were angry. They wanted the same level of pay that Roman 
citizens were paid, and all the rights of a Roman citizen. Rome 
found itself at a crossroads. They could make their allies—peo-
ple who lived in the annexed territories and provinces—citizens 
of Rome, which would give them rights equal to other Roman 
citizens under the law, or they could ignore the situa-
tion. They chose to ignore the situation.
Why was it bad for the Romans 
to expand so much?
Q:
The Roman republic in 133 BCE.

N 133 BCE, TIBERIUS SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, 
a tribune, introduced the idea of land reform to the Senate. 
He wanted to take public land that was being used by 
private individuals (often rich people who were farm-
ing the land to make even more money) and divide it 
into small parcels. These parcels would then be given to 
land-poor citizens in order to make them eligible 
for military service. Remember, Rome needed a 
large army to control its vast empire. A group of 
wealthy senators did not like Tiberius's idea at 
all, and when Tiberius tried to seek reelection, 
a mob of senators attacked and killed him and a 
number of his supporters. 
Things just went downhill in the Roman Republic. 
A decade after Tiberius was killed, his brother Gaius, 
The Demise  
of the Republic
Witness the 
senators’greed, 
and fear of 
the poor
See why 
Caesar's life is 
worthy of the 
worldwide stage
Explore the 
crafty mind of 
Rome's first 
emperor
33
Chapter4

34
Tools of the Ancient Romans
            also a tribune, proposed giving the 
right to vote to Italian allies. This 
made the poor of Rome angry 
because they feared what 
little power they had would 
be taken away by outsiders. 
The Senate didn’t like Gaius 
because he was always proposing 
reforms that hurt the rich and helped the 
poor (like keeping grain prices low). So Senators 
did what they could to encourage the poor to dislike Gaius. 
After Gaius lost the election for tribune in 121 BCE as a result of the 
Senate manipulating the poor against him, he and his supporters staged 
a protest in the streets of Rome. Unfortunately, the protest got out of 
hand and became violent. The fact that some of Gaius's supporters were 
Roman Names
Roman men usually had three names, and sometimes four. The first name was like our first 
name. Common first names were Gaius, Marcus, and Lucius. The second name was the clan 
name (a clan is a group of people who feel a connection to one another, usually through 
marriage). And the third name was the family name. So Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus would 
be a man named Tiberius from the Gracchus family of the Sempronius clan. One big problem 
in ancient Rome was that there could be many people with the same name. This was solved by 
getting a nickname. For example, Publius Cornelius Scipio became P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus 
after beating the Carthaginians at Zema, in northern Africa.
It was more difficult to figure out who was who among Roman women. Girls weren’t given a 
first name. A girl was given the feminine form of her father’s clan name plus the family name. 
It became really confusing if she had sisters because they all had the same name! How did 
outsiders distinguish one sister from another? If there were two sisters, the oldest would have 
Maior (major) after her name and the youngest would have Minor. If there were more than 
two sisters, they would be distinguished by numbers—Prima, Secunda, Tertia (first, second, 
third), and so on­—until all the sisters were named. When a woman married, she took the 
feminine version of her husband’s name. For example, Claudia Scipio Fundani was the daugh-
ter of somebody named Claudius Scipio and the wife of some guy named Fundanus.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Nomenclator
A nomenclator was a slave with a very good memory. He 
went out in public with his master and told him the names 
of all the important people they were about to pass on the 
street. This way the master could seem very smart as he 
correctly addressed everyone by name.

35
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
armed gave the senators the excuse they needed to pass a 
decree allowing troops to attack Gaius and his supporters. 
After seeing the destruction around him and knowing he 
was going to be caught, Gaius committed suicide.
The Senate Loses Power
As distrust of the Senate grew among the common 
people, three things happened over the next few 
decades to further erode its power. First, due to a 
need for more soldiers, men who didn’t own land 
were finally allowed to serve in the army—and 
they were even promised land at the end of their 
service. This seemed like a good idea and a way 
to get more soldiers into the military, but it would 
prove to be a big mistake for the state. The problem 
was that the state didn't distribute land to soldiers who 
completed their service. That task 
was left to the army commanders. The most 
successful military commanders were those who 
could promise the most land to their men, and this 
you should know
The Gracchus Brothers
The Gracchus brothers, Tiberius and Gaius, became heroes to the poor of Rome. They tried 
to enact reforms that gave public land to Roman citizens who were too poor to purchase 
land on their own. The Senators didn’t like this idea because it threatened their financial 
advantage and power over the poor. Years after they died, statues of Tiberius and Gaius 
were erected on the spots where they died.
Lucius Cornelius Sulla (138–78 BCE)
Sulla was a consul who attacked the city of Rome when he didn’t get his own way, and 
declared himself dictator.
names
What did the Senate have 
against  Tiberius and 
his brother Gaius?
Q:

36
Tools of the Ancient Romans
made the soldiers more loyal to their commander than they were to  
the central government. Just imagine what would happen if one of 
those commanders wanted to challenge the power of the central  
government in Rome. Would the army follow him, or would they be 
loyal to the state?
Second, many Italian allies had finally had enough of being treated like 
second-class citizens and openly revolted against Rome. So Rome was 
having trouble with the military and trouble with their closest annexed 
neighbors. 
Then the inevitable happened. Lucius 
Cornelius Sulla, a consul and com-
mander of an army, used troops loyal to 
him to take control of the city of Rome. He 
killed all his enemies and declared himself dictator. A dictator was like 
a king—he had all the power and could do as he wished. By declaring 
himself dictator, Sulla proved that a clever man could use the might of 
the military to gain political power for himself.
The Rise of Powerful Generals
The following three decades (78–49 BCE) were chaotic. Warlords 
emerged—generals who realized, like Sulla, that they could gain  
unprecedented powers through military threat. Gnaeus Pompeius 
Magnus, nicknamed Pompey, received a command in Spain by 
threatening the Senate. Then he was given command over the entire 
Mediterranean Sea. 
The Senate gave him ships, money, and men to tackle the problem of 
piracy. There were so many pirates that sea trade on the Mediterranean 
had almost stopped. Pompey was a fierce warrior and smart general, 
and he got rid of the pirates in short order. Then he moved on with his 
What made military leaders 
more powerful then the   
central government?
Q:

37
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
army to Asia Minor where he annexed territory, called Syria, for Rome. 
When Pompey finally returned to Rome he was an extremely wealthy 
man. Remember, these military men reaped the spoils of war, taking what-
ever they could when they conquered new territory.
Pompey formed an alliance with two other powerful Roman generals, Gaius 
Julius Caesar and Marcus Licinius Crassus. Called the First Triumvirate, 
they agreed to help each other out politically. Pompey and Crassus served 
as consuls and voted themselves juicy commands of armies in Spain and 
Syria. Caesar went to Gaul (modern France), where he extended Roman 
rule far to the north. Caesar proved to be a great military leader. His army 
was extremely loyal to him because he was a very fair man, and it soon 
became clear that the army would follow him anywhere.
you should know
Pompey [Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus] (106–48 BCE)
Pompey annexed Syria as a province and opened the way for Roman expan-
sion to the east. In 60 BCE, Pompey formed a triumvirate of consuls (three 
rulers) with Caesar and Crassus and the three self-appointed rulers ruled 
Rome and its territories for several years. When Crassus died and Caesar 
left Rome, Pompey was left as sole consul. When Caesar came back with an 
army in 48 BCE, Pompey met him on the battlefield and was 
defeated. He fled to Egypt where he was stabbed to death.
Julius Caesar [Gaius Julius Caesar] (c. 100–44 BCE)
Julius Caesar was a clever politician and general who eventually became dictator 
of Rome. He was assassinated by some of his senators, on the Ides of March in 44 
BCE. Today, we still rely on many aspects of the “Julian” calendar developed by 
Caesar in 46 BCE.
Marcus Licinius Crassus (115–53 BCE)
Crassus came to fame as the military leader who defeated Spartacus and the slave 
revolt. He joined Pompey and Caesar in forming a triumvirate to rule Rome in 60 
BCE. Crassus was killed on a military campaign against the Parthians in Persia.
names

38
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Crassus was killed in battle, which left Pompey and Caesar—two men 
who didn’t like or trust each other—in power. When Caesar needed 
to be reelected consul to keep his power, Pompey was very clever. He 
became the leader of Caesar’s opponents (those who had preferred 
Crassus before he was killed), which meant that Caesar would not 
have the votes he needed to get reelected. Caesar marched his army 
into Italy (remember he was annexing territory for Rome in France). 
He crossed the Rubicon River and met his opponents head on. The two 
sides battled for the next three years, and in 46 BCE, Caesar emerged the 
winner. He pardoned his enemies, many of whom then supported him. 
Although Caesar held elections to fill many of the traditional offices, he 
had grander ideas for his own future. In 44 BCE, he appointed himself 
dictator for life, giving himself the power of a king.
Crossing the Rubicon
As things were heating up in Rome, Caesar was stationed with a legion of troops in Ravenna 
in northern Italy. The Senate, which was controlled by Pompey at the time, told him to 
disband his army or risk being called an enemy of the state. Instead, in 50 BCE Caesar 
gathered his troops and stood on the northern bank of the Rubicon River, the small river 
that separated his province from that of Rome. 
According to the Roman historian, Suetonius, 
Caesar said, “Let us go where the omens of the 
Gods and the crimes of our enemies summon 
us! The die is now cast.”
He crossed the Rubicon and made his way into 
Rome where a bloody civil war took place for 
the next three years.
Today, the term “crossing the Rubicon” is used 
whenever someone commits to a risky course 
of action.
“crossing the Rubicon”
       commiting to a risky course of action

39
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
That would prove to be Caesar’s biggest 
mistake. Sixty senators didn’t like the 
d i r e c t i o n 
Rome was going—they were afraid 
they were going to lose the power 
they had—and took matters into 
their own hands. They assassinat-
ed Caesar on March 15, 44 BCE.
After Julius Caesar
Many senators hoped for a full 
restoration of the republic after the 
death of Caesar but they hadn’t 
counted on the power of Caesar’s 
heir. Caesar had no children of his 
own so he had adopted his 
19-year-old great neph-
ew—Gaius Octavianus 
Thurnius, known as Octavian. It was not unusual for pow-
erful men to adopt relatives or even non-relatives as a 
way of guaranteeing heirs (individuals who would inherit 
their wealth and power). 
Although Octavian was young he was shrewd. Seeing them-
selves losing power, some senators tried to keep Octavian from 
The name Caesar 
signifies a supreme 
ruler and the words 
Kaiser in German, tsar 
in Russian, and qaysar 
in Islamic countries, are 
all words for rulers in 
those countries
The Ides of March
The Ides is simply a term from the Roman calendar for the fifteenth day of March, May, July, 
and October, and the thirteenth day of every other month. On the Ides of March in 44 BCE, 
just three days before he was to leave for a military campaign in Parthia (modern-day Iraq), 
Julius Caesar was stabbed to death by a group of senators. The Ides of March came to repre-
sent a day of bad luck—a day when everyone should take precautions to prevent unexpected 
harm coming to them.
Plutarch (46–119 CE)
“I came, I saw, I conquered.” 
According to Plutarch, the words 
by which Julius Caesar succinctly 
described one of his victories. In 
Latin the words are “veni, vidi, vici.” 

40
Tools of the Ancient Romans
assuming control. Octavian turned toward 
other powerful men who could help him 
defy the will of the Senate. Mark Antony 
(Marcus Antonius), a consul, was the 
most notable of them. Antony, how-
ever, also longed for power and so 
at times found himself allied 
with Octavian and at 
other times at odds 
with him. At one point, Octavian, Antony, and anoth-
er general, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, formed an 
alliance and appointed themselves triumvirs (we’re 
back to three rulers), each grabbing a share of the 
empire. Lepidus took control of Africa, Antony took 
over the east, and Octavian remained in Italy. Soon, 
Octavian forced Lepidus out of office, leaving only 
Antony to deal with.
In a twist worthy of a soap opera (or a Shakespearean 
play) Antony was married to Octavian’s sister, but 
that didn’t stop him from carrying on an affair with 
the Egyptian ruler, Cleopatra. He was so smitten 
with Cleopatra that he gave her and her children 
Roman territory. Octavian was furious about that, 
and required Roman cities under his control to 
swear an oath of personal loyalty to him as he pre-
pared for war. In 32 BCE, his forces met Antony and 
Cleopatra’s forces in western Greece. Antony was 
A Cesarean section 
is the delivery of 
an infant by surgical 
removal through an 
abdominal incision. The 
operation is of ancient 
origin and the name comes 
from the legend that Julius 
Caesar was born in this 
fashion.
“Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears” 
From the play Julius Caesar, by William Shakespeare, the first line of a speech in which 
Mark Antony addresses the crowd at Caesar’s funeral.
William Shakespeare 
(1564–1616 CE)
“Et tu Brute?” 
These are Caesar’s famous last 
words, spoken to his friend Brutus, 
who had betrayed him. In English 
they mean, “And even you, 
Brutus?” 
1,600 years after Caesar’s murder 
took place, Shakespeare borrowed 
this line for his play, Julius 
Caesar.

41
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
activity:
Make a Roman Newspaper
Now it’s your turn to be a star reporter. Create a newspaper with a dateline of 
March 15, 44 BCE 
Include the following in your paper: The major story of the day  (hint: something 
happened to Julius Caesar), Entertainment, Sports, What’s happening around the Empire, 
Houses for Sale, Weather, Fashion, Special Events, Death notices, Advice Column
1	Look at several newspapers and notice 
how they look. Where do the articles 
appear? What do headlines look like? 
How many columns are there? Where 
do you find ads? The appearance of the 
paper is called the layout.
2	Write your stories. Keep in mind that 
newspaper stories are often short and to 
the point. Just the facts. 
3	If you have a 
computer, you 
can do the layout 
on the screen 
using columns. 
If you want to 
do it by 
hand, write 
or type your 
articles, making 
sure to make 
them look like a 
newspaper article.
4	Don’t forget photographs or illustrations. 
And remember the captions underneath 
the pictures.
HEADLINE HERE
SUBHEAD 
HERE
PICTURE
GOES HERE
AD
GOES HERE
RULES (lines)
CAPTION
RULES
(lines)
STORY COPY
STORY COPY
NAME OF PAPER HERE
LAYOUT 
SALE   SALE   SALE   SALE
on New and Used Chariots at 
“Fast” Flavio’s Chariot Lot
Easy Finance Terms           Horses Sold Separately
45 Appian Way
Rome
Turn left at Forum, 
then right onto 
Colleseum Drive
Last Words Said to 
Be, “Et Tu Brute?”
The
Road Construction 
to Start on the 
Rome Expressway
CAESAR ASSASSINATED
Ancient Times Herald
March 15, 44 BC
The Republic fell, in part, because 
the central administration in Rome 
hadn’t figured out how to control 
these far-flung colonies. Although 
there was a system of provincial 
governors (men sent by Rome to rule) 
they commanded. 
       promise of land at the end of their military 
service. This allowed warlords, like Pompey, 
to gain power and wreck havoc on the central 
government in Rome if they wished to do so.
     Finally, the political system started to fall 
apart as it became further and further out of
 touch with the most basic needs of the Roman 
people like food, shelter, and employment. 
In other words, the rich were growing richer 
and the poor were growing poorer. By the end 
of the Republic, this was a problem all over Italy. 
Once-powerful senators were frequently reduced 
to violent squabbles over who would be in power 
and these tended to end in riots or murder. This 
civil unrest provided a golden opportunity for a 
brilliant leader, and Octavian was perfectly 
positioned to take advantage of the opportunity. 
He created an empire and closed the door on 
the republic forever.
Let’s start with Roman roads. Under Gaius 
Gracchus, the Romans began building roads 
from Rome to connect the various parts of 
the empire. As the empire grew, so did the 
length of their roads. They were originally 
built as a way to enable the military to move 
quickly (think about it, taking a road is a heck 
of a lot easier than bushwhacking through the 
countryside), but obviously, trade and commerce, 
and even communication between different parts 
of the empire, grew with the development of the roads. 
Octavian creates an Empire and closes the door on the Republic Forevr.
FINISHED PAPER
in place, there was little administrative 
oversight from Rome itself. This allowed 
bad leaders to exploit their provinces by 
forcing the people to pay high taxes by 
virtually enslaving them. Many provincial 
governors were also brutal toward the troops 

42
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Cicero [Marcus Tullius Cicero] (106–43 BCE)
Cicero was a famous speaker and writer. Unfortunately, Cicero wanted Rome to be a republic 
once again and he made Mark Antony and Octavian mad by writing some nasty things about 
them. Antony and Octavian had Cicero put to death by having his head and hands cut off.
outmaneuvered by Octavian, and a year later he and Cleopatra fled to 
Egypt where they died. This left Octavian the only survivor of the trium-
vir, and the first thing he did as sole leader of Rome was make sure that 
no one would ever challenge him again.
The End of the Republic
Throughout the last century of the Roman 
Republic, even while Rome expanded, the 
political system had been falling apart as the 
government became further and further out of touch 
with the most basic needs of the Roman people. The 
rich were growing richer, and the poor were grow-
ing poorer. By the end of the republic, in about 30 
BCE, , this was a problem all over Roman territory. 
Senators were frequently reduced to violent power 
struggles, which tended to end in riots or murder. 
This civil unrest provided a golden opportunity 
for a brilliant leader, and Octavian was perfectly 
positioned to take advantage of the opportunity. 
He created an empire and closed the door on the 
republic forever.
you should know
names
Cleopatra, ruler of Egypt.
What kind of government 
replaced the  republic?
Q:

43
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
Mark Antony [Marcus Antonius] (83–30 BCE)
A distinguished cavalry commander, Mark Antony is best known for 
his love affair with Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt. Unfortunately, 
Mark Antony was married to Octavian’s sister when he took up with 
Cleopatra, which made Octavian very angry. Octavian defeated 
Antony and Cleopatra’s military forces in 31 BCE and then chased 
the couple to Egypt where they both committed suicide.
you should know
names
Republic versus Empire
The Roman Republic refers to the period in Roman history from the time the last king ruled 
(remember Tarquin the Proud?) to the rise in power of Octavian. Throughout many of the years 
of the republic, the Senate and Assembly ruled (or at least the people they put in power ruled).
After Octavian came to power he changed his name to Augustus, and the Roman Empire 
began. This is when Rome, and the lands controlled by Rome, were ruled by one man, 
an emperor, sometimes self-appointed and other times named as a successor by a sitting 
emperor.
The Roman Republic in 30 BCE.

44
Tools of the Ancient Romans
activity:Roman Medal
serrated knife
Styrofoam cups
 paper
ballpoint pen
plaster of Paris
 old coffee can
metal-colored paint
paintbrush
supplies
Rome issued medals and coins to commemorate great deeds.
3	Using your ballpoint pen, transfer your 
design to the bottom of the Styrofoam 
cup. Press hard so that your pen digs 
right into the Styrofoam 
and 
traces the outline. 
 
Make a couple of 
medals at a time.
1	Use the serrated knife to carefully 
cut several Styrofoam cups about 
11⁄2  inches from the bottom. 
Keep the bottoms and throw  
away the tops. 
2	Trace around the bottoms on a piece of paper. Now 
draw your design. Whatever you come up with will 
be the mirror image of what you’ll get at the end 
so if you’re using words, you have to write them 
backwards. Practice writing backwards by holding 
your words up to a mirror to check them.
about 1 1/2
inches {
transfer design 
to bottom of cup

45
Chapter 4    The Demise of the Republic
4	Mix up some plaster in the coffee can. Make 
sure the can is clean and dry before you start. 
You don’t need much plaster—maybe mix 
up 1⁄2 cup of cold water to about 3⁄4 cup of 
plaster—that should be plenty.
5	Carefully pour the plaster into the 
Styrofoam cup–until it’s about 1⁄2 inch 
full–and let sit for at least 30 minutes.
6	Tear the Styrofoam 
away from the plaster and 
you’ll see your medal! 
7	Paint with the metal-colored 
paint to make the 
design stand out even 
more.
Plaster of Paris

Remarkable Feats 
in Engineering & 
Technology
Discover how 
and why Roman 
roads were built 
so well 
Find out how 
Roman arches, 
aqueducts, and  
bathhouses 
worked
Analyze the 
engineering 
secrets hehind 
Roman military 
success
Chapter
46
5
HROUGHOUT THEIR LONG HISTORY, ROMANS BECAME  
known for their simple, durable buildings (like their many temples 
and the Coliseum), their public works 
projects (like aqueducts, sewers, and 
roads), and their military siege machines 
(such as catapults). All of these structures 
or creations showed a real aptitude for 
engineering. Once the Romans decided 
that something worked—either the 
designs or the materials they used—they 
stuck with it.
The Romans began working with concrete 
in about 300 BCE. They discovered that 
if they put the hard volcanic sand from 

Mount Vesuvius into the mix, the concrete became 
very hard and able to withstand any kind of weather. 
This mixture was durable enough that they could even 
use it underwater.
Roads
Let’s start with Roman roads. Under 
Gaius Gracchus, the Romans began 
building roads from Rome to various 
parts of the republic. As the republic 
grew, so did the length of the roads. 
Roads were originally built to enable 
the military to move quickly (think 
about it, taking a road is a heck of a 
lot easier than bushwhacking through 
dense forest and marshland, but obvi-
ously, trade and commerce, and even 
communication between different parts 
of the republic grew with the develop-
ment of the roads. 
Roman roads were marked by mileposts measured from 
the miliariaum aureum, or the “golden milepost,” which 
was a marker located in the Forum (the marketplace 
in the middle of the city of Rome). A Roman mile was 
measured at 1,000 paces. Our word mile comes from the 
Roman word for “thousand” (mille).
Once it was determined that a road should be built, 
the course of the road was very carefully laid out. 
The routes ran straight from one sighting point to 
another—no curves—or followed the natural topog-
raphy of the land. All the material used in building 
How do you make 
concrete?
First you heat limestone until 
all the water burns off. Then 
you pulverize what’s left—the 
lime—and mix it with sand 
(in Rome’s case, the sand 
from Mount Vesuvius). This 
is called mortar. Mix your 
mortar with small stones and 
gravel to get the concrete 
mix. Finally, add water, mix 
thoroughly, and let it set. 
Voilà. You’ve got concrete.
The Romans weren’t the first 
to use concrete—the ancient 
Mesopotamians and the 
Egyptians used it as well—
but, as with many things 
the Romans did, they took 
an existing technology and 
improved it.
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
47

48
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Surveying equipment
A groma was the main surveying instrument of Roman 
surveyors. It consisted of two crossed sticks attached to 
a vertical staff that was placed in the ground. From the 
end of each stick hung a string with a plumb bob, or 
weight, attached. Surveyors used a groma to determine 
straight lines and right angles.
roads was collected from the local area, since it didn't make sense to cart 
stones over long distances. The use of local materials meant that Roman 
roads were different throughout the republic. 
The most important roads were called viae publicae 
(public roads), which were funded by the state. Next 
were viae militares (military roads), which were built at 
the expense of the army, but became public roads after 
they were built. Local roads were called viae actus. And finally there 
were viae privatae (private roads) built and maintained by the person 
who owned the road. 
After figuring out the course of the road, it was time to build. First, the 
Romans built up an embankment, called an agger, for good drainage, 
which was very important if you wanted the road to last. Larger stones 
were laid at the base of this embankment to allow for drainage. Next 
came the middle layer of sand and gravel, sometimes mixed with clay, 
that made the road more durable. The sand and gravel would be well 
flattened, or tamped down. The top surface, called the metalling (although 
it was not made from metal), had to be hard to withstand the impact of 
weather and lots of use. On roads 
near cities the metalling surface 
was made up of flat stones, called 
paving stones. In the country, road 
What are the origins 
of the mile?
Q:
A groma.,

49
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
builders used a fine dust and gravel, 
which hardened like cement over 
time.
Road width varied from a maximum 
of about 40 feet on public roads, to a 
minimum of 8 feet on private roads. 
Sometimes, to help horse-drawn wag-
ons through steep or slick parts of a 
road, tracks were cut lengthwise into a 
road to guide the wheels, and grooves 
were cut across a road to give a horse 
better footing.
Romans figured out how to build roads over exten-
sive wetlands or swampy areas. First, they would 
drive wooden pilings into a marsh and build an elevat-
ed wooden platform (like a boardwalk). They’d build the road on top of 
this platform. Paving stones were placed on the platform and gravel and 
sand was laid on top of that.
If roads had to cross rivers, road builders built bridges by digging down 
to bedrock and cementing the foundations of the piers. Then, with the 
guidance of engineers, the laborers used stone arches to span the river 
to create a beautiful Roman bridge.
In a mountainous region, the Romans would try to follow the contours 
of the land when possible. Then, if they had to, they would cut roadbeds 
into the sides of mountains. On occasion, they even tunneled through. 
You can still see some Roman tunnels along the Via Flaminia and the Via 
Appia. Ultimately, Romans built about 50,000 miles of roads through 
their vast empire, linking the city of Rome to outposts as far away as 
Hadrian’s Wall in Britain.
The Romans built 
50,000 miles of hard-
surfaced roads, mostly 
for the military

50
Tools of the Ancient Romans
As with our modern roads, lots of businesses grew up along 
the highway to serve and profit from the many travel-
ers. In Roman times these businesses included public 
baths, toilets, places to stay, 
shops, and the Roman 
version of fast-food 
joints.
Traffic became so 
congested in the city 
of Rome that Julius 
Caesar banned delivery traffic during the day (this 
would be similar to our truck traffic, only goods 
were moved by horse- or oxen-drawn carts). 
Although this helped clear up some of the 
clogged roads, it didn’t make people who 
lived in the city very happy when they 
had to listen to delivery carts all 
night long!
Aqueducts
Although aqueducts were not 
invented by the Romans, the 
Romans put aqueducts on the 
map.
What is an aqueduct? It's basically a 
manmade channel or pipe built to bring 
water to people where they live. The 
Roman aqueducts were often enclosed 
in large pipes, which ran through a series 
of tunnels and enclosed bridges. Water 
Hadrian's Wall 
was built in 122 CE 
all the way across Britain 
to keep the barbarians 
from invading the Roman 
Empire. It was 12 feet 
high and 73 miles long
Statius
In a poem by Statius, one 
of the premier poets of his time 
(45–96 CE), he explains the 
construction of a Roman road:
“The first task here is to trace 
furrows, ripping up the maze of 
paths, and then excavate a deep 
trench in the ground. The second 
comprises refilling the trench with 
other material to make a founda-
tion for the road build-up. The 
ground must not give way nor 
must bedrock or base be at all 
unreliable when the paving stones 
are trodden. Next the road metal-
ling is held in place on both 
sides by kerbing and numerous 
wedges. How numerous the 
squads working together! 
Some are cutting down 
woodland and clearing 
the higher ground, others 
are using tools to smooth 
outcrops of rock and plane 
great beams. There are 
those binding stones and 
consolidating the material 
with burnt lime and volcanic 
tufa. Others again are work-
ing hard to dry up hollows 
that keep filling with water or are 
diverting the smaller streams.”

51
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
from a lake or other large catch-basin would flow through the aqueduct, 
downhill to the city, where it was collected in another large basin. From 
there, smaller pipes would siphon off the water and distribute it to pub-
lic baths, fountains, and neighborhoods.
The first Roman aqueduct, Aqua Appia, was built in 
312 BCE and was about 10 miles long. Over the next 
several hundred years, 10 more aqueducts were built to 
supply enough water for Rome's fountains and public baths.
As with Roman roads, the building of aqueducts required a lot of plan-
ning and hard work. When planners identified a good source of water, 
such as a lake, they sent surveyors out to calculate the difference in ele-
vation between the source and the water's destination in the city. Bodies 
of water were generally in the hills, higher up than the cities. Then they 
carefully planned a route to make sure there was a continuous, gentle, 
downhill grade, so the water could make use of gravity on its journey 
toward the city.
Most of the aqueducts ran underground so the water would stay cool. 
Often the aqueducts or pipes were buried in trenches, but sometimes, 
Take to the Road
When the city of Pompeii was excavated, archeolo-
gists found something very interesting built right 
into the road—raised stepping stones so people 
could cross the street without having to step down 
onto the road. There were spaces between the step-
ping stones to allow the wheels of a cart or wagon 
to pass. There were also raised sidewalks lining the 
edges of the road. Although this is hard to imagine 
today, think about why you wouldn’t want to be 
walking at road level (hint: think about what pulls 
wagons and what they leave behind).
List the phases of 
construction in 
a Roman Road.
Q:

52
Tools of the Ancient Romans
in order to continue the proper downhill gradient, deeper 
tunnels were dug. The aqueduct itself was a closed pipe that 
was as tall as a man so that someone could enter the aqueduct 
periodically to clean it.
If the pipe couldn’t be buried underground, it was supported on road-
like structures, or built into overpasses or bridges. The Romans created 
many beautiful bridges supported by arches to carry their aqueducts. 
The most famous Roman aqueduct still around today is probably the 
Pont du Gard in Provence, France, built by the Roman emperor Trajan in 
the first century CE.
Roman Baths
Almost every Roman city had at least one public bathhouse, or thermae. 
Everyone went to the baths—rich and poor, young and old, man and 
woman alike. Baths were not only a place to get clean, they were also 
meeting places and places of entertainment, something like the modern-
day shopping mall.
The bathhouses were a series of rooms, with separate sections for men 
and women. The first room was the changing room (apotyterium), fol-
lowed by a hot bath room (caldarium), then a warm 
bath or intermediate room (tepidarium), 
and, finally, the cold bath room 
(frigidarium). A swimming 
pool (natatio), saunas, 
libraries, gymnasiums, 
reading rooms, and 
lounges rounded out 
the bath complex.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Water and the City of Rome
It's been calculated that between the third and fourth 
centuries CE, the city of Rome was provided with over three 
million cubic feet of water a day to meet the needs of a 
population of around one million. This means that ancient 
Romans were using twice as much water per person as 
modern Romans.
What is an 
aqueduct?
Q:

53
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
The baths got their water from pipes that 
ran from large cisterns fed by an aqueduct. 
Some water went directly into the cold baths. 
Water for the warm and hot baths was first 
diverted to the boilers, where it was heat-
ed. It was then mixed with cold water and 
sent through pipes to the tepidarium and the 
caldarium. 
In some bathhouses, another method of 
heating the water also provided space-heating for the baths. A fire was 
lit in an oven and the hot air it created flowed through a space under the 
floor called the hypocaust. The heat then rose through a network of brick 
pipes that blanketed the walls of the caldarium, 
thoroughly heating the room. The floor of the 
caldarium was often too hot to walk on with bare 
feet so bathers wore wooden-soled clogs. This 
system of heating was also used in private villas.
Roman Architecture
The most distinctive element of 
Roman architecture is probably 
the arch. The Romans borrowed 
the idea for the arch from the 
Etruscans and improved upon 
it. Arches were found in bridges 
and aqueducts and were the 
basic support structure of many 
buildings.
Arch construction allowed the 
Romans to build very large 
Why were  aqueduct 
pipes built as tall 
as a man?
Q:

54
Tools of the Ancient Romans
structures, such as amphitheaters. An amphi-
theater is a huge oval building surrounding 
a flat, open area called an arena. The 
outside walls of amphitheaters were 
generally a series of arcades (con-
nected arches) stacked one on top of 
the other. Because the arch distrib-
utes weight evenly but is relatively 
light, Roman builders could build 
high walls of stone without fear 
that the walls would collapse of their 
own weight. Today, the best-known 
example of a Roman amphitheater is 
the Coliseum in Rome.
Other famous ancient Roman buildings are 
the temples. Roman temples looked a lot 
like Greek temples of the time. The Romans 
loved all things Greek, including their architec-
ture. Conquering Greek territory and acquiring Greek 
slaves gave Romans access to Greek ideas and technology. Most Roman 
temples were large rectangular buildings with columns in the front that 
held up a pediment. However, the most famous Roman temple, called 
the Pantheon, is round. 
Interesting Tidbit: 
Water, Water Everywhere
At its peak, the city of Rome had 11 
huge public baths, 856 middle to small 
sized public baths, 15 monumental 
fountains, 1,352 smaller fountains and 
basins, and two naumachiae (where 
staged sea battles were held, which 
you’ll read about later). All of this 
water was supplied by 11 aqueducts 
bringing water into the city.
Interesting Tidbit: 
The Pantheon
“Pantheon” is the word for the entire collection of the 
Roman gods. The building called the Pantheon is a 
Roman temple dedicated to the gods.
What civilization did 
the Romans model their
temples after?
Q:

55
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
The Pantheon was built in about 25 BCE by Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, 
the faithful advisor to Augustus, the first Roman emperor. The huge 
temple has a magnificent domed roof made of cast concrete, which 
stands behind a rectangular, columned porch. The dome has a diam-
eter of 143 feet and is still the largest dome ever made without using 
reinforced concrete. It has a 30-foot-wide circular opening—called an 
oculus—at the top of the dome to let in light. The height of the dome 
is 143 feet, equal to the diameter, making the Pantheon a perfect hemi-
sphere (half-circle). The first Pantheon burned down and was rebuilt by 
Emperor Hadrian around 120 CE.
The Arch
Although the Romans didn’t invent the arch, they sure did 
perfect it. The Romans came up with the idea of using a 
keystone (also called a capstone or just the key). This is a V-
shaped stone set at the top of the arch, which takes the weight 
from above and evenly distributes it down both sides of the 
arch. As the weight presses down on the arch, the stones are 
compressed, which makes the arch even stronger! The Roman 
arch could support more weight than earlier designs, allowing 
them to build bigger and bigger structures (like the Coliseum).
Have you ever tried to build an arch? It’s impossible to keep the 
pieces together until you put in the keystone. The Romans used a 
wooden frame to support the tapered stone blocks that made up 
the sides of the arch until the keystone could be put in place.
Look around your neighborhood, particularly at the public buildings and bridges, and see if 
you can spot examples of a Roman arch. Then try to figure out if these arches are structural 
(are they holding something up?) or just for decoration.
Know your Roman Architecture 
aqueduct: 
A channel or pipe that transports water.
Ampitheater: An oval building or arena for gladiator contests and other spectacles.

56
Tools of the Ancient Romans
1	Take a bit of the clay in your hand and work it 
around so that it gets nice and soft. Roll it into a  
ball and then start to roll it on the work surface  
until you have a “column.”
2	Cut the ends off your column, then make lines  
down the length of the column. Make several 
columns of different lengths.
3	Flatten some clay and cut pieces into squares with 
hollowed-out centers. Fit a couple of your columns 
into these—they’re the base of the column.
4	Flatten some more clay and cut out a large  
triangle. This triangle represents a pediment— 
the large triangular part of the building that’s held 
up by the columns.
5	Look at a picture of a Roman building and try to 
copy some of the details in clay. Can you figure  
out how to make an amphitheater? 
activity:Roman Ruins
air-hardening clay
plastic knife
a hard surface 
to work on
supplies
This activitiy is a way to get familiar with parts of a Roman building. You’ll 
make a column, a column base, and a pediment (the large triangular part of 
the building that's held up by the columns). If you’re feeling ambitious, you 
can make an arch.
Pediment
Column
Base

57
Chapter 5    Remarkable Feats in Engineering & Technology
Technology of War
As usual, the Romans borrowed and 
adapted much of their military technology 
from other cultures. They learned a great 
deal from the innovations of Archimedes, 
a Greek mathematician and engineer. 
Archimedes served as a military con-
sultant to the Greeks during the Roman 
siege on the Greek city of Syracuse. He 
was killed during the sack of the city, 
which was very unfortunate for the field 
of technology (as well as math, physics, 
and philosophy).
Throughout ancient Roman history, 
Roman military forces were almost always fighting somewhere. They 
were either defending their hold on territory they'd already gained, 
or they were trying to expand Roman borders even further. One of 
the greatest challenges to expansion was taking over big cities. Unlike 
small towns, which usually didn't put up a fight, big cities were often 
defended by armies. 
There were a couple of steps involved in laying siege to (or attacking) 
a city. First, the Romans surrounded the city with ditches and walls 
to keep anyone from getting in or out. Then, they figured out how to 
breach, or go over or through, the city walls. The main instrument used 
to breach walls were iron-tipped battering rams called aries and boring 
drills called terebras. These siege machines were often so heavy that 
they had to be rolled up to a wall.
Another tool Romans used against fortified cities was a huge assault 
tower on wheels. They built these towers higher than the wall so they 
Assault tower.

58
Tools of the Ancient Romans
could shoot arrows down into the city while they lowered a bridge onto 
the wall for their soldiers to enter the city
The catapult was an effective weapon in the 
capture of cities and territory. A few kinds 
of catapults were used by the Romans. The 
ballista was a huge crossbow that shot 
flaming arrows. The ballista could fire the 
arrows with deadly accuracy and in rapid 
succession. The oneger was a smaller 
catapult that could be moved around 
because it was mounted on wheels. It 
shot either single stones or bags of stones 
and had a range of about 1,400 feet. A larger 
version of the oneger did not have wheels but 
could hurl boulders as heavy as 60 pounds up to half a mile.
The Romans were very aggressive and determined in their sieges. One 
of the most famous sieges was of Herod’s fortress in Israel, in 73 CE. 
This was the site of the last stand of Jewish rebels against Rome. Roman 
soldiers built a wall along the circumference of the hilltop fortress and 
waited for two years, trying to starve the rebels and their families out. 
Finally, the Romans built a huge earthen siege ramp against the wall. 
When they entered the city, most of the rebels and their families killed 
themselves so as not to be taken by the Romans.
Know your ANCIENT Roman Weapons 
aries: 
iron-tipped battering rams used 
to breach walls.
terebra: giant drills that were rolled up 
to fortress walls.
ballista: 
a huge crossbow that shot 
flaming arrows.
oneger: 
a small, easy-to-move catapult 
on wheels.

Birth of an 
Empire
See how 
Augustus 
distracted Rome 
from his greed
Read about 
some of Rome 
and the world's 
greatest writers
Ponder why 
emperors after 
Augustus were 
not as well-liked
59
HEN OCTAVIAN TOOK CONTROL after the death 
of Mark Antony in 32 BCE, he very carefully kept the appear-
ance of maintaining a republic. He knew it was best to try to 
make the Senate and the people happy, as most of the rulers who 
hadn't done that ended up dead. The Senate gave Octavian the name 
“Augustus” in 27 BCE. Augustus means “Revered One.” He also received 
the title princeps, or first citizen of Rome. The titles Augustus and princeps 
would be used by the rulers of the Roman empire until 293 CE.
Chapter6

60
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Augustus [Gaius Octavius] (63 BCE–14 CE)
Adopted by his uncle, Julius Caesar, he became heir to the Roman empire at 
the age of 18. Octavian (as he was then known) managed to win the support of the 
Senate and the people. He oversaw the massive expansion of the Roman Empire and, at 
the same time, he made many reforms for the betterment of Roman society. He was 
behind the construction of great temples like the Pantheon, public libraries, public 
baths, roads, aqueducts, and the first imperial Forum. He centralized the administra-
tion of the government and strengthened the borders of the empire, in part by paying 
the soldiers their back pay. Enormously wealthy, Augustus used his own money to 
promote economic stability, growth, and prosperity. 
you should know
names
The time period known as the Augustan Age 
goes from the death of Julius Caesar in 
44 BCE to the death of the poet Ovid 
in 17 CE. Augustus ruled the Roman Empire from 29 
BCE until his death in 14 CE—over four decades!
Over the course of Augustus's long rule, he came to 
embody and symbolize Rome. When he began his 
rule, things were a mess. The republic was financial-
ly bankrupt, struggling to maintain authority over 
the military (whose soldiers had not been paid for a 
while), and there was no stable central administra-
tion to look after the far-flung provinces. Augustus 
took control of the provinces and the armies. A very 
wealthy man, he was able to use his own money to 
straighten out the state and military. He developed 
an important system of administration so the far-off 
governments of the provinces had to report to the 
central government in Rome. That way he had more 
control over all the territory ruled by Rome.
Dio Cassius, 
Roman administrator 
and historian, author 
of a history of Rome 
“The name Augustus was bestowed 
upon him by the Senate and the 
people. They wanted to address 
him by some special name, and 
while they were proposing one 
name or another, and deciding on 
it, Caesar [Octavian] was extremely 
eager to be called Romulus. When 
he perceived, however, that people 
therefore suspected him of yearning 
for a position as king, he no longer 
sought this title, but instead accept-
ed the title Augustus, as if he were 
somewhat more than human; for 
everything that is most valuable and 
most sacred is called augustus.”

61
Chapter 6    Birth of an Empire
Socially and culturally, Augustus promoted 
“traditional values.” He instituted morality 
laws and provided rewards for marriage 
and children. He promoted religion and 
the importance of being a good citizen.
Great building and public works projects 
were begun under Augustus, including 
the Forum, temples, libraries, baths, the 
Mausoleum of Augustus, aqueducts, and 
roads. He knew that if Rome looked like 
an important imperial city, chances were 
good that it would act like one and be 
respected as one. 
Unlike his predecessors, Augustus worked 
at strengthening the borders of the empire 
rather than expanding them. He also 
encouraged the provinces to become more 
economically stable and independent. 
Rome was very fortunate to have a man like 
Augustus as its first emperor. At his death 
in 14 CE, he left behind a prosperous empire 
very different from the unruly one he inher-
ited 40 years before. 
1	Make a map of the 
region controlled by 
Rome in 100 BCE, 
30 BCE, 150 CE, and 
300 CE. Label both 
the Roman and modern names of the 
regions on your map.
2	Go to http://www.roman-empire.net/
maps/map-empire.html and you will 
find maps from different eras. You can 
use the information you find here for 
your maps.
activity:
Map of the 
Roman Empire
The Roman Empire expanded and 
contracted over the centuries. Make a  
map and follow the changes!
poster paper
markers
supplies
Praetorian Guards
Praetoriean Guards were the elite soldiers who originally surrounded and protected Roman 
generals. Augustus created several groups of elite bodyguards and called them the Royal 
Praetorian Guards. They were a force to be reckoned with, and they knew everything that was 
happening around the emperor. Throughout their history, they were at the center of a lot of 
palace plots and schemes.

62
Tools of the Ancient Romans
A major difference between the Roman 
Republic and the Roman Empire 
was how the rulers were chosen. 
Remember, the republic was 
ruled jointly by two elected con-
suls, so the people had a say in 
who ruled them. The empire was 
ruled by an emperor, who the people 
had nothing to do with choosing.
Augustus became obsessed with who would succeed him as emperor. 
Tiberius (emperor from 14 BCE to 37 CE) was the son of Augustus’s sec-
ond wife, Livia. Augustus thought Tiberius would be a good emperor, so 
he convinced Tiberius to divorce his wife and marry his own step-sister, 
Augustus's daughter, Julia. Twenty-five years later Augustus adopted 
Tiberius to ensure an heir. When Augustus died, Tiberius was 56 and 
a well-trained general and administrator. During his rule he reduced 
taxes, built roads and other public works, and took care of the provinces. 
When Tiberius died, Rome was a much better place economically than it 
had been when he became emperor. Tiberius’ greatest problem was that 
he wasn't a good people-person and didn’t know how to be diplomatic. 
He struggled to get along with the Senate and many members of his 
own family. He eventually went to 
live in Capri and ruled the empire 
from afar. When he knew he was 
dying, he tried to return to Rome 
to ensure a smooth succession, 
but the prefect of the Praetorian 
Guard—a powerful and influen-
tial person who was supposed to 
protect the emperor’s interests— 
suffocated him.
Interesting Tidbit: 
The Golden Age of Literature
Literature and art flourished under Augustus. 
Three of the most famous poets who ever lived—
Ovid, Horace, and  Virgil—wrote during the reign 
of Augustus.
Mausoleum of Augustus (Mausoleum Divi Augusti). 
Drawing by Etienne Du Pérac from 1575

63
Chapter 6    Birth of an Empire
Ovid [Publius Ovidius Naso] (43 BCE–17 CE) 
Ovid was one of the greatest poets of antiquity and the author of 
Metamorphoses, a single epic poem containing several individual stories.
you should know
names
Caligula, the son of Tiberius’s nephew, Germanicus, became emperor 
after Tiberius died. His real name was Gaius. Caligula was a nickname 
meaning “little boots” that was given to him as a young boy when he 
accompanied his father on military campaigns. While on these 
campaigns, Caligula was often dressed in miniature military 
clothing. Caligula became extremely ill during his first year as 
emperor, and when he recovered he was a changed man. He 
became a megalomaniac (someone who had to be in complete 
control of everything) who did outrageous things like appoint 
his favorite horse, Incitatus, to a seat in the Senate. Caligula 
disliked senators, and in one famous story had a group of them 
wait on him like slaves. He continued to do outrageous things, 
such as spending all of Rome’s money in four short years, 
leading the military out on campaigns but then unexpectedly 
turning around and heading home, and even killing members 
of his own family. Finally, in an act all too familiar in Roman 
history, a member of the Praetorian Guard killed him in 41 CE.
The next emperor was Claudius. He was Caligula’s uncle and, according 
to the Roman historian Suetonius, was proclaimed emperor while hid-
ing behind a curtain after Caligula was killed. There’s a great deal we 
don’t know about Claudius. Roman historians, like Suetonius, generally 
portray him as an idiot who was brought to power because he could be 
easily controlled by others. However, when you examine his record, it 
seems he was actually quite clever.
Why did Octavian decide not to adopt 
the title, “Romulus,” as he desired?
Q:
Tiberius

64
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Although he had a birth defect that left him deformed and with 
a speech impediment, Augustus, his grandfather, had 
recognized something special in him when he was 
young and had him tutored. Claudius was an expert 
on Roman law, history, and languages (Etruscan 
and Carthaginian). However, he had no admin-
istrative or military experience before coming 
to power.
Luckily, Claudius was smart enough to surround 
himself with very talented and ambitious freed-
men. Freedmen, or freed slaves, had become very 
important to the government, because they were 
often placed in charge of imperial correspondence, 
records, and accounting. They had the power to 
bring matters before the emperor and to assist in 
the smooth running of the bureaucracy. Remember, 
slaves were taken from all over the empire and 
some were highly educated and talented men.
The empire’s borders expanded under Claudius— 
he added Britain, Thrace, and Mauritania (in north-
western Africa). He also completed some great 
building projects, such as an artificial harbor at 
Ostia on the Tiber River. The empire was thriving. 
Who’s Who in the Julio-Claudian Dynasty 
The first of the Julio-Claudian emperors was Julius Caesar. He was succeeded by his nephew 
Octavian who renamed himself Augustus. Augustus named his stepson, Tiberius, (who was also 
married to his daughter) as his successor. Tiberius’s grandnephew, Caligula, was named as succes-
sor to Tiberius. Claudius, Caligula’s uncle, succeeded Caligula. Claudius married his niece, Agrippina 
(Caligula’s sister) and adopted her son, Nero. Claudius conveniently died (some say poisoned by 
mushrooms given to him by Agrippina) just as Nero was old enough to assume power.
What one 
Roman Historian 
thought of Octavian 
“When he had seduced the military 
with gifts, the people with food, 
and all with sweet tranquility, he 
gradually usurped the powers of 
the Senate, magistrates, and courts. 
No real opposition remained—the 
bravest men were casualties of 
battle and proscriptions. He 
elevated the remaining nobility 
financially and politically according 
to their willingness to serve him 
and they, enriched by his regime, 
preferred the safety of their new 
arrangement to the dangers of 
the old. Nor did the provinces 
object: competition and greed of 
the wealthy and the governors 
had undermined the republic’s 
legitimacy; power, favoritism, and 
primarily money had rendered the 
laws no help whatsoever.”

65
Chapter 6    Birth of an Empire
But for all Claudius's public success, his private life was a 
wreck. After several messy marriages, he had the law changed 
so he could marry Caligula’s sister, his niece, Agrippina. He 
adopted Agrippina’s son, who was renamed Nero, and had 
him educated by the philosopher Seneca. When Nero turned 16 in 54 
CE and was old enough to take power as emperor, Claudius mysteri-
ously died.
Nero (emperor from 54 to 68 CE), his mother, and his mother's trusted 
advisors took over. Things went pretty well in the empire for several 
years, but eventually Nero found himself in a power struggle with his 
mother. At one point, he sent her out to sea in a boat that was rigged to 
sink, but she swam back to shore. Later, Nero sent some men to kill her. 
As the story goes, her last words were, “Strike here!” as she pointed to 
her womb, where she carried Nero for nine months of pregnancy.
Nero proved to be a terrible emperor. He insisted on participating in 
chariot races and performing on the stage, which greatly embarrassed 
the senators. They grew to hate him and his ego. Nero’s 
personal life was also a mess. He was married several 
Seneca [Lucius Annaeus Seneca] (4 BCE–65 CE)
Seneca was a Spanish-born orator, best known as tutor and later political advi-
sor to Nero.
you should know
names
Livy [Titus Livius] (59 BCE to 17 CE)
A Roman historian from Padua, Livy wrote a 142-book history of 
Rome from its origins to 9 BCE.
you should know
names

66
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Who did Nero blame  
for the fire of 64 CE?
Q:
times and killed most of his wives. It was said that he roamed the streets 
in disguise so he could rob and assault people. 
In 64 CE much of the city of Rome burned in a fire that 
raged for three days. It was well known that Nero 
wanted 
to build a palace in the area where the fire started. 
This raised suspicion that Nero had the fire set delib-
erately. Nero wasn’t in the city when the fire started, 
and he rushed back to Rome to help the victims of 
the fire. When the rumors that Nero was behind the 
blaze didn’t stop, Nero blamed the Christians for 
the fire. The fire cost the empire dearly. Money was 
needed to rebuild, and so the people were taxed. 
Nero took the opportunity to construct some public 
buildings and a huge imperial residence named the 
Golden House in the area that had burned. In 68 CE 
when civil and military unrest in Gaul and Spain 
threw Rome into chaos, the Senate declared Nero a 
public enemy. His days were numbered.
Tacitus on Nero
“But the terrible rumor that Nero 
himself had ordered the burning 
of Rome could not be quelled by 
charitable distributions or dona-
tions by the princes of ceremonies 
of atonement. Therefore Nero 
sought to put down the rumor 
by providing culprits and visited 
with outrageous punishments a 
group called Christians by the 
mob and hated for their misdeeds 
. . . So they first arrested profess-
ing Christians, then on their 
evidence a huge multitude who 
were convicted not so much on 
the charge of incendiarism as of 
hatred of the human race.”

Roman Society—
Everyday Life
Study the 
difference 
between ancient 
Rome's rich 
and poor
Build and then 
count with a 
Roman version 
of a calculator
Explore everyday 
life within the 
family and   
society
67
ODAY, YOUR DAILY LIFE VARies DEPENDING ON where 
you live. If you live on a farm, you have different chores than if you 
live in a city apartment. Also, your social life will vary according to 
where you live. People who live in cities and towns can probably 
walk or take a bus or subway to stores and movies, whereas people 
in rural areas might have to travel farther and use private modes of 
transportation.
Now, think about your daily life versus that of someone who lived 100, 
200, or even 500 years ago. Now, transport yourself back to ancient 
Rome. Ancient Rome lasted from the seventh century BCE to at least the 
fourth century CE. That’s over a thousand years! Let’s look at everyday 
life during the late republic and early empire—when Roman influence 
was at its peak.
Chapter7

68
Tools of the Ancient Romans
On the Farm
Life on a farm in ancient Rome varied depending on whether you were 
rich or poor. Wealthy landowners lived in big villas on large estates, 
and the work was done by slaves. Or, they lived in big houses in 
Rome and their estates were overseen by managers.
Most rural people, however, were poor. They owned 
small farms, between two and five acres in size, and 
worked very long hours for very little return. Every 
person in the family worked on the farm. The typical farmer grew 
grains to make flour for bread, and fruits and vegetables like carrots, 
radishes, cabbage, beans, beets, lentils, peas, onions, grapes, plums, 
pears, and apricots. They might also have a grove of olive trees. Most 
of the olives were eaten, but some were pressed to make olive oil to use 
for cooking or lamp-light. If a farmer had any extra grain he would sell 
it to a bakery.
By the early years of the empire, many small farmers had been 
forced off their land. The small farmers could not compete with the 
large estates worked by slaves that covered hundreds or even thousands 
of acres. Not having to pay the workers, large estates could produce 
things like grain or livestock very cheaply. As a result, many farmers lost 
their land when they couldn’t pay their taxes. What happened to them? 
Many became tenant farmers and worked portions of the big estates in 
return for some of the harvest. Others left the land altogether and went 
to the city to look for work. Some were able to hold on to their land  
by going into the military, leaving wives and children at home to do all 
the work. 
Why couldn't people  
survive on small farms?
Q:

69
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
In the Cities and Towns
If you lived in a city, life was bustling. The cities were very cosmo-
politan. People from all over the empire—Greeks, Romans, Orientals, 
Gauls, and Egyptians—mingled on the streets, in the shops, and in the 
taverns. 
People traveled about the city 
on foot, by horse-drawn carts, 
or on palanquins—enclosed 
couches for one person, carried 
by several men. The streets were 
very crowded, and at night, 
because there was no public 
lighting, people had to carry 
lamps wherever they went.
The streets were lined with vendors and stores. It was possible 
to find anything and everything for sale in Rome—food, cloth-
ing, fabric, dishes, and art objects from around the world. Rome 
had bakeries, tanneries, artisan workshops, and banks. There 
were numerous building projects underway at any one  
time, bringing jobs, excitement, and noise to an already 
bustling city. 
In the middle of most Roman towns was a forum, or 
public square. The forum was surrounded by public 
buildings and little shops—kind of like an outdoor 
pedestrian mall. This was the gathering place of the people, 
and also the place to conduct formal business. A temple 
usually stood at one end, and the basilica—the building 
that housed the city’s commercial and public activities—ran 
along one side. The curia, the workplace of the municipal 
Roman ruins.

70
Tools of the Ancient Romans
activity: Clay vessel
The Romans stored oil and wine in clay vessels called amphora, and made 
dishes and pots out of clay. They used a coil technique when making pottery.
1	Take a clump of clay and work it in your hands to soften 
it. Start with a very small pot—maybe 3 inches tall— 
to get the hang of what you’re doing.
2	Roll the clay into long “snakes” or coils—that’s what 
you’re going to use to make your pot. Make sure the 
coils are about the same size around from end to end.
3	For the base of your pot, make your clay snake into a tight 
spiral, starting from the center. When one coil ends, 
make another one and add it on where you stopped. 
4	Build the pot by layering coils in the general shape you 
want your pot to be. Wet your fingers in the water and 
begin to smooth the clay on both the outside and the inside 
of the pot. Your coils will start to disappear. Refine the shape 
and continue smoothing over the clay with water. 
5 You might want to make handles on the sides of 
your pot. Make them out of clay. Score the area where 
they’re going to attach to the pot with a knife (make 
lines) and score the parts on the handles 
that will attach to the pot. Press the handles 
on firmly and smooth a bit.
6	Let your pot air dry.
air-hardening clay 
or 
paperclay
a little bowl 
of water
supplies

71
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
Roman Numerals
The following letters of the Roman alphabet 
correspond with the following numbers:
All other numbers are represented by a combination 
of letters. For example: III= 3 (1+1+1); XX = 20 
(10+10); XIII = 13 (10+1+1+1); LXXIII = 73 (50+10+10+1+1+1).
The rule is to use the biggest numeral possible at each stage, so 15 would be XV and not 
VVV or XIIIII. You always read the numerals from left to right. Eventually a rule developed 
that allowed you to put a smaller value numeral to the left of a larger one that let you write a 
number in a kind of shorthand. For example, 4 could be written IV (1 less than 5) instead of 
IIII, or 90 could be written XC (10 less than 100) instead of LXXXX. Only the numerals I, X, 
and C can be used this way and you can only use one numeral this way at a time (you can’t 
write 18 as IIXX). One final rule, the subtracted number to the left must be more than a tenth 
of the value of the number it’s subtracted from. For example, 49 is XLIX (10 less than 50 plus 
9) and not IL (1 less than 50).
Can you figure out how to write the number 1,999? MM would be the number 2,000. There 
are several answers, but one way to write 1,999 is MCMXCIX. Here’s how you figure it out: 
“M” represents 
1,000; “CM” 
stands for 1,000 
minus 100 (900); 
“XC” means 100 
minus 10 (90); 
and “IX” is 10 
minus 1 (9). 
1,000 + 900 + 
90 + 9 = 1,999. 
Phew.
Romans used a 
counting board or 
an abacus to do 
calculations.
I = 1 
V = 5 
X = 10
L = 50 
C = 100 
D = 500
M = 1000

72
Tools of the Ancient Romans
magistrates responsible for running the city, was another important 
building on the forum. There would also be a fountain and statues. And 
every town had a public bath, which was important not only for bathing 
but for socializing.
Homes
Most people lived in apartments or rooms in large blocks called insulae 
(which means “little island”). These buildings could be up to six sto-
ries tall. On the first floor would be shops and food stalls, and in nicer 
insulae there might be an inner courtyard with gardens, walkways, and 
fountains. As you went up in the insulae the rooms got smaller. The 
poorest people lived on the top floor. Insulae were notorious fire hazards 
because they were timber-framed buildings with mortar and rubble 
infill. That meant that if a fire started, it would go right up through the 
walls and travel from floor to floor. The buildings were also 
prone to collapse. After that big fire in Rome in 64 CE 
(that was rumored to be the work of Nero), certain 
building codes and restrictions were put in place, but 
they were not always observed.
A townhouse, where wealthier Romans lived, was 
called a domus. These townhouses often had a court-
yard, gardens, an atrium (an enclosed garden space), 
dining room, kitchen, slave’s room, and bedrooms.
Family
Within the Roman family, the father, or paterfa-
milias, had absolute power. He controlled all the 
property and made all the decisions. He decided 
when his children married and who they married. 
He also decided if marriages should end in divorce. 
He chose the careers of his sons. He even had the 
Seneca on Roman Baths
“I live over the public baths—you 
know what that means. Ugh! 
It’s sickening. First there are the 
‘strongmen’ doing their exercises 
and swinging heavy lead weights 
about with grunts and groans. 
Next the lazy ones having a cheap 
massage—I can hear someone 
being slapped on the shoulders. 
Then there’s the man who always 
likes the sound of his own voice 
in the bath. And what about 
the ones who leap into the pool 
making a huge splash!”

73
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
power to decide if a member of his family should live or die when 
they did something improper. The father could punish a family 
member with banishment, slavery, or even death. 
As discussed in chapter 2, the wife of the paterfamilias, called 
the materfamilias, was in charge of the household chores. 
She was also in charge of her children's education, and, 
when necessary, worked outside the home to help 
support the family. They were spinners, weavers, 
secretaries, shopkeepers, butchers, fishers, mid-
wives, waitresses, and entertainers. Sometimes 
they were even physicians, landladies, moneylend-
ers, businesswomen, or construction workers.
Boys were valued more highly than girls in ancient 
Rome (remember that girls didn’t even have first 
names). The reason for this was that girls usual-
ly weren't allowed to do anything beyond what 
Money in Ancient Rome
Ancient Rome used three coins: the as—a bronze coin, the sestertius—a small silver coin, and 
the denarius—a large silver coin (plural: denarii).
In 301 CE, sewer cleaners and day laborers were paid 25 denarii a day, the same amount a 
scribe would earn for copying 100 lines of script. Carpenters and bakers earned 60 denarii 
a day. A pound of pork cost 12 denarii. An arithmetic teacher earned about 2.5 denarii per 
student per day whereas a teacher of rhetoric or public speaking earned about 8 denarii per 
student per day. So if a sewer cleaner worked all day or a rhetoric teacher had three students, 
they earned enough to buy two pounds of pork.
During the time of Julius Caesar (around 50 BCE), a lot of the wealth was concentrated in the 
hands of very few people. Most people could only afford basic necessities. For example, a 
soldier was paid about 900 sestertii per year and a laborer earned about 1,000 sestertii per 
year. A senator, on the other hand, would have property valued at 800,000 sestertii (and many 
were considerably wealthier).

74
Tools of the Ancient Romans
activity:Abacus
The Romans often used an abacus—a counter—to do arithmetic problems.
1	Cut a rectangle from the foam- 
board that measures 13 by  
9 inches. USE YOUR XACTO KNIFE  
WITH CAUTION.
2	Cut six strips of foamboard—
each 1 by 9 inches.
9 inches
13 inches
3	Glue two strips 
onto each of the 
short ends of the 
rectangle (you’re 
building up a 
frame at the top 
and bottom).
Glue two strips 
at each end of base
foamboard 
(about 1⁄4 inch thick)
tape, glue, ruler
 Xacto knife
bamboo skewers
60 craft beads in 
2 colors (30 beads each)
pen, scissors
supplies

75
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
4	Take six bamboo skewers and place 10 beads on each—
5 beads of one color on the bottom of each skewer and 
5 beads of the other color on the top.
6	Put glue on the frame and then place the 
remaining strips of foamboard down to 
cover the ends of the bamboo skewers. Let 
the glue dry.
7	Put a couple of pieces of tape on 
the ends to secure the frame.
8	Each row contains 10 beads worth one of the 
six basic Roman numerals. Label the bottom of 
your abacus from left to right: M, D, C, L, X, 
I. Lay your abacus flat. Now you can add and 
subtract by sliding the beads up and down.
M=1000 
L=50
D=500 
X=10
C=100 
I=1
Glue remaining 1 inch 
strips over ends of skewers
Secure each end with tape
M
D
C
L
X
I
Tape ends down
5	Lay the beaded skewers 
lengthwise on the frame, 
and then tape the ends 
down onto the frame.

76
Tools of the Ancient Romans
was necessary to keep the family and home running 
smoothly, whereas boys had more potential to bring 
their family wealth or glory through military service, 
politics, or business.
Few Roman children went to school. They were 
taught at home by their parents, usually their moth-
er. They learned Roman virtues like truthfulness, 
self-reliance, piety, respect for law, and obedience 
to authority. Boys from noble families might go 
to school or be tutored. Above all, they would be 
expected to master the art of public speaking, an 
important skill for boys headed for the Senate. Poor 
children went to work.
Health
While life in Rome was dangerous because of fires, 
collapsing buildings, and muggings, the real haz-
ards lay in the area of public health. Chances of 
catching an easily spread disease were pretty good 
because, in addition to the city being very crowded, 
most people used the public baths. In the year 65 CE, 30,000 people died 
of the plague. If the plague didn’t get you, an illness like malaria might. 
Today we know how diseases are spread, and we know how to treat and 
control them, but that wasn't the case in ancient Roman times.
to know
piety: 
loyalty to parents and family.
plague: a contagious disease that kills a  
lot of people who get it.
malaria: 
a contagious disease in humid 
climates with chills and fever.
malnutrition: an inadequate or unbalanced 
diet that causes ill health.
words
Martial, Roman poet, 
on life in Rome
“The schoolmasters won’t leave 
you in peace in the morning or 
the bakers by night, and at all 
hours of the day the coppersmiths 
are beating with their hammers. 
Here, there’s a moneychanger 
who, having nothing else to do, 
overturns a pile of coins on his 
filthy table; over there is a work-
man with a gleaming hammer 
beating gold ore from Spain, 
already smashed into pieces . . . 
and who can tell how many hands 
beat copper receptacles in the city 
when, during an eclipse of the 
moon, spells are cast and magic 
rites practiced?”

77
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
Malnutrition was also a common 
problem until 123 BCE when a food 
law was enacted to help the poor. 
The state bought up grain in bulk 
and stored it in public ware-
houses, then sold a monthly 
ration to poor Roman citi-
zens at a reduced price. 
With this system in place, 
Romans got used to a guar-
anteed food supply.
Art
Art was highly valued in Roman culture, 
and beautiful art could be found throughout the homes of the wealthy. 
Mosaics (pictures made from tiny pieces of colored tile, stones, or beads) 
adorned walls and floors, with flowers, animals, hunting scenes—you 
name it! Some walls were decorated with frescoes, paintings 
done on wet plaster. Frescoes might depict landscapes or 
other scenes.
Statues were very popular and were found in 
temples, public places, and in homes. Statues and 
busts (just the head and shoulders) of the emperors 
were made and sent all over the empire. In the days 
before television and newspapers, this was one way 
the emperor could make sure his subjects knew who 
he was!
Wealthy Romans admired Greek statues and want-
ed them for their homes and gardens. Eventually, 
Roman art studios began to copy and sell them. 
Interesting Tidbit: 
The Orator
Being a good orator, or public speaker, was a very 
important skill to have in ancient Rome. The most 
effective senators were skilled orators. We might think 
of orators as being people who are good at arguing, 
but it was more than that. Orators had to be gifted and 
skilled in the art of delivering a persuasive argument. 
The point was to get people not only to listen to  
you, but also to agree with you.
Pliny the Elder
“Medicine is the only profession, 
by Jove, where any man off the 
street gains our immediate trust if 
he professes to be a doctor; and 
yet surely no lie would be more 
dangerous. But we don’t worry 
about that; each one of us is 
lulled by the sweet hope of being 
healed. And we don’t even have 
laws against the ignorance which 
endangers our lives.

78
Tools of the Ancient Romans
activity:Mosaic
reusable plastic mosaic form 
or 
an aluminum pan 
(usually about 6 inches square)
plaster of Paris
 little tiles 
(sold in canisters 
in craft stores)
glue 
(Elmer's is fine)
grout
plastic spatula
sponge
supplies
Mosaics were common throughout the Roman empire. Pictures on walls and floors 
were often created out of these little tiles (called tessera).
1	Mix up enough plaster to fill the 
reusable mosaic form (you can use an 
aluminum pie plate as well, although a 
square is easier to work with).
2	Pour plaster into the form, and let it  
sit until dry (at least 45 minutes).
3	Arrange your tiles on the table in the 
design you want to make. Don’t place the 
tiles right next to each other because you 
need room to put the grout in. If you’re 
doing a picture of an object, it often works 
best to make the design in the middle first, 
then fill in the tiles around the outside.
4	When the plaster is dry, 
remove it from the form.
Plaster of Paris

79
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
Glue tiles in a pattern on the plaster
5	Transfer the tiles, one by one, to the 
surface of the plaster, placing a bit of 
glue on the back of each tile.
6	Let your design sit for a while to dry.
7	Mix up the grout with water until it 
becomes a thick paste.
8	Using the spatula, cover your mosaic with 
the grout, being sure to push it into the 
cracks. Don’t worry that it’s covering your 
design.
9	After the grout is covering the tiles, let it 
sit for a couple of minutes, then take a 
damp sponge and start to wipe it off the 
surface. Keep wiping until your tiles show 
and the extra grout is removed.
10 Let dry.

80
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Some of the Greek statues we’re familiar with today might not 
actually be originals, but Roman copies. 
Friezes—scenes carved in stone—were very popular on public build-
ings and are a great way for us to get a glimpse into life in ancient Rome. 
Trajan’s Column shows scenes of a victorious battle. In a long, spiral 
frieze on Augustus’s Altar of Peace, there is a realistic scene showing 
members of his family and court taking part in a religious procession. 
From these friezes we can see details of everyday life—such as what 
people wore, and even what their hairstyles looked like.
Literature
Plautus and Terence, both playwrights, lived in the second century BCE 
(the 100s) and were the earliest Roman comedians. Much of the dialogue 
in their plays was recited to music or sung while actors danced.
Cicero (106–43 BCE) was the most famous literary figure of his time. 
Many of Cicero’s written works survive, but he is best known as a  
Interesting Tidbit: 
Statues
Although Romans admired Greek statues, there was a big 
difference in their statues. The Greeks created idealized (or 
perfect) human forms in their statues, whereas the Romans 
created statues to resemble the people they were represent-
ing. In other words, if someone had a really big nose, a 
Greek sculptor would not carve the face the way it really 
existed, but the Roman sculptor would.

81
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
The Roman Calendar
The first day of the month was called the calends and the middle of the month was called the 
ides (from an Etruscan word that means divide). Priests determined whether it was going to 
be a long month or a short month by telling people when the nonae was going to fall—it was 
always nine days before the ides so it would either be on the fifth or the seventh day of the 
month.
The day after the calends, the nonae, and the ides were all called nefasti (ill-omened) and it was 
forbidden to do any business on these days. The Roman calendar didn’t have weekends, so this 
gave people a couple of days off a month. The idea of a “week” as we know it didn’t exist.
The early Romans had a 12-month, 355-day year, but the lunar month and the solar year were 
always getting out of step with each other, so the Romans had to add an extra month every 
other year. 
By the time of Julius Caesar, the calendar was off by a whole season! He hired a Greek astrono-
mer, Sosigenes, to straighten it out. Sosigenes suggested a year of 365.25 days. Caesar tried to 
fix everything in 46 BCE by adding an extra 67 days, plus an additional month of 23 days at 
the end of the year. He also suggested that each year should be 365 days long with an addi-
tional day added every fourth year—the leap year.
The priests misinterpreted Caesar’s leap year and added an extra day every three years, which 
Augustus straightened out during his reign.
Caesar’s calendar—or the Julian Calendar—stood the test of time for the next 12 centuries.
You might recognize the names of our months in the names the Romans used for months all 
those hundreds of years ago: Januarius, Februarius, Martius, Aprilis, Maius, Junius, Julius, Augustus, 
September, October, November, and December.
brilliant orator, turning public speaking into an art form. Catullus (84–54 
BCE) and Lucretius (95–55 BCE) were famous poets from the same era.
But it was under the reign of Augustus that Rome enjoyed a golden 
age of literature. Virgil (80–19 BCE) was one of the greatest poets of 
that era and ever after. His masterpiece, Aeneid, is full of romance, 
adventure, and patriotism (remember, part of Aeneid is about the found-
ing of Rome). The historian Livy (59 BCE–17 CE) and the poet Horace 
(65–8 BCE) also wrote about Rome’s destiny. Ovid (43 BCE–17 CE) was a 

82
Tools of the Ancient Romans
supreme storyteller and his bold poems are 
regarded as some of the finest 
ever written.
In the second century CE Apuleius 
wrote one of the most popu-
lar works of Latin literature, 
Metamorphoses, also called The 
Golden Ass. This novel tells of 
the adventures of Lucius, who 
plays around with magic and acci-
dentally transforms himself into a 
donkey.
Roman Clothing and Fashion
Much of what we know about Roman clothing 
comes from how people were shown in statues, paintings, and mosaics, 
or how they were written about in literature. Because it was usually the 
rich portrayed in art and literature, we don’t know a lot about how com-
mon people might have dressed or worn their hair.
The most basic garment of clothing in ancient Rome was the tunica. The 
tunica was usually sleeveless and fell to about the knee. It was decorated 
with wide purple trim for senators and thin purple trim for magistrates. 
All other citizens wore plain white tunicas.
Men wore a toga over the tunica. This was a large white cloth made of 
wool that was wrapped around the body in a particular way, leaving the 
right arm free. Until they were initiated into manhood at age 16, boys 
wore the toga praetexta, which was decorated with a purple strip. After 
the ceremony, they traded in their old toga for a toga virilis, which was 
all white.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Trajan’s Column
The spiral frieze on Trajan’s Column is about 
650 feet long and contains no fewer than 155 
different scenes. The column itself is 100 feet 
high and the frieze wraps around it. The most 
amazing thing about this frieze is not neces-
sarily its artistic value, but its historical value. 
We can learn a great deal about the day by 
looking at, or “reading,” the scenes in  
the frieze. This frieze depicts Emperor 
Trajan’s conquest over Dacia.

83
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
Over the tunica, girls and women wore a stola, 
a short-sleeved dress fastened at the waist by 
a belt, and carefully folded to create elegant 
pleats. Cloaks with hoods were worn over the 
stola when women went outside.
Women’s hairstyles changed over time. 
Initially, hairstyles were plain—pulled 
back into a ponytail or into a simple bun at 
the neck. During the Augustan period, hair-
styles began to grow fancier, and by Trajan’s time in the first century CE 
they had become elaborate constructions of curls. Women curled their 
hair with a calamistrum, a hollow iron that was heated on a brazier (like 
a little grill). They also used hairpins, ribbons, wigs, and hairpieces to 
add volume to their hairstyles.
Wealthier matrons often had their hair and makeup done by a slave—an 
ornatrix—who specialized in beauty treatments. Hair was 
often dyed or bleached a reddish-blonde. Makeup was 
liberally applied. As a foundation, women used a 
layer of white lead mixed with honey and some type 
of 
oil. 
Sometimes the lead was mixed with dyes (such as 
red ocher or wine dregs) to give a pinker tint. Next, 
the face was sprinkled with finely ground hematite 
to give it a sparkly appearance. Eyelashes and eye-
brows were highlighted with soot and the eyelids 
were given green or blue eye shadow.
Men were clean shaven until Emporer Hadrian’s 
day in the early second century CE (100s). Hadrian 
wore a full beard to cover a disfigurement and, in 
doing so, set a new style. Care of the hair and the 
Interesting Tidbit: 
Hair for Wigs
German women often provided 
hair for use in wigs and hairpieces. 
Their hair was preferred, probably 
because it was blond in color.
Pliny the Elder 
gives cosmetic tips. 
“Asses’ milk is believed to remove 
wrinkles from the skin of the 
face and make it soft and white; 
certain women are known to treat 
their cheeks exactly seven times a 
day. It was Poppea, the wife of the 
emperor Nero, who started this 
fashion; she also used it to bath 
in, which is why she took herds of 
asses with her on journeys.”

84
Tools of the Ancient Romans
beard meant frequent trips to the 
barber shop, which, like 
today, served as a place 
where men traded 
ideas and gossip.
Beautiful jewelry 
was worn for every 
occasion. 
Rings, 
bracelets, 
necklaces, 
hairpins, and brooches of 
gold, pearls, and emeralds were 
common. Cameos were very popular and showed up in pendants, 
rings, and brooches. These carved stones were made of materials such 
as rock crystal, agate, or even glass paste. Scenes on cameos ranged from 
portraits to mythological stories. Men often wore a ring—one was pre-
ferred, but some wore many.
Bulla
Interesting Tidbit: 
Death Masks
Patrician families made wax death masks (created 
by molding wax over the faces of a dead person). 
Death masks were made of important people in 
the family and were then hung in a cabinet as a 
kind of visual family tree.

85
Chapter 7    Roman Society—Everyday Life
a square of felt  
preferably brown
scissors
needle & brown thread
little favorite items 
string
supplies
This is the little pouch that all children wore around their necks. 
The bulla carried items or charms that were thought to protect them from harm.
1	Fold your square of felt in half, and cut 
according to the diagram. Take one of 
the pieces, and, keeping it folded, cut the 
corners off the folded side to make the 
bottom rounded.
2	Thread your needle with the brown 
thread and sew the two sides. Turn the 
little pouch right side out (the sewed part 
will be on the inside now).
3	Find some little items you really like: 
some smooth rounded stones,  
little figures, or a special coin—and  
place them in your bulla.
4	Tie the bulla shut with a piece of string 
making sure you have really long ends 
to the string. Tie the ends together and 
hang your bulla around your neck.
Cut in half
Felt square
Round corners
Turn inside out
to hide stitching
Make sure your
string is long
enough to tie around
your neck
activity: Bulla

oman military history can be divided into 
five important periods: the wars they fought with their 
neighbors on the Italian peninsula (509–270 BC); the Punic 
Wars (264–146 BCE); the Social Wars (91–88 BCE); the wars 
of expansion outside the Italian peninsula (58 BCE–200 CE); and the 
Wars of Attrition (early 200s–476 CE). After a brief discussion of the 
general structure and technique of the military, we’ll explore how it 
changed from one stage to the next. 
The Roman Military
Until its collapse, the Roman military featured a system of legions 
(hence the word legionnaire, which means “soldier”). A legion 
was made up of 10 cohorts, and a cohort was made up of three 
maniples. Each maniple was made up of two centuries, and a 
The Mighty  
Roman Army
86
Discover how 
the Roman Army 
conquered the 
civilized world
Learn who the 
soldiers were 
and how they 
lived on the road
See what 
motivated the 
soldier to march 
on through 
hard times
Chapter8

87
Chapter 8    The Mighty Roman Army
century was a unit of 100 soldiers. That 
would make each legion 6,000 soldiers 
strong. As far as leadership went, a 
centurion commanded a century, and 
six tribunes commanded each legion. 
As the empire expanded, the army 
grew to a point where two consuls, 
who were elected for one-year terms, 
split the army in half to make it more 
manageable.
When legions went into battle, soldiers 
were organized into a phalanx—a 
square of spearman spaced so close-
ly together that their shields locked, 
making a nearly impenetrable fight-
ing machine. Lightly armored troops 
would fight skirmishes (little fights) on 
the edges of the phalanx. The poorest 
soldiers usually served as skirmishers, 
because they couldn’t afford the heavy 
armor, javelins, or swords used by sol-
diers in the phalanx. Skirmishers went into battle with little more than 
a small round shield, a dull sword, and a helmet covered with wolfskin. 
They accounted for about 1,200 men in every legion.
phalanx: a square of spearman spaced 
so closely together that their 
shields locked.
Know your ANCIENT Roman Army 
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
C
=
C
C
=
M
M
M
M
=
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
CoH
= L =
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
60 x
100 soldiers = 1 century
2 centuries = 1 maniple
3 maniples = 1 cohort
10 cohorts = 1 legion
1 legion = 6,000 soldiers

88
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Wars with its neighbors on the Italian peninsula is considered 
an important period of Roman military history. During 
these battles, the Roman army first learned how to fight 
and rule conquered territories effectively with a large 
group of soldiers. One important lesson they learned 
was that if they built all-weather roads to and with-
in the defeated territories, it was easier to protect 
their conquests (see chapter 5 to read more about 
Roman roads). Also, they figured out how to 
set up colonies of people loyal to Rome, and 
the importance of establishing military bases. 
They carried this knowledge with them for 
centuries to come.
The Punic Wars
Shortly after Rome had gained complete 
control of the entire Italian peninsula, the 
second major period of their military history 
began, the Punic Wars period. There were three Punic Wars, all of which 
were fought against the state of Carthage in Northern Africa. From the 
outset of these conflicts it was clear that whoever won them would con-
trol the Mediterranean Sea and all the valuable trade that took place on 
its waters. 
The Romans never had a sea presence until the Punic Wars. They cap-
tured a Carthaginian ship and then copied it and created a fleet. They 
booty:   money and belongings that a conquering army takes from people of conquered lands.
palisade wall:   a defensive wall lined with pointed logs facing outward. See picture above.
auxiliaries:   Roman troops recruited from territories conquered by the Roman army.
Know your ANCIENT Roman Army 

89
Chapter 8    The Mighty Roman Army
added an innovation called a 
corvus to the war ship—a bridge 
with a spike that could be low-
ered from the deck of a Roman 
ship onto their opponent’s ship.  
This locked the two ships 
together and allowed Roman 
soldiers to board the enemy ship 
and engage in hand-to-hand 
combat. The corvus made the  
Roman ship top-heavy, though, 
and in bad weather the ship 
tended to capsize. Back to the drawing board.
The Social Wars
The brief but important period known as the Social Wars (91–88 BCE) 
resulted from the Roman military having to deal with the pressures of 
having taken on so many provinces on the Italian peninsula. 
Although it had been a long while since these provinces had 
been acquired, in 91 BCE the men of these colonies finally 
worked up the courage to fight against Rome for Roman citizen-
ship and the rights they would gain by becoming citizens. As it was, 
Spartacus and His Slave Revolt
Spartacus was a captured soldier from Thrace that was sold as a slave to work 
on a gladiator. Having fought against the Roman army, he knew how the 
Roman army fought. In 73 BCE he and 70 others escaped from slavery and 
hid on Mount Vesuvius. He raised an army of 90,000 men with whom he 
defeated two Roman legions. All told, Spartacus skirmished with the Roman 
army for about two years. Finally, Marcus Licinius Crassus routed Spartacus 
in 71 BCE and, to make an example, crucified 6,000 of Spartacus’s soldiers, 
placing them every 30 yards along the road out of Rome.

90
Tools of the Ancient Romans
they were paying taxes to Rome and obeying Roman law 
without the privileges they deserved in return. When 
the Senate realized that these individuals would con-
tinue to fight until they got what they wanted, they 
enacted a law that was similar to the laws introduced 
by the Gracchus brothers before their murders in 
133 and 121 BCE. They granted both land and citi-
zenship to landless Romans and colonists 
on the Italian peninsula who laid down 
their arms within 60 days. Suddenly, the 
Roman army had a much larger pool of 
citizens to draw from.
With ever-growing numbers of 
landless troops joining the military, 
military leaders gained power, for it 
was they—not the Senate—who paid 
their troops the land they earned for their 
military service. Julius Caesar was prob-
ably the most gifted of these leaders. More 
than the other army commanders, he 
was able to win over and keep hold of his 
troops’ loyalty. He could lead his troops 
anywhere. Why? Because he followed 
through with the promises he made, 
he inspired them with his words, and he 
made all of his men—even the low-ranked skirmishers—feel important. 
Furthermore, unlike most commanders, whenever Caesar conquered a 
city, he did not take more than his share of the booty. He left much of 
it for his men and made sure it was fairly divided. 
 
What was at the root 
of the Social Wars?
Q:
Crassus 
on the Slave Revolt
“One Lentulus Batiates trained up 
a great many gladiators in Capua, 
most of them Gauls and Thracians, 
who, not for any fault by them 
committed, but simply through 
the cruelty of their master, 
were kept in confinement for 
this object of fighting one 
with another. Two hundred 
of these formed a plan to 
escape, but being discovered, 
those of them who became 
aware of it in time to anticipate 
their master, being seventy-
eight, got out of a cook’s shop 
chopping-knives and spits, and 
made their way through the 
city, and lighting by the way on 
several wagons that were carry-
ing gladiators’ arms to another 
city, they seized upon them and 
armed themselves...”

91
Chapter 8    The Mighty Roman Army
The Wars of Expansion
Caesar valued military glory as much as anything. So when he became dicta-
tor in 46 BCE, the fourth major period in Roman military history—the wars of 
expansion—began. Under Caesar, Rome defeated the Celtic Gauls and Britain. 
The Roman military, which was already the biggest and fastest moving mili-
tary in the world, grew even larger and faster. 
Throughout the wars of expansion, the Roman army traveled with incred-
ible speed and efficiency. Not only did they march fast (often thanks to their 
own excellent roads), but they set up camp fast, too. At the end of a hard 
day’s march of 15 miles, the soldiers set up a virtual fortress in a very short 
time. They surrounded the perimeter of the camp with a ditch and a wall of 
pointed wooden logs called a palisade wall that faced out to prevent enemies 
from getting inside. Just think about all the work that took—clearing space,  
digging the ditch, and felling trees for the palisade wall. 
And this was all after a long 
day’s march.
As the Roman Empire pushed 
farther and farther into the 
known world the armies got 
farther from the center of 
power—Rome—and relied 
more heavily on non-citizen 
soldiers, and auxiliaries. It 
became increasingly difficult to 
maintain the peace both within the 
army and in the territories.
By the time Hadrian came along as emperor (117–138 CE), the wars of expan-
sion sparked by Caesar were nearing their end. Hadrian put more energy into 
maintaining the widespread borders. In Britain, Hadrian built an 80-mile-long 
Interesting Tidbit: 
Auxiliary troops
Even with land and citizenship reforms made as a result 
of the Social Wars, there weren’t enough Roman men to 
serve. More and more, Rome recruited men from newly 
conquered territories. These men were called “auxiliary” 
troops and they served in units of 500 to 1,000 men. 
Auxiliary troops and their descendents were rewarded 
with Roman citizenship after 25 years of service.

92
Tools of the Ancient Romans
fortified stone wall that separated England from Scotland. The idea 
was to protect Roman interests to the south and to prevent the Picts 
and other Scots to the north from invading. Hadrian’s Wall included 
elaborate pit traps dug in front of the wall and towers placed at strategic 
points to better observe enemy movements. 
The Wars of Attrition
By the time the Roman military entered into the fifth and final major 
period of its thousand-year history, the Wars of Attrition (or the how-to-
lose-the-empire-bit-by-bit phase), feelings about the Roman army had 
changed. It was no longer seen as a privilege and duty to serve in the 
army. Rather, the army was having a hard time filling its ranks and men 
were deserting. Increasingly the Roman army had to rely on recruiting 
men from the outlying provinces. These recruits never felt the same kind 
of allegiance to Rome as those who lived closer to the seat of power. 
Under Diocletian, emperor from 284 to 305 CE, the separation of the 
army and the state was formalized. He divided the army into the field 
army and the frontier troops. The field army went on campaigns into 
Hadrian's Wall.

93
Chapter 8    The Mighty Roman Army
new territories. The frontier army stayed behind in the strongholds to 
make sure they didn’t lose any territory. 
This division would be the beginning of the end of the mighty Roman 
Empire. Dividing the once great army would eventually pit Roman 
soldiers against each other out on the battlefield. As the succession of 
emperors slipped into chaos, so did the army, making it unable to unite 
against invaders.
	
field army: 
the core of troops that went out on campaigns.
campaign: 
any military effort to conquer new territory or defeat enemies. 
frontier army: the troops who defended Roman borders and strongholds.
Know your ANCIENT Roman Army 

N A SINGLE YEAR AFTER NERO’S DEATH IN 68 CE, FOUR  
different men tried to reign as emperor, and they were all disasters. 
The last of the four, Vitellius, was particularly bad. He squandered 
his money on unnecessary luxuries. For one banquet, he reportedly 
served 2,000 fish and 7,000 birds to his guests. He spent 900 million ses-
tertii on dining alone (the yearly salary for a million Roman soldiers!). 
Eventually, Titus Flavius Vespasian, a military general who had been 
stationed in Egypt, fought his way into Rome and took charge. 
Vespasian 
Vespasian was emperor for 10 years, from 69 to 79 CE. He was the first 
Roman equite (member of the middle class) to reach the pinnacle of 
power. Having served with the military all over the empire, he proved 
to be a very able ruler. He was down to earth, understood the financial 
aspects of running an empire, and embarked on a number of public 
building projects. The most famous building from his era was called 
Flavian’s Amphitheater when it was built, but we call it the Coliseum.
The Next Two 
Hundred Years
Learn about 
the Coliseum's 
original purpose, 
builder, and 
design
Find out about 
one of history's 
deadliest volcanic 
eruptions
See the 
beginning of 
the empire's 
decline
94
Chapter9

Vespasian also strengthened the governments of the provinces, 
or provincial governments, around the empire. He extended 
Roman citizenship to people who lived in the provinces, 
which eventually allowed some of them to sit in the Senate. 
He beefed up Rome’s border defenses, and he moved 
regional military recruits from their home territories to 
other parts of the empire. Why? Because Vespasian was 
interested in spreading Rome’s influence to the far reaches 
of the empire. He knew that if military recruits stayed close to 
home, they wouldn’t have any incentive to think like Romans. 
But if they were in foreign territory, they would have to rely 
more on their superiors and fellow soldiers and would thus 
become more “Roman.”
Titus
Titus (emperor from 79 to 81 CE) succeeded his 
father Vespasian. He proved to be a kind, intelli-
gent, and compassionate ruler. In his first year, the 
volcano Mount Vesuvius blew its top and rained 
up to 20 feet of ash on the cities of Pompeii and 
Herculaneum. Thousands of people died 
and Titus helped with disaster relief. We 
can think of him as the emperor of disas-
ter because soon after Vesuvius erupted, 
there was a major fire in 
Rome, and right after that a plague swept  
through Italy. Titus met each challenge head-on 
and with generosity. The public loved him. 
On his deathbed he said, “I have made only 
one mistake.” He died before he could 
explain this mistake. To this day, no 
one knows what he meant.
95
Chapter 9    The Next Two Hundred Years
Interesting Tidbit:
The Coliseum 
The Coliseum got its name because 
it was near the spot where a colossal 
statue of Nero once stood.

96
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Coliseum (or Flavian’s Amphitheater)
The Coliseum was a remarkable structure, one of the finest architectural achievements in the 
history of the Roman empire. This building, which looks like a series of arches placed one 
on top of the other, was created by Emperor Vespasian to remind the Roman people that 
they lived in the greatest, most powerful nation in the world. The stadium was oval in shape, 
seated about 55,000 people, and was the site of entertainment on a grand scale, including 
the bloody gladiator games. 
There was, a common 
saying that goes: “When the 
Coliseum falls, so falls Rome 
and all the world.” 
Domitian 
Titus left no heir but his 
brother, Domitian (emper-
or 81–96 CE) moved in to 
fill the void. By all accounts 
he was a very able admin-
istrator. He completed 
public works and build-
ing projects begun by his 
father and brother, and he put down rebellions in some of the outlying 
provinces. He also raised the pay of men serving in the army.
But Domitian was hated. Why? Because he acted like a dictator. Okay, 
he was a dictator—like the emperors before him, he had all the power—
but the Romans didn’t appreciate him acting that way. He built an 
enormous imperial palace and walked around in royal garb. He dis-
regarded the Senate. He wanted to be known as dominus et deus—lord 
and god—and saw himself as the center of Roman religion. Failure 
to worship the emperor and imperial gods became an act of treason 
under his reign.

97
Chapter 9    The Next Two Hundred Years
Eventually, Domitian became paranoid and saw conspiracies everywhere 
he looked. Finally, his wife, the Praetorian Guard, imperial servants, 
and high-ranking senators conspired to have him 
murdered. Rome celebrated. 
Trajan
Nerva (emperor from 96 to 98 CE) was appointed emperor by the Senate 
when Domitian was killed. Nerva knew he wasn’t up to the task and, 
in a shrewd move, adopted Marcus Ulpius Trajanus (Trajan) as his heir 
in 97 CE. 
Trajan, who ruled the empire for almost 20 years (98–117 CE), proved 
to be one of Rome’s most popular emperors. He fought wars in Dacia 
Why is Pompeii so 
well preserved?
Q:
Pliny the Elder [Gaius Plinius Secundus] (23–79 CE)
A Roman lawyer, Pliny the Elder wrote a 32-book encyclopedia titled Natural History. When 
Mount Vesuvius erupted in 79 CE, he went to Pompeii by boat to help rescue survivors who 
were on the beach. He died there,  probably overtaken by the poisonous gas.
you should know
names
Trajan [Marcus Ulpius Trajanus] (c. 53–117 CE)
Trajan, from southern Spain, was the first emperor to be born outside of Rome (although he 
was raised in Rome). As emperor, he was known as a generous and fair leader. He built many 
buildings throughout the empire and created the public baths in Rome itself. Under his rule, 
the empire annexed the territory north of the Danube River in a victory commemorated on 
Trajan’s Column.
Plutarch (50–120 CE)
A Greek writer and a Roman citizen, Plutarch wrote The Parallel Lives, which looked at the 
careers of great men in the history of Greece and Rome. A lot of what we know about early 
Romans and Greeks comes from Plutarch.
you should know
names

98
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Pompeii and Herculaneum
In 79 CE, the volcano Vesuvius erupted and rained volcanic ash and pumice down on the city 
of Pompeii. The ash didn’t kill the 3,600 people who died in Pompeii—it was the volcanic gas.
In Herculaneum, a mud flow and debris collapsed buildings and trapped people beneath 
them. The mud flow hit with the force of an 
atomic bomb and carried much of the town 
several miles away. 
Today, these two cities are remarkably well 
preserved, particularly Pompeii, which lay 
buried under up to 20 feet of ash for almost 
two millennia. We’ve learned much about 
the architecture, art, and daily life of the 
first-century CE Roman Empire from archeo-
logical excavations of these cities.
The buried town of Pompeii was discovered 
in 1748 and archeological excavations began 
in 1860. Much of Pompeii has been restored 
and has been visited by millions of people. Beautiful villas—complete with frescoes and mosa-
ics—were perfectly preserved by the ash, along with shops and inns along the main road. 
There were also some gruesome finds, such as “casts” made in the ash of people and animals 
as they were asphyxiated by the poison gas (they’re casts because the actual bodies have disin-
tegrated). Pompeii offers a vivid picture of what life was like in this thriving port city when it 
was encapsulated in ash in 79 CE.
(Romania), Armenia, and Mesopotamia. His exploits in 
Dacia were documented on an exquisite 100-foot col-
umn engraved with a spiraling bas relief known as 
Trajan’s Column. He built fabulous public buildings 
in Rome including the magnificent Roman Forum, 
the market, a basilica, public baths, and libraries. 
Trajan also realized that the health of the empire 
depended on the health of its citizens. Trajan believed 
the government should pay for education and food 
Graffiti found 
in Pompeii
“Celadus, the Thracian, 
makes all the girls sigh.”
“Crescens, the net fighter, 
holds the hearts of all the girls.”

99
Chapter 9    The Next Two Hundred Years
for needy families and children throughout Italy. 
This system was called alimenta.
Trajan died while on a military campaign to the 
east where he was trying to expand the empire, yet 
again. After his death, every new emperor was hon-
ored by the Senate with the prayer felicior Augusto, 
melior Traiano (may he be luckier than Augustus and 
better than Trajan). His honorable reputation has 
remained intact for 1,900 years.
Hadrian
Publius Aelius Hadrianus (Hadrian) succeeded 
Trajan in 117 CE and ruled the empire for the 
next 21 years. With Trajan having been so popu-
lar, Hadrian had big shoes to fill. What made this 
an even harder task was that Trajan left behind a 
Rome that was stretched thin. He'd poured money 
into defending an empire that was crumbling 
around the edges. Hadrian believed that a return 
to a non-expansionist Rome—a Rome with clearly 
defined borders—would make for a stronger 
empire. He gave up some of the recently conquered 
land in the east and strengthened some of the other 
borders, including building Hadrian’s Wall to 
defend the northern border of the empire in Britain.
Hadrian was not well-liked in Rome, and he spent a good deal of his 
time traveling throughout the empire. He reformed the military—where 
he was adored as a commander—by bringing more discipline to the 
army. He also extended the system of alimenta.
Pliny the Younger
Nephew of Pliny the Elder, Pliny 
the Younger wrote about the erup-
tion of Mount Vesuvius in what 
remains as the only recorded eye-
witness account of the incident.
“You could hear the groans of the 
women, the cries of the children 
and the clamor of the men; some 
loudly sought their parents, others 
their children, others again their 
spouses, and recognized them by 
their voices.; there were some who, 
for fear of death, invoked it; many 
raised their arms to the gods, but 
still more said there were no more 
gods, and that this was the last 
night of the world . . .”

100
Tools of the Ancient Romans
There are some spectacular buildings created by Hadrian that are still 
standing, including his mausoleum (known today as Castel San Angelo) 
and his villa in Tivoli. He adopted Antoninus Pius as his successor.
Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus Pius, who was emperor from 138 to 161 CE,  was not a remark-
able ruler. Although he had a lengthy reign, not much has been written 
about him. He never left Italy, and his most significant reforms were in 
Hadrian [Publius Aelius Hadrianus] (ruled 117–138 CE)
Hadrian was proclaimed emperor the day after his adop-
tive father, Trajan, died. Hadrian’s rule is marked by 
extensive building projects throughout the empire, one 
of the most famous being Hadrian’s Wall in Britain.
you should know
names
Hadrian coin.

101
Chapter 9    The Next Two Hundred Years
the courts. Two legal principles 
Antoninus developed that you 
might be familiar with are the 
notion of presuming someone innocent until proven 
guilty, and the idea that in the case of a tie verdict, 
the person accused of the crime is given the benefit 
of the doubt. Antoninus didn’t pay much attention to 
military affairs, and by the time of his death, there was 
plenty of trouble on the borders of Rome.
Marcus Aurelius, who was the nephew of Hadrian, 
was adopted by Antoninus so he could be the suc-
cessor. When he was appointed emperor in 161 CE, 
Marcus insisted that his close friend, Lucius Varus, 
act as co-emperor. They worked together until Varus’s 
death in 169 CE.
Marcus was relentless in his quest to hold the empire 
together. He defended Rome’s borders, issued imperial decisions, and 
heard legal cases. While trying to hold back invasions along the Danube 
River, he wrote Meditations, a simple reflective journal. 
Chaos and Many Emperors
When Marcus died in 180 CE, the empire was 
slipping into a period of decline and frag-
mentation. For the next 100 years, until the reign of Diocletian in 285 CE, 
Rome was ruled by a series of emperors who went from bad to worse 
and back again. Most of the rulers and their families during this period 
ended up being killed in very gruesome ways.
Also during this 100-year period where one bad leader was assasinated 
only to be followed by the next, military legions began to promote their 
Marcus Aurelius
What judicial reforms did 
Antoninus Pius make?
Q:
“ felicior Augusto, melior Traiano” 
may he be luckier than Augustus and better than Trajan

102
Tools of the Ancient Romans
commanders to serve as emperors. 
There were at least 25 of these “bar-
racks emperors” who ruled during 
this century, with 16 of them ruling 
between the years 244 and 260. It’s 
hard to imagine anyone wanting 
to be emperor during this time 
because it seemed like an immedi-
ate death sentence. To make matters 
worse, the Roman Empire was being 
attacked from all sides. The Franks, Jutes, and 
Germanic Alemanni invaded across the Rhine River, 
and the Vandals and Goths crossed the Danube River. If this weren’t 
enough, the Persian Empire had begun to creep westward toward the 
Roman Empire.
In the meantime, provinces began to split off from the empire and fend 
for themselves. Parts of France, Germany, Britain, and Spain formed 
the Gallic Empire in 260 CE with a capital in Trier (Germany), ruled 
by Emperor Tetricus. The areas now inhabited by the countries Syria, 
Palestine, and Egypt, as well as large parts of Asia Minor also formed 
their own empire. It was called the Palmyrene Empire, named after the 
ancient city of Palmyra, and it was ruled by Queen Zenobia.
A series of emperors gradually conquered the Goths, stabilized the cen-
ter of the empire, and reunited the eastern and western portions that had 
broken away. One of the most important of these emporers was Aurelian. 
He brought the Palmyrene Empire in the east back under Roman control 
in 274 CE and, in the same year, defeated the Gallic Empire in the west. 
He is best remembered for constructing a massive defensive wall around 
Rome that still bears his name. 
Interesting Tidbit: 
What's in a name?
Look at the names of the tribes of people who were 
invading Rome because you might recognize them. 
We still use the word vandal to describe someone 
who destroys something. “Goth” is at the root of the 
word Gothic. “Franks” come from a place that we 
now call France.

103
Chapter 9    The Next Two Hundred Years
Aurelian met an untimely death at the hands of his own men in 275 CE. 
For the next decade, the empire was ruled by six emperors who were all 
put in place by legions (barracks emperors) and then mur-
dered by those who put them in power. Rome was not a 
safe place to be if you were an emperor.
Within the 200 years covered in this chapter, the government of the 
Roman empire went from caring and stable to disjointed and chaotic. 
But life goes on, and even during this time of government disintegration, 
people turned to entertainment to pass the time.
Commodus (ruled from 180 to 192 CE)
Commodus was chosen emperor upon the death of his father, Marcus Aurelius. He was 
18 at the time and put the running of the government in the hands of advisors while he 
acted like a teenager, racing chariots and playing at being a gladiator. The senators were 
disgusted. Soon Commodus wanted to be known as Hercules and wore a Hercules outfit 
while participating in sporting events. He then wanted Rome to be renamed Colonia 
Commodianna, or, “Colony of Commodus.” Commodus was killed by a group of senators 
and his favorite girlfriend.
you should know
names
Describe the 
Aurelian Wall.
The Aurelian Wall
In 271 CE Aurelian recognized the vulnerability of Rome and constructed a massive defensive 
wall around the city. It’s about 12 miles long and originally contained 18 gates. Today you can 
find its remains all around the city of Rome, which has grown far beyond the borders defined 
by the Aurelian Wall.

104
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Emperors wore wreaths made from laurel (bay leaves) on special occasions.
1	Take a couple of pipe 
cleaners and connect 
them to make a circle that 
will fit around your head.
2	Fold your green paper in half and cut out the 
shape of a laurel leaf. See diagram.
 
3	Open up the leaf so you have two leaves 
connected by a stem. Fold each of 
these leaves around the pipe 
cleaner, using a drop of glue 
to keep the leaves in place. 
Place the leaves pointing in 
different directions so that 
they all aren’t sticking up 
or sticking down.
4	Place on your head  
and feel like an emperor.
You might want to try different kinds of 
paper­—tissue paper, construction paper, 
or shiny green wrapping paper—to see 
which leaves you like the most.
activity:Laurel Wreath
pipe cleaners
green paper
glue
supplies

That’s 
Entertainment
Learn about 
the Roman 
sport of 
chariot racing
Meet the 
gladiators 
behind the 
masks
Compare Roman 
athletes to the 
star athletes of 
today
105
HE EARLIEST GAMES AND FESTIVALS, 
or ludi, in ancient Rome were religious celebra-
tions. A ludi could last several days and there 
might be up to a dozen ludi throughout the calendar 
year. Stages were erected for dramatic performances 
associated with the festival and then taken down. 
This went on for hundreds of years until Pompey 
built and dedicated the first permanent theater 
building in 55 BCE.
Theater was popular but ancient Romans were just wild 
for chariot racing and staged gladiator battles that 
took place in the Coliseum.
Chapter
10

106
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Chariot Racing
Chariot racing was one of the most popular sports in both the Greek and 
Roman worlds. Originally, wealthy Greek aristocrats from all over the 
Hellenistic (Greek) world competed against each other in the “sport of 
kings.” While the Greeks enjoyed chariot racing they did not take it as 
seriously as the Romans, whose entire culture became obsessed by it. 
Early on in Rome, chariot racing became a professional 
sport. There were four teams that competed against 
each other—Red, White, Blue, and Green—and a 
day at the races involved heavy betting on your 
favorite team. The chariot racing industry was 
set up much like NASCAR is today. There were 
professional drivers, fantastic horses bred for rac-
ing, and sleek chariots all competing against 
each other for a purse. When an official decid-
ed to put on a chariot race, he paid each team a  
certain amount of money for participating and then 
Juvenal 
A second-century CE satirist, 
Juvenal wrote that the two things 
yearned for by the Roman mob 
were bread and circuses (panem a 
circenses).

107
Chapter 10   That’s Entertainment
the winner received the 
prize money. Purses for 
the big races were often 
between 40,000 and 
60,000 sestertii (remem-
ber that a Roman 
soldier earned only 900 
sestertii a year!).
The place where char-
iot races occurred was 
called the circus. In 
the early years, chariot 
races took place on an 
oval track surrounded by bleacher-style seating. Emperor Trajan built 
the Circus Maximus. The new circus was 600 meters long and could 
accommodate up to 180,000 spectators, making it the largest single com-
plex for public congregation in the world (compare this with the New 
Orleans Superdome, which holds 72,000 spectators). 
The track was divided with a barrier down the middle, which kept 
chariots from cutting corners as they raced. On top of the barrier were 
a number of sculptures that served as lap-counting devices. There were 
two lap-counting mechanisms: the seven gilded eggs and the seven 
gilded dolphins. As the lead chariots rounded the corners, the lap coun-
ters would be flipped (you knew what end of the track you were at if 
you saw either an egg or a dolphin). At either end was a turning point 
in the form of a large gilded cone.
Circus Maximus

108
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Races lasted for seven laps, which worked out to about five and a quarter 
miles. The two, four, or sometimes even six-horse chariots lined up at the 
starting gate with grooms to hold them in position. (Emperor Nero even 
tried to race a ten-horse team.) At the horn, the horses leaped forward and 
the race was on!
Chariots were small vehicles with wheels about the size of 
wheelchair wheels and a platform just big enough to hold 
a standing driver. Keeping this thing upright while making tight turns took 
a very skillful driver. Even so, there were many crashes, much to the thrill 
of the spectators. Chariot racing was a no-holds-barred event and drivers 
would do just about anything they could to win. There were no rules saying 
you couldn’t whip another driver’s horse or ram into the side of his chariot. 
The fans could be rowdy, often provoking fights before, during, and after 
the races. It was a wild place to be, and clearly a lot of people loved it.
“panem e circenses” 
bread and circuses

109
Chapter 10   That’s Entertainment
Who were the drivers? They often began life as slaves or 
were the children of drivers. Winning drivers became 
celebrities (and, like today’s celebrities, were hounded 
any time they went out in public). Some went on to buy 
their freedom—if they lived long enough. Scorpus, a 
late-first-century charioteer won an amazing 2,048 vic-
tories before dying in a crash around the age of 27.
Gladiatorial Combat
Gladiatorial combat began in Etruria as part of aristo-
cratic funeral games and sacrifices. When the gladiator 
games were introduced to Rome in the third century 
BCE, the Roman aristocracy was very keen to adopt 
the practice. They hosted lavish games that included 
gladiator combat as a way to increase their own popularity with the 
common people as well as with influential Romans. By the first century 
BCE, gladiatorial combat was a lucrative sport for the lanistae (owners/
managers) of gladiatorial troops who traveled in the wake of the Roman 
army, offering to put on matches for a handsome fee.
Gladiatorial contests were originally held in places like the marketplace 
or the forum with only a few pairs of gladiators fighting at a time. As the 
popularity of these contests soared, it became necessary to build a per-
manent structure for the games. In 80 CE the Coliseum was completed 
for this purpose. Under the Coliseum's wood-floored arena were cells 
and small rooms where the criminals, animals, and gladiators were kept 
before the games. For the inauguration of the Coliseum there were 100 
consecutive days of games.
Who were the gladiators? Just like many charioteers, they were slaves, 
men captured in war, or criminals. Every now and then a desperate citi-
zen signed up for gladiator school in hopes of making some money.

110
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Know your ANCIENT Roman Gladiators 
There were different types of gladiators. Some specialized in strength and armor, 
while others relied on speed and mobility. The two types were often pitted against 
each other in the arena.
The heavily armed fighters:
Secutores carried a huge rectangular shield; a sword; a heavy, simple 
helmet with eyeholes; one protective arm sleeve, and a protective greave 
(shin guard) for their forward leg.
Thraeces had a helmet with a wide brim, crest, and protective visor. They 
were armed with a curved sword called a scimitar—and a small shield, 
and wore greaves on both legs.
Myrmillones were heavily armed fighters who were named 
for the emblem of a fish on their helmets. Their curved 
sword, which got wider toward the pointed end, was 
called a scimitar.
The lightly armed fighters:
Retiarii were armed with nets and tridents.
Laquearii were armed with a lasso.
Sagittarii were armed with a bow and 
arrows.
Essedarii fought one another from  
chariots.
Dimachaeri fought with two swords.
Andabatae were riders in armor who fought 
with closed visors, which, in effect, made 
them blind.

111
Chapter 10   That’s Entertainment
Sometimes, men were sold to a 
gladiator school where they came 
under the supervision of a trainer 
and an owner. They had to swear 
an oath of complete submission and 
agree “to be burned, to be bound, to 
be beaten, and to be killed by the 
sword.” They trained with heavier 
weapons than they would use in 
the games to build up their muscles, 
and competed three or four times 
a year. Most gladiators died in the 
arena—killed by wild animals like lions and tigers or by members of 
their own gladiator school. Those who survived could hope to win their 
freedom and the “wooden sword” that was given to retired gladiators. 
Good gladiators, like good chariot drivers, became wildly popular with 
the public.
Executions usually served as the warm-up to the contests between gladi-
ators. Often criminals sentenced to execution were pitted against each 
other. One would be armed and the other unarmed, and the winner 
would then face the next criminal, until they were all dead. 
A day at the games might begin with wild animals being pitted against 
one another (the Romans were responsible for killing thousands of wild 
and exotic animals that were imported to Rome from the far reaches of 
the empire). Then the execution of the criminals would follow.
The afternoon featured gladiator pairs. Each fight was refereed, and if 
the referee thought they weren’t fighting hard enough, he would liter-
ally whip them along. When a gladiator was wounded or defeated, he 

could ask for mercy and concede defeat by holding up his index finger. 
It was up to the sponsor of the games as to whether he lived or died—a 
thumbs up meant the gladiator should live to fight another day, and 
a thumbs down meant he should die. The crowd really got into it by 
cheering and waving and making their wishes known.
If the gladiator was to die, he was supposed to die 
bravely and with honor. After the death blow was 
delivered, he was dragged off by a slave out of  the 
arena through the Porta Libitinensis, or Death’s Gate.
In a spectacle even greater than the gladiator games, 
sea battles were enacted on artificial lakes created by 
flooding arenas. Emperor Augustus even created an 
artificial lake next to the Tiber River—it was drain-
able so it wouldn’t smell between battles. Thousands 
of men took part in these battles and the survivors, if 
they had fought well, could go free.
Why did the Romans like these gruesome games involving life and 
death? No one can really answer that. Perhaps it was a way for people 
to keep their minds off of the larger problems around them—like the 
failing health of their empire. Whatever the case, it's 
impossible for you or me to fathom killing and mutilat-
ing people for sport—and it's comforting to know that 
many writers of the day deplored the violent nature 
of the games.
Porta Libitinensis, or Death’s Gate.
112
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Pylades to 
Augustus 
“It is to your advantage, Caesar, 
that we keep the public occupied.”
Pylades was referring to the 
Roman games.

HEN WE LAST LOOKED AT THE EMPIRE IN ABOUT 
284 CE, it was a mess. Although Aurelian tried to knit the 
empire back together when he brought the Gallic and the 
Palmyrene Empires back under Roman control, the empire 
was still like a loosely stitched scarf that could unravel at any moment.
The Tetrarchy
Diocletian, who was emperor from 284 to 305 CE, and 
who split the army in two, faced a horrendous chal-
lenge. How was he going to reestablish firm central 
authority? First of all, he  felt that succession needed 
to be predictable to lessen competition for the posi-
tion of emperor. And, secondly, he realized that he 
needed the help of someone he trusted to help him 
rule. The empire was too big to rule alone. 
The Rise of the 
Empire, Again
Witness the 
mighty empire's 
last stand
See why 
Constantine 
moved the 
capital
Explore the roots 
of the Catholic 
Church
Chapter
11
113
113

114
Tools of the Ancient Romans
He brought in a right hand man, Maximian, and gave him the 
title Caesar (junior emperor), as well as the western side of 
the empire to rule. Diocletian himself would remain Augustus 
(senior emperor), with power to govern the east. 
Even with this new arrangement, both rulers had their hands 
full with half of the empire. So Diocletian appointed two more 
caesars as helpers. Both of his choices had impressive military 
backgrounds and were required to marry into the two emperors’ 
families. Constantius married Maximian’s daughter and helped 
rule the west, and Galerius married Diocletian’s daughter and helped 
rule the east. The empire was now ruled by a tetrarchy, or four rulers. 
Constantine
While the tetrarchy arranged 
by Diocletian worked for a 
time, it began to fail when Constantius (who had risen to Augustus after 
Diocletian and Maximian’s retirement) died. At the time of Constantius’s 
death, his son and junior emperor, Constantine, took over his domain. 
Constantine had a powerful personality and didn’t want help ruling 
in the west. By 312 CE, five years after his father’s death, he defeated 
Maxentius, Maximian’s son, to become sole ruler of the west. In 324 
CE, the tension between Constantine and his brother-in-law, Licinius, 
who was senior emperor of the east, boiled over into war. Constantine 
defeated Licinius and became sole emperor of the Roman world.
Diocletian (emperor from 284 to 305 CE)
Diocletian rose through the military ranks to become emperor. He was responsible for 
bringing the empire back together and reorganizing the government. With a series of broad 
tax reforms he saved the central government, but it forced the common people into a system 
that tied them to their land and to one profession for their entire lives.
you should know
names
Diocletian
How did workers pay their 
taxes under Constantine?

115
Chapter 11   The Rise of the Empire, Again
activity:Cameo Pin
Cameos are small scenes or figures that are carved in relief, meaning the image is raised 
higher than its background. Cameos are carved from one material—often coral—and are 
made into all different kinds of jewelry, such as necklaces, rings, and brooches. Usually 
the figure on a cameo is a profile of someone. It’s likely that the rulers in the tetrarchy 
and their wives would have had their images carved on cameo pins.
1	Soften a piece of clay by kneading it with your fingers. Roll it into a 
ball, then flatten it to create your base. Soften a smaller piece of 
clay, then roll it into a ball and squish it onto the base.
2	Use your knife or wooden tools to shape the clay into a 
profile. Make sure to make all the features—nose, eye, 
mouth, chin, ear, hair.
3	When you’re satisfied with the way it looks, you can soften 
another piece of clay, then roll it into a narrow, long “snake.” 
Place this around the edge of the base to create a decorative border. 
4	Follow the directions on the package of clay 
and bake the pin on a cookie sheet in the 
oven. After your creation has 
baked and cooled, glue on a 
pin back.
Fimo or Sculpy clay 
just one color
plastic knife or 
wooden clay tools
metal pin back 
(these can be found in 
packages in craft stores)
glue
supplies

116
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The first thing Constantine (often 
called 
Constantine 
the 
Great) did in his 
new, all-powerful 
position was move the capital of the empire to Constantinople (ancient 
Byzantium, now modern Istanbul). Why did he do this? Because he 
thought he needed a break with the past, which was represented by the 
now-isolated city of Rome. Constantine chose four prefects to rule over 
four other areas of the empire, but he maintained complete control over 
the military.
Constantine continued an economic program started by Diocletian. 
When workers paid their taxes, they paid “in kind,” which meant 
if you made olive oil, you paid in olive oil. Workers were organized  
into guilds—like unions—and weren’t allowed to change jobs. Sons 
were required to do the same kind of job their fathers did. This allowed 
Constantine to figure out how much money and what kinds of goods 
were going to be collected by the government, but it made the people 
very unhappy.
In 312 CE, Constantine had a vision of a giant cross just before the 
decisive battle he won against Maxentius. The vision prompted him 
Constantine the Great (emperor 310–337 CE)
Constantine continued the reforms begun under Diocletian, but his most 
significant impact on the empire had to do with his a religious conversion 
to Christianity in 312. Under Constantine, the Roman Catholic 
Church was established. He created a new capital for the Roman 
empire in the Greek city of Byzantium, which he rebuilt and 
renamed Constantinople. The Roman empire—at least the 
eastern Roman empire—became a Christian state.
you should know
names

117
Chapter 11   The Rise of the Empire, Again
to convert to Christianity. Although his conversion was not immediate, 
he eventually proclaimed himself the earthly representative of God and 
made Christianity the state religion. He called himself Isoapostelis (Equal 
of the Apostles). In 325 CE, he brought bishops from all over Europe to 
a Council at Nicea. There, they wrote the Nicene Creed, which lays out 
the basics of the Christian faith regarding the nature of God, the Trinity, 
and the Church. The council also established the date for Easter and orga-
nized the Catholic Church.
Although Constantine the Great went 
on a tremendous building campaign 
in Constantinople (including building 
an imperial palace, a Senate house, 
libraries, universities, a forum, fan-
tastic churches, and a hippodrome) 
he did not neglect building in the for-
mer capital of Rome. He completed 
the Basilica of Maxentius and the last 
great imperial public bath. He also 
built the churches of St. John Lateran 
and St. Peter’s.
Constantine died in 337 CE on his 
way to conquer the Persian Empire 
and convert it to Christianity. Under the direction of Constantine the 
Great, the seat of power shifted east and the empire was converted from 
a pagan state with many gods to a theocracy. In a theocracy, the state is 
ruled by one god or by someone like Constantine the Great, who felt 
chosen by God to rule in his name.
Where did Constantine move the capital of 
the Roman Empire? What did he name it?
Q:

he ancient Roman WoRLd Was FuLL oF Gods 
and goddesses. Why? Because the Roman world included 
people from every culture of the known world, and most 
of these cultures had unique religious beliefs and gods.
Early Gods
the oldest religious practices centered on the home and 
the land. early Romans believed that gods and spirits 
of the ancestors protected the family and the land. every 
morning and evening the entire family gathered—including 
the slaves—and the paterfamilias led prayers on behalf of the 
family. Families prayed to the guardian spirits called Lares 
and penates and to the gods Janus and Vesta. Lares pro-
tected the land and the Roman peasant as he worked the 
land. Janus, a two-faced god, represented and protected 
Gods and
Goddesses
Learn about the 
pre-Christian 
roman Gods
Study the link 
between the 
gods and
government
See how 
Christianity
survived and 
spread
ChapTEr
12
118

the entrance to the home, reassuring 
peasants that the house was safe while 
they worked the fields during the 
day. the penates blessed and guarded the food 
and were thanked for providing food for the 
table. Finally, the goddess Vesta protected the 
hearth—the center of the home—which pro-
vided warmth, heat, and light for the family. 
early in Rome’s history, a Roman state religion 
was established. since the time of the kings, 
Romans had pontifices and augurs (priests 
and priest-like figures), and collegia (boards 
of priests) to oversee, perform, and organize 
Rome’s religious rites. Romans believed that 
the gods would give them good harvests and 
victory in battle if they worshipped them prop-
erly. While today we often view religion as a 
personal choice, the Romans felt that praying 
to the gods and goddesses was the same as 
believing in Rome. priests wielded a great deal 
of influence and the priesthood was often seen 
as a good stepping-stone to a political career.
Religion
as Rome became more of a regional power 
and a republic, it also developed into a reli-
gious center. Greek, Latin, and etruscan gods 
and goddesses were folded into the existing 
belief system. the highest Roman god was 
Jove, or Jupiter. he became the divine paterfa-
milias, or father of the Roman people, serving 
Augury
Augury was the art of interpreting 
from signs or omens, whether Jupiter, 
Rome’s main god, would be happy 
or mad about a future event (like a 
battle). Augurs interpreted omens 
from observations of birds, called 
auspices. 
Romans took the auspices before 
every important function, rang-
ing from elections to battles. They 
watched the flight of birds or observed 
the feeding patterns of sacred chick-
ens. Augurs would accompany armies 
and right before a battle would feed 
the sacred chickens. If the chickens ate 
a lot, it meant that Mars, the god of 
war, was pleased and the battle would 
go well. If they didn’t eat much, it 
meant the troops should fight another 
day. Oftentimes, augurs, whose lives 
could depend on the outcome of the 
auspices, wouldn’t feed the chickens 
for a while, just to make sure they ate 
well before the battle. 
The second king of Rome appointed 
three augurs to look out for things in 
the city. By Julius Caesar’s day, there 
were 16 official augers.
Name some of the guardian 
spirits of the home and farm.
Q:
119
CHAPTER 12   Gods and Goddesses

120
Tools of the Ancient Romans
activity:Fresco
Frescoes often showed natural landscapes or important Roman gods and goddess-
es, and were found throughout the Roman Empire. Frescoes were created by paint-
ing directly on plaster that was not quite dry so that the paint soaked in. Pompeii 
has some gorgeous examples of fresco and mosaic work.
1	Mix up the plaster and pour it into your 
aluminum tin. Let it sit for at least 45 minutes. 
The plaster will be hard but still wet.
2	While you wait, think about what you’d like to 
paint. You could make some sketches to help you 
plan your picture. 
3	Paint your picture directly on the plaster.
4	When the plaster is 
completely dry, remove 
your fresco from the 
aluminum tin. It should lift 
right out.
Plaster of Paris
aluminum tin 
(any shape)
poster paints
paintbrushes
supplies
Pour plaster into aluminum tin
Start to draw design onto plaster
Finish drawing design, 
and start to paint it in

121
Chapter 12   Gods and Goddesses
as the bringer of victory, the guarantor of justice, 
and the highest authority. He was the god who 
could throw thunderbolts down from the sky. 
Juno, Jove’s wife and the protector of women, 
became the materfamilias of the Roman people. 
Mars was the next most important god. He was 
the Roman god of war and defender of the city.
The following is a list of Roman gods and goddesses important during 
the republic. There were other gods as well, but these were the gods 
with Greek counterparts. As we’ve seen, many Romans, particularly the 
leaders, idealized all things Greek so it is not surprising that they bor-
rowed and “Romanized” Greek gods.
There were other gods and goddesses as well. Saturn was the ancient 
god of agriculture, Ceres was the fertility goddess, Neptune was the god 
of all waters and seas, and Fortuna was the mistress of good luck.
Vestal Virgins
At the center of the Forum in Rome was the Temple of Vesta, which contained a symbolic 
hearth tended by priestesses known as Vestal Virgins. It was a great honor to tend the hearth, 
and it was the duty of the priestesses to ensure the hearth’s flame never went out. Romans 
believed that bad things would happen to Rome if the flame went out. Girls between the 
ages of six and ten were chosen by lottery to be Vestal Virgins. During the 30 years they spent 
tending the hearth, these girls and women could not marry or have relationships with men. If 
it was discovered that a Vestal Virgin had been with a man, she would be buried alive.
Unlike some holy women, Vestal Virgins were 
permitted to participate in public life. They were 
given the authority to pardon any criminal who 
walked in their path on his or her way to prison 
or execution, but they had to swear the accused 
criminal met them by accident.

122
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Romans believed deeply in the power of their 
gods and took religion very seriously. If a Roman 
general won a battle, he didn’t take credit for 
the victory. He believed it was the god act-
ing through him who had won the battle. If 
the general lost the battle, it was because the gods of the other side were 
stronger than his god, or because he hadn’t prayed or sacrificed enough 
to his god. The Romans believed that the more they showed their dedica-
tion to a god, the more they were given in return. 
With Augustus’s rise to power and the beginning of the empire, he put 
more emphasis on religious life. He ordered the restoration of temples 
that had fallen into disrepair and the revival of religious rites and festi-
vals. Augustus thought that if people concentrated on religious activities 
they wouldn’t pay as much attention to what was wrong with the gov-
ernment. For that  reason he didn’t care what religion people followed. 
Roman	
Greek	
Their Realm or Role
Jupiter/Jove	
Zeus	
rule, power, justice
Juno	
Hera	
protector of women
Mars	
Ares	
war
Minerva	
Athena	
wisdom, strategy, skill
Diana	
Artemis	
goddess of the wild
Apollo	
Apollo	
divine wisdom, knowledge
Vulcan	
Hephaistus	
fire, metallurgy
Vesta	
Hestia	
hearth and home
Venus	
Aphrodite	
love and attraction
Cupid	
Eros	
desire
Dis	
Hades	
the dead
Mercury	
Hermes	
boundaries, commerce
Hercules	
Herakles	
hero and son of Zeus

123
Chapter 12   Gods and Goddesses
Mystery Religions
This toleration allowed new religions, called mystery religions, to spread 
through Rome. Mystery religions offered cleansing, purification, and 
salvation, as well as wild ceremonies that people enjoyed. Why are they 
called mystery religions? Because we don’t know much about them. 
They all have common elements, though, including a benevolent divine 
figure with whom believers could have direct personal contact, secret 
rites, and initiation of believers into the special knowledge and 
understanding of the religion. The cults of Isis, Mithras, 
and Cybele were a few of the most prominent.
Isis was originally an Egyptian nature deity but 
became the most popular deity in the Roman world 
during the time of the emperors. Called the Queen 
of Heaven, the Queen of War, the Lawgiver, and 
the Glory of Women, Isis became the benevolent 
mother to all. She would grant believers a happier 
life on earth and a life of eternal bliss after death. 
The story was that Isis had resurrected Osirus (her 
husband, and the Egyptian god of vegetation) from 
the dead, so she became the goddess of rebirth and 
resurrection. The ceremonies celebrating Isis were 
all about excess, wild music, and getting emotion-
ally charged up.
The Mithras cult originated in Persia. Mithras was 
the god of light and truth, and acted as a kind of 
middleman between humanity and the supreme 
Sun God. He had a miraculous birth, and he accom-
plished many heroic feats while fighting evil, 
including the sacrifice of a great bull from which all 
good things and the promise of salvation came to 
Pliny the Elder 
on the importance of 
prayer
“It is thought that sacrifices of peti-
tions to the gods are ineffectual 
without prayer. The text for invok-
ing a happy omen is different 
from that for averting an ill or that 
for making a request. The high-
est officials pray in fixed forms of 
words, and to make sure that not 
a word is omitted or spoken in the 
wrong place, a prompter reads the 
text before them, another person 
is appointed to watch over it, yet 
another to command silence, and 
the flute player plays to mask all 
other sounds. There are well-known 
examples of both kinds of mishap, 
either where the effectiveness of 
the prayer was spoiled by a chance 
expletive or where there was a slip 
in the recitation of the prayer.”

124
Tools of the Ancient Romans
mankind. Mithras then ascended to heaven to join his father and care 
for the souls of those who followed him. Worshipping Mithras was 
very popular among soldiers who admired his heroic deeds. Mithraic 
rites, including baptism, confirmation, and communion were held by 
small groups in underground caves or in temple basilicas. Those who 
followed strict moral guidelines were promised eternal life. One prob-
lem—no women were allowed.
Finally, there was the cult of Cybele, which originated in Asia Minor. To 
members of this cult, Cybele was the great mother goddess who embod-
ied all of the concerns of women. After she was introduced to Rome, her 
popularity grew fast and the cult became one of the most important in 
the empire. Astride the cult’s growing popularity, it became commonly 
acknowledged that Cybele tended not only to the needs of women, but 
also to the outcome of crops and wars.
Mithras

125
Chapter 12   Gods and Goddesses
The one aspect about this cult that slowed its growth and 
eventually led to its outlaw in the fourth century (the 
300s) was that its wild rituals and ceremonies went 
overboard. Some of them required its followers to 
cut themselves, while others involved wild music, 
chanting, and dancing like people had never seen 
before. 
As the empire expanded and more and more peo-
ple came under Roman rule, new religious beliefs 
and cults were often incorporated into the existing 
beliefs. As long as people weren’t participating in 
religious activities that encouraged them to think less of the state, the 
Roman government let well enough alone. 
Christianity
Given that we’ve just learned about how tolerant the Roman 
empire was of different religious beliefs, it seems odd that 
Romans persecuted the early Christians. A fundamental 
difference between Christianity and the other cults is the 
likely reason why Christianity was not tolerated at first. 
Christians believed in one god and therefore refused 
to acknowledge the divinity of the Roman emperor or 
gods. They became branded as atheists in the Roman 
world, people who didn't believe in God.
Yet many Romans became Christians. When Paul, an 
early Christian leader, traveled through the Roman 
world between 30 and 60 CE he spread Christianity 
to all levels of Roman society. Christianity offered a 
benevolent savior, personal salvation, the promise of 
eternal happiness, a strong moral and social code, and 
Cybele
Livy, 
Roman historian
“You will find that those who 
followed the gods had every 
success, while those who 
disregarded them were visited  
with misfortune.”

an organized community of believers. It was simi-
lar to Mithraism, but Christianity was open 
to women. Early Christianity depended 
upon the patronage of wealthy women.
Religious tension mounted in Rome 
by the second century CE (the 100s) 
because the growing number of 
Christians were openly refusing to 
recognize and participate in state rituals 
and sacrifices. This refusal was seen as anti-
social and unpatriotic. It was a direct rejection of 
what it meant to be Roman and threatened local order. 
Things reached a boiling point by 303 CE when the emperor Diocletian 
issued edicts against Christians and their churches. Christians were told 
that all who would not perform state sacrifices would be put to death or 
sent to the mines. By 311, however, it became clear that the persecutions 
weren’t working—Christians were peacefully going to their deaths or to 
the mines. The emperor Galerius issued the Edict of Toleration in 311 CE 
that put an official end to the Roman state’s persecution of Christians.
The very next year Constantine had 
his vision that led him to convert 
to Christianity. He established the 
Roman Catholic Church and made 
Christianity the official state religion 
of the Roman Empire. These actions 
by Galerius and Constantine helped 
Christianity to spread far and wide.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Burial
Most Romans cremated their dead, but early 
Christians practiced inhumation (burial) because 
they believed bodies needed to be kept intact 
while waiting for Jesus’s Second Coming. They 
buried their dead in underground cemeter-
ies called catacombs that still exist beneath the 
streets of Rome.
Edict of Toleration
The Edict of Toleration, by 
Galerius, allowed Christians to 
practice their faith. This came 
as a surprise to many because 
Galerius was notorious for 
his persecution of Christians 
under Diocletian. Why did 
he lighten up? No one really 
knows, but some suspected he 
did so just in case Christianity 
was the road to heaven.
126
Tools of the Ancient Romans

fter Constantine the Great died in 337 CE, the 
once-mighty Roman empire finally fell apart over the following 
decades, splitting into eastern and western empires. There wasn't 
a leader who could hold the empire together. 
Around 370 CE, the Huns—fierce, nomadic people from central Asia—
swept into Eastern Europe, driving the Visigoths and other Germanic 
tribes south into the Roman border provinces. The migration sparked by 
the Huns was one of the greatest in human history. Visigoths, Vandals, 
Franks, Angles, Saxons, and other tribes went on the move to escape the 
Huns and search for new lands to settle.
The End of the 
Roman Empire 
& Rome's Legacy
Meet the tribes 
who broke the 
Roman Empire 
in two
Learn from 
the empire's 
triumphs and 
mistakes
Notice the 
Roman ideas 
and structures 
around you
Chapter
13
127
127

128
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Barbarians
Valens, the eastern emperor, made a 
truce with the Visigoths, allow-
ing them to settle in Roman 
territory. He promised them 
protection from the Huns in 
exchange for Visigoth men 
joining his army. The deal 
went sour the very next year 
when famine struck. With barely 
enough grain to feed the Roman army, 
the Visigoths starved until they rioted. Other tribes joined the Visigoths, 
and at the Battle of Adrianople in 378 CE, they killed Valens and three-
fourths of his army.
 
Valens was succeeded by Theodosius, who was emperor from 379 to 395 
CE. Theodosius made deals with the Visigoths and other barbar-
ians who’d defeated his father. He allowed the Goths to settle 
as a kingdom under the jurisdiction of their own kings. This 
set a precedent for other tribes, such as the Vandals, to estab-
lish themselves within the borders of the empire. Why was 
this a problem for the empire? Because before long the 
leaders of these tribes challenged the emper-
ors for control.
Within Roman territory, Theodosius offi-
cially banned both public and private 
pagan religious observations in 391 CE. 
Christianity was officially the only Roman 
religion. This drove pagan Romans—and there 
were still many of them—to make alliances with 
barbarians.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Barbarians
Barbarian is a Greek word that refers to everyone who did 
not speak Greek. Romans used the word when talking 
about tribal people they considered less civilized. Some 
say the word itself comes from “bar-bar-bar-bar” the sound 
the Greeks heard when listening to a non-Greek speaker. 

129
Chapter 13   The End of the Roman Empire & Rome's Legacy
As more and more borderland passed out of Roman hands, 
the reach of the empire shrank. The Roman army had fewer 
soldiers who were Roman citizens, so it came to rely on large 
numbers of warriors from the barbarian tribes. Some emperors 
thought this would work because they believed the barbarians 
wanted to become Roman citizens. While this may have been 
true, eventually discipline within the army broke down. Because 
the government didn't have enough money, soldiers didn't get 
paid on a regular basis. It was a recipe for disaster.
The Empire Disintegrates
In the early 400s, Roman legions were recalled from Britain, 
allowing the Picts of Scotland to move south and the Saxons of 
Germany to cross the North Sea into Roman towns in Britain. Britain 
quickly fell under the control of native and Germanic peoples. Other 
tribes, such as the Vandals, swept through Gaul (France), then Rome’s 
Spanish provinces, and then down through North Africa. 
Meanwhile, the Visigoths united under the powerful leadership of Alaric 
and marched right into Rome in 410 CE. This shocked the 
world. Although Alaric only stayed for three days and 
little physical damage was done to the city itself, the 
psychological damage was tremendous.
Over the next half century, what was left of the 
western Roman Empire foundered. From 430 to 
453 CE, Attila the Hun rampaged through the area, 
invading towns and striking fear into the hearts of 
millions. With the Roman army weak and unorga-
nized, the fall of the western Roman Empire was all 
but complete.
Theodosius
Jerome, 
an early Christian writer 
living in Palestine,
“My voice is stopped, and sobs 
cut off the words as I try to speak. 
Captive is the city which once took 
captive all the world . . . The city 
of old . . . is fallen to ruin . . . and 
everywhere is the specter of death.”

130
Tools of the Ancient Romans
Who was the last Roman emperor of 
the west? Probably young Romulus 
Augustulus, a 16-year-old boy who was 
defeated by the German chieftain 
Odoacer in 476 CE. Augustulus was 
sent to live in Naples with a nice 
allowance. By that time the western 
empire was filled with many small, 
independent kingdoms. 
The combination of weak leadership, the split 
from the east, the collapse of the military, and relentless invasions 
from the north and west all caused the western Roman Empire to 
decline and eventually disintegrate.
What was left of the Roman Empire in the east, 
headquartered in Constantinople, continued 
on for another thousand years. It was a rocky 
millennium filled with internal conflicts 
over leadership and religion, and external 
pressure from invaders. But what else 
is new? 
The split between the east and 
west grew deeper as the years 
went on. In the east, Islamic 
armies spread their religion and 
culture. In the west, Christianity 
remained secure in its place as 
the main religion, with Latin as 
the language of Christianity.
Interesting Tidbit: 
Pagan
This word comes from the Latin word paganus, 
which means “country peasant.” Why apply this 
term to non-Christians? Christianity was mainly 
an urban religion, so the country people were 
the last to convert to Christianity.

131
Chapter 13   The End of the Roman Empire & Rome's Legacy
Rome's Legacy
Reminders of Rome remain throughout the regions that were once part 
of the mighty empire. Buildings, walls, bridges, aqueducts, and roads 
built by the Romans are still used today. These physical reminders of 
Rome’s legacy offer proof of Roman brilliance in engineering. There are 
also many Roman influences that permeate our religion, government, 
and cultures that we don’t even think about.
After Constantine established the Roman Catholic Church as the official 
religion of the empire, the church organized itself much like the empire 
was organized. The pope was the head of the church in Rome. Bishops 
spread throughout various regions, filling roles similar to those once 
filled by provincial governors. This allowed the early Catholic church to 
thrive, keeping Roman culture intact through the centuries so that we’re 
still influenced by it today. 
politics and government  
candidate, committee, congress, 
conservative, constitution, election, 
governor, legislature, liberal, majority, 
minority, republican, Senate
arts  
actor, audience, author, camera, director, 
editor, literature, mural, novel, opera, 
statue, verse, video
science 
evolution, friction, gravity, liquid, particle, 
radiation, solid, species, vacuum
education  
campus, college, course, history, language, 
library, pupil, student, university
measurement  
acre, century, decade, decimal, meter, 
mile, ounce, quart, volume
military  
admiral, army, commander, company, 
corporal, defense, general, navy
food  
asparagus, cereal, fruit, herb, onion, pork, 
radish
law  
courts, judge, jury, legal, verdict
architecture  
arch, cement, concrete, exterior, interior
Latin-Based Words in Everyday Use

132
Tools of the Ancient Romans
The Roman Catholic mass was conducted in Latin, the language of 
Rome, until the 1960s. For a long time after the fall of the empire, Latin 
was viewed as the language of scholarship. Today, many fields, includ-
ing medicine, law, and biology use specialized vocabularies that rely on 
Latin words. 
Many modern legal notions are actually not so modern. Cicero wrote that 
a state without law was like a body without a mind. This makes sense. 
Roman law was based on common sense, with certain legal principles 
that could be applied to all, whether or not they were Roman citizens. 
These principles developed into the philosophical notion of “natural 
law,” which forms the underpinnings for international law today.
The founders of the United States turned to Roman ideas, particularly 
to the writings of Cicero, when developing the new nation. Much of 
what they learned from the Romans influenced the writing of the 
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution and Bill of Rights. 
In many ways our representative democracy is structured much like 
the government of the Roman Republic.
Look around at some 
of our public build-
ings. You might find 
some obvious Roman 
influence. 
Thomas 
Jefferson 
designed 
many buildings at the 
University of Virginia 
to look like Roman 
temples. Public build-
ings like the United 
States Supreme Court, 
the New York Public 
United States Supreme Court.

133
Chapter 13   The End of the Roman Empire & Rome's Legacy
Library, and Boston’s Museum of Fine Arts draw heavily from Roman 
architectural forms.
The Roman Empire lasted for about a thousand years, which is a very 
long time. Modern societies can learn lessons from what the Romans 
did right—and they did many, many things right—as well as from 
what they did wrong. Things were okay in the empire as long as the 
central authority in Rome remained just and fair. When an emperor 
tried to expand the empire too far, stretching its resources, or when he 
didn’t treat people in the provinces fairly, things began to fall apart. 
We can look at recent history to see other examples of empires expand-
ing and contracting (for these same general reasons). Britain lost 
control over the American colonies partly because it was not treating 
the people in the provinces fairly (remember taxation without repre-
sentation?).
Born of mistreatment, America became a haven for equality, and our 
forefathers made laws to ensure that it would stay that way. And 
although America has grown powerful as a representative govern-
ment modeled after the Roman Republic, its attention to upholding 
the basic rights of every individual has made it even stronger than the 
mold from which it was cast.
What lessons has the United States learned 
from the Roman Empire's mistakes?
Q:

Bibliography
Adkins, Lesley & Roy A. Handbook to Life in Ancient Rome. Facts on File, Inc., 1994.
Ardagh, Philip. History Detectives: The Romans. Peter Bedrick Books, 2000.
Bise, Sara C. The Secrets of Vesuvius. Madison Press Books, 1990.
Cambridge Illustrated History of the Roman World. Edited by Greg Woolf. Cambridge  
University Press, 2003.
Chrisp, Peter. Make it Work! Ancient Rome. Two-Can Publishing, LLC, 2001.
Christ, Karl. The Romans: An Introduction to their History and Civilisation. University of  
California Press, 1984.
Corbishley, Mike. History as Evidence: The Romans. Warwick Press, 1983.
Corbishley, Mike. Ancient Rome. Facts on File, Inc., 2003.
Dargie, Richard. Picturing the Past: Ancient Rome. Enchanted Lion Books/Arcturus  
Publishing, 2004.
Guillard, Charles, & Annie-Claude Martin. The Romans: Life in the Empire.  
Millbrook Press, 1992.
Hinds, Kathryn. Cultures of the Past: The Ancient Romans. Benchmark Books, 1997.
Humez, Alexander & Nicholas. ABC et cetera: the life & times of the Roman Alphabet.  
David R. Godine, 1985.
James, Simon. Eyewitness Books: Ancient Rome. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 1990.
James, Simon. Ancient Rome. Viking, 1992.
Jovinelly, Joann & Jason Netelkos. The Crafts & Culture of the Romans. Rosen  
Publishing Group, Inc., 2002.
Liberati, Anna Maria, & Fabio Bourbon. Ancient Rome: History of a Civilization that Ruled  
the World. Barnes & Noble, Inc., 2004.
MacDonald, Fiona, & Gerald Wood. A Roman Fort. Peter Bedrick Books, 1993.
Markel, Rita J. Your Travel Guide to Ancient Rome. Lerner Publications Company, 2004.
Morley, Jacqueline, & John James. A Roman Villa. Peter Bedrick Books, 1992.
Nardo, Don. The Ancient Romans. Lucent Books, Inc., 2001.
Nelson, PhD. Eric. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to The Roman Empire. Alpha, 2002.
134
Tools of the Ancient Romans

Resources
http://www.exovedate.com/ancient_timeline_one.html   
A good timeline with quotes from Ancient Romans.
http://www.teach-nology.com/teachers/subject_matter/social_studies/rome/   
A web site for teachers with a lot of links about Ancient Rome.
http://www.roman-empire.net/diverse/chronicle-emps.html   
A great chronology of all the Roman rulers.
http://www.pbs.org/empires/romans/empire/index.html  An excellent web site with 
thumbnail sketches of everything you’d want to know about Ancient Rome.
Glossary
abolish: to destroy, get rid of, or end.
aediles: an elected official responsible for public 
works and games.
agger: a mound or rampart made of earth.
alimenta: public funds used to subsidize 
education and food for the poor.
alliance: a friendship between individuals, 
groups, and/or the leaders of groups.
amphitheater: an oval building surrounding an 
arena for gladiator contests and other spectacles.
annex, annexation: to add on, an addition.
aptitude: skill or excellence.
aqueduct: an artificial channel to carry water 
from its source to a city.
arch: a curved span over an opening.
atrium: the front room of a Roman house.
augur: a priest who divined the will of the gods.
barracks: a soldiers’ quarters.
basilica: a building for business and government 
in the forum.
benevolent: kind or charitable.
booty: valuables seized or stolen by soldiers  
in war.
brooch: a piece of jewelry fastened to a garment 
by a pin. 
bulla: a locket or pouch worn by children.
bureaucratic: relating to the administrative 
systems of governments.
censor: an appointed magistrate who determined 
voting and property lists.
centurions: the Roman army’s highest 
professional officer, originally the leaders of the 
centuries (units of a hundred men).
charismatic: the ability to charm or influence 
others.
circus: a long oval enclosure, often surrounded  
by bleachers, for chariot races.
cistern: a tank for storing water. 
city-state: an independent nation the size of  
a city. 
135
Glossary

conscript: to force somebody into the military.
consul: one of two head magistrates of Rome 
elected every year. 
coppersmiths: those who shape heated copper 
into crafts or tools.
cremation: the process of burning a dead body.
dictator: a supreme commander with complete 
control of all civil and military affairs.
divvy: to divide up to dole out.
earth rampart: a defensive wall made of earth, 
often topped by a low protective wall.
edict: a proclamation or law.
embankment: a hill or sloped land.
empire: territory ruled by an emperor.
equites: the wealthy class of cavalry, which 
became the business or middle class.
erode: to wear away or disintegrate.
ethnic: belonging to a group in a society with 
distinctive cultural traits.
excess: too much or more than is needed.
fasces: a bundle of wooden rods bound around 
a double axe with a red ribbon that signified 
authority or imperium.
fauna: animal life considered as a whole.
flogging: to whip or beat someone with a whip 
or a stick.
flora: plant life considered as a whole.
fortification: a structure built to strengthen a 
defenses (a wall, ditch, or rampart).
forum: the main meeting place within a Roman 
city surrounded by government buildings, courts, 
and temples.
fresco: a wall painting made while the plaster is 
still wet.
frieze: a scene, often one that tells a story, carved 
into the side of a building. 
garb: manner of dress.
Gaul: the Celtic and Germanic tribes that migrated 
back and forth over Europe for centuries. 
Sometimes divided into their specific tribe names 
(Celts, Germans, etc).
gladiator: a trained fighter, usually a slave, who 
fought to the death in an arena.
hearth: the fireplace of a home, thought of as a 
symbol of the home and life within it.
Hellenistic: refers to Greek civilization and culture 
throughout the Mediterranean and Asia Minor 
after the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE 
up to the Roman conquest of Egypt in 31 BCE.
heir: one who inherits or succeeds to the 
possession of property after the death of  
its owner.
imperium: Latin word for “power of command,” 
which included the power of life and death.
inscriptions: words of description carved into rock 
or metal.
insula: an apartment building in ancient Rome.
keystone: the V-shaped stone set at the top of an 
arch and cemented into place.
knead: to work dough until its smooth.  
land redistribution: a plan in ancient Rome to 
take land from the rich and divvy it up for the 
poor. This plan would qualify more individuals to 
join the army, which required its soldiers to own 
land.
Latin League: a confederation of Latin cities, 
including Rome.
lucrative: profitable.
magistrate: someone who administers laws.
136
Tools of the Ancient Romans

malnutrition: poor nutrition or not enough food.
megalomaniac: Greek word for “huge madness” 
that several Roman emperors fell into. 
metalling: the top surface of a Roman road.
millennia: 1,000 years.
mosaic: a picture or design made of colored tiles.
mystery religions: secret religious practices that 
are only revealed to initiated members. 
noxious fumes: unhealthy or poisonous gas.
pagan: used by Christians to describe someone in 
ancient Rome who didn’t believe in religion,  
or believed in many gods.
paterfamilias: the male head of the household.
patrician: member of Rome’s ancient ruling class.
Pax Romana: a period of time during the early 
empire of  peace and stability. 
peninsula: a narrow piece of land that juts out 
into an area of water.
perimeter: a boundary that encloses an area.
piety: loyalty to family or religious devotion.
plebeian: a member of the ancient freeborn 
lower class.
Praetorian Guard: the emperor’s personal  
elite guards.
praetors: any of several magistrates ranking  
just below the consuls and acting as the chief law 
officers in ancient Rome.
predecessor: someone who held a position or 
job before somebody else.
prefect: a senior administrative or military official 
in ancient Rome.
principate: from princeps, “first citizen,” and 
covers the period from Augustus (27 BCE) to 
Diocletian (293 CE).
provinces: a region controlled by an empire 
through a governor appointed by the central 
government.
Punic: comes from the Latin Punici, which the 
Romans called the Carthaginians. 
quaestors: any public official in ancient Rome 
responsible for finance and administration in 
government and/or military.
ratify: to accept, usually treaties or laws.
reform legislation: laws that change things, 
usually to benefit those in need.
relief: a form of sculpture where the images 
project out from a flat surface. 
republic: refers to the period of Roman history 
from the overthrow of the monarchy in 509 BCE 
to the Principate of Augustus in 27 BCE.
rhetoric: persuasive speech or writing.
roadbed: the area prepared for a road, before the 
pavement or concrete has been laid.
romance languages: French, Italian, Portuguese, 
and Spanish—descended from Latin.
sack: to destroy a captured town and steal its 
valuables.
sesterce (or sestertius): a coin of the realm. .
state-sanctioned: approved by the government.
succession: a series of people or things coming 
one after the other.
theocracy: a state governed by religious 
representatives.
tribune: an elected official who led a plebeian 
assembly and was supposed to protect plebeian 
interests.
veto: to deny a law or series of laws that have 
been thought up by others.  
137
Glossary

Index
A
abacus, 71, 74, 75
activities
	 Abacus, 74, 75
	 Brooch, 27
	 Bulla, 85
	 Cameo Pin, 115
	 Clay Vessel, 70
	 Fresco, 120
	 Laurel Wreath, 104
	 Map of the Roman Empire, 61
	 Mosaic, 78, 79
	 Roman Medal, 44, 45
	 Roman Newspaper, 41
	 Roman Ruins, 56
	 Toga, 26
	 Uncovering Your Family 
History, 10, 11
	 Writing Tablet, 20, 21
Aeneid, Aeneas, 5, 81
Africa, 3, 28, 29, 34, 43, 64, 88, 
129
Agrippina, 64, 65
Alaric, iv, 129
Alexander the Great, 30, 31
amphitheater, 54–56
Antoninus Pius, 100, 101
aqueducts, 7, 12, 46, 50–55, 60, 
61, 131
arch, 1, 46, 52–56, 96
archeology, 3–5, 7, 8, 51, 98
architecture, 1, 9, 12, 46, 52–56, 
96, 133
army. See military
art, 9, 16, 72, 77–80, 82, 98, 120
Asia Minor, 3, 4, 30–32, 37, 43, 
102
Augustus, iv, 39, 40, 42, 43, 55, 
59, 60–64, 80–83, 99, 112, 
122. Also Octavian.
Aurelian, Aurelian Wall, 102, 
103, 113
B
baths, 7, 46, 50–54, 60, 61, 72, 
97, 117
borders, 61, 65, 91, 95, 99, 101, 
128, 129
bridges, 1, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55, 
131
Britain, 3, 64, 91, 99, 100, 129, 4
building, public, 1, 7–9, 12, 19, 
46, 47, 49–56, 60, 61, 66, 69, 
72, 77, 94–100, 105, 107, 109, 
117, 121, 122, 131, 132
C
Caesar, Julius, iv, 37–40, 50, 60, 
64, 73, 81, 90, 91, 119
calendar, 6, 37, 39, 81
Caligula, 63–65
Carthage, Carthaginians, iv, 
9, 16, 28–32, 34, 64, 88. Also 
Punic 
catapults, 46, 58
Catholic Church, 17, 116, 117, 
126, 131, 132
Cato the Elder, 31
Centuriate Assembly, 13, 14, 
18, 22
chariot racing, 66, 103, 105–110
Christians, Christianity, iv, 
17, 66, 116–118, 125, 126, 
128–132
Cicero, 2, 42, 80, 81, 132
Circus Maximus, 107
citizens, citizenship, 14–17, 32, 
89, 91, 95, 129
class structure, 14–16
Claudius, 63–65
Cleopatra, iv, 40, 42, 43
Cloaca Maxima, 8, 9, 12
clothing, 26, 27, 82–85
Coliseum, 46, 54, 55, 94–96, 
105, 109
columns, 1, 54, 56
Commodus, 103
Constantine, iv, 114, 116, 117, 
126, 127, 131
Constantinople, iv, 116, 117, 
130
consul, 13, 14, 18, 22, 25, 28, 
36–38, 40, 62, 87
Crassus, 37, 38, 89, 90
D
Diocletian, iv, 92, 93, 101, 113, 
114, 116, 126
Domitian, 96, 97
E
education, 73, 76, 98
Egypt, Egyptians, 30, 31, 42, 
43, 47, 69, 94
emperors, iv, 43, 55, 59–66, 93–
103, 113–117, 122, 126–131
engineering, 46–58
equites, 14, 17, 22, 94
Etruscans, iv, 5, 8, 9, 12, 53, 64, 
119
F
family, 67, 69, 72, 73, 76, 118
farm, farmers, 16, 31, 68, 69
food, 68, 77, 98, 99
forum, the Forum, 8, 12, 19, 47, 
60, 61, 69, 72, 98, 121
frescoes, 77, 98, 120
frieze, 80, 82
G
Gracchus Brothers, 33–35, 47, 
90
Galerius, 114, 126
Gallic Empire, 102, 103, 113
games, 105–112
Gauls, iv, 19, 69, 91
gladiator, 55, 89, 90, 96, 103, 
105, 109–112
gods and goddesses, 3, 5, 54, 
97, 99, 118–125
Goths, iv, 102, 127–129
Greece, Greeks, 5, 9, 30, 40, 54, 
57, 69, 77, 80, 97, 100, 106, 
119, 121, 122, 128
H
Hadrian, Hadrian’s Wall, 49, 
50, 55, 83, 91, 92, 99–101
Hannibal, 29, 30
health, 76, 77, 95, 98, 99
Herculaneum, 95, 98
houses, 7, 53, 72
138
Tools of the Ancient Romans

I
ides, ides of March, 37, 39, 81
imperium, 13, 14, 18, 22
J
Julius Caesar, iv, 37–40, 50, 60, 
64, 73, 81, 90, 91, 119
K
kings, iv, 3, 6, 9, 12, 13, 36, 38, 43
L
land, land reform, 33–36, 90, 
91, 118
Latin League, 23, 24
Latin, 2, 8, 9, 14, 15, 24, 130, 132
Latium, 5, 23
law, iv, 1, 15–17, 19, 22, 24, 32, 
89, 101, 132, 133
libraries, 60, 61, 97
literature, 5, 7, 62, 63, 80–82
Livy, 65, 82, 125
M
Macedonia, 30, 31
Marcus Aurelius, iv, 100, 101, 
103
Mark Antony, iv, 40, 42, 43, 59
Mediterranean Sea, 4, 16, 
28–31, 36, 88
military, 4, 15, 17, 24, 25, 
28–33, 35, 36, 46, 47, 57, 58, 
68, 73, 86–96, 99, 101, 116, 
122, 128, 129
money, 14–16, 63, 73
mosaic, 77–79, 82, 98
Mount Vesuvius, 47, 89, 95, 
98, 99
N
names, 34
Nero, 64–66, 72, 83, 94, 95, 108
Nerva, 97
O
Octavian. See Augustus
omens, 6, 38, 119
Ovid, 60, 62, 63, 81, 82
P
Palmyrene Empire, 102, 103, 
113
Pantheon, 54, 55, 60
patricians, 14, 17, 18, 22, 84
pediment, 1, 54, 56
Persian Empire, 102, 117
plebeians, 15–18, 22
Pliny the Elder, 77, 83, 96, 99, 
123
Pliny the Younger, 99
Plutarch, 39, 97
Pompeii, 51, 95, 97, 98
Pompey, 36–38, 105
Praetorian Guards, 61–63, 64, 
97
public speaking, 76, 77
Punic, Punic Wars, iv, 16, 28–
30, 86, 88, 89. Also Carthage
R
religion, iv, 17, 97, 116–126, 
128–132
Remus, 4–7, 9
rights, 16, 17, 22, 32, 89
roads, 1, 7, 24, 25, 29, 46–51, 
60–62, 131
Roman numerals, 71
Roman Empire, 59–66, 91–103, 
113–117, 122–130
Roman Republic, 13–45, 
88–91, 119–122
Rome, founding of, 3–12
Romulus Augustulus, iv, 130
Romulus, iv, 4–7, 9, 22, 60, 63
Rubicon River, 38
S
Sabines, 6, 9, 12
Scipio Africanus the Elder, 29, 
30, 34
Senate, senators, iv, 14, 17, 22, 
31, 33–36, 38–40, 42, 43, 59, 
60, 62, 63, 66, 73, 76, 77, 90, 
95, 97, 98, 103
Seneca, 65, 72
Servius Tullius, Servian wall, 
12
slaves, 13, 16, 17, 19, 25, 30, 31, 
34, 37, 54, 63, 64, 68, 89, 90, 
109, 111, 118
soldiers. See military
Spartacus, 37, 89
Statius, 50
Struggle of the Orders, 22
Sulla, 35, 36
T
Tarquin the Proud, 12, 13, 43
taxes, 17, 24, 28, 62, 66, 68, 89, 
114, 116
temples, 12, 46, 54, 60, 61, 69, 
77, 121, 122
Theodosius, 128, 129
Tiber River, 3–5, 8, 64, 112
Tiberius, 62–64
Titus, 95
toga, 26, 27, 82, 83
Trajan, Trajan’s Column, iv, 
52, 80, 82, 83, 97–100, 107
tribes, iv, 4–6, 8, 9, 12, 19, 53, 
64, 69, 91, 102, 119, 127–129
tribune, 22, 33–35, 87
Trojan, Troy, 4, 5
tunnels, 50, 52
Twelve Tables, iv, 19
V
Valens, 128
Vandals, 102, 127–129
Vespasian, 94–96
Vestal Virgins, 121
Vesuvius, Mount, 47, 89, 95, 
98, 99
Virgil, 5, 7, 62, 81
vote, 14, 15, 17, 38
W
wars, iv, 5, 15, 16, 28–30, 57, 58, 	
86, 88–93, 128
water, 50–55
weapons, 46, 57, 58, 87, 110
women, 15, 16, 73, 83, 124, 126
139
Index

Children’s Activity/Education Resource	
Ages 9 & up
$16.95
$22.95 Canada
“A wonderful example of how to clearly organize information about history, technology 
and science to appeal to the curiosity and learning capabilities of gifted students . . . 
excellent resources for an inquiry learning format.”
—Gifted Education News
About the Author: 
Rachel Dickinson is a travel, nature, and science writer whose articles 
have been published in magazines such as Audubon, The Christian 
Science Monitor, National Geographic Traveler, and U.S.A. Weekend. She 
is also the author of Tools of Navigation: a Kid’s Guide to the History 
and Science of Finding Your Way.
In Tools of the Ancient Romans, kids will:
Meet the people whose ideas helped shape  
our world view
learn interesting facts, trivia, myths,  
and legends about ancient Rome
     Build fifteen hands-on projects that help 
show how the discoveries and  
inventions of the ancient Romans  
still affect us today.
ISBN 0-9785037-0-8
Tools of the Ancient Romans: 
A Kid’s Guide to the History and Science 
of Life in Ancient Rome explores the history 
and science of the most powerful empire the world has 
ever known. Through biographical sidebars, interesting 
facts, anecdotes, and 15 hands-on activities that put 
kids in ancient Roman shoes, readers will learn about 
Roman innovations and ideas of government, science, 
religion, sport, and warfare that have shaped world 
history and our own world view.
Who founded Rome? 
How big was the Roman Empire 
and how long did it last? 
Did gladiators really fight 
to the death? 
Did Romans really have the 
first indoor plumbing?

